ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A dynamic ensemble learning algorithm for neural networks
Kazi Md. Rokibul Alam1 • Nazmul Siddique2
• Hojjat Adeli3
Received: 24 July 2018 / Accepted: 19 July 2019 / Published online: 29 July 2019
 The Author(s) 2019
This paper presents a novel dynamic ensemble learning (DEL) algorithm for designing ensemble of neural networks (NNs).
DEL algorithm determines the size of ensemble, the number of individual NNs employing a constructive strategy, the
number of hidden nodes of individual NNs employing a constructive–pruning strategy, and different training samples for
individual NN’s learning. For diversity, negative correlation learning has been introduced and also variation of training
samples has been made for individual NNs that provide better learning from the whole training samples. The major beneﬁts
of the proposed DEL compared to existing ensemble algorithms are (1) automatic design of ensemble; (2) maintaining
accuracy and diversity of NNs at the same time; and (3) minimum number of parameters to be deﬁned by user. DEL
algorithm is applied to a set of real-world classiﬁcation problems such as the cancer, diabetes, heart disease, thyroid, credit
card, glass, gene, horse, letter recognition, mushroom, and soybean datasets. It has been conﬁrmed by experimental results
that DEL produces dynamic NN ensembles of appropriate architecture and diversity that demonstrate good generalization
Keywords Neural network ensemble  Backpropagation algorithm  Negative correlation learning  Constructive
algorithms  Pruning algorithms
1 Introduction
Neural network (NN) structures have been used for
knowledge representation , modelling , prediction
 , design automation , classiﬁcation , identi-
ﬁcation , and nonlinear control applications in
many domains. All these applications mainly used the
monolithic structure for NN. In a monolithic structure, the
NN is represented by a single NN architecture for the
whole task to be performed . Scalability is a major
impairment for monolithic NN for a wide range of applications. Incremental learning is also not possible as the
addition of new elements to NN requires retraining of the
NN with old and new data . An inevitable phenomenon in the retraining of NN is the catastrophic forgetting (also known as crosstalk), which was ﬁrst reported
by McCloskey and Cohen . Two types of crosstalk
phenomena can get exposed during retraining: temporal
crosstalk and spatial crosstalk. In temporal crosstalk,
learned knowledge is lost during retraining of a new task.
In spatial crosstalk, NN cannot learn two or more tasks
simultaneously . Kemker et al. demonstrated that
catastrophic forgetting problem in incremental learning
paradigm has not been resolved despite many claims and
showed methods of measuring such catastrophic forgetting
can be measured. A number of attempts have been made to
mitigate the phenomenon such as regularization, rehearsal
and pseudorehearsal, life-long learning-based dynamic
combination, dual-memory models and ensemble methods
 . A collection or committee of individual NNs
can also be advantageous for addition of a new NN to store
& Nazmul Siddique
 
Kazi Md. Rokibul Alam
 
Hojjat Adeli
 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Khulna
University of Engineering and Technology, Khulna 9203,
Bangladesh
School of Computing, Engineering and Intelligent Systems,
Ulster University, Londonderry BT48 7JL, UK
Departments of Neuroscience, Neurology, and Biomedical
Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH 43210, USA
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
 
(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
new knowledge mitigating forgetting phenomena where
tasks can be subdivided . Instead of employing a large
NN for a complex problem, the researchers are impressed
by the idea of decomposing the problem into smaller
subtasks leading to smaller architecture, shorter training
time and increased performance . NN ensemblebased classiﬁer can also improve generalization ability
 . The structure of an NN ensemble is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Each NN in the ensemble (1 through n) is ﬁrst
trained on the training instances. The output of the
calculated
Oi; i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; n, of the individual NNs . The challenge here is to design a learning algorithm for ensemble
NN. The initial weights, topology of NNs, training datasets,
and training algorithms also play decisive roles in the
design of ensembles . In general, NN ensembles are
designed by mostly varying these parameters.
Many algorithms similar to NN ensembles have
been reported in the literature such as mixer of experts
 , boosting and bagging . The main drawbacks
of these algorithms are manual design and predeﬁned
number of neurons in the hidden layer and the number of
NNs in an ensemble.
In general, ensemble and modular approaches are
employed for combining NNs. The ensemble approach
attempts to generate a reliable and accurate output by
combining the outputs of a set of trained NNs rather than
selecting the best NN, whereas the modular approach
strives to have each NN as self-contained or autonomous
 . In modular approach, the problem is divided into
a number of tasks. Each task is assigned to an individual
NN to be accomplished. It is not possible to know the best
size of NN a priori. The size of NN is deﬁned by the
number of layers and the number of neurons in each layer.
Moreover, the backpropagation (BP) algorithm is
not useful for training NN unless the topology is known.
Therefore, ﬁnding the correct topology is the foremost
design issue. In order to deﬁne the topology of an NN, a
number of parameters such as the number of layers, the
number of hidden neurons, activation functions, and degree
of connectivity have to be determined. A second issue is to
determine the training parameters that include the initial
weights of the NN, the learning rate, acceleration term,
momentum term and weight update rule. The choice of the
topological and training parameters has signiﬁcant impact
on the training time and the performance of the NN.
Unfortunately, there is no straightforward method of
selecting the parameters; rather the designer has to depend
on the expert knowledge or employ empirical method.
The performance of NNs in an ensemble is dependent on
a number of factors such as (1) the topology of the NNs and
the initial structure; (2) the training method; (3) the
learning rate; (4) the input and output representations; and
(5) the content of the training sample . Eventually, the
numbers of NNs and the number of neurons in the hidden
layers in NNs determine the performance of an ensemble.
In most of the cases, these are predeﬁned by human experts
based on available a priori information. Formal learning
theory is used to estimate the size of the ensemble system
based on the complexity, and the examples required
learning the particular function. In such cases, the generalization error becomes high if the number of examples is
small. Consequently, choosing appropriate NN topology is
still something of an art. The data examples play a crucial
role in learning where learning is sensitive to initial
weights and learning parameters .
The purpose of this research is to design an NN
ensemble that addresses the following issues: (1) automatic
determination of NN ensemble architecture (i.e. the number of NNs in the ensemble), (2) automatic determination
of the size of individual NNs (i.e. the number of hidden
neurons in individual NNs), and (3) variation of training
examples for each individual NN’s better learning. Realworld classiﬁcation problems are used to verify the effectiveness and the generalization ability of the ensemble.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents the
related works. Section 3 contains the description of DEL
algorithm. Section 4 presents the datasets description,
experimental results and comparison. Section 5 presents a
discussion. Some conclusions are made in Sect. 6.
2 Related works
In ensemble learning, the individual NNs are called base
learners. They are single classiﬁers, which are trained and
combined together to ease individual errors and crop generalization independently. Hitherto, efforts have been made
Combined network output
Ensemble output
Fig. 1 A neural networks ensemble
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
to design ensemble by combining NNs based on either the
accuracy or the diversity . There are evidences
that accurate and diverse NNs can produce a good
ensemble that distribute errors over different regions of the
input space . Rosen proposed an ensemble
individual
sequentially where the individual NNs minimize training
errors as well as de-correlate previous training errors.
Sequential training of an NN does not affect the NNs that
were previously trained, which is a major disadvantage in
ensemble learning. Consequently, there is no correlation
between the errors of the individual NNs . The topology of the mixtures-of-experts (ME) can produce
biased individual NNs which may be negatively correlated
 . The disadvantage of ME is that it needs a separate
gating NN and also can not provide a balance control over
the bias–variance–covariance tradeoff .
A two-stage design approach is employed in most of the
architectures mentioned above where individual NNs are
generated ﬁrst followed by combining them. As the combination stage does not provide any feedback to design
stage, some individual NNs designed independently may
not contribute signiﬁcantly to the ensemble . Therefore, some researchers proposed a one-stage design process
and used a penalty term into the error function of each NN.
The researchers also proposed the simultaneous and interactive training for all NNs in the ensemble instead of the
independent and sequential training . NNs with negative correlation can be created by reassuring specialization
and cooperation among the NNs in an ensemble. This will
enable NNs to learn the different regions of training data
space and ensure the ensemble learns the whole data space.
To ensure interaction between NNs and simultaneous
learning in an ensemble, some researchers employed evolutionary computing . Liu et al. applied evolutionary algorithm for ensemble learning of NNs with
negative correlation. This approach can determine the
optimal number of NNs and the combinations of NNs in an
ensemble using ﬁtness sharing mechanism.
Chen and Yao employed multi-objective genetic
algorithm for regularized negative correlation learning
(NCL) optimizing errors of the base NNs and their diversity in ensemble. Mousavi and Eftekhari proposed
static ensemble selection and deployed the popular multiobjective genetic algorithm NSGA-II . This combination of static ensemble selection and NSGA-II ensures
selecting the best classiﬁers and their optimal combination.
There are two other widely popular approaches to
ensemble learning, namely constructive NN ensemble
(CNNE) and pruning NN ensemble (PNNE) .
CNNE determines the number of NNs in the ensemble and
the hidden neurons of the individual NNs by employing
NCL in an incremental fashion. On the other hand,
PNNE employs a competitive decay approach. PNNE uses
a neuron cooperation function in each NN for the hidden
neurons and a selective deletion of NNs in the ensemble
based on the criterion of over-ﬁtting. PNNE employs NCL
to ensure diversity of the NNs in the ensemble.
Islam et al. proposed two incremental learning
algorithms for NNs in ensemble using NCL: NegBagg and
NegBoost. NegBagg ﬁxes the number of hidden neurons of
NNs in ensemble by constructive method. NegBoost also
uses constructive method to ﬁx the number of hidden
neurons of NNs as well as the number of NNs in the
Yin et al. proposed a two-stage hierarchical
approach to ensemble learning called dynamic ensemble of
ensembles (DE2). DE2 comprises component classiﬁers and
interim ensembles. The ﬁnal DE2 is obtained by weighted
averaging. Cruz et al. used a two-phase dynamic
ensemble selection (DES) framework. In the ﬁrst phase,
DES extracts meta-features from training data. In the second phase, DES uses a meta-classiﬁer to estimate the
competence of the base classiﬁer to be added to the
Chen and Yao show that NCL considers the entire
ensemble as a single machine with the objective of minimizing the mean square error (MSE) and NCL does not
employ regularization while training. They proposed a
regularized NCL (RNCL) incorporating a regularization
term for the ensemble which enables the RNCL decomposing the training objectives into sub-objectives each of
which is implemented by an individual NN. RNCL shows
improved performance over the NCL even when noise
level is higher in datasets.
Semi-supervised learning is the mechanism of learning
using a large amount of unlabelled data and a small amount
of labelled data. Chen and Wang proposed a semisupervised boosting framework taking three assumptions
such as smoothness, cluster and manifold into consideration where they used a cost function comprising the margin
cost on labelled data and the regularization penalty on
unlabelled data. Experiments on benchmarks and realworld classiﬁcation reveal constant improvement by the
algorithm. Semi-supervised learning is a widely popular
method due to its higher accuracy at a lower effort.
The generalization of an ensemble is related to the
accuracy of the base NNs and the diversity among NNs
 . Higher accuracy for the base NNs leads to the
lower diversity among them. To strike a balance of the
dilemma between accuracy and diversity in an ensemble,
semi-supervised
(SemiNCL) where a correlation penalty term on labelled
and unlabeled data is incorporated into the cost function of
each individual NNs in the ensemble.
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
Though the semi-supervised learning has been very
successful for labelled and unlabelled data, its generalization ability is sensitive to incorrect labelled data. To mitigate this limitation, Soares et al. proposed a clusterbased boosting (CBoost) with cluster regularization. In
CBoost, the base NNs in the ensemble jointly perform a
cluster-based
semi-supervised
optimization.
experimentation shows that the CBoost has signiﬁcant
generalization ability over the other ensembles.
Recently, Raﬁei and Adeli reported a new neural
dynamic classiﬁcation algorithm. A comprehensive review
of multiple classiﬁer systems based on the dynamic
selection of classiﬁers was reported by Britto et al. .
Recent developments in ensemble methods are analysed by
Ren et al. . Cruz et al. reported a review on the
recent advances on dynamic classiﬁer selection techniques.
Dynamic mechanism is used in the generalization phase in
those studies, while the dynamic mechanism is employed
in the training phase in DEL.
3 Dynamic ensemble learning (DEL)
3.1 Main steps of the algorithm
Unlike ﬁxed ensemble architecture, DEL automatically
determines the number of base learner NNs and their
architectures in an ensemble during the training phase. The
DEL algorithm is presented in 8 steps in the sequel. The
ﬂow diagram of the DEL algorithm is shown in Fig. 2.
Step 1 Create an ensemble with minimum architecture
comprising two NNs. Each NN consists of an input layer,
two hidden layers, and an output layer. The number of
neurons in the input and output layers is determined by the
system. Next, apply a constructive algorithm based on
Ash’s dynamic node creation method for the ﬁrst (later
on the odd number of NNs in sequence in the ensemble)
NN training. Initially, this NN starts with a small architecture containing one node in each hidden layer. For the
second (later on even number of NNs in sequence in the
ensemble) NN training, apply Reed’s pruning algorithm
 . In the pruning phase of NN training, the number of
neurons in the hidden layer is larger than necessary (i.e. it
starts with a bulky architecture). Initialize the connection
weights for each NN randomly within a small interval.
Step 2 Create separate training examples for each NN of
the ensemble. In general, subsets of training examples for
individual NNs are created by randomly picking from the
main set of the training examples. In this work, training
sets are created in such a way that if one NN learns from
training examples from the ﬁrst to the last, other NN learns
from the last to the ﬁrst of the same training examples.
Step 3 Train the NNs in the ensemble partially on the
examples for a ﬁxed number of epochs speciﬁed by the
user using NCL regardless of whether the NNs
converge or not .
Step 4 Compute the training error Ei for the ith NN in the
ensemble according to the following rule:
Ei ¼ 100 Omax  Omin
ðdðn; sÞ  Fiðn; sÞÞ2 þ kPiðn; sÞ
where Omax is the maximum value and Omin is the minimum
value of the target outputs, respectively, N is the total
number of examples, S is the number of output neurons, d(n,
s) is the desired output, and Fi(n, s) is the actual output of
the neuron s in the nth training data. The rule in Eq. (1) is a
combination of the rule proposed by Reed and NCL for
an NN error. The error Ei is independent of the size of the
training examples and the number of output neurons.
Step5Compute theensemble error E where Eisthe average of
Ei of the base learner NNs. If E is small and acceptable, the
ensemble architecture is believed to have the highest generalization ability and output the ﬁnal ensemble. If E is not
architecture?
architecture
Create initial
architecture
Create different
training sets for
Training NNs
using Negative
Correlation
ensemble error
Add and /or
delete hidden
Successful?
Fig. 2 Flow diagram of the DEL algorithm
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
acceptable, then either the ensemble architecture or the individual base learner NNs undergo change.
Step 6 Check the neuron addition and/or deletion criterion
of individual NNs. In this criterion, hidden neurons are
added or deleted if the error of individual NNs does not
change after a speciﬁed number of epochs chosen by the
user (see Sect. 3.2). If the criterion is not met, then the
individual NNs are not good enough and the ensemble
undergoes addition of new learner NN.
Step 7 Add and/or delete hidden neurons to/from the NNs
to meet the addition and/or deletion criterion (see Sect. 3.2)
and continue training using NCL.
Step 8 Add a new NN to the ensemble (see Sect. 3.3) if the
previous NN addition improves the performance of the
ensemble. Initialize and create different training sets for
the new NN as in step 2. Go to step 3 for further training of
the ensemble.
The above-mentioned procedure (steps 1–8) is implemented in DEL that determines the architecture of
ensemble. For example, the networks in Fig. 1 work as
follows: network 1 has 2 hidden layers, uses constructive
algorithm for node addition, and trains examples from ﬁrst
to last. On the contrary, network 2 has 2 hidden layers, uses
pruning algorithm for node deletion, and trains examples
from last to ﬁrst. Then, network 3 has a single hidden layer,
uses constructive algorithm for node addition, and trains
using examples from ﬁrst to last. Similarly, network 4 has a
single hidden layer, uses pruning algorithm for node
deletion, and trains using examples from last to ﬁrst and so
on. The idea of varying the training examples is to enable
the NNs to learn different regions of the data distribution.
Major components of DEL are the addition/deletion of
hidden neurons to/from learners NNs and addition of NN to
ensemble described in Sects. 3.2–3.4.
3.2 Nodes addition/deletion to/from individual
Both constructive and pruning algorithms provide some
beneﬁts as well as some drawbacks. At the training period
of individual NNs, there may be some portions which may
be critical or stable either for constructive or pruning
algorithms. If all the NNs in the ensemble learn either only
by constructive or only by pruning algorithm, then their
learning will be very similar.
Even though NCL forces the NNs to learn from different
regions of the data space, the learning will not be perfect if
the NNs in the ensemble have the same architecture. Different architectures of the NNs in the ensemble will provide a different weight on the accuracy and diversity,
which justiﬁes the deployment of the hybrid ‘constructive–
pruning strategy’ in DEL.
3.3 NN addition to the ensemble
In DEL, constructive algorithm is used to add NNs in
the ensemble. New NNs are added to the ensemble if the
performance
ensemble. This addition process continues until the minimum ensemble error criterion has been met.
3.4 Different training sets for individual NNs
Varying the examples into different training sets enables
efﬁcient learning and can help the ensemble learning from
the whole training examples. Training sets are varied by
maintaining one important criterion, i.e. training sets
should have appropriate number of examples so that individual NNs obtain the necessary information for learning.
In DEL, if the ﬁrst NN in the ensemble learns from oddpositioned training examples, the second one learns from
even-positioned training examples, and the third one learns
from other training examples in a similar fashion. In some
cases, subsets of training examples are created just by
partitioning or by randomly selecting. The pseudocode of
DEL algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: DEL algorithm
Step 1: Create ensemble with minimum architecture
Create an ensemble comprising 2 NNs with minimum
architecture of 1 input-2 hidden-1 output layers
Number of neurons in input and output layer is
determined by the system
Apply Ash’s constructive algorithm for dynamic node
creation for the first NN training
Apply Reed’s pruning algorithm for the second NN
Step 2: Create training examples
1 Create separate training examples for each NN
Step 3: Training NNs in ensemble
Train NNs partially for fixed number of epochs using
Step 4: Compute training error
Compute the training error Ei for the ith NN using Eq.
Step 5: Compute ensemble error
Compute the ensemble error E
If E < acceptable
Output final ensemble
Step 6: Check node addition/deletion criterion
If (addition/deletion criterion is not met)
Add NN to ensemble
Go to Step 2
Add/delete hidden nodes to NN
Go to Step 3
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
4 Experimental analysis
The effectiveness and performance of DEL are veriﬁed on
real-world benchmark problems. The datasets of the
selected benchmark problems are taken from the UCI
machine learning repository .
Different tests were carried out on DEL algorithm with
varying parameter settings. For setting the correlation
strength parameter k to nonzero, the DEL performs as
described in Sect. 3. For the correlation strength parameter
k equal to zero, it is the individual NN’s independent
training. The independent training is performed using
standard backpropagation algorithm .
The learning rate and correlation strength parameter k
were chosen between [0.05, 1.0] and [0.1, 1.0], respectively. The initial weights for NNs were randomly generated within the interval of [- 0.5, 0.5]. The winner-takesall method of classiﬁcation is used. Both the majority
voting method and the simple averaging method are used
for computing the generalization ability of the DEL.
Medical and non-medical datasets described in Sects. 3.1
and 3.2 are used in the experimentation. Table 1 shows the
summary of benchmark datasets.
4.1 Medical datasets
The medical datasets comprise four datasets from medical
domain: the cancer, the diabetes, the heart disease, and the
thyroid dataset. These datasets have some characteristics in
DEL uses the similar input attributes that an expert uses
for diagnosis.
The datasets pose a classiﬁcation problem, which the
DEL has to classify to a number of classes or predict a
set of quantities.
Acquisition of examples from human subjects is
expensive, which results in small datasets for training.
Very often the datasets have missing values of attributes
and contain a small sample of noisy data , which
make the classiﬁcation or prediction challenging.
4.1.1 The breast cancer dataset
The breast cancer dataset comprises 699 examples. 458
examples are benign, and 241 examples are malignant.
There are 9 attributes of a tumour collected from expensive
microscopic examinations. The attributes relate to the
thickness of clumps, the uniformity of cell size and shape,
the amount of marginal adhesion, and the frequency of bare
nuclei. The problem is to classify the tumour as either
benign or malignant.
4.1.2 The diabetes dataset
The diabetes dataset comprises 768 examples of which 500
belong to class 1 and 268 belong to class 2. Datasets are
collected from female patients of 21 years of age or older
and of Pima Indian heritage. There are 8 attributes to be
classiﬁed as either ‘tested positive for diabetes’ or ‘tested
not positive for diabetes’.
4.1.3 The heart disease dataset
The heart disease datasets comprise 920 examples. The
datasets are collected from expensive medical tests on
patients. There are 35 attributes to be classiﬁed as presence
or absence of heart disease.
4.1.4 The thyroid dataset
The thyroid disease dataset comprises 7200 examples
collected from patients through clinical tests. There are 21
attributes to be classiﬁed in three classes, i.e. normal,
hyper-function and subnormal function. 92% of the
Table 1 Summary of
benchmark datasets
No. of examples
Attributes
Training set
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
patients are normal, which insists that the classiﬁer accuracy must be signiﬁcantly higher than 92%.
4.2 Non-medical datasets
The non-medical datasets comprise seven datasets from
different other domains: the credit card, glass, gene, horse,
letter, mushroom, and soybean datasets.
4.2.1 The credit card dataset
The credit card dataset comprises 690 examples collected
from real credit card applications by customers with a good
mix of numerical and categorical attributes. There are 51
attributes to be classiﬁed as credit card granted or not
granted by the bank. 44% of the examples in the datasets
are positive. The datasets also contain 5% missing values
in the examples.
4.2.2 The glass dataset
The classiﬁcation of glass dataset is used for forensic
investigations. The datasets comprise 214 examples collected from chemical analysis of glass splinters. There are
70, 76, 17, 13, and 19 examples for 6 classes, respectively.
The datasets contain 9 attributes of continuous value to be
classiﬁed into 6 classes.
4.2.3 The gene dataset
The gene dataset comprises 3175 examples of intron/exon
boundaries of DNA sequences elements or nucleotide. A
nucleotide is a four-valued nominal attribute and encoded
binary, i.e. {- 1, 1}. There are 120 attributes to be classiﬁed into three classes: exon/intron (EI) boundary, intron/
exon (IE) boundary, or none of these. EI boundary is called
donor, and IE boundary is called acceptor. 25% examples
of the dataset are donors, and 25% examples are acceptors.
4.2.4 The horse dataset
The horse dataset comprises 364 examples of horse colic.
Colic is an abdominal pain in horses, which can result in
death. There are 58 attributes collected from veterinary
examination to be classiﬁed into three classes: horse will
survive, die, or euthanized. The dataset contains 62%
examples of survival, 24% examples of death, and 14%
examples of euthanized. About 30% of the values in the
challenges
classiﬁcation.
4.2.5 The letter recognition dataset
Alphabet consists of 26 letters, and recognition of letters is
a large classiﬁcation problem. It is a tough benchmark
problem for the DEL algorithm. The dataset contains
20,000 examples of digitized patterns. Each example was
converted into 16 numerical attributes (i.e. real valued
vector), which are to be classiﬁed into 26 classes.
4.2.6 The mushroom dataset
The mushroom dataset comprises 8124 examples based on
hypothetical observations of mushroom species described
in a book. There are 125 attributes of the mushrooms
collected based on the shape, colour, odour, and habitat.
30% of the examples have one missing attribute value.
48% of examples are poisonous. The classiﬁer has to categorize the mushrooms as edible or poisonous.
4.2.7 The soybean dataset
The soybean dataset comprises 683 examples collected
from the descriptions of beans. The attributes are based on
the normal size and colour of leaf, the size of spots on leaf,
hallow spots, normal growth of plant, the rooted roots, and
the plant’s life history, treatment of seeds, and the air
temperature. There are 82 attributes to be classiﬁed into 19
diseases of soybeans. There are missing values of attributes
in most of the examples.
4.3 Experimental setup
Datasets are divided into training and testing sets, and no
validation set is used in the experimentation. The classiﬁcation error rate is calculated according to:
Ci ¼ 100  T:T:P  C:P
where T.T.P denotes the total number of test patterns and
C.P denotes the total number of correctly classiﬁed patterns. The numbers of examples in the training and test sets
are chosen based on the reported works in the literature so
that a comparison of results is possible. The size of the
training and testing sets used in DEL is shown in Table 1.
4.4 Experimental results
A summary of the experimental results of the DEL algorithm carried on 11 datasets described in Sects. 4.1 and 4.2
is presented in Table 2. The classiﬁcation error is deﬁned
as the percentage of wrong classiﬁcations in the test set
deﬁned by Eq. 2. Table 3 shows the comparison of DEL
with its component individual networks in terms of
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
classiﬁcation error rates for glass dataset. It shows the error
rates for glass datasets are relatively higher than the other
datasets. This is due to the error rates of the individual NNs
that led to the higher error rate of the ensemble. Table 4a
shows the accuracy of NNs and the common intersection
and the diversity of the NNs of ensemble for the glass
dataset is shown in Table 4b. The accuracy X means the
correct response sets of the individual NNs, whereas the
diversity 1 means the number of different examples correctly classiﬁed by individual NNs. If Si is the correct
response set of the ith NN in the testing set, Xi is the size of
Si, and Xi1;i2;...;ik is the size of the set Si1 \ Si2; . . .; \Sik,
then the diversity 1 of the ensemble is Xi ¼ Xi1;i2;...;ik. For
the glass dataset, DEL produced an ensemble of four NNs
Table 2 Results obtained applying the proposed learning model for 11 benchmark datasets
Classiﬁcation
(9-8-2-2), (9-10-2-2), (9-8-2), (9-10-2)
(8-8-4-2), (8-7-4-2), (8-8-2), (8-7-2), (8-8-2), (8-7-2)
Heart disease
(35-12-2-2), (35-11-2-2), (35-12-2), (35-11-2), (35-10-2)
(21-12-3-3), (21-16-2-3), (21-12-3), (21-16-3), (21-12-3), (21-16-3)
Credit card
(51-13-2-2), (51-26-2-2), (51-13-2), (51-26-2), (51-13-2)
(9-10-7-6), (9-9-7-6), (9-10-6), (9-9-6)
120-14-5-3
120-18-6-3
(120-17-5-3), (120-16-6-3), (120-18-3), (120-16-3)
(58-17-2-3), (58-16-2-3), (58-17-3), (58-16-3), (58-17-3)
Letter recognition
16-20-23-26
16-24-23-26
(16-23-23-26), (16-22-23-26), (16-23-26), (16-22-26)
(125-4-2-2), (125-6-2-2), (125-4-2)
82-22-7-19
82-26-8-19
(82-25-7-19), (82-24-8-19), (82-25-19), (82-24-19), (82-25-19)
Table 3 Comparison of
ensemble’s classiﬁcation error
with its component NNs for the
glass database
Ensemble/NN
Architecture
Classiﬁcation error
(9-10-7-6), (9-9-7-6), (9-11-6), (9-9-6)
Table 4 For the test datasets of glass problem: (a) the accuracy and
intersection of NNs; (b) the measure of diversity of these individual
(a) Accuracy of NNs
X1234 = 29
(b) Diversity of NNs in ensemble
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
(N1, N2, N3, and N4). The sizes of the correct responses are
S1 = 37, S2 = 33, S3 = 36, and S4 = 36. The large variations in accuracies are caused by the incremental learning
used by DEL. The ensemble started with N1 and N2 and
trained them. When the two failed to achieve a successful
ensemble, DEL added N3 and N4 at a ﬁnal step. The size of
S1 \ S2 \ S3 \ S4 was only 29 resulting in diversity 1 = 8
among N1, N2, N3, and N4.
It is demonstrated here that the DEL uses a smaller
number of training cycles to ﬁnd the dynamic ensemble
architecture with a small classiﬁcation error. For example,
for the glass dataset DEL with dynamic architecture produces a ﬁnal ensemble with only four individual networks.
Only ﬁve hidden nodes were added to individual networks
training with constructive algorithm, and two hidden nodes
were deleted from individual networks’ while training with
a pruning algorithm. DEL achieved a classiﬁcation error of
26.415% for this dataset. According to the comparison with
other algorithms shown in Table 5, DEL achieves the
lowest percentage of classiﬁcation error.
To demonstrate how a hidden neuron’s output changes
during the entire training period, the hidden neurons’ output for the cancer dataset is shown in Fig. 3. Constructive
algorithm was used for training one network. The individual network started the training with one node in its ﬁrst
hidden layer and two nodes in its second hidden layer.
During the training period, four nodes were added to the
ﬁrst hidden layer of the network and nodes in second
hidden layer were kept ﬁxed at two nodes. The outputs
stabilize and the convergence curve becomes smooth after
about 100 iterations, indicating that the learning may not
require a very large number of iterations.
Figure 4 shows the training error proﬁle of ensemble for
cancer, heart disease, glass, and soybean datasets. Two
from medical and two from non-medical datasets are
chosen. During the intermediate period of the training,
individual networks were added to the ensemble by constructive strategy and hidden nodes were added as well as
deleted from corresponding individual networks using a
hybrid constructive–pruning strategy. For example, for
cancer dataset in Fig. 4, the ensemble started with two
individual networks with architecture (9-4-2-2) and (9-12-
2-2). The NN architecture (9-4-2-2) has 9 inputs, two
hidden layers with 4 and 2 neurons, respectively, and 2
outputs. The NN architecture (9-12-2-2) has 9 inputs, two
hidden layers with 12 and 2 neurons, respectively, and 2
outputs. Constructive algorithms for individual network (9-
4-2-2) and pruning algorithm for individual network (9-12-
2-2) were applied during training. During the training,
individual NNs with architectures (9-4-2) and (9-12-2)
were added to the ensemble. Hidden nodes were added to
individual networks (9-4-2-2) and (9-4-2) as constructive
algorithms were used to train them. Hidden nodes were
deleted from individual networks (9-12-2-2) and (9-4-2) as
these two were trained using pruning algorithm. After
addition of individual networks and hidden nodes by constructive strategy and deletion of hidden nodes by pruning
strategy, the ﬁnal ensemble with individual NN architectures of (9-8-2-2), (9-10-2-2), (9-8-2), and (9-10-2) was
Figure 5a, b shows the training error proﬁles of individual NNs with constructive algorithm. For example,
Fig. 5a shows the curves of individual networks for which
constructive algorithms were applied starting with architectures (9-4-2-2) (indicated by solid line) and (9-4-2)
(indicated by dash line) for cancer dataset. At the intermediate period of training, hidden nodes were added to
individual networks by the dynamic node creation (DNC)
method until this node addition increased the performance
of the ensemble. Finally, all these constructive networks in
the ensemble completed training with (9-8-2-2) and (9-8-2)
architectures. Solid lines indicate NNs with 2 hidden layers, and dash lines indicate NN with single hidden layer
from Figs. 5, 6, 7 and 8.
Figure 6a, b shows training error proﬁles of individual
NNs with pruning algorithm. The pruning algorithm has an
impact on error proﬁles which is visible from the nonsmooth curves. Figure 6a shows the curves of individual
NNs applied to cancer dataset starting with (9-12-2-2) and
(9-12-2) architectures. At the intermediate training period,
hidden nodes were deleted from individual networks by the
sensitivity calculation method until this node deletion
increased the performance of the ensemble. Finally, all
these pruning networks in the ensemble ended up training
with (9-10-2-2) and (9-10-2) architectures.
Figure 7a, b shows the curves of hidden nodes addition
to the individual NNs training applying constructive algorithm. In this case, individual networks with small architecture started training and at the intermediate training
period, hidden nodes were added to the ﬁrst hidden layer of
the individual network sensitivity by the dynamic node
creation method. For example, Fig. 7a shows the curves of
the hidden nodes addition to individual networks trained
using constructive algorithm for cancer dataset. Here, the
individual network started training with (9-4-2-2) and (9-4-
2) architectures and ﬁnally ended up training with (9-8-2-2)
and (9-8-2) architectures.
Figure 8a, b shows the curves of the hidden nodes
deletion from the individual NNs training applying pruning
algorithm. Individual networks with architecture larger
than necessary started training in this case and at the
intermediate training period, hidden nodes that deem not
necessary were deleted from the ﬁrst hidden layer of the
individual network by the sensitivity calculation method.
Hidden node with the lowest sensitivity was deleted. If
the deleted node does not possess the lowest sensitivity,
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
Table 5 Test set error rates for the datasets: comparison of DEL with results of (1) a single NN classiﬁer (Stan); (2) an ensemble created by varying random initial weights (Simp); (3) an
ensemble created by Bagging method; (4) an ensemble created by Arcing method, (5) an ensemble created by Ada method , (6) a semi-supervised ensemble learning algorithm, i.e.
SemiNCL , and (7) a cluster-based boosting (CBoost) ensemble in two versions, i.e. CBoost-Sup and CBoost-Semi 
(with % of labelled data)
SemiNCL 
CBoost-Sup 
CBoost-Semi 
Credit card
15.87 ± 3.73
14.68 ± 2.84
14.10 ± 2.58
21.47 ± 3.47
19.96 ± 2.67
18.35 ± 3.03
18.67 ± 1.26
16.18 ± 2.73
15.82 ± 3.44
38.96 ± 12.01
19.01 ± 7.31
18.84 ± 6.88
36.31 ± 10.36
19.54 ± 4.57
20.32 ± 7.66
36.59 ± 6.30
33.82 ± 4.97
32.80 ± 5.22
25.87 ± 6.27
23.45 ± 5.23
29.11 ± 4.99
26.23 ± 6.17
22.52 ± 5.19
29.12 ± 5.04
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
then the weights were restored. For example, Fig. 8a shows
the curves of hidden nodes deletion from individual networks training by pruning algorithm for cancer dataset.
Individual networks here started training with (9-12-2-2)
and (9-12-2) architectures and ﬁnally completed training
with (9-10-2-2) and (9-10-2) architectures.
Figure 9a, b shows the curves of individual networks
addition during the training period. Individual networks
were added to the ensemble applying constructive strategy.
Initially, the number of NNs in the ensemble was two.
When addition increased the performance of the ensemble,
the number was increased. For example, Fig. 9a shows the
curve of individual network addition to the ensemble for
cancer dataset. The curve shows that network addition to
the ensemble completed training with four networks.
4.5 Correlations among the individual NNs
In Tables 6, 7, and 8, Corij means correlation between
individual networks j and i in the ensemble.
The distinguishable difference between Tables 6 and 7
is the negative correlation strength parameter k = 0.2, so
that the correlation between any two networks is positive in
Table 6. But in Table 7, the negative strength correlation
parameter is k = 1.0 so that in almost all cases the value of
correlation between any two networks is negative.
The distinguishable difference between Tables 8 and 9
is the negative correlation strength parameter k = 0.2 in
Table 8 so that the correlation between any two networks is
positive. But in the case of Table 9, the negative correlation strength parameter is k = 1.0, which results in negative
correlation between any two networks in many cases.
Iterations
Hidden node output
Fig. 3 The hidden nodes output of a network with initial architecture
(9-4-2-2) and ﬁnal architecture (9-8-2-2) for the cancer datasets
Iterations
Training error
Heart disease
Fig. 4 The error proﬁle of the ensemble: cancer dataset; glass dataset;
soybean dataset; and heart disease dataset
Iterations
Training error
Iterations
Training error
Fig. 5 The error of the individual networks for constructive algorithm: a for the cancer dataset; b for the heart disease dataset. Solid
line indicates NN with 2 hidden layers, and dash line indicates NN
with single hidden layer (shown in Table 2)
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
4.6 Comparison
To verify the performance of DEL algorithm, the results
are compared with popular empirical study of ensemble
network by Opitz and Maclin , a semi-supervised
ensemble learning algorithm, i.e. SemiNCL by Chen et al.
 , and a fully semi-supervised ensemble approach to
multiclass semi-supervised classiﬁcation in two versions,
i.e. CBoost-Sup and CBoost-Semi by Soares et al. .
Opitz and Maclin have studied a number of networks such
as a simple NN, an ensemble with varying initial weights,
Bagging ensemble, and Boosting ensemble. They used
resampling based on Arcing and Ada method. A conﬁdence
level of 95% can be achieved by an ensemble method than
a single-component classiﬁer . Opitz and Maclin didn’t
apply thyroid, gene, horse, and mushroom datasets in their
experiments; therefore, the results are not available for
comparison and marked as ‘-’ in the table. Chen et al. 
and Soares et al. both have presented test errors by
mean ± standard deviation % with 5%, 10%, and 20% of
labelled data. They also didn’t apply cancer, diabetics,
heart, thyroid, gene, letter, mushroom and soybean datasets
in their experiments; therefore, the results are not available
for comparison and marked as ‘-’ in the table.
5 Discussions
Most of the existing ensemble learning methods use trailand-error method to determine the number and architecture
of NNs in the ensemble. Most of them use a two-stage
design process for designing an ensemble. In the ﬁrst stage,
individual NNs are created, and in the second stage these
NNs are combined. In the ensemble, the number of NNs
Iterations
Training error
Iterations
Training error
Fig. 6 The error of the individual networks for pruning algorithm:
a for the cancer dataset; b for the heart disease dataset. Solid line
indicates NN with 2 hidden layers and dash line indicates NN with
single hidden layer (shown in Table 2)
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Fig. 7 Hidden nodes addition for individual networks training with
constructive algorithm: a for the cancer dataset; b for the glass
dataset. Solid line indicates NN with 2 hidden layers, and dash line
indicates NN with single hidden layer (shown in Table 2)
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
and the number of hidden neurons in the individual networks are predeﬁned and ﬁxed. These existing methods use
two cost functions for designing the ensemble. One is for
the accuracy, and another is for diversity. In most of the
existing ensemble methods, individual NNs are trained
independently or sequentially rather than simultaneously,
which lead to loss of interaction among NNs in the
ensemble. In ensemble training, the previously trained
network is not affected.
In DEL, we presented a dynamic approach to determine
the topology of an ensemble. This dynamic approach
determines the number and architecture of the individual
NNs in the ensemble. Such a dynamic approach is entirely
new to designing NN ensemble. In DEL, better diversity
among the NNs has also been maintained. In DEL, constructive strategy has been used for automatic determination of the number of NNs and constructive–pruning
strategy has been used for automatic determination of the
architecture of NNs in the ensemble. The hybrid constructive–pruning strategy has provided better diversity for
the whole ensemble (Table 4b). NCL has been used for
diversity of NNs in the ensemble encouraging individual
networks to learn different regions and aspects of data
space. But, if different NNs attempt to learn different
regions with inaccurate architecture, learning will also be
insufﬁcient or improper by this attempt. Different training
sets for individual networks are created which also help
maintaining diversity among the NNs in the ensemble
(Table 4b). In some cases, different training sets were
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Fig. 8 Hidden nodes deletion for individual networks training with
constructive algorithm: a for the cancer dataset; b for the glass
dataset. Solid line indicates NN with 2 hidden layers, and dash line
indicates NN with single hidden layer (shown in Table 2)
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Iterations
No. Hidden Nodes
Fig. 9 Individual network addition to the ensemble at the training
period: a for the cancer dataset; b for the soybean dataset
Table 6 Correlation of networks for the cancer dataset for g = 0.1,
k = 0.2. In this case, iteration continued 116. In ensemble, individual
networks required is 4
Cor12 = 0.018309
Cor13 = 0.021606
Cor14 = 0.019284
Cor23 = 0.017636
Cor24 = 0.015741
Cor34 = 0.018576
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690
created by variation of training examples, and in other
cases by random choice of the training examples. As NN is
a kind of unstable learning, random redistribution of the
training samples has provided better learning in the case of
an unstable learning. Both three- and four-layered individual networks were used to design the ensemble.
DEL uses a minimum number of parameters, i.e. only
one correlation strength parameter k. An incremental
training approach has been used in DEL because even after
choosing the appropriate architecture of the ensemble, DEL
has to be trained several times for ﬁnding the correct value
of the learning rate parameter and the correlation strength
parameter k. DEL uses only one cost function (the
ensemble error E) during training, not two cost functions,
one for accuracy and the one for diversity used in some
other ensemble method in the literature. DEL uses a onestage design process. Individual networks are created and
combined at the same design stage. The advantage of DEL
is that it does not need any separate gating block. DEL uses
the parameter k as a balancing mechanism for bias–variance–covariance tradeoff. Since DEL generates uncorrelated networks in the ensemble, individual networks in this
ensemble are well diversiﬁed.
DEL algorithm uses both simple averaging and majority
voting combination methods. For some problems, simple
averaging method performed better, and for some other
Despite problem dependent, the choice of the correlation
strength parameter k is important in DEL. To delete hidden
nodes from individual networks in an ensemble, initially a
network larger than necessary is considered. But, assessing
the initial size of the NN is challenging, which is still an
unknown parameter in DEL algorithm.
6 Conclusions
DEL is a new algorithm for designing and training NN
ensembles. Traditional way of ensemble designing is still a
manual trial-and-error process, whereas DEL is an automatic design approach. The number of NNs and their
architectures are determined by DEL algorithm.
The major beneﬁts of the proposed DEL algorithm
compared to existing ensemble algorithms are (1) automatic creation of ensemble architectures; (2) preservation
of accuracy and diversity among the NNs in the ensemble;
and (3) minimum number of parameters speciﬁed by
DEL emphasizes both accuracy and diversity of NNs in
ensemble to improve the performance. Constructive and
constructive–pruning strategies are used in DEL to achieve
the accuracy of individual NNs. To maintain diversity of
NNs, NCL and different training sets are used. The performance of DEL algorithm was conﬁrmed on benchmark
problems. In almost all cases, DEL outperformed the others. However, the performance of DEL needs to be evaluated further on some regression and time series problems.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Attribution
International
( 
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
Table 7 Correlation of networks for the cancer dataset for g = 0.1, k = 1.0
Cor12 = (- 0.006913)
Cor13 = 0.013130
Cor14 = (- 0.017219)
Cor23 = (- 0.006320)
Cor24 = (- 0.005632)
Cor34 = (- 0.005960)
Table 8 Correlation of individual networks for the diabetes dataset
for g = 0.1, k = 0.3. In this case, iteration continued 212. In the
ensemble, the number of individual networks required to complete
training was 6
Cor12 = 0.018343
Cor13 = 0.016651
Cor14 = 0.015793
Cor15 = 0.017334
Cor16 = 0.015708
Cor23 = 0.022907
Cor24 = 0.021727
Cor25 = 0.023847
Cor26 = 0.021609
Cor34 = 0.019722
Cor35 = 0.021647
Cor36 = 0.019616
Cor45 = 0.020531
Cor46 = 0.018605
Cor56 = 0.020420
Table 9 Correlation of networks for the diabetes dataset for g = 0.1,
Cor12 = 0.024974
Cor13 = 0.006464
Cor14 = 0.000086
Cor15 = 0.029325
Cor16 = (- 0.015724)
Cor23 = 0.007256
Cor24 = 0.000096
Cor25 = 0.032919
Cor26 = (- 0.017651)
Cor34 = 0.000025
Cor35 = 0.008520
Cor36 = (- 0.004569)
Cor45 = 0.000113
Cor46 = (- 0.000060)
Cor56 = (- 0.020727)
Neural Computing and Applications 32:8675–8690