MRI-Assisted PET Motion Correction for Neurologic Studies
in an Integrated MR-PET Scanner
Ciprian Catana1, Thomas Benner1, Andre van der Kouwe1, Larry Byars2, Michael Hamm2, Daniel B. Chonde1,
Christian J. Michel2, Georges El Fakhri3, Matthias Schmand2, and A. Gregory Sorensen1
1Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, Massachusetts; 2Siemens Healthcare; and 3Division of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Department of
Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Head motion is difﬁcult to avoid in long PET studies, degrading
the image quality and offsetting the beneﬁt of using a highresolution scanner. As a potential solution in an integrated MR-
PET scanner, the simultaneously acquired MRI data can be
used for motion tracking. In this work, a novel algorithm for data
processing and rigid-body motion correction (MC) for the MRIcompatible BrainPET prototype scanner is described, and
proof-of-principle phantom and human studies are presented.
Methods: To account for motion, the PET prompt and random
coincidences and sensitivity data for postnormalization were
processed in the line-of-response (LOR) space according to
the MRI-derived motion estimates. The processing time on
the standard BrainPET workstation is approximately 16 s for
each motion estimate. After rebinning in the sinogram space,
the motion corrected data were summed, and the PET volume
was reconstructed using the attenuation and scatter sinograms
in the reference position. The accuracy of the MC algorithm was
ﬁrst tested using a Hoffman phantom. Next, human volunteer
studies were performed, and motion estimates were obtained
using 2 high-temporal-resolution MRI-based motion-tracking
techniques. Results: After accounting for the misalignment
between the 2 scanners, perfectly coregistered MRI and PET
volumes were reproducibly obtained. The MRI output gates
inserted into the PET list-mode allow the temporal correlation
of the 2 datasets within 0.2 ms. The Hoffman phantom volume
reconstructed by processing the PET data in the LOR space
was similar to the one obtained by processing the data using
the standard methods and applying the MC in the image space,
demonstrating the quantitative accuracy of the procedure. In
human volunteer studies, motion estimates were obtained from
echo planar imaging and cloverleaf navigator sequences every
3 s and 20 ms, respectively. Motion-deblurred PET images, with
excellent delineation of speciﬁc brain structures, were obtained
using these 2 MRI-based estimates. Conclusion: An MRIbased MC algorithm was implemented for an integrated MR-
PET scanner. High-temporal-resolution MRI-derived motion
estimates (obtained while simultaneously acquiring anatomic
or functional MRI data) can be used for PET MC. An MRI-based
MC method has the potential to improve PET image quality,
increasing its reliability, reproducibility, and quantitative accuracy, and to beneﬁt many neurologic applications.
Key Words: PET; MRI; multimodality imaging; motion tracking;
motion correction
J Nucl Med 2011; 52:154–161
DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.110.079343
Simultaneous MR-PET data acquisition (1) permits temporal correlation of the signals from the 2 modalities, opening
up opportunities impossible to realize using sequentially acquired data. One such example is using the MRI information for PET data motion correction (MC). Typically,
subject motion is difﬁcult to avoid and can lead to degradation (blurring) of PET images and severe artifacts when
motion has large amplitude. In the case of neurologic PET
studies performed using stand-alone PET scanners, efforts
have been made to minimize these effects using different
techniques to restrain the subject’s head, but these methods
have had limited success (2,3). Alternatively, methods to
correct for head movements have been investigated (4–12),
and comprehensive reviews on this topic have been published (13,14). The simplest technique consists of realigning individual frames to a reference position and summing
them to create a single volume. In a variation of this method,
video cameras have been used to monitor the motion of the
head and a new frame started each time motion above a set
threshold was detected (4). Such image-based methods allow a frame-by-frame correction to be implemented but do
not account for motion within the predeﬁned frame. Furthermore, low statistics images obtained from short-duration
frames are sometimes used, making the coregistration less
A more sophisticated MC method consisted of obtaining
more detailed motion estimates using external monitors to
track the motion of sensors placed on the subject’s head.
For example, it was demonstrated that it is possible to
perform head MC using the Polaris optical tracking system
(5–8) combined with the line-of-response (LOR) rebinning
algorithm (15). In this algorithm, an LOR is transformed
using the rigid-body transformation provided externally and
rebinned into sinogram space. In these implementations,
Received May 19, 2010; revision accepted Sep. 27, 2010.
For correspondence or reprints contact: Ciprian Catana, Athinoula A.
Marinos Center for Biomedical Imaging Bldg. 149, Rm. 2301, 13th St.,
Charlestown, MA 02129.
E-mail: 
COPYRIGHT ª 2011 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine, Inc.
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 52 • No. 1 • January 2011
the LOR data were normalized before rebinning (i.e., prenormalization). However, postnormalization can also be
performed (16), but this requires the estimation of motioncorrected time-weighted normalization (17). List-mode reconstruction can be performed by combining the optical
motion-tracking method with list-mode data acquisition
(7). Although this combined method has the potential of
producing the most accurate results, the estimation of the
sensitivity image through sampling is not trivial (18). Additionally, the precision of the optical tracking methods is
limited by the residual freedom of the reﬂectors positioned
on the subject’s head. A promising technique to address this
problem uses video cameras and structured light to observe
a portion of the patient’s face (12). However, all these methods require the optical sensors to have an unobstructed view
from outside the scanner, which is not feasible on an integrated MR-PET scanner because of the presence of the radiofrequency coils.
In a combined MR-PET scanner, the MRI data acquired
simultaneously with the PET data could be used to derive
high-temporal-resolution motion estimates, eliminating the
need for an optical tracking system. In this work, rigid-body
MRI-assisted MC was demonstrated on an integrated MR-
PET scanner. First, an implementation of an MC algorithm
based on the LOR rebinning method and using postnormalization was proposed. Next, the quantitative accuracy of
the proposed method was compared with image-based MC
in phantom experiments. Finally, proof-of-principle studies
in human volunteers were performed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Integrated MR-PET Scanner
PET Scanner Geometry. The BrainPET prototype is a dedicated
brain scanner that can be operated inside the bore of the Siemens
MAGNETOM 3-T MRI scanner, a total-imaging-matrix system.
Brieﬂy, there are 32 detector cassettes that make up the PET
gantry, each consisting of 6 detector blocks (Fig. 1). Each detector
block consists of a 12 · 12 array of lutetium oxyorthosilicate
crystals (2.5 · 2.5 · 20 mm) with a readout by magnetic ﬁeld–
insensitive avalanche photodiodes. To minimize the potential for
interference with the MRI system, each cassette was individually
shielded. Because of the geometric constraints and limitations in
the number of electronic channels provided by the QuickSilver
architecture (i.e., maximum 192 channels) (19), there were 6mm gaps between adjacent heads in the same ring. Additionally,
there were 2.5-mm gaps between the blocks in the same cassette.
Data-Processing Workﬂow Without Motion Correction. Coincidence event data were acquired and stored in list-mode format.
Each 48-bit event contained the addresses of the 2 crystals in
which the annihilation photons were detected. The LOR joining
these 2 crystals was positioned in the 3-dimensional (3D) space,
using the physical coordinates of the crystals. LOR were rebinned
into sinogram space using nearest-neighbor approximation and
axial compression (span, 9; maximum ring difference, 67). In such
a discrete remapping, more than one LOR is sent to a sinogram
bin. To account for this, the sinogram sampling density, called dwell
(DW) hereafter, is calculated by applying the same rebinning
algorithm to an LOR dataset ﬁlled with 1 count per LOR. A lookup table, which contains the sinogram addresses for all LORs, was
precalculated to speed up the rebinning. The sinogram space consisted of 1,399 sinograms; because of axial compression, the space
was organized in 15 segments. Each sinogram consisted of 192
angular projections and 256 radial elements. A set of sinograms—
prompt and random coincidences—was obtained after data rebinning. The calculation of random coincidences was performed,
sorting the delayed coincidences into delayed single maps from
which the total singles rate and the variance-reduced randoms
were estimated (20).
The sensitivity data were acquired with a plane source scanned
in 16 positions (with a 22.5 angular step), at 4 h per position.
Each position provided the sensitivity for the LORs that were the
most perpendicular (611.25) to the plane source, and the overall
sensitivity (LORS) was obtained by combining these ﬁles. The
normalization was obtained from the LORS sorted into the sinogram space and from the DW sinogram, using the following procedure. First, the sensitivity sinogram was divided by the DW
sinogram, and the resulting sinogram was scaled by dividing it
by the mean of the nonzero values. Next, to control the noise
propagation in the reconstruction, the bins with low sensitivity
(i.e., ,0.1) were discarded, and the thresholded sensitivity was
multiplied by the DW. Finally, the normalization sinogram was
obtained by taking the inverse of the nonzero elements of this
The head attenuation map (m-map) was obtained using a
recently implemented MRI-based attenuation-correction method
(21). The scatter sinogram was obtained using a calculated method
based on the single scatter estimation method (22). The implementation has been revisited for improving the speed, allowing a
full 3D calculation .
The images were reconstructed with the ordinary Poisson orderedsubset expectation maximization 3D algorithm from prompt and
expected random coincidence, normalization, attenuation, and scatter
coincidence sinograms using 16 subsets and 6 iterations (23). The
reconstructed volume consisted of 153 slices with 256 · 256 pixels
(1.25 · 1.25 · 1.25 mm).
Data-Processing Workﬂow with Motion Correction. The listmode dataset was divided into n frames (LMFi, i 5 1,n) of variable
duration (Dti) according to the desired pharmacokinetic protocol.
MC was subsequently applied separately for each of these frames.
3D rendering of BrainPET scanner (left) shows placement of detector blocks inside gantry. Transaxial (upper right) and
axial (lower right) sections illustrate gaps between LSO arrays.
LSO 5 lutetium oxyorthosilicate.
MRI-ASSISTED PET MOTION CORRECTION • Catana et al.
The head position at the beginning of the acquisition is usually set
as the reference position for the whole study. Assuming there are k
motion estimates available during LMFi, this frame was divided
into k subframes (LMFij, j 5 1,k). Rigid-body spatial transformation matrices (Tij) to the reference position for all these subframes
and frame durations (Dtij) were obtained from the MRI data. The
list-mode frames LMFij were histogrammed into the corresponding
LOR ﬁles (LORFij). The motion was accounted for in the LOR
space by moving the coordinates of all crystals based on Tij.
Speciﬁcally, it is applied to the physical coordinates of the 2 crystals deﬁning each individual LOR, and 2 points that deﬁne a new
line (LORcorr) were obtained. After this step, LORcorr was rebinned
into sinogram space, generating prompt (SPij_corr) and random
(SRij_corr) sinograms. A subframe-speciﬁc DW (SDWij_corr) was
also calculated to account for the different sampling density after
application of the spatial transformation. Because the radiofrequency coil was stationary with respect to the scanner, its attenuation (LORC) cannot simply be combined with the subject’s head
attenuation anymore and instead was combined with the sensitivity in the LOR space (i.e., LORSC 5 LORS · LORC). Tij was then
applied to LORSC to obtain the subframe-speciﬁc sensitivity sinogram (SSCij_corr). The processing time for a subframe is currently
approximately 16 s on the BrainPET workstation (Xeon X5355
[Intel]; 2.66-GHz quad processor, 16-GB RAM).
The emission data from all the subframes were combined to
obtain the corrected prompt and random coincidence sinograms
(i.e., SPi_corr 5 S SPij_corr and SRi_corr 5 S SPRij_corr). Timeweighted sensitivity (SSCi_corr 5 SDtij · SSCij_corr) and DW
(SDWi_corr 5 SDtij · SDWij_corr) sinograms were generated and
used to create the frame-speciﬁc normalization sinogram (SNi_corr).
The head attenuation (SAref) and scatter correction (SScatref) sinograms were estimated only in the reference frame. The motioncorrected PET volume was reconstructed from these sinograms
(i.e., SPi_corr, SRi_corr, SNi_corr, SAref, and SScatref) using the standard
3D ordinary Poisson ordered-subset expectation maximization
algorithm.
MRI Motion Tracking. One MRI-based motion-tracking method
is to repeatedly acquire anatomic data during the PET data
acquisition and then coregister the individual MRI volumes to
obtain the motion estimates. The disadvantage, however, is that
motion estimates with a temporal resolution in the minute range
are obtained depending on the MRI sequence acquisition time and
they do not allow for intraframe MC. Furthermore, this method
cannot be used for sequences that do not provide anatomic information (e.g., MRI spectroscopy).
Another method for tracking the motion is the one already
implemented on the Siemens Trio scanner—prospective acquisition correction (24). This method requires the collection of an
echo planar imaging (EPI) series and tracking of prospective
real-time motion by registration of each volume with the ﬁrst in
the series. Thus, EPI-derived motion estimates are obtained every
time a complete volume is acquired, and these motion estimates
could be made available to the PET reconstruction algorithm.
Motion-tracking information during high-resolution anatomic
imaging with MRI can also be obtained using embedded cloverleaf navigators (CLNs), as we have previously demonstrated
(25). Brieﬂy, a CLN (duration , 4 ms) is inserted every repetition
time (TR) of a 3D-encoded fast low-angle shot (FLASH)
sequence, providing an estimate of the rigid-body transformation
between the current position of the object relative to an initial
k-space map (this map is acquired at the beginning of the scan
in 12 s). These motion estimates are used by the MRI system to
compensate for motion in real time. A log ﬁle containing all the
transformations is produced.
These methods are suitable for tracking the head rigid-body
motion and were used in this work.
MRI and PET Data Correlation
Despite the simultaneous acquisition, the PET and MRI data
acquired with the BrainPET were not correlated by default, and
2 issues had to be addressed: the spatial coregistration of the
2 volumes and the temporal correlation of the 2 signals.
Spatial Correlation. The spatial misregistration between the
PET and MRI volumes comes from the fact that, due to physical
limitations, the center of the PET scanner ﬁeld of view (FOV) does
not precisely coincide with the magnet’s isocenter. Furthermore,
the axial FOVs are not identical, and the MRI slices can be prescribed in any orientation. Acquiring isotropic 3D MRI data in the
transversal orientation solves all these limitations, with the exception of the spatial mismatch issue. A solution to the spatial mismatch problem is to obtain a transformation matrix (TMRI/PET)
by scanning a structured phantom visible on both PET and MRI
scans. A Derenzo 20-cm-diameter phantom with holes ranging
from 2.5 to 6 mm was ﬁlled with 50 MBq of 18F-FDG, and
PET and MRI data were acquired simultaneously. The 2 volumes
were coregistered based on mutual information using the Vinci
software package (26). The experiment was repeated 6 times after
the phantom was repositioned inside the scanner.
The MRI and PET scanners’ device coordinate systems follow
the same rules for deﬁning the orientations of and the rotations
along each of the 3 orthogonal axes, and these same rules have
been adopted in this work. PET and MR images are both presented
using the radiologic convention.
Temporal Correlation. On this prototype scanner, no clock
synchronization between the 2 systems was implemented, and
PET and MRI data were acquired independently under the control
of different computers. Therefore, a synchronization method was
implemented by inserting MRI output triggers into the PET listmode data every time a motion estimate was obtained. Time marks
normally inserted into the PET list-mode data every 0.2 ms were
used to time stamp these MRI trigger events. Thirty-two different
gates can be encoded, and a mechanism that allowed the manual
switching between the inputs on which the gates were inserted
(e.g., each time a new sequence started, a different trigger was
inserted) was implemented.
To verify that all the trigger events were recorded, the following
experiments were performed. First, a pulse generator was used to
create trigger signals, and PET list-mode data were acquired with
a 68Ge line source. The events were recorded for different pulse
frequencies and acquisition times. As a next step, triggers were
obtained directly from the MRI scanner. Because the MRI output
signal was narrower (i.e., 10 ms) than the signal expected by the
BrainPET, a signal stretcher was built. List-mode data were
acquired with the line source and an MRI-visible phantom. The
number of trigger events recorded was analyzed for various sequences, acquisition times, and TRs.
Hoffman Phantom Studies
A Hoffman phantom ﬁlled with approximately 50 MBq of 18F-
FDG was used to acquire MRI and PET data simultaneously in
5 positions. A multiecho magnetization-prepared rapid-acquisition gradient echo (ME-MPRAGE) sequence was used to acquire
data in each case. The ﬁrst frame was set as the reference, and the
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 52 • No. 1 • January 2011
other 4 MRI volumes were coregistered to it using mutual information (26). These transformations were used to correct exactly
the same PET data both in the LOR and in the image space. In the
ﬁrst case, the procedure outlined in the “Data-Processing Work-
ﬂow with Motion Correction” section was followed. The m-map in
the reference position was created by assuming uniform linear
attenuation coefﬁcients throughout the phantom volume (i.e.,
0.096 cm21). In the second case, the 5 PET volumes were reconstructed using the standard procedure. The m-maps for these positions were obtained from the reference m-map by applying the
inverse transformations. Subsequently, the reconstructed PET volumes were moved back to the reference position and summed in
image space. A PET volume uncorrected for motion was also reconstructed from all the data summed in the sinogram space. The
2 MC methods were compared by analyzing horizontal proﬁles
drawn on representative images and average activity in volumes of
Human Volunteer Studies
For testing the MC algorithm in a more realistic situation, 2
human volunteers were recruited to undergo combined MR-PET
brain examinations. As per our approved Institutional Review
Board protocol, the subjects injected with approximately 185 MBq
of 18F-FDG were scanned for approximately 90 min. After an
uptake period of approximately 25 min, the functional MRI and
CLN sequences were each run for approximately 15 min, and the
subjects were asked to move their heads 4 times in each case.
Anatomic data were collected in between these acquisitions.
PET and MRI data were acquired simultaneously throughout the
EPI-Derived Motion Estimates. The prospective acquisitioncorrection sequence provides motion estimates in the MRI reference frame (TMRI) every 3 s. To derive the estimates in the PET
reference frame (TPET), the ﬁrst individual MRI volume was transformed to account for the spatial mismatch, and then the subsequent volumes were retrospectively coregistered. In this way, the
motion estimates were obtained directly in the PET reference
frame. Each of the 300 subframes was processed using these estimates, and a corrected volume was reconstructed. Additionally,
the data were reconstructed without MC.
CLN-Derived Motion Estimates. A series of motion estimates
with a sample rate of 50 Hz was obtained. However, 50 of these
estimates were averaged and used for correcting the corresponding
900 1-s PET subframes. The problem of correcting for multiple
receive radiofrequency coil elements for the navigator was circumvented by receiving the navigator signal using the birdcage while
collecting the image information from the 8-channel receive array.
The motion-corrected and uncorrected volumes were quantitatively compared. For this purpose, the list-mode data were divided
into 4 consecutive 3-min frames. These data were then processed
with and without MC, and the corresponding 8 volumes were reconstructed. Brain structures were segmented from the ME-MPRAGE
data acquired in the reference position using an automated segmentation algorithm (27). Time–activity curves were generated from the
average activity measured in brain structures of interest.
MRI and PET Data Correlation
Spatial Correlation. Representative PET images of the
Derenzo phantom are shown in Figure 2 (left). Even the
smallest structures (i.e., 2.5 mm) were resolved. A fusion of
the PET and MR images demonstrating the axial offset
between the 2 volumes is shown in the middle column.
Table 1 provides the transformations derived by the coregistration of the PET and MRI data acquired after the phantom was repositioned inside the scanner. The average
transformation obtained from these measurements was used
for subsequent studies. After this transformation was applied,
perfectly coregistered PET and MRI data were obtained
(Fig. 2, right).
Temporal Correlation. The number of gates recorded into
the PET list-mode data for different MRI sequences (e.g.,
EPI, CLN), using a wide range of TRs (e.g., 20 ms to 5 s),
measurements (e.g., 1 to 10) or acquisition times, perfectly
matched the expected values (e.g., the total number of
recorded gates equaled the acquisition time divided by the
Hoffman Phantom Studies
A representative prompt sinogram is shown in Figure 3
(upper left). These data were obtained by summing the
individual prompt sinograms corresponding to the 5 positions of the phantom. Also shown in Figure 3 were the
corresponding normalization sinogram (lower left) and
prompt and normalization sinograms after application of
Simultaneously acquired MR-PET data using Derenzo
phantom: representative PET images (left) and fused MR-PET
images before (middle) and after (right) accounting for spatial mismatch between the 2 scanners. Images in transaxial and coronal
orientations are shown in each case.
Spatial Mismatch Between PET and MRI Scanners
Rotation (degrees)
Translation (mm)
Experiment no.
MRI-ASSISTED PET MOTION CORRECTION • Catana et al.
the MC (right column). Because of motion, most of the
sinogram space has been ﬁlled with data; the percentage
of empty bins was reduced from 44% to 2%.
A representative MR image of the Hoffman phantom
acquired in the reference position is shown in Figure 4A
(upper left). The transformations for the subsequent volumes are given in Table 2. The corresponding PET image
reconstructed without MC and images obtained after application of the MC in LOR space and in the image space are
also shown in Figure 4A (upper right, lower left, and lower
right, respectively), demonstrating substantial improvement. On the basis of the proﬁles drawn on the transaxial
image (Fig. 4B) and the average activity measured in volumes of interest (Table 3), the 2 MC methods produced
similar results, suggesting that the proposed LOR-based
MC is as accurate as the image-based method.
Human Volunteer Studies
EPI-Derived Motion Estimates. A plot of the transformations obtained every 3 s from the EPI data is shown in
Figure 5A. The amplitude of the motion was less than 66
mm and 66. In addition to voluntary motion, a slow drift
can be observed in the third time interval. The changes
observed immediately after the subject moved at some of
the other time points (e.g., ﬁrst and fourth) are probably due
to the subject slowly drifting to a more comfortable position.
The reconstructed PET images before and after MC and
the corresponding MRI anatomic slices are shown in Figure
5B. An overall blurring of all the brain structures and a
reduction in the gray matter uptake can be observed in
the uncorrected data. After MC, excellent delineation of
speciﬁc brain structures can be appreciated. The processing
time was approximately 80 min.
CLN-Derived Motion Estimates. A plot of the translations and rotations applied to the PET data is shown in
Figure 6A. Slightly larger amplitude movements were
recorded in this case. The transformation matrices in the
MRI reference frames (TMRI) were derived from these average values. This matrix was then combined with the
TMRI/PET matrix to obtain the transformation in the PET
reference frame (TPET) as follows: the translations between
the 2 coordinate systems were ﬁrst removed, the rotations
were then applied, and ﬁnally the translations were reintroduced.
Representative images reconstructed before and after
MC are shown in Figure 6B. The substantial improvement
in image quality is evident. The processing time was approximately 4 h. Representative time–activity curves are
shown in Figure 7. The expected 18F-FDG kinetics in the
cortex were observed only after MC.
On visual inspection, the CLN-based correction seems to
produce slightly blurrier images than the functional MRI–
based one (Figs. 5B and 6B), possibly due to the larger
amplitude of the motion observed in the former case. It
was previously reported that the accuracy of the CLN estimates decreases for translations larger than 10 mm or rotations larger than 10 (25). A quantitative comparison
between the 2 MC methods was not possible because the
Representative prompt (upper) and normalization
(lower) sinograms before (left) and after (right) spatial transformations are applied. Empty bins were ﬁlled with data after transformation was applied.
MRI-based MC in Hoffman
phantom using ME-MPRAGE–derived motion estimates: (A) MR images in reference
position (upper left), uncorrected PET images (upper right), data corrected in LOR
space before image reconstruction (lower
left), and data corrected in image space after
each individual frame was reconstructed
(lower right). (B) Proﬁles drawn at indicated
demonstrated
agreement.
a.u. 5 arbitrary units.
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 52 • No. 1 • January 2011
activity was not in a steady state. These aspects will be
investigated in future phantom studies.
DISCUSSION
Motion correction is highly desirable when a highresolution PET scanner is used with patients. A solution
to this problem is offered by the simultaneous acquisition of
MRI and PET data in an integrated MR-PET scanner.
In this work, an LOR-based MC method for the BrainPET
scanner has been proposed. This solution allows the use of
the standard frame-based reconstruction toolbox and addresses the challenge imposed by the transaxial gaps present between the PET detectors blocks. Because an iterative
reconstruction was used, low-count frames may introduce
bias in the low-uptake regions (due to positivity constraints).
This bias could be minimized by combining the data in
LOR space before reconstruction. Furthermore, this method
allows the proper handling of the regions that are not inside
the PET FOV during the whole scan. For example, if the
subject moves outside the FOV for 50% of the time, a sharp
transition would be observed in the ﬁnal image between the
region that was inside the FOV for the whole study and the
one that was temporarily outside. Performing the MC in
LOR space leads only to a noise increase in this region
while the average signal is maintained; however, a correction applied after image reconstruction leads to a 50% decrease in the average signal in the same region.
Three MRI-based motion-tracking methods were used in
this work.
First, an image-based approach was used for deriving the
motion estimates by spatially coregistering the MRI volumes. Compared with the PET image-based method, the
coregistration of high-resolution MRI volumes is likely
more accurate. In this work, the image-based method (using
high-count frames) was used to validate our MC implementation. In phantom experiments, the proposed MC implementation was tested for a wide range of transformations,
likely exceeding those normally observed in clinical studies.
Although our phantom data results seem to suggest that
the quantitative properties of the MC images are preserved,
likely more work is required for a complete characterization.
Second, a method using EPI-derived motion estimates
was tested in human volunteers. This method is also imagebased because the motion estimates are derived by coregistering the individual EPI volumes acquired every TR.
This approach is particularly attractive because it allows the
simultaneous acquisition of functional MRI and PET
data—of interest for several research applications.
Third, a method using CLN was presented in this work.
Similar to the EPI-based method, a CLN-based method has
the advantage of not interfering with the standard MRI data
acquisition. Furthermore, the high-temporal-resolution motion estimates can be used to correct the PET data in short
frames—a process that could be important for performing
MC in the early phase of a dynamic PET study to sample
the radiotracer input function.
In principle, it could be possible to obtain MRI motion
estimates from the start to end of a PET acquisition. However, this is not trivial because a typical MRI protocol
consists of multiple sequences acquired sequentially, which
poses at least 2 challenges. First, intersequence realignment
is necessary. For this purpose, a 3D scout (e.g., AutoAlign
(28)) could be run between scans to monitor the head position. Second, motion tracking needs to be implemented for
all standard MRI sequences. The initial CLN implementation (25) is not suitable for non–steady-state and 2-dimensional sequences. In these cases, a solution would be to
separate the navigator from the imaging acquisitions using
spatial–spectral radiofrequency pulses. For the navigator,
the radiofrequency pulse could excite only the fat in the
3D slab, and for imaging, the radiofrequency pulse would
excite only water in the required slice. Proper design of the
Hoffman Phantom MRI-Derived Motion Estimates
Rotation (degrees)
Translation (mm)
Quantitative Comparison of LOR-Based and Image-Space–Corrected Volumes in Hoffman Phantom
LOR rebinning MC
Image space MC
No. of voxels
Frontal cortex
Occipital cortex
Cerebellar cortex
Frontal white matter
Ventricles
MRI-ASSISTED PET MOTION CORRECTION • Catana et al.
spatial-spectral pulse could make this approach suitable for
2-dimensional FLASH and 2-dimensional turbo spin-echo
sequences (the standard sequences routinely acquired in
patient care). A different approach could be used when
acquiring morphologic 3D MPRAGE data. In these sequences, there is a recovery period of several hundred milliseconds in which a navigator could be inserted.
The other challenge to the routine use of this method
relates to the prohibitive computational time required for
processing a long PET study. However, this could be signi-
ﬁcantly improved by exploiting the fact that the procedure
is highly parallelizable (i.e., each subframe can be processed
independently on a computer cluster). Furthermore, depending on the study, a threshold for relevant motion could be
used (e.g., observing the motion of a virtual point above the
nasion), which would reduce the number of subframes that
have to be processed.
MRI-based MC has the potential to improve PET as a
quantitative method. First, the nominal spatial resolution of
the scanner can be achieved. Second, the mismatch between
the attenuation and emission volumes can be eliminated.
Third, better estimates of the radiotracer arterial input function can be obtained using image-based approaches from
motion-corrected data. Together these improvements can
increase the reliability and reproducibility of the PET data,
potentially beneﬁtting several neurologic applications that
require precise quantiﬁcation or involve uncooperative
CONCLUSION
A novel implementation of a rigid-body LOR-based MC
algorithm is proposed for the BrainPET scanner. The
quantitative accuracy of the method was ﬁrst demonstrated
in phantom experiments using motion estimates derived
from coregistered high-resolution MRI volumes. Proof-ofprinciple MRI-assisted PET MC was demonstrated in human
MRI-based MC in healthy volunteer using CLN-derived
motion estimates. (A) Plot of motion estimates: translations along
(black) and rotations about (gray) 3 orthogonal axes are shown. (B)
PET data reconstructed before (left) and after MC (right). PET image
quality substantially improved after MC. deg. 5 degrees; SUV 5
standardized uptake value.
MRI-based MC in healthy volunteer using EPI-derived
motion estimates. (A) Plot of motion estimates: translations along
(black) and rotations about (gray) 3 orthogonal axes are shown. (B)
PET data reconstructed before (left) and after MC (middle). PET
image quality substantially improved after MC. Corresponding MR
images are provided as reference (right). Images in transverse
and coronal orientations are shown in each case. deg. 5 degrees;
SUV 5 standardized uptake value.
Time–activity curves obtained from PET data acquired
during CLN sequence before and after MC. a.u. 5 arbitrary units.
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 52 • No. 1 • January 2011
volunteers using 2 different MRI methods for tracking the
motion. The MRI-assisted MC method allows one to take
advantage of the high temporal resolution of the motion
estimates provided by the MRI scan and, ultimately, to
recover the nominal spatial resolution of the BrainPET
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in
part by the payment of page charges. Therefore, and solely
to indicate this fact, this article is hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by NIH grant
1R01CA137254-01A1.