Simulated-tempering approach to spin-glass
simulations
Werner Kerler and Peter Rehberg
Fachbereich Physik, Universit¨at Marburg, D-35032 Marburg,
After developing an appropriate iteration procedure for the determination
of the parameters, the method of simulated tempering has been successfully
applied to the 2D Ising spin glass.
The reduction of the slowing down is
comparable to that of the multicanonical algorithm.
Simulated tempering
has, however, the advantages to allow full vectorization of the programs and
to provide the canonical ensemble directly.
Introduction
A better theoretical understanding of spin glasses is still highly desirable. To
make progress within this respect more eﬃcient simulation algorithms are needed.
In particular at low temperatures conventional simulations suﬀer from severe slowing down due to energy barriers. Recently Berg and Celik have been able to
reduce the slowing down considerably by applying the multicanonical method .
Shortcomings of this method are that the computer programs cannot be vectorized
and that additional calculations (with complicated error estimates) are needed to
obtain the canonical ensemble.
An alternative is oﬀered by the method of simulated tempering which has been
introduced by Marinari and Parisi for the random-ﬁeld Ising model. It works by
associating a set of inverse temperatures to an additional dynamical variable of the
Monte Carlo scheme. Because then the system is warmed up from time to time one
gets a chance to avoid the eﬀective ergodicity breaking observed in conventional
approaches. By this method at each of the temperatures one gets the canonical
ensemble directly and there is nothing that prevents vectorization of the programs.
In these simulations involving the joint probability distribution of the spins and
of the additional variable one has the freedom to choose the set of temperatures
and the probability distribution of the additional variable. To ﬁx these quantities
in an optimal way is crucial for the eﬃciency of the method. In the ﬁrst application to the random-ﬁeld Ising model on small lattices this appeared to be not very
demanding . However, for spin glasses, in particular for larger lattices and low
temperatures, we ﬁnd that the appropriate determination of these parameters is far
from straightforward.
In the present paper we discuss the related issues in detail and develop a systematic
procedure which allows to ﬁx the respective parameters in an appropriate way. We
apply our method to the 2D Ising spin glass and show that an eﬃcient algorithm is
We use the Edwards-Anderson Hamiltonian with two replicas,
H(s, t) = −
Jij(sisj + titj)
where the sum goes over nearest neighbors, and si = ±1, ti = ±1. Thus we are able
to measure the order parameter 
We investigate samples for which Jij is put equal to +1 and −1 with equal probability.
To each value of the additional dynamical variable n of simulated tempering, which
takes the values 1, 2, . . . , N, an inverse temperature βn with β1 < β2 < . . . < βN is
associated. The partition function of the joint system then becomes
exp (−βnH(s, t) + gn)
The parameters gn reﬂect the freedom in the choice of the probability distribution
p(n) of the variable n.
Two steps are necessary in the calculations. In the ﬁrst step the parameters gn and
βn are determined. Then in the second step, using these parameters, the simulations
are performed and the physical observables are measured. The dynamical variables
si, ti, n are all updated by standard Metropolis techniques. Slowing down is
measured in terms of the ergodicity time τE, which is deﬁned as the mean time the
system needs to travel from n = 1 to N and back.
In Sec. II the iteration procedures for the determination of the parameters is
described.
Sec. III contains a discussion of the properties of this procedure.
Sec. IV some numerical results are presented.
Iteration procedure
To choose p(n) constant as proposed in Ref. , i.e. to visit the states n with equal
probability, appears reasonable. In a similar approach , in which the additional
dynamical variables is the number of components in the Potts model, it has been
tested that such a choice is optimal. Constant p(n) in terms of the gn means that
gn = −ln ˜Z(βn)
with the spin-glass partition function
exp (−βH(s, t))
It should be noted that gn depends on βn only.
Our choice here is to come suﬃciently close to (2.1). Because of the exponential
dependence of p(n) on gn the deviations from (2.1) must be small in order that all
states n are appropriately reached. We use two methods to calculate the gn. The
ﬁrst one is to replace gn by gn −ln(Np(n)) in subsequent iterations such that one
ultimately arrives at constant p(n). The second method is to apply reweighting 
of the obtained distribution to get the ratio of the ˜Z at neighboring n and thus by
(2.1) the diﬀerences of the respective new gn. The new gn then are calculated from
these diﬀerences.
To get hints on a reasonable choice of the βn one observes that the mean value of
the logarithm of the acceptance probability exp(−∆βH + ∆g) to order (∆β)3 is
On this basis one may require to choose βn in such a way that (2.3) gets as
constant as possible. Then, due to ⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2 ∼L2 at ﬁxed β, it follows that
the number N of temperature values should scale like N ∼L on the L × L lattice.
Further, this indicates that at larger β, where ⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2 is small, the distances
between the β–values should increase. Unfortunately at low temperatures (large β)
the requirement to make (2.3) constant cannot be used to determine ∆β because
the measurements are likely to arrive at ⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2 = 0, which would result in a
breakdown of an iterative determination of the βn.
We propose to calculate the βn by using a map which has an attractive ﬁxed point.
The map which we have constructed and applied has the property that if the ﬁxed
point is reached in a sequence of mappings the eﬀective stay time τ eff
at a state n
gets constant. This quantity is deﬁned by
2 ≤n ≤N −1
where the stay time τn is the mean time which elapses between entering state n and
leaving it. To perform the map we ﬁrst compute the auxiliary quantities
(βn+1 −βn)/(τ eff
n+1 + τ eff
n = 1, . . . , N −1
Then we get new values β′
n−1 + an−1
n = 2, . . . , N
Since β1 and βN are mapped to themselves the region of β covered does not change.
The ﬁxed point gets attractive because a large stay time implies a smaller β–
diﬀerence and thus a smaller stay time in the next iteration step. The numerical
results indicate that by the sequence of mappings also (2.3) gets very close to a
constant value.
Our procedure,
which determines the parameters in an iterative way,
started with equidistant βn and with gn estimated by the relation gn =
−L2 (aβn + b exp(−kβ)) + c. Each iteration involves four steps: 1) An appropriate
number (typically some multiple of the expected ergodicity time) of Monte Carlo
sweeps are performed to obtain the necessary data, as e.g. p(n) and τn. 2) New gn
are computed by one of the two methodes indicated above. 3) The map described
above is used to obtain new βn. 4) New gn which are related to these βn are determined by spline interpolation (this step is dictated by the fact that gn is a
function of βn). Criteria for the termination of the iteration procedure are discussed
in Sec. III.
Properties of the procedure
To study the impact of the number N of β–values, we have measured the ergodicity time as a function of N. Fig. 1 shows the respective results for lattices 12 × 12
and 24×24. These results suggest to avoid the steep increase at small N by choosing
N slightly above the minimum. Thus we put N = 1.25L in our simulations. This is
in accordance with the remark in Sec. II that one should have N ∼L and it turns
out to be appropriate on all lattices considered.
On smaller lattices we have used the ﬁrst method to get the new βn described
in Sec. II. On large lattices the second one involving reweighting, which performs
better for larger N, has been applied.
For lattices with L ≥24 we ﬁnd eﬀects caused by the occurrence of of metastable
spin-glass states. Since gn = βnfn, where fn is the free energy, one should have
where H0 is the ground state energy. In our calculations (gN −gN−1)/(βN −βN−1)
turns out to be, in fact, with good accuracy an integer number.
However, one
actually relies on the lowest energy which has been reached in the Monte Carlo
sweeps, which might be larger than H0 and thus lead to a wrong determination of
the parameters.
To see which serious trouble this can cause suppose that
with ∆H > 0 (where ∆H can take the values 4, 8, . . .).
The probability to get
from state N (related to the largest β) to state N −1 is min(pA, 1) with pA =
exp (−(βN−1 −βN)H + (gN−1 −gN)) which after inserting (3.2) becomes
pA = exp ((βN −βN−1)(H −H0 −∆H))
From (3.3) it is seen that if in the course of the simulations a true ground state with
H = H0 is reached, the probability for the transition from N to N −1 becomes
extremely small, i.e. the system gets trapped at low temperature.
Therefore special care is needed to avoid a wrong determination of type (3.2) of
the parameters. For this reason we have done a large number of iterations in each of
which we have determined the set of parameters and an estimate of the ergodicity
time τE. Out of these sets we have selected the set of parameters associated to the
smallest τE which in addition has satisﬁed the requirement
In (3.4) for H0 the lowest energy reached in all previous iterations has been inserted,
which has turned out to be a workable concept. Because, as already pointed out,
for ∆g/∆β we ﬁnd integers with good accuracy, ǫ = 0.1 is a reasonable bound. The
iterations have been terminated if after an appropriate time no set of parameters
with still lower τE and respecting (3.2) has occurred.
On the largest lattices which we have considered to reach suﬃcient accuracy of the
parameters in the iterations has turned out to be cumbersome. If the parameters
used in a simulation are not accurate enough, the sweeps happen to get restricted
to a subinterval of the n-interval which spoils the calculation.
Numerical results
Our simulations have been performed on 2D lattices with periodic boundary
conditions of sizes L = 4, 12, 24, 32, 48 for ten samples of Jij-conﬁgurations in each
case. This has been done for 0.3 ≤β ≤3.5 putting N = 1.25L. The ground-state
energy density
the distribution P(q) of the order parameter (1.2), and the ergodicity time τE have
been determined. From the obtained data the moments ⟨q2⟩and ⟨q4⟩of P(q) and
the Binder parameter
have been calculated. The results of this for β = 3.5 are presented in Tables 1 – 5.
For the samples the errors of the listed quantities are statistical ones including the
eﬀect of autocorelations (the E0 are exact). The errors of the mean values are the
ones derived from the ﬂuctuations of the sample values.
Our results for the mean value of the ground-state energy within errors agree with
the numbers of other authors . The results for ⟨q2⟩and Bq are compatible
with those given by Berg and Celik , though they are generally slightly larger. A
possible reason for this is that we have measured at a lower temperature than they
did. From our tables it is seen that there are strong dependences on the particular
sample as is expected because of the lack of self-averaging .
Figs. 2 and 3 show typical results for the distribution P(q). The invariance of the
Hamiltonian under the transformation si →si, ti →−ti requires P(q) = P(−q) as
is observed. The scaling law P(q) = L0.1 ¯P(qL0.1) with an universal function ¯P
was veriﬁed (due to the low number of samples with rather large errors).
The dependence of the ergodicity time on the lattice size L is depicted in Fig. 4
and compared to the multicanonical data given by Berg and Celik . We get the
dependence
τE ∼L4.27(8)
A ﬁt of the form τE ∼exp(kL) is not possible. Our ergodicity times are comparable
with those of Ref. (where the dynamical criticial exponent 4.4(3)) is obtained).
However, because our computer programs can be fully vectorized in terms of CPU
times we gain a large factor.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
through grants Ke 250/7-1 and Ke 250/7-2. The computations have been done on
the SNI 400/40 of the Universities of Hessen at Darmstadt and on the Convex C230
of Marburg University.