MIT Open Access Articles
Website Morphing
The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please share
how this access benefits you. Your story matters.
Citation: Hauser, John R. et al. “Website Morphing.” MARKETING SCIENCE 28.2 : 202-223.
© 2009 INFORMS
As Published: 
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences
Persistent URL: 
Version: Final published version: final published article, as it appeared in a journal, conference
proceedings, or other formally published context
Terms of Use: Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be
subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use.
Vol. 28, No. 2, March–April 2009, pp. 202–223
issn 0732-2399eissn 1526-548X0928020202
doi 10.1287/mksc.1080.0459
© 2009 INFORMS
Website Morphing
John R. Hauser, Glen L. Urban
MIT Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
{ , }
Guilherme Liberali
MIT Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, and
Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Sao Leopoldo, RS 90450 Brazil, 
Michael Braun
MIT Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
 
irtual advisors often increase sales for those customers who ﬁnd such online advice to be convenient and
helpful. However, other customers take a more active role in their purchase decisions and prefer more
detailed data. In general, we expect that websites are more preferred and increase sales if their characteristics
(e.g., more detailed data) match customers’ cognitive styles (e.g., more analytic). “Morphing” involves automatically matching the basic “look and feel” of a website, not just the content, to cognitive styles. We infer cognitive
styles from clickstream data with Bayesian updating. We then balance exploration (learning how morphing
affects purchase probabilities) with exploitation (maximizing short-term sales) by solving a dynamic program
(partially observable Markov decision process). The solution is made feasible in real time with expected Gittins
indices. We apply the Bayesian updating and dynamic programming to an experimental BT Group (formerly
British Telecom) website using data from 835 priming respondents. If we had perfect information on cognitive
styles, the optimal “morph” assignments would increase purchase intentions by 21%. When cognitive styles are
partially observable, dynamic programming does almost as well—purchase intentions can increase by almost
20%. If implemented system-wide, such increases represent approximately $80 million in additional revenue.
Key words: Internet marketing; cognitive styles; dynamic programming; Bayesian methods; clickstream
analysis; automated marketing; website design; telecommunications
History: Received: December 7, 2007; accepted August 25, 2008; processed by Fred Feinberg. Published online
in Articles in Advance February 24, 2009.
Introduction and Motivation
Website design has become a major driver of proﬁt.
Websites that match the preferences and information
needs of visitors are efﬁcient; those that do not forego
potential proﬁt and may be driven from the market. For example, when Intel redesigned its website
by adding a verbal advisor to help customers ﬁnd
the best software to download for their digital cameras, successful downloads increased by 27%.1 But
verbal advisors are not for every customer. Less verbal and more analytic customers found the verbal
advisor annoying and preferred a more graphic list
of downloadable software. If customers vary in the
way they process information (that is, vary in their
cognitive styles), Intel might increase downloads even
1 Although downloads are free, the beneﬁts to Intel are substantial
in terms of enhanced customer satisfaction, increased sales of hardware, and cost savings because of fewer telephone-support calls.
The cost savings alone saved Intel over $1 million for their camera
products with an estimated $30 million in savings across all product categories . Figure 1 illustrates one virtual
advisor. See Urban and Hauser for other examples.
more with a website that automatically changes its
charateristics to match those cognitive styles.
Intel is not alone. Banks, cell phone providers,
broadband providers, content providers, and many
retailers might serve their customers better and sell
more products and services if their websites matched
the cognitive styles of their visitors. One solution
is personalized self-selection, in which a customer
is given many options and allowed to select how
to navigate and interact with the site. As the customer’s options grow, this strategy leads to sites that
are complex, confusing, and difﬁcult to use. Another
option, popular in the adaptive-learning literature,
is to require visitors to complete a set of cognitivestyle tasks and then select a website from a predetermined set of websites. However, retail website visitors
are likely to ﬁnd such intensive measurement cumbersome and intrusive. They may leave the website before
completing such tasks.
We propose another approach: “morphing” the
website automatically by matching website characteristics to customers’ cognitive styles. Our practical
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
goal is to morph the website’s basic structure (site
backbone) and other functional characteristics in real
time. Website morphing complements self-selected
branching (as in recommendations (as in factorial
experiments (Google’s Website Optimizer), or customized content . Website morphing is an example of targeting optimal marketing communications to customer
segments .
Example dimensions on which cognitive styles
are measured might include impulsive (makes decisions quickly) versus deliberative (explores options
in depth before making a decision), visual (prefers
images) versus verbal (prefers text and numbers),
or analytic (wants all details) versus holistic (just the
bottom line). (We provide greater detail and citations
in §7.) A website might morph by changing the ratio
of graphs and pictures to text, by reducing a display
to just a few options (broadband service plans), or by
carefully selecting the amount of information presented about each plan. A website might also morph
by adding or deleting functional characteristics such
as column headings, links, tools, persona, and dialogue boxes.
Website morphing presents at least four technical
challenges. (1) For ﬁrst-time visitors, a website must
morph based on relatively few clicks; otherwise, the
customer sees little beneﬁt. (2) Even if we knew a customer’s cognitive style, the website must learn which
characteristics are best for which customers (in terms
of sales or proﬁt). (3) To be practical, a system needs
prior distributions on parameters. (4) Implementation
requires a real-time working system (and the inherently difﬁcult Web programming).
We use a Bayesian learning system to address the
rapid assessment of cognitive styles and a dynamic
program to optimally manage the tension between
exploitation (serving the morph most likely to be best
for a customer) and exploration (serving alternative
morphs to learn which morph is best). Uncertainty in
customer styles implies a partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP), which we address with
fast heuristics that are close to optimal. Surveys, using
both conjoint analysis and experimentation, provide
priors and “prime” the Bayesian and dynamic programming engines. We demonstrate feasibility and
potential proﬁt increases with an experimental website developed for the BT Group to sell broadband
service in Great Britain.
An Adaptive System to Infer
Cognitive Styles and Identify
Optimal Morphs
A cognitive style is “a person’s preferred way of
gathering, processing, and evaluating information”
 and can be identiﬁed as “individual differences in how we perceive,
think, solve problems, learn and relate to others”
 . “A person’s cognitive style
isﬁxed early on in life and is thought to be deeply
pervasive[and is] a relatively ﬁxed aspect of learning performance” .
Cognitive styles tend to be forced-choice (ipsative)
constructs, such as analytic versus holistic, and are
usually measured by question banks or cognitive
tasks .
The literature is wide and varied. We derive a ﬂexible system that works with any reasonable set of
cognitive-style dimensions. We illustrate the system
with commonly used cognitive-style constructs found
in the literature (§7, BT application).
Figure 1 illustrates two of the eight versions
(“morphs”) of broadband advisors from the BT application. Figure 1(a) uses an analytic virtual advisor
(a technology magazine editor willing to provide data)
who compares plans on 10 characteristics (a large
information load), presents a bar chart to compare
prices (graphical), and provides technical information about plans (focused content). In contrast, Figure 1(b) uses an holistic virtual advisor (typical user)
to whom the website visitor can listen (verbal). This
advisor avoids details, compares plans on only four
characteristics (small information load), and gives an
easy-to-comprehend overall comparison of three plans
(general content).
We expect different morphs to appeal differentially depending on visitors’ cognitive styles. For
example, impulsive visitors might prefer less-detailed
information, whereas deliberative visitors might prefer more information. Similarly, the more focused of
the two morphs might appeal to visitors who are
holistic, while the ability to compare many plans in
a table might appeal to analytic visitors. If preferences match behavior (an empirical question), then,
by matching a website’s characteristics to cognitive
styles, the morphing website should sell broadband
service more effectively and lead to greater proﬁts
We defer to §7 the selection, deﬁnition, and measurement of cognitive styles, the deﬁnition and implementation of website characteristics (morphs), and
the market research that provides prior beliefs (purchase probabilities) on the relationships between cognitive styles and morph characteristics. For BT we
use four binary cognitive-style constructs yielding
24 = 16 cognitive-style segments, indexed by rn for
the nth website visitor (customer). We attempt to
morph the BT website to match cognitive styles of
each segment by using three binary website characteristics yielding 23 = 8 possible morphs, indexed by m
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Comparison of Two Morphs for a Website Advisor
(a) Focused content, large-load, graphical morph
(b) General content, small-load, verbal morph
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Website Morphing: Bayesian Inference Loop (Grey Dashed Line) and Dynamic Programming Inference/Optimization Loop
(Black Dotted Line)
Respondent n
enters website.
Observe purchase
opportunity. Visitor either
purchases or not.
Update beliefs (αns, βns)
about purchase probabilities
using observed purchase
opportunity and prior beliefs
(αn–1s, βn–1s).
Compute new
morph-assignment rule
(using posterior purchase
probability distribution).
Dynamic programming loop
(after each respondent)
Cognitive-style inference loop
(dashed box, potentially after each click)
Assign initial morph, mo, based on prior
beliefs about cognitive styles, rn.
Website visitor
sees morph, m,
and clicks on one
of Jk alternatives.
Bayesian update of
cognitive style, rn,
based on clickstream.
Assign morph based on current
morph-assignment rule and updated
cognitive-state probabilities.
Visitor goes to purchase opportunity.
Visitor saw optimal morph, mr*, based on
updated beliefs about cognitive styles.
f(rn|yn,ckjns, Ω)
If we had perfect information on cognitive-style segments and perfect knowledge of segment × morph
purchase probabilities, we could map an optimal
morph to each cognitive-style segment. There are
16 × 8 = 128 such segment × morph probabilities. In
the absence of perfect information, our challenge is
to infer the cognitive-segment to which each visitor
belongs while simultaneously learning how to maximize proﬁt by assigning morphs to cognitive-style
In real systems, we must infer visitors’ cognitivestyle segment from their clickstreams. We can do
this because each visitor’s click is a decision point
that reveals the visitor’s cognitive-style preferences.
If we observe a large number of clicks, we should
be able to identify a visitor’s cognitive-style segment
well. However, in any real application, the number of
clicks we observe before morphing will be relatively
small, yielding at best a noisy indicator of segment
membership.
The website begins with morph mo (to be determined). We observe some number of clicks (say, 10),
infer probabilities for the visitor’s cognitive-style segment, then morph the website based on our inference
of the visitor’s segment. The visitor continues until
he or she purchases (a broadband service) or exits the
website without purchasing. In our application, maximizing purchases is a good surrogate for maximizing
proﬁt through the Web channel. (In §11 we indicate
how to extend our framework to address the size of
the purchase.)
We begin with the Bayesian inference loop (grey
dashed line in Figure 2) through which we infer the
visitor’s cognitive-style segment. Denote by Jkn the
number of potential click-alternatives that the nth visitor faces on the kth click. Let ykjn be 1 if the nth
visitor chooses the jth alternative on the kth click, and
0 otherwise. Let ⃗ykn be the vector of the ykjns and let
⃗yn be the matrix of the ⃗ykns. Each click-alternative is
described by a set of characteristics, ⃗ckjn. In our application, there are 11 characteristics: three macro characteristics (e.g., visual versus verbal), four detailed
function characteristics (e.g., a link that plays audio),
and four topical website areas (e.g., virtual advisor).
All notation is summarized in Appendix 1 for easy
reference.
A visitor in a particular cognitive-style segment
will prefer some combinations of characteristics to
other combinations. Let ⃗rn be a vector of preference
weights that maps click-alternative characteristics,
preferences
cognitive-style
segment, rn. Deﬁne  as the matrix of the ⃗rs. If we
know (1) preferences for morph characteristics for
each cognitive-style segment, (2) morph characteristics for click-alternatives (various links on which
the visitor can click when he or she makes a decision to click), and (3) the clicks that were made, we
can infer the visitor’s cognitive-style segment using
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Bayes’ theorem. Speciﬁcally, we update the posterior
distribution, f rn  ⃗yn ⃗ckjns, that the visitor is in the
n segment based on the observed data.2
The second inference loop (outer loop denoted by
a black dotted line in Figure 2) identiﬁes the optimal morph conditioned on f rn  ⃗yn ⃗ckjns. This
inference loop must learn and optimize simultaneously. In theory, we might allow the website to morph
many times for each visitor, potentially after every
click. However, in our application we observe only
one purchase decision per visitor. To avoid unnecessary assumptions in assigning this purchase to website characteristics, our initial application morphs only
once per visitor. (We address alternative strategies
in §5.) Any results we report are conservative and
might be improved with future websites that morph
more often (potentially taking switching costs, if any,
into account).
Let prm be the probability that a visitor in cognitivestyle segment, rn = r, will purchase BT’s broadband
plan after visiting a website that has the characteristics of morph m. Let ⃗p be the matrix of the prms.
Clearly, if we knew rn and the ⃗p perfectly, then we
would assign the morph that maximizes prm. However, we do not know either rn or ⃗p perfectly; we have
only posterior probabilistic beliefs about rn and ⃗p.
Without perfect information, maximizing long-term
expected proﬁt (sales) requires that we solve a much
more difﬁcult problem.
For example, suppose we knew rn but had only
posterior beliefs about prm. A naïve myopic strategy might choose the morph m, which has the
largest (posterior) mean for prm. But the naïve strategy
does not maximize long-term proﬁts. There might be
another morph, m′, with a lower (posterior) mean but
with a higher variance in (posterior) beliefs. We might
choose m′ to sacriﬁce current proﬁts but learn more
about the distribution of prm′. The knowledge gained
might help us make better decisions in the future.
We are more likely to choose m′ when we value
future decisions and when we beneﬁt greatly from
reducing the uncertainty in prm′. The optimal morphassignment problem is even more difﬁcult when we
face uncertainty about the cognitive-style segment, rn.
We must also take into account “false negatives”
when we assign a morph that is not right for the true
cognitive-style segment. This is an explicit opportunity cost to BT for which we must account when we
assign morphs to maximize proﬁt.
To maximize proﬁt, taking both exploration and
potential false negatives into account, we formulate
a dynamic program. When r is known, the solution
2 This posterior distribution depends on the morph, mo, that the nth
visitor has experienced. We have suppressed this subscript for ease
of exposition. We explore estimation of  in §8.
is based on a well-studied structure (“multiarmed
bandits”). The optimal morph-assignment rule can
be computed between clicks to automatically balance
exploration and exploitation. When r is unknown,
the partial-information optimal solution is not feasible between clicks. Instead, we use a fast heuristic
that obtains 99% of long-term proﬁts (sales) when
all uncertainty is taken into account. (We test both
dynamic programming solutions on our data.)
Before we formulate these dynamic programs we
brieﬂy review prior attempts to adapt content to
latent characteristics of users of that content.
Related Prior Literature
Cognitive styles (also learning styles or knowledge
levels) have been used to adapt material for distance learning, Web-based learning, digital libraries,
and hypermedia navigation. In most cases, cognitive styles are measured with an intensive inventory
of psychometric scales or inferred from predeﬁned
tasks . Methods
include direct classiﬁcation, neuro-fuzzy logic, decision trees, multilayer perceptrons, Bayesian networks,
and judgment. Most authors match the learning or
search environment based on judgment by an expert
pedagogue or based on predeﬁned distance measures.
In contrast we infer cognitive styles from relatively
few clicks and automatically balance exploration and
exploitation to select the best morph.
Automatic assignment is common in statistical
machine learning. For example, Chickering and Paek
 use reinforcement learning to infer a user’s
commands from spoken language. After training the
system with 20,000 synthetic voices, they demonstrate that the system becomes highly accurate after
1,000 spoken commands. Like us, they formulate their
problem as a multiarmed bandit, but their focus and
data require an entirely different solution strategy.
When latent customer states are transient, hidden Markov models (HMMs) have proven useful.
Conati et al. identify students’ mastery of
Newton‘s laws by predeﬁning a Bayesian network
and updating hidden-state probabilities by observing students’ answers. Conditional probabilities are
set by judgment. Their intelligent tutoring system
(ITS) provides hints for “rules” when it infers that
a student has not yet mastered the lesson. Yudelson
et al. extend this ITS with more hidden states
and estimate the parameters of the Bayesian network with an expectation-maximization algorithm.
In other HMM models, Bidel et al. identify
navigation strategies for hypermedia, Liechty et al.
 identify visual attention levels for advertising,
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
and Netzer et al. identify customer attitudes
for alumni gift giving. Estimation methods include
machine learning and hierarchical Bayes Monte Carlo
Markov chain methods. Montoya et al. estimate
an HMM and optimize sampling and detailing with
dynamic programming.
HMMs have proven accurate in these situations and
policy simulations suggest signiﬁcant proﬁt increases.
However, HMMs are computationally intensive, often
requiring more than a day of computer time to estimate parameters and almost as long to optimize
policies. In contrast, we compute strategies in real
time between clicks (Bayesian inference loop) and
update strategies between online visitors (dynamic
programming loop). Because we expect cognitive
styles to be enduring characteristics of website visitors , we avoid the
computational demands necessary to model transient
latent states. In our application we use priming data
and ipsative scales to identify cognitive style segments (see §7 and the Technical Appendix, available
at on morphing taxonomies). Alternatively, one might consider latentclass analyses to uncover enduring cognitive-style
We now present a working system in which we combine and adapt known methods to website morphing.
Finding the Optimal Morph with
Gittins Indices
We present the dynamic programming solution in
steps. In this section we temporarily assume that the
visitor sees morph m for the entire visit and we know
the visitor’s cognitive segment, r. In the next section we relax these assumptions to solve a partially
observable Markov decision process where we infer r
and where the visitor may not see morph m for the
entire visit.
Let mn = 1 if the nth visitor purchases a BT broadband plan after seeing morph, m. Let mn = 0 otherwise. For clarity of exposition when r is known,
we write mn as rmn to make the dependence on r
explicit. Under the temporary assumption that r
is known, we model the observed broadband subscriptions, rmn, as outcomes of a Bernoulli process with probability, prm. Based on these purchase
observations and prior beliefs, we infer a posterior distribution on purchase probabilities, f ⃗p  mn,
parameters based on previous visitors.
To represent our prior beliefs, we choose a ﬂexible
family of probability distributions that is naturally
conjugate to the Bernoulli process. The conjugate
prior is a beta distribution with morph-and-segment–
speciﬁc parameters rmo and
rmo. Speciﬁcally,
f prm  rmo
rmo ∼p rmo−1
With beta priors and Bernoulli observations, it is easy
to show that the posterior is also a beta distribution with rmn+1 = rmn + mn and
1 −mn. If a visitor in segment r receives morph
m, we expect an immediate expected reward equal
to the mean of the beta distribution, ¯prmn = rmn/
rmn, times the proﬁt BT earns if the nth
visitor purchases a broadband plan. We also earn an
expected reward for acting optimally in the future,
which we discount by a. The solution to the dynamic
program is the morph, m∗
r, which maximizes the sum
of the expectation of the immediate reward and the
discounted future reward.
In general, such multiarm bandit dynamic programs
are difﬁcult to solve. In fact, “during the Second
World War [this problem was] recognized as so difﬁcult that it quickly becamea by-word for intransigence” . However, in a now-classic
paper, Gittins proposed a simple and practical
solution that decomposed the problem into indices.
In the Gittins solution a candidate “arm,” in our case
a morph, is compared to an arm for which the payoff probability is known with certainty. Gittins formulates the Bellman equation (given below) and solves
for this known payoff probability, which we denote by
Grmn. Grmn depends only on rmn,
rmn, and a and is
independent of the parameters of the other arms. This
known payoff probability has become known as the
Gittins index. Gittins proved that these indices contain
all of the information necessary to select the optimal
strategy at any point in time, automatically balancing
exploitation and exploration. Gittins’ solution is simply to choose the arm with the largest index.3 Future
morph assignments might change when we update
rmn+1, and Grmn+1 with new information. However, the strategy of choosing the highest-index morph
is always optimal.
Gittins proof of indexability is beyond the
scope of this paper. However, it is instructive to formulate the Bellman equation from which we obtain
Grmn as a function of rmn,
rmn, and a. The solution is
best understood as a two-armed bandit .
Consider ﬁrst an arm with known payoff probability, Grmn. If we always select this arm, the expected
reward in each and every period is Grmn times the
reward for success. Without loss of generality, normalize the reward for success to 1.0. If we discount future
periods by a factor of a per period, the net present
value is computed with the closed form of a geometric series: Grmn/1 −a. The reward for selecting an
uncertain arm is more complicated to derive because
3 Intuitively, we ﬁnd an arm with certain expected payoffs such
that we are indifferent between the uncertain arm and the certain
arm. We then compare the corresponding certain arms and choose
the arm with the highest payoff.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
each success or failure updates our beliefs about the
probability of success.
Following standard dynamic programming notation we let R rmn
rmna be the value of acting optimally. To act optimally, we must choose one of two
actions, the known arm or the uncertain arm. When
we select the uncertain arm, we get a success (with
probability rmn/ rmn +
rmn) or a failure (with probability
rmn/ rmn +
rmn). If we observe a success,
we get the payoff of 1.0 plus the discounted payoff we
will receive for acting optimally in the future. The success also updates our beliefs about the future. Specifically, rmn+1 = rmn + 1 and
rmn. Thus, we
expect a discounted reward of 1+aR rmn +1
when we observe a success. By similar reasoning, we
expect a discounted reward of aR rmn
rmn + 1a
when we observe a failure. Putting these rewards
together we calculate the expected reward of an
uncertain arm as rmn/ rmn +
1 + aR rmn + 1
rmn/ rmn +
rmnaR rmn
rmn + 1a. Our
strategy is to choose the arm with the highest
expected discounted proﬁt; hence the Bellman equation becomes
1 + aR rmn + 1
rmn + 1a
Equation (1) has no analytic solution, but we can
readily compute Gittins indices with a simple iterative numeric algorithm.4 We illustrate Grmn as a function of n in Appendix 3. As expected, the indices
behave in an intuitive manner. If uncertainty is high
(n small), exploration is valuable and Grmn exceeds
rmn/ rmn +
rmn substantially. As we observe more
website visitors, Grmn decreases as a function of n.
As n →, the expected rewards become known and
Grmn converges to rmn/ rmn +
rmn. The discount
rate, a, is constant for our application, but if a were to
increase, we would value the future more, and Grmn
would increase to make exploration more attractive.
Given a we precompute a table of indices for the
values of rmn and
rmn that we expect to observe in
the BT application, using interpolation if necessary.
table is made manageable by recognizing
that Grmn converges to rmn/ rmn +
rmn as the number of visitors gets large.
Is Gittins’ Solution Reasonable for
BT’s Website?
It is not uncommon for a retail website to have
100,000 visitors per annum. With so many visitors it
4 We are indebted to Professor John Gittins for sharing his code
is likely to be valuable to explore different morphs
for early visitors so that BT can proﬁt by providing
the correct morph to later visitors. Suppose BT values
future capital with a 10% discount per annum and
suppose 100,000 visitors are spread evenly throughout
the year. Then the effective discount from one visitor to the next is 1/100,000th of 10%, suggesting an
implied discount factor of a = 0999999. Even if visitors are spread among 16 cognitive-style segments,
the effective discount factor is much closer to 1.0
than the discount factors used in typical Gittins
applications . With a so close
to 1.0, we expect a Gittins strategy to entail a good
deal of exploration. It is a valid fear that such exploration might lead to costly false morph assignments
more so than a null strategy of one website for everyone. (The Gittins strategy is optimal if we allow morphing. The question here is whether morphing per se
is reasonable in the face of issues outside our model.
That is, is there a noticeable improvement relative to
a no-morph strategy?5)
To address this practical implementation question,
we use an a appropriate to BT’s experimental website and we generate synthetic visitors who behave as
we expect real visitors to behave. Our simulations are
grounded empirically based on an experimental website. Full-scale implementation is planned, but production results are likely a year or more away.
We estimate real behavior by exposing a sample
of 835 website visitors to one of eight randomly
chosen morphs and observing their stated purchase
probabilities. We measure cognitive styles with an
intrusive question bank and estimate prm for each
segment × morph combination. (Details are in §§7–9.)
For example, to simulate one cognitive-style segment
we used empirically derived probabilities
02945 04023 03901 02624 02606 0365803580;
for morphs m = 0 to 7. For each synthetic visitor
we generate a purchase using the probability that
matches the morph assigned by the Gittins strategy.
We generate 5,000 visitors in each of 16 cognitive-style
segments (80,000 in total). This is well within the
number of visitors to BT’s website.
We seek a conservative test. As a lower bound, we
start the system with equally likely prior probabilities
that do not vary by morph and we begin with low
precision beta priors. To avoid ties in the ﬁrst morph
assignment, we perturb the prior means randomly.
Figure 3 illustrates website morphing for a sample
cognitive-style segment. The ﬁrst panel plots the evolution of the Gittins indices; the second panel plots the
5 However, we would still have to be able to identify the no-morph
strategy—itself a Gittins problem.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Evolution of the Dynamic Programming Loop
Gittins indices
Chosen morph
morph chosen by the system. The Gittins indices for
each of the eight morphs all start close to 0.7, which
is signiﬁcantly higher than the best-morph probability
(approximately 0.4). The larger values of the indices
reﬂect the option value of our uncertainty about the
true probabilities. For the ﬁrst few hundred visitors,
the system experiments with various morphs before
more or less settling on Morph 2 (red line). However,
the system still experiments until about the 1,200th
visitor. Around the 2,500th visitor the system ﬂirts
with Morph 3 (cyan line) before settling down again
on Morph 2. This blip around the 2,500th visitor stems
from random variation—a run of luck in which visitors purchased after seeing Morph 3. Morph 3’s probability of buying is 0.3901. It is close to, but not better
than, Morph 2’s value of 0.4023. The system settles
down after this run of luck, illustrating that the longterm behavior of the Gittins strategy is robust to such
random perturbations.
Because the Gittins strategy is optimal in the
presence of uncertainty, we can calculate the cost
of uncertainty for this cognitive-style segment. The
best morph for this segment is Morph 2 with an
expected reward of 0.4023 times BT’s proﬁt per sale.
If we had perfect information, we would always
choose Morph 2 for this segment and achieve this
expected reward. Because the Gittins strategy does
not have perfect information, it explores other morphs
cost of exploration, the Gittins strategy achieves an
expected reward of 0.3913, which is 97.2% of what
we could have attained had perfect information been
available. This is typical. When we average across
cognitive-style segments we achieve an expected
reward of 97.3% of that obtainable with perfect
information.
We can also estimate the value of morphing. A website that is not designed with cognitive styles in mind
is equivalent to one for which BT chooses one of the
morphs randomly. In that case, the expected reward
is 0.3292 times BT’s proﬁt per sale. The Gittins strategy improves proﬁts by 18.9%. Even if we had perfect information on purchase probabilities, we would
only do 22.2% better. Strong priors (see §9) improve
the Gittins strategy slightly—a 19.7% improvement
relative to no morphing. These results illustrate the
potential improvements that are possible by using
the Gittins strategy to identify the best morph for
a segment (assuming we knew to which segment
the visitor belonged). We now extend our framework
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
to deal with uncertainty in cognitive-style-segment
membership.
Dynamic Programming When
Cognitive Styles Are Inferred
It is not feasible for BT to use an intrusive cognitivestyle assessment on its production website. However,
it is feasible to infer cognitive styles from visitors’
clickstreams with the Bayesian inference loop. We
demonstrate in §6 how the clickstream provides a
posterior probability, qrn = f rn  ⃗yn ⃗ckjns, that visitor n is in cognitive-style segment rn. Because the
state space of cognitive styles is only partially observable, the resulting optimization problem is a POMDP.
The state space is Markov because the full history of
the multiple-visitor process is summarized by rn, the
rmns, and the
rmns. The POMDP cannot be solved
optimally in real time, but good heuristics achieve
near-optimal morph-assignment strategies. To incorporate uncertainty on cognitive styles, we make three
modiﬁcations.
First, the Gittins strategy deﬁnes a unique morph
per visitor and assumes the visitor makes a purchase
decision after having experienced that morph. The
outcome of the purchase-decision Bernoulli process
is an independent random variable conditioned on
the morph seen by a visitor. Although we do not
know with certainty to which cognitive-style segment
to assign this observation, we do know the probability, qrn, that the observation, mn, updates the rth
cognitive-style segment’s parameters.6 Because the
beta and binomial distributions are conjugate, Bayes’
theorem provides a means to use qrn and mn to
update the beta distributions:
rmn = rmn−1 + mnqrn
Second, following Krishnamurthy and Mickova
 we compute an
expected reward over the distribution of cognitivestyle segments (the vector of probabilities qrn as well
as over the posterior beta distribution with parameters rmn and
rmn. KM demonstrate that while the full
POMDP can be solved with a complex index strategy,
a simple heuristic solution, called an Expected Gittins
Index (EGI) strategy, achieves close to 99% of optimality. KM’s EGI algorithm replaces Grmn with EGmn and
chooses the morph with the largest EGmn, where
qrnGrmn rmn
6 Because rn is now partially observable, we have returned to the
mn notation, dropping the r subscript. To simplify exposition we
continue to assume temporarily that the visitor experienced the mth
morph for the entire visit.
For BT’s experimental websites we cannot guarantee that KM’s EGI solution will be within 99% of optimality (as in their problems). Instead, we bound the
EGI’s performance with comparisons to the expected
rewards that would be obtained if BT were able to
have perfect information on cognitive styles. The EGI
solution does quite well (details are in §6).
Third, even if the website morphs once per visitor,
the visitor sees the best initial morph, mo, for part of
the visit and the EGI-assigned POMDP morph, m∗,
for the remainder of the visit. To update the EGI we
must assign the visitor’s purchase (or lack thereof) to
a morph. The appropriate purchase-assignment rule
is an empirical issue. If the number of clicks on m∗
is sufﬁciently large relative to the number of clicks
on mo, then we assign the purchase to m∗and update
only the indices for morph m∗. (We use the same
rule if the last morph, m∗, has the strongest effect on
purchase probabilities.) Alternatively, we can assign
the purchase-or-not observation to mo and m probabilistically based on the number of clicks on each
morph. Other rules are possible. For example, we
might weight later (or earlier) morphs more heavily or we might condition pr
m1m2m3 on a sequence
of morphs,
m1m2m3. For our data we obtain
good results by assigning the observation to m∗. Fortunately, for the BT experimental website, simulations
with proportional purchase-assignment rules suggest
that the performance of the system is robust with
respect to such assignment rules.7 We leave further
investigation of purchase-assignment rules to future
Inferring Cognitive
Styles—A Bayesian Loop
BT’s website is designed to provide information about
and sell broadband service. Asking respondents to
complete a lengthy questionnaire to identify their cognitive styles prior to exploring BT’s website is onerous
to visitors and might lower, rather than raise, sales of
broadband service. Thus, rather than asking website
visitors to directly describe their cognitive styles, the
Bayesian loop infers cognitive styles. Speciﬁcally, after
observing the clickstream, ⃗yn, and the click-alternative
characteristics, ⃗ckjns, we update the probabilities that
the nth visitor belongs to each of the cognitive-style
segments (qrns). (Although the ⃗ckjns depend on the initial morph, mo, seen by the nth visitor, we continue
7 For example, with a last-morph assignment rule we obtain a mean
posterior probability (qrn of 0.815 and a median posterior probability of 0.995. With a proportional-morph assignment rule, the
mean is higher (0.877) but the median lower (0.970). The resulting
rewards are quite close. To explore this issue empirically, we might
seek data in which we assign both mo and m∗randomly rather than
endogeneously using the EGI solution to the POMDP.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
to suppress the mo subscript to keep the notation
We assume the nth visitor has unobserved preferences, ˜ukjn, for click-alternatives based on the clickalternative characteristics, ⃗ckjns, and based on his or
her preference weights, ⃗rn, for those characteristics.
We assume that preference weights vary by cognitivestyle segment. (Recall that  is the matrix of the ⃗rns.
Temporarily assume it is known.) We express these
unobserved preferences as ˜ukjn = ⃗c′
kjn ⃗rn + ˜kjn, where
˜kjn has an extreme-value distribution. Conditioned
on a cognitive-style segment, rn, the probability that
we observe ⃗ykn for the kth click by the nth visitor is
f ⃗ykn  ⃗ckjnsrn =
After we observe Kn clicks, the posterior distribution for cognitive-style segments is given by Bayes’
qrn = f rn  ⃗yn ⃗ckjns
k=1 f ⃗ykn  ⃗ckjnsrnqorn
k=1 f ⃗ykn  ⃗ckjnsrqor
where the qorn are the prior probabilities that the nth
visitor belongs to cognitive-style segment rn. Computing the qrns and the corresponding EGmns is sufﬁciently fast (∼0.4 seconds; dual processor, 3 GHz, 4 GB
RAM); visitors notice no delays on BT’s experimental
Equations (4) and (5) require prior probabilities,
qor, and estimates of the preference matrix, . The
click-alternative characteristics, ⃗ckjns, are data. We
obtain qorn and  from a priming study as described
in §7. Because we use Bayesian methods to estimate , it is theoretically consistent to update the qrns
using the full posterior. Unfortunately, this is not yet
practical because computation time is roughly linear
in the number of samples from ’s posterior distribution. For example, with only 15 samples from the posterior it took 6.5 seconds to compute the EGmns—too
long between clicks in a production setting. Furthermore, 15 samples is far too few to integrate effectively
over the 50-element posterior distribution of . This
practical barrier might fall with faster computers and
faster computational methods.8
In practice, if we identify new types of clickalternative characteristics or if BT feels that  has
changed because of unobserved shocks, then selected
8 We tested a 15-sample strategy with synthetic data. The results
were virtually indistinguishable from those we obtained using the
posterior mean for . Testing with large numbers of samples is not
feasible at this time.
visitors can be invited to complete the priming-study
questionnaire to provide data to update .9 At any
time, we can update qorn based on averaging the
posterior qrn over n.
Summary of the Gittins and Bayesian Loops
For each visitor, we update qrn after each click. EGmn
predicts the best morph based on these qrns. After
a set of initial clicks we morph the website to that
best morph. After observing a purchase occasion we
update the rmns and
rmns for the next visitor. We use
these updated rmns and
rmns to update the Gittins
indices and continue to the next visitor. As n gets
sufﬁciently large, the system automatically learns the
true prms.
The Effect of Imperfect Cognitive-Style
Identiﬁcation
In §5 we found that the cost of uncertainty in segment × morph probabilities reduced the optimal solution to 97.2%, of that which we would obtain if we
had (hypothetical) perfect information. The EGI solution to the POMDP should achieve close to the optimal morph assignment in the face of uncertainty on
both segment × morph probabilities and cognitive
styles, but that is an empirical question. To examine this question we compare the performance of the
POMDP EGI solution to four benchmarks.10 Rewards
are scaled such that 1.0000 means that every visitor
purchases broadband service. The benchmarks are as
• A website without the Gittins loop and no
knowledge of cognitive styles.11 The expected reward
is 0.3205.
• A website with the Gittins loop, but no customization for cognitive-style segments. The expected
reward is 0.3625.
• A website with the Gittins loop and (hypothetical) perfect information on cognitive-style segments.
The expected reward is 0.3879.
• A website with (hypothetical) perfect knowledge of purchase probabilities and cognitive-style segments. The expected reward is 0.3984.
To compare the EGI solution to these benchmarks
we begin with a scenario that illustrates the potential of the POMDP. We create synthetic Web pages
9 This last step adds no new conceptual challenges and incurs a
modest, but not trivial, cost. BT has not yet seen a need to collect these additional data for its experimental website. The current
implementation assumes that preferences vary by cognitive styles
but are homogeneous within cognitive-style segment.
10 Figure 3 and the corresponding Gittins improvements in §4 are
for a representative cognitive-style segment. The benchmarks cited
here are based on the results of all 16 cognitive-style segments.
11 Without information on cognitive styles or the Gittins loop,
BT must select one of the eight morphs at random.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Benchmark Comparison of the Inference and Optimization Systems
Expected reward
Improvement (%)
Efﬁciency (%)
Relative efﬁciency (%)
No Gittins loop nor knowledge of cognitive styles.
No morphing. Website chosen optimally by Gittins loop.
Morphing: Match characteristics to cognitive-style segment.
Bayesian inference of cognitive styles (10 clicks).
Bayesian inference of cognitive styles (50 clicks).
Perfect information on cognitive styles, Gittins loop.∗
Perfect information on style and purchase probabilities.∗
∗Upper bounds. BT does not have perfect information on cognitive styles or purchase probabilities.
(⃗cjkns) that provide clear choices in click-alternative
characteristics both among and within morphs. In
the simulations we know each customer’s cognitive
style, r. We create synthetic clickstreams from representative rs by making multinomial draws from the
random-utility model in Equation (4). After 10 clicks,
we use the Bayesian loop to update qrn and choose
an optimal morph based on the EGIs. The synthetic
customer then purchases a broadband service with
probability prm, where r is the true cognitive state
and m is the morph provided by the EGIs. (The EGIs
may or may not have chosen the best morph for that
synthetic customer.) Based on the observed purchase
(mn), we update the rmns and
rmns and go to the
next customer. We simulate 80,000 customers (5,000
customers per cognitive-style segment). As the number of clicks per customer increases, we expect the
(Bayesian) posterior qrns to converge toward certainty
and the rewards to converge toward those based on
(hypothetical) perfect cognitive-style-segment information. Thus, for comparison, we include a 50-click
simulation even though 50 clicks are more clicks than
we observe for the average BT website visitor.
This simulation illustrates the potential of the EGI
solution. It corresponds to a second generation website (Gen-2) that is now under development. The
ﬁrst-generation (Gen-1) BT experimental website was,
to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst attempt to
design a website that morphs based on cognitivestyle segments. We learned from our experience
with that website. There were sufﬁcient differences
among morphs to identify prm easily with the Gittins
loop; however, the relative similarity between clickalternatives within a morph meant that the Bayesian
loop required more click observations than anticipated. We return to the Gen-1 website after we
describe fully the empirical priming study (see §§7
and 8). The empirical insights obtained by comparing
the Gen-1 and Gen-2 simulations are best understood
based on the  estimated from the data in the priming study. (The Gen-1 Bayesian-loop improvements in
revenue that we report in §10 are less dramatic but
not insigniﬁcant from BT’s perspective.)
In Table 1 we compare the Bayesian loop to the
four benchmarks with three metrics. “Improvement”
is the percent gain relative to the baseline of what
would happen if a website were created without any
attempt to take cognitive styles into consideration.
The 10-click Bayesian/Gittins loop improves sales by
19.9%. “Efﬁciency” is the percentage of sales relative to that which could be obtained with perfect
knowledge. The 10-click Bayesian/Gittins loop attains
96.5% of that benchmark. “Relative efﬁciency” is the
percent gain relative to the difference in the lower
and upper benchmarks. The 10-click Bayesian/Gittins
loop attains an 82.0% relative efﬁciency.
Based on 10 clicks the Bayesian loop can identify
most cognitive states. The median posterior probability (qrn) is 0.898; the lower and upper quartiles are
0.684 and 0.979, respectively. However, on four of the
cognitive states the Bayesian loop does not do as well;
posterior probabilities are in the range of 0.387 to
0.593. If we were to allow more clicks (50 clicks) than
we observe for the average website visitor, the posterior probabilities converge toward certainty. Based
on 50 clicks the median and upper quartile are both
1.00, while the lower quartile is 0.959. The efﬁciency is
97.0%—very close to what BT would obtain if it had
perfect information on cognitive styles (97.4%).
We estimate the marginal contribution of the Gen-2
Bayesian loop using revenue projections based on
discussions with managers at the BT Group. (Gen-1
results are discussed in §10.) A 20% increase in sales
corresponds to an approximately $80 million increase
in revenue. The Gittins loop projects a gain of approximately $52.3 million by ﬁnding the best morph even
without customization. The 10-click Bayesian loop
adds another $27.4 million by customizing the look
and feel of the website based on posterior cognitivestyle-segment probabilities. This is within $2.6 million of what could be obtained with 50 clicks. Perfect
information on cognitive-style segments would add
yet another $1.8 million, bringing us to $84.1 million. These potential improvements are not insigniﬁcant to BT. However, we must caution the reader that
BT has not yet implemented a Gen-2 website, and
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
the Gen-1 website is still experimental. Many practical implementation issues remain before these gains
are achieved.
Data to Prime the Automated
Inference Loops
We now describe the priming study for the experimental BT website. Although the morphing theory
of §§2–6 can be applied to a wide range of websites,
the priming study is an integral component of the
BT application. It provides priors for the rmos,
and qorns and data with which to estimate preference
weights () for website characteristics.
Priming Study—Questionnaires to Potential
BT Website Visitors
professional
(Applied Marketing Science, Inc.) and a respected
British online panel (Research Now), we invited current and potential broadband users to complete an
online questionnaire that combined BT’s experimental website with a series of preference and cognitivestyle questions. This sampling strategy attempts to
obtain a representative sample of potential visitors to
BT’s broadband website. Because these data are used
to calibrate key parts of the preference model, it is
important that this sample be as representative as is
feasible. Within a cognitive-style segment, we seek to
assure that any response bias, if it exists, is not correlated with ⃗rn. Fortunately, with sufﬁcient productionwebsite data, the Gittins and Bayesian loops should
self-correct for response biases, if any, in segment ×
morph probabilities and/or cognitive-style segmentmembership priors.
A total of 835 respondents completed the questionnaire. Because the questionnaire was comprehensive
and time consuming, respondents received an incentive of £15. The questionnaire contained the following
sequential sections:
• Respondents
whether they are in the target market.
• Respondents identify which of 16 broadband
providers they would consider and provide initial purchase-intention probabilities for considered
providers.
• Respondents are given a chance to explore one
of eight potential morphs for the BT website. The
morphs were assigned randomly, and respondents
were encouraged to spend at least ﬁve minutes on
BT’s experimental website.
• Respondents
post-visit
consideration
and purchase-intention probabilities.12
12 Because respondents see only the BT website, we attempt to minimize demand artifacts by renormalizing the data. Click-characteristic
• Respondents are shown eight pairs of websites
that vary on three basic characteristics. They are
asked to express their preferences between the pairs
of websites with a choice-based conjoint analysis-like
exercise. These data augment clickstream data when
estimating .
• Respondents complete established scales that
the academic literature suggests measure cognitive
styles. The questionnaire closes with demographic
information.
Reaction to the experimental BT websites was positive. Respondents found the websites to be helpful,
accurate, relevant, easy to use, enjoyable, and informative (average scores ranging from 3.2 to 3.8 out
of 5.0). On average, respondents clicked more than 10
times while exploring the websites, with 10% of the
respondents clicking over 30 times.
Cognitive Style Measures
Figure 4 provides 10 of the 13 scales that we used
to measure cognitive styles. We chose these scales
based on prior literature as the most likely to affect
respondents’ preferences for website characteristics.
We expect these scales to be a good start for website applications. To encourage further development,
the Technical Appendix, available at 
pubs.informs.org, provides a taxonomy of potential
cognitive styles.
We expected these scales to identify whether the
respondent was analytic or holistic, impulsive or
deliberative, visual or verbal, and a leader or a
follower. The analytic versus holistic dimension is
widely studied in psychology and viewed as being
a major differentiator of how individuals organize
and process information . Researchers in both psychology and
marketing suggest that cognitive styles can be further differentiated as either impulsive or deliberative . With a slight
rescaling three cognitive reﬂection scales developed
by Frederick differentiate respondents on the
deliberative
dimension.13
scales measure visual versus verbal styles, a key cognitive concept in psychology . This dimension is particularly relevant to website design where the trade-off between
pictures and text is an important design element.
Although leadership is not commonly a cognitivepreferences, , should not be affected by any induced demand artifacts. Any demand artifacts affect primarily the priors. Fortunately,
the Gittins loop is relatively insensitive to prior probabilities.
13 For example, “A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs
a dollar more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?” The
impulsive answer is 10¢; all other answers are considered to be
deliberative.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Example Measures of Cognitive Styles
style dimension in psychology, we included leadership scales because thought leadership has proven
important in the adoption of new products and
new information sources . To the extent that
we included scales that do not distinguish cognitive
styles, our empirical analyses will ﬁnd null effects.
Additional scales can be explored in future research.
Our results are a conservative indicator of what is feasible with improved scales.
Although the scales are well established in the literature, we began with construct tests using our data.
We used exploratory factor analysis and conﬁrmatory
reliability analyses to reduce the 13 scales (10 scales
from Figure 4 plus the 3 impulsive versus deliberate
scales) to four cognitive dimensions. For the BT data, impulsive versus deliberative
and leader versus follower were measured with suf-
ﬁcient reliability (0.55 and 0.80, respectively); analytic
versus holistic and visual versus verbal combined to
a single construct (0.56 reliability). The analyses identiﬁed a fourth dimension: a single scale, reader versus
listener. We suspect that this reader versus listener
scale was driven by the nature of the broadband service websites that often give respondents a choice
of reading text or tables or listening to an advisor.
Although multi-item scales are more common in the
literature, recent research recognizes the corresponding advantages of single-item scales . Based on
this research we include this single-item scale as a
fourth cognitive-style dimension.
Although some of these reliabilities are lower
than we would like, this reﬂects the challenges in
measuring cognitive styles and, for our analytic models, adds noise to the estimation of  and to the
Bayesian loop. Fortunately, the constructs as measured appear to affect purchase probabilities . In summary, we identiﬁed four
empirical constructs to measure respondents’ cognitive styles:
• leader versus follower,
• analytic/visual versus holistic/verbal,
• impulsive versus deliberative,
• (active) reader versus (passive) listener.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Using median splits, we deﬁne 16 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2
cognitive-style segments.14
Click-Alternative Characteristics
There are four sources of variation in click-alternative
characteristics. First, the morphs themselves vary
on three basic dimensions. Second, click-alternatives
within the morphs vary on the same three dimensions.
Third, there are functional characteristics of clickalternatives, for example, whether a link provides
general information (of potential interest to holistic
respondents). Fourth, the home page of the experimental BT website gives the respondent a choice of
four content areas. We expect visitors with different
cognitive styles to vary in their desire to visit different
content areas on their ﬁrst click.
Basic Characteristics of a Morph. Based on
the literature cited above we chose three basic clickalternative characteristics that were likely to distinguish morphs and click-alternatives within morphs.
These characteristics were used to design the basic
structures (backbones) of the BT experimental websites based on initial hypotheses about the variation among cognitive-style segments in preferences
for characteristics. The characteristics varied on the
following:
• graphical versus verbal (e.g., graphs and pictures
versus text and audio),
• small-load versus large-load (e.g., the amount of
information presented),
• focused content versus general content (e.g., a
few recommended plans versus all plans).
The characteristics of the websites (morphs) that
were shown (randomly) to each respondent at the
beginning of the questionnaire and the characteristics
of the pairs of websites shown in the choice-based
conjoint-like exercise were designed to be distinguished on these basic click-alternative dimensions.
Hence, we describe each morph by one of eight binary
vectors, from
111. For example, the
111 morph is graphic, focused, and small load.
This binary notation is chosen to be consistent with the
earlier notation of m = 0 to 7; e.g., m = 0 ⇔
We invested considerable effort to design morphs
that would match cognitive styles, and to some extent,
we succeeded. One advantage of the EGI optimization is that asymptotically it will identify automatically the best morph for a cognitive-style segment
even if that morph is not the morph that we expect to
be best a priori. The system in Figure 2 is robust with
respect to errors in website design. In fact, a serendipitous outcome of the priming study was a better
14 The Gittins inference/optimization loop is based on discretely
many cognitive-style segments rn. Future research might explore
more continuous cognitive-style descriptions of website visitors.
understanding of website design and the need for a
Gen-2 experimental website.
Characteristics of Click Alternatives Within a Morph. We used ﬁve independent judges to
characteristics
click-alternative, a methodology that is common in marketing
 . The judges were trained in the task
but otherwise blind to any hypotheses. The average
reliability of these ratings was 0.66 using a robust measure of reliability . Like cognitive styles, click-alternative
characteristics are somewhat noisy but should provide sufﬁcient information for the Bayesian loop and
the estimation of preference weights .
Functional Characteristics of Click Alternatives. We identiﬁed four functional characteristics
that were likely to appeal differentially to respondents
with different cognitive styles. These functional characteristics were represented with the following binary
variables:15
• general information about BT (e.g., likely to
appeal to holistic visitors),
• analytic tool that allows visitors to manipulate
information (e.g., likely to appeal to analytic visitors),
• link to read a posting by another consumer (e.g.,
likely to appeal to followers),
• link to post a comment (e.g., likely to appeal to
deliberative visitors).
Areas. The
experimental BT website offered the visitor four content areas (advisor, community, comparisons, and
learning center), each of which could be morphed.
Figure 5 illustrates these four content areas. To test
whether the content areas would appeal differentially
to respondents based on their cognitive-style segments, we coded the content areas as binary variables.
(We have three, rather than four, independent dummy
variables for the four content areas.)
Together, the three types of click-alternative variations give us ten (10) click-alternative characteristics:
three basic dimensions, four functional characteristics,
and three of four content areas.
Estimation of Click-Alternative
Preferences, , from the
Priming Data
The Bayesian inference loop uses visitors’ clickstreams
probabilities
15 The BT experimental website also contained audio links, column
headings, and a review of past information; however, these were
collinear with the four primary characteristics. Generation 2 websites will be designed to make these and other characteristics as
orthogonal as feasible given BT’s primary goal of selling broadband
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Broadband Advice Centre Home Page
cognitive-style segments rn. The posterior probabilities (qrn, Equation (5)) require preference weights,
, for the click-alternative characteristics (⃗ckjns). We
now address how we obtain from the priming data
a posterior distribution for . We can infer a posterior distribution for  because, in the priming data,
we observe the respondent’s cognitive-style segment
directly. The inference problem is to infer  from
⃗yns ⃗ckjnsrns.
We have two sources of data within the priming
study. First, we observe each respondent’s clickstream. Second, we augment each respondent’s clickstream data with conjoint analysis-like data in which
the respondent provides paired-comparison judgments for eight pairs of website pages. Because the
latter choices among pairs of websites may not be
derived from the same “utility” scale as choices
from among click-alternatives, we allow for scale
differences. Before we write out the likelihoods for
each of the two types of data, we need additional
Cognitive-Style-Segment Vector Notation
In §§2–6 we deﬁned rn
as a scalar. This is a
general formulation for the Gittins loop. It allows
each cognitive-style segment to be independent of
every other segment. In the BT application there are
24 = 16 cognitive-style segments based on four binary
cognitive-style dimensions. To reﬂect this interdependence among segments, we rewrite rn as a 5×1 binary
vector, ⃗rn, where the ﬁrst element is always equal to 1
and represents the characteristic-speciﬁc mean. Each
subsequent element of ⃗rn reﬂects a deviation from that
mean based on a cognitive-style dimension of the segment. For example, a member of cognitive-style segment rn = 0 ⇔⃗r′
1−1−1−1−1 is a follower,
holistic/verbal, deliberative, and a listener; rn = 15 ⇔
11111 is a leader, analytic/visual, impulsive, and a reader. With this notation, we write characteristic preferences compactly as ⃗rn = ⃗rn.
Clickstream Likelihood
Using the vector notation combined with the notation
of §§2–6, the clickstream likelihood (CSL) is based on
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Results of Bayesian Updating on Website-Characteristic Preferences −1 = 017
Analytic/visual versus
Impulsive versus
Reader versus
Mean effect
Leader versus follower
holistic/verbal
deliberative
Basic dimensions
Graphical versus verbal
Small versus large load
Focused versus general
Functional characteristics
General information
Analytic tool
Read a post
Post a comment
Website areas
Compare plans
Virtual advisor
Learning center
Equation (5), except that  is unknown and the ⃗rn are
data. This likelihood assumes the unobserved errors
are independent across clicks:
Paired-Comparison Likelihood
Each respondent is presented with eight pairs of website pages that vary on the three basic morph characteristics of graphic versus verbal, focused versus
general, and small versus large load. The eight pairs
are chosen randomly from a 23 experimental design
such that no pair is repeated for a respondent and left
and right presentations were rotated randomly. The
overall D-efﬁciency of this design is close to 100%. For
each respondent, n, let ⃗dt1n and ⃗dt2n be the descriptions of the left and right website pages, respectively,
for the tth pair on the three dimensions, and let stn
indicate the selection of the left website page, t = 1
to 8. The respondent’s preference for the left website page is based on the characteristics of the website
pages. If ˜tn is an extreme-value measurement error,
then the respondent’s unobserved preference for the
left website page is given by  ⃗d′
t2n⃗rn + ˜tn.
Note that we allow a differential scale factor, , to
reﬂect possible differences between the clickstream
and paired-comparison choice tasks. With this formulation, the paired-comparison likelihood (PCL)
becomes the standard choice-based conjoint likelihood, which assumes that the unobserved errors are
independent across paired-comparison choices:
Finally, we use the method of Train to match
the variances in Equations (6) and (7) and to assure
that  is scaled properly for both likelihoods.16
Posterior Distribution for
Cognitive-Style Preferences
We combine Equations (6) and (7) with weakly informative priors, g, on the unknown parameters to
obtain a posterior distribution for the cognitive-style
preferences and the scaling parameter. Equation (8)
assumes that the unobserved errors in the clickstream
are independent of the measurement errors in the
paired comparison choices:
f   ⃗ckjm ⃗dtn1 ⃗dtn2stn ⃗yn ⃗rn ∀kjtn
∝PCL ∗CSL ∗g
From the 835 respondents in the priming study we
observe 4,019 relevant clickstream choices and 6,680
paired-comparison choices. Samples from the posterior distribution of  and  were generated using
WinBUGS.17 Table 2 provides the posterior means
of . Appendix 2 provides the intervals between
the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles for the posterior distribution. Using the mean posterior probabilities alone, we
explain 60.3% of uncertainty in the clickstream choices
 .
16 The standard deviations of the error terms, kjn and tn, for the
logit likelihoods determine the scale or “accuracy” of the parameter
estimates. By allowing  ̸= 1, we automatically allow different standard deviations for the errors. Independence assumes the conjoint
design is not endogenous .
17 WinBUGS code and convergence details are available from the
authors. As a check on the WinBUGS code, we also estimated 
using classical methods (maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)).
The Bayesian and MLE estimates were statistically equivalent.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
We have highlighted in bold those coefﬁcients for
which the 0.05 to 0.95 quantile of the posterior distribution is either all positive or all negative. The lack
of “signiﬁcance” for the remaining coefﬁcients might
reﬂect insufﬁcient variation in functional characteristics, the relative sparseness of data for the website
areas (ﬁrst click only), or unobserved variation.18 19
We expect improved discrimination on BT’s Gen-2
websites. By creating more distinct click-alternative
choices, the Gen-2 website will be better able to identify cognitive styles with only a few clicks.
On average, graphical content increases preference
but small loads and focused content decrease preference. Analytic tools, consumer posts, plan comparisons, and virtual advisors are popular click
choices by respondents. Respondents prefer to go
ﬁrst to website areas that compare plans and provide virtual advisors. There are also cognitive-stylespeciﬁc effects: respondents who are holistic/verbal
or readers prefer focused content. Although not
“signiﬁcant,”
respondents
small information loads. The tendency to go ﬁrst to
plan comparisons and virtual advisors while avoiding general information appears to be a trait that
distinguishes
analytic/visual
holistic/verbal
respondents.
In the spirit of Bayesian inference, we cautiously
examine characteristics for which 80% of the posterior is either all positive or negative. In this case we
would ﬁnd that followers such as learning communities and listeners like to post comments and compare plans. Listeners also prefer verbal and general
content and analytic/visual respondents prefer large
information loads. We interpret these results, based
on the Gen-1 experimental website, as hypotheses to
be tested with Gen-2 websites and the corresponding
priming studies.
Strong Priors for Gittins and
Bayesian Loops
The priming study was based on a representative
sample of potential visitors to BT’s experimental
Gen-1 website. We can use these data to obtain strong
priors with which to improve the performances of the
18 We use the classical term “signiﬁcance” as shorthand for the
quantiles being either all positive or negative. We do this for ease
of exposition recognizing the more subtle Bayesian interpretation.
19 Preferences vary across cognitive-style segments and the model
does explain over 60% of the variation in clickstream choices.
Future research might test more complex speciﬁcations subject to
the need to update qrn in real time. For example, if we speciﬁed a
normal hyperdistribution over the 50 parameters in Table 2, updating qrm would require extensive numerical integration (or simulated
draws) in real time (e.g., 50 parameters × 16 segments × 10 clicks
× 10 alternatives per click).
Gittins and Bayesian loops. For example, although the
Gittins loop works well with equally likely priors on
the beta parameters, the analyses of §4 suggest that
we can achieve a slight improvement with stronger
Prior Cognitive-Style-Segment Probabilities
for the Bayesian Loop
established
cognitive-style segment, rn, for every respondent in
the representative sample. The empirical distribution
of cognitive-style segments provides priors, qorn, for
the Bayesian loop.
Prior Purchase Probabilities
for the Gittins Loop
In the priming study we observe directly each respondent’s purchase intentions. Thus, because we assigned
each respondent randomly to one of the eight morphs
and we inferred that respondent’s cognitive-style segment from the established scales, we have a direct
estimate of the prior purchase probabilities for each
segment × morph combination, ¯prmo. These direct estimates provide information on the prior beta parameters via ¯prmo = rmo/ rmo +
For the Gittins loop, we want the data to overwhelm the prior so we select a relatively small effective sample size, Nrmo, for the beta prior. Because
Nrmo = rmo +
rmo and because the variance of the beta
distribution is
rmo2 rmo +
we choose an approximate Nrmo by managerial judgment informed by matching the variance of the beta
distribution to the variance of the observed purchaseintention
probabilities.
Caveats and Practical Considerations
With sufﬁciently many website visitors from whom to
observe actual purchase decisions, the ¯prmn will converge to their true values and the priors will have
negligible inﬂuence. Nonetheless, we sought to use
the data more efﬁciently for obtaining strong priors
for the Gittins and Bayesian loops. Our ﬁrst practical
consideration was sample size. With 835 respondents
for 16 cognitive-style segments and eight morphs,
the average sample size is small for each segment ×
morph estimate of ¯prmo. To make more efﬁcient use of
the data and smooth these estimates over the r × m
cells, we used logistic regression. The explanatory
variables were the basic characteristics of the morphs,
the cognitive-style dimensions of the segments, and
characteristic-dimension matches (e.g., small information loads for impulsive segments). The variance
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
of ¯prmo is also based on the smoothed estimates. See
Braun et al. for further analyses.
Our second practical consideration in the priming
study was the use of purchase intentions rather than
observed purchases. In a production, website visitors
self-select to come to BT’s website; we expect such
visitors are closer in time to purchasing broadband
service than those recruited for the priming study.
Although we were careful in recruiting to obtain a
representative sample, we measured purchase intentions rather than observed purchases.20 Purchase
intentions have the beneﬁt of obtaining a more discriminating measure from each respondent than 0
versus 1 purchase. However, purchase intentions
are often subject to demand artifacts . For example, for nonfrequently purchased
items, true probabilities tend to be linear in purchase
intentions . To reduce the impact of potential scale factors, we normalized purchase intention
measures relative to other broadband services and we
used baseline benchmarks in Table 1 as quasi controls.
Revenue increases are based on the relative efﬁciencies of the Gittins and Bayesian loops. Finally, because
morphs were assigned randomly and each respondent
saw only one morph, the relative differences between
morphs are less sensitive to any demand artifacts.
Improvements and
Further Applications
The development and testing of morphing websites
is ongoing. BT is optimistic based on the Gen-1 priming study. Viewed as a feasibility test, the Gen-1 test
identiﬁed a few website characteristics that could be
matched to cognitive-style segments. The Gen-1 test
also conﬁrmed that website characteristics can affect
purchase probabilities.
Before collecting data we did not know which of the
eight morphs would maximize revenue. However,
the Gittins loop alone (without morphing) identiﬁed
the best website characteristics, implying an increase
in revenue of $52.3 million (Table 1 and §6). Section 6
also suggests that a Gen-2 website (designed to distinguish among cognitive styles cleanly after 10 clicks)
could increase revenues an additional $27.4 million.
Based on this “proof of concept,” BT plans to implement the customer advocacy backbone, illustrated in
Figures 1 and 5, and add Gen-2 morphing to the site
as soon as feasible.
appropriate
respondents
recruited with promises that we would not attempt to sell them
anything in the guise of market research. Because of these guidelines we could not offer respondents the ability to sign up for a BT
broadband plan.
In addition, Suruga Bank in Japan is developing and testing a morphing website to sell personal loans. The website morphs based on cognitive
styles and cultural preferences such as hierarchical
versus egalitarian, individual versus collective, and
emotional versus neutral .
Gen-1 Compared to Gen-2 Experimental
The eight morphs in the Gen-1 experimental website were sufﬁciently varied in the way they affected
purchase probabilities. However, the website characteristics within a morph (from which we identify
cognitive-style segments) were not sufﬁciently varied in Gen-1. For example, the website areas on the
Gen-1 home page were effective at distinguishing
analytic/visual from holistic/verbal respondents (see
 in Table 2), but less so on the other cognitivestyle dimensions. The simulations in Table 1 assumed
that website characteristics within a morph were more
distinct leading to larger posterior means (Gen-2 ).
(BT feels that such a website is feasible.)
To motivate Gen-2 development and to assess the
Bayesian-loop gains for Gen-1, we resimulated the
Bayesian loop with the Gen-1 . (The Gittins-onlyloop results remain unchanged.) With 10 clicks, 80,000
visitors, and a Gen-1 , the expected reward is 0.3646.
While the implied revenue increase is not insigniﬁcant for BT, the Gen-1 gains (total Gittins + Bayesian
gains = $54.9 million) are much smaller than the
potential gains with a Gen-2 website (total gains =
$79.7 million). Interestingly, even the Gen-1 website
could get substantially more revenue if it had inﬁnitely
many visitors such that the system learned almost
perfectly the segment × morph purchase probabilities prm. Gen-1 n =  could achieve $75.7 million in additional revenues, close to that which Gen-2
achieves with 80,000 visitors.
Future Research to Improve the
Theory and Practice of Morphing
Prior research and industry practice have demonstrated the power of self-selected branching, recommendations, and customized content . In this paper
we explore the next step, changing the presentation
of information to match each customer’s cognitive
style. The EGI solution to the POMDP enables us to
explore different assignments of morphs to cognitivestyle segments. The Bayesian updating enables customers to reveal their cognitive styles through their
clickstreams. Together, the Gittins and Bayesian loops
automate morphing (after a priming study).
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
Feasibility considerations required empirical tradeoffs. We used segments of cognitive styles rather
than continuously deﬁned cognitive styles because
the dynamic program requires ﬁnitely many “arms.”
We morphed once per visit, in part, because we
observe a single subscription decision per customer.
We estimated homogeneous click-characteristic preference weights so that we could identify cognitivestyle segments in real time. We used the posterior
mean of  rather than sampling from the posterior
distribution of  because we need to compute the
EGI between clicks. Moreover, the priming study
was based on a Gen-1 implementation. Each of these
issues can be addressed in future applications.
BT was most interested in broadband subscriptions.
In other applications, purchase amounts might be
important. If purchase amounts are normal random
variables, we can use normal priors rather than beta
priors. Gittins demonstrates that
this normal-normal case is also solved with an index
strategy and provides algorithms to compute the
normal-normal indices. Vermorel and Mohri 
explore a series of heuristic algorithms that perform
well in online contexts. We easily extend the theory
to a situation where we observe (1) whether a purchase is made and (2) the amount of that purchase. In
this case we observe the normally distributed outcome
conditioned on a Bernoulli outcome. This is a special
case of “bandit-branching” as introduced by Weber
 and studied by Bertsimas and Niño-Mora 
and Tsitsiklis . Using a “fair charge” argument,
Weber shows that the value of a bandit-branching
process can be computed by replacing the reward
to a branch with its Gittins index. The index of a
sales-then-sales-amount process becomes the product
of the beta-Bernoulli and the normal-normal indices.
All other considerations in Figure 2 remain the same.
Recent developments in the bandit literature now
make it feasible to include switching costs via fast generalized index heuristics .
Our application focused on cognitive styles. The literatures in psychology and learning posit that cognitive styles are enduring characteristics of human
beings. If our EGI algorithm was extended to other
marketing-mix elements besides website design, we
might consider latent states that evolved randomly
or based on marketing-mix elements. (See review in
§3.) There are exciting opportunities to combine the
advantages of HMMs or latent-class analysis with the
exploration-exploitation trade-offs made possible with
expected Gittins indices.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the MIT Sloan School
of Management, the Center for Digital Business at MIT
(ebusiness.mit.edu), and the BT Group. The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of their industrial collaborators, research assistants, and faculty colleagues: Cinda
Amyx, Theta Aye, Fabio Colacchio, Shane Frederick, Shirley
Fung, Tilli Kalisky, Steven Kao, Robert Klein, Mangesh
Kulkarni, Shelly Lau, Matthew Lawson, Antonio Lorenzon,
Clarence Lee, Aman Narang, Gavin Patterson, Harold
Salomann, Steven Stokols, Fareena Sultan, and Steven
Whittaker. The authors thank the editor, area editor, and
reviewers at Marketing Science for constructive comments
that improved their paper.
Appendix 1. Notation
a = amount by which future visitors are valued, the discount rate in the dynamic program;
⃗ckjn = characteristics of the jth click-alternative of the kth
click decision by visitor n;
⃗dtn1 ⃗dtn2 = ﬁrst three elements of ⃗ckjn; notation used for
paired-comparison selections;
EGmn = expected Gittins index for the mth morph for
visitor n;
f · = probability density function, usually the posterior
distribution;
g· = probability density function, usually a prior;
Grmn = Gittins index for the rth cognitive-style segment
and the mth morph for visitor n;
j indexes click-alternatives;
Jkn = number of click-alternatives at the kth click by visitor n;
k indexes clicks;
Kn = number of clicks made by visitor n;
ℓ= used as an index in Equation (3); summation in the
denominator;
m = indexes morphs, m = 1 to 7 or, equivalently, m
implies a binary representation;
mo = initial morph seen by website visitors;
r = optimal morph for cognitive-style segment r;
n indexes visitors, used for both production visitors and
priming-study respondents;
Nrm = total number of visitors who see the mth morph
and are in the rth cognitive-style segment;
o indexes prior values, e.g., for rmo,
rmo, prmo, Nrmo, mo;
prm = probability that visitor n in the cognitive-style segment, r, will subscribe to BT when shown morph m; ¯prmn is
the mean of the posterior for prm after the nth visitor; ¯prmo
is the mean of the prior for prmo;
⃗p = matrix of the prms;
qrn = f rn  ⃗yn ⃗ckjns; inferred probability that visitor
n is in cognitive-style segment r;
qorn = prior cognitive-style segment probabilities;
rn = indexes cognitive-style segments, rn = 0 to 15;
⃗rn = vector notation for rn as used in ⃗rn = ⃗rn; ⃗rn is
coded as four binary indicators plus a constant;
rmna = expected reward for acting optimally
conditioned on rmn,
rmn, and a as used in the Bellman
stn = paired-comparison selection for the tth conjoint
question for the nth priming visitor;
t indexes the constant-sum questions; t = 1 to 8;
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS
˜ukjn = visitor n’s utility for the jth click-alternative of the
kth click; implies clickstream likelihood;
ykjn = 1 if visitor n chooses the jth click-alternative on
the kth click, 0 otherwise;
⃗ykn = binary vector for the kth decision point for the nth
⃗yn = clickstream matrix for the nth visitor;
⃗y = set of ⃗yns for all n, used only in summary notation;
rmn = parameter of the naturally conjugate beta distribution used in the Gittins dynamic program ( rmo is a prior
rmn = parameter of the naturally conjugate beta distribution used in the Gittins dynamic program (
rmo is a prior
Appendix 2. Quantiles of Posterior Distribution of 
Analytic/verbal
Leader versus
Reader versus
Mean effect
verbal/holistic
deliberative
Graphical versus verbal
Small versus large load
Focused versus general
General information
Analytic tool
Read a post
Post a comment
Compare plans
Virtual advisor
Learning center
Appendix 3. Gittins Index as Function of n Holding rmn/rmn + rmn = 040
100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
Visitors (n + priors)
Gittins index
Priors, αrmo and βrmo, are
equivalent to pseudo-observations
mn = indicator variable to indicate when the nth visitor
purchases a BT broadband plan after seeing morph, m; rmn
when r is known and we wish to make dependence on r
⃗ = matrix of the mns, used in summary notation only;
˜kjn = extreme-value errors for choice among clickalternatives;
 = scaling parameter to allow scale differences in clickstream and paired-comparison data;
⃗rn = preference vector for the rnth cognitive-style segment; used in ˜ukjn = ⃗c′
kjn ⃗rn + ˜kjn;
 = matrix of the ⃗rn;  is a 10 × 5 matrix;
˜tn = extreme-value measurement error used for pairedcomparison conjoint questions.
Hauser et al.: Website Morphing
Marketing Science 28(2), pp. 202–223, © 2009 INFORMS