Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7556–7566
July 5 - 10, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Good-Enough Compositional Data Augmentation
Jacob Andreas
 
We propose a simple data augmentation protocol aimed at providing a compositional inductive bias in conditional and unconditional
sequence models.
Under this protocol, synthetic training examples are constructed by taking real training examples and replacing (possibly discontinuous) fragments with other fragments that appear in at least one similar environment. The protocol is model-agnostic and
useful for a variety of tasks. Applied to neural
sequence-to-sequence models, it reduces error
rate by as much as 87% on diagnostic tasks
from the SCAN dataset and 16% on a semantic parsing task. Applied to n-gram language
models, it reduces perplexity by roughly 1%
on small corpora in several languages.
Introduction
This paper proposes a rule-based data augmentation protocol for sequence modeling. Our approach
aims to supply a simple and model-agnostic bias
toward compositional reuse of previously observed
sequence fragments in novel environments. Consider a language modeling task in which we wish
to estimate a probability distribution over a family
of sentences with the following ﬁnite sample as
training data:
a. The cat sang.
b. The wug sang.
c. The cat daxed.
In language processing problems, we often want
models to generalize beyond this dataset and infer
that (2a) is also probable but (2b) is not:
a. The wug daxed.
b. * The sang daxed.
This generalization amounts to an inference about
syntactic categories . Because cat and
wug are interchangeable in (1a) and (1b), they are
also likely interchangeable elsewhere; cat and sang
are not similarly interchangeable. Human learners
make judgments like (2) about novel lexical items
 and fragments of novel languages
 . But we do not expect such
judgments from unstructured generative models
trained to maximize the likelihood of the training
data in (1).
A large body of work in natural language processing provides generalization to data like (2a) by
adding structure to the learned predictor .
On real-world datasets, however, such models are
typically worse than “black-box” function approximators like neural networks, even for black-box
models that fail to place probability mass on either example in (2) given small training sets like
(1) . To the extent that we believe (2a) to capture an important inductive bias,
we would like to ﬁnd a way of softly encouraging it
without tampering with the structure of predictors
that work well at scale. In this paper, we introduce
a procedure for generating synthetic training examples by recombining real ones, such that (2a)
is assigned non-negligible probability because it
already appears in the training dataset.
The basic operation underlying our proposal
(which we call GECA, for “good-enough compositional augmentation”) is depicted in Figure 1: if
two (possibly discontinuous) fragments of training
examples appear in some common environment,
then any additional environment where the ﬁrst
fragment appears is also a valid environment for
the second.
She picks the wug up in Fresno.
She puts the wug down in Tempe.
Pat picks cats up.
Pat puts cats down.
Visualization of the proposed approach:
two discontinuous sentence fragments (a–b, underlined) which appear in similar environments (a–b, highlighted) are identiﬁed. Additional sentences in which
the ﬁrst fragment appears (c) are used to synthesize new
examples (d) by substituting in the second fragment.
GECA is crude: as a linguistic principle, it is
both limited and imprecise. As discussed in Sections 3 and 4, it captures a narrow slice of the many
phenomena studied under the heading of “compositionality”, while also making a number of incorrect
predictions about real language data. Nevertheless,
GECA appears to be quite effective across a range
of learning problems. In semantic parsing, it gives
improvements comparable to the task-speciﬁc data
augmentation approach of Jia and Liang on
logical expressions, better performance than that
approach on a different split of the data designed
to test generalization more rigorously, and corresponding improvements on a version of the dataset
with a different meaning representation language.
Outside of semantic parsing, it solves two representative problems from the SCAN dataset of Lake
and Baroni that are synthetic but precise in
the notion of compositionality they test. Finally,
it helps with some (unconditional) low-resource
language modeling problems in a typologically diverse set of six languages.
Background
Recent years have seen tremendous success at natural language transduction and generation tasks
using complex function approximators, especially
recurrent and attentional
 neural models. With enough
training data, these models are often more accurate than than approaches built on traditional tools
like regular transducers and context-free grammars
 , which are brittle and
difﬁcult to efﬁciently infer from large datasets.
However, models equipped with an explicit symbolic generative process have at least one signiﬁcant advantage over the aforementioned black-box
approaches: given a grammar, it is straightforward
to precisely characterize how that grammar will
extrapolate beyond the examples in a given training set to out-of-distribution data. Indeed, it is
often possible for researchers to design the form
that this extrapolation will take: smoothed n-gram
language models ensure that no memorization is
possible beyond a certain length ;
CCG-based semantic parsers can make immediate
use of entity lexicons without having ever seen the
lexicon entries used in real sentences .
It is not the case that black-box neural models are
fundamentally incapable of this kind of predictable
generalization—the success of these models at capturing long-range structure in text and controlled algorithmic data indicate that some representation of hierarchical structure can be learned given enough data.
But the precise point at which this transition occurs
is not well characterized, and it is evidently beyond
the scale available in many real-world problems.
How can we improve the behavior of highquality black-box models in these settings? There
are many sophisticated tools available for improving the function approximators or loss functions
themselves—structured regularization of parameters , posterior regularization
 , explicit
stacks and composition operators . These existing proposals tend to be taskand architecture-speciﬁc. But to the extent that
the generalization problem can be addressed by increasing the scale of the training data, it is natural
to ask whether we can address the problem by increasing this scale artiﬁcially—in other words, via
data augmentation.
Data augmentation techniques, which generate auxiliary training data by performing structured transformation or combination of training
examples, are widely used in computer vision
 . Within NLP, several data
augmentation approaches have been proposed for
text classiﬁcation ; these approaches give improvements
even when combined with large-scale pretraining
 .
Jia and Liang study
data augmentation and compositionality in speciﬁc
setting of learning language-to-logical-form mappings, beginning from the principle that data is
compositional if it is generated by an explicit grammar that relates strings to logical forms. This view
of compositionality as determined by synchronicity
between form and meaning is essentially Montagovian and well-suited to problems in formal semantics ; however, it requires access
to structured meaning representations with explicit
types and bracketings, which are not available in
most NLP applications.
Here we aim at a notion of compositionality that
is simpler and more general: a bias toward identifying recurring fragments seen at training time, and
re-using them in environments distinct from those
in which they were ﬁrst observed. This view makes
no assumptions about the availability of brackets
and types, and is synchronous only to the extent
that the notion of a fragment is permitted to include
content from both the source and target sides. We
will ﬁnd that it is nearly as effective as existing
approaches in the speciﬁc settings for which they
were designed, but also effective on a variety of
problems where they cannot be applied.
Consider again the example in Figure 1.
data augmentation protocol aims to discover substitutable sentence fragments (underlined), with
the fact that a pair of fragments appear in some
common sub-sentential environment (highlighted)
taken as evidence that the fragments belong to a
common category. To generate a new examples
for the model, an occurrence of one fragment is
removed from a sentence to produce a sentence
template, which is then populated with the other
Why should we expect this procedure to produce well-formed training examples? The existence of syntactic categories, and the expressibility
of well-formedness rules in terms of these abstract
categories, is one of the foundational principles of
generative approaches to syntax .
The observation that context provides a strong signal about a sentence fragment’s category is in turn
the foundation of distributional techniques for the
study of language . Combining the
two gives the outlines of the above procedure.
This combination has a productive history in
natural language processing: when fragments are
single words, it yields class-based language models
 ; when fragments are contiguous spans it yields unsupervised parsers . The present data
augmentation scenario is distinguished mainly by
the fact that we are unconcerned with producing a
complete generative model of data, or with recovering the latent structure implied by the presence
of nested syntactic categories. We can still synthesize high-precision examples of well-formed
sequences by identifying individual substitutions
that are likely to be correct without understanding
how they ﬁt into the grammar as a whole.
Indeed, if we are not concerned with recovering linguistically plausible analyses, we need not
limit ourselves to words or contiguous sentence
fragments. We can take
a. She picks the wug up.
b. She puts the wug down.
as evidence that we can use picks. . . up wherever we
can use puts...down. Indeed, given a translation
a. I sing. ▷Canto.
b. I sing marvelously. ▷
Canto maravillosamente.
c. I dax marvelously. ▷
Dajo maravillosamente.
we can apply the same principle to synthesize I
dax. ▷Dajo. based on the common environment
...marvelously ▷...maravillosamente. From the
perspective of a generalized substitution principle,
the alignment problem in machine translation is the
same as the class induction problem in language
modeling, but with sequences featuring large numbers of gappy fragments and a boundary symbol
The only remaining question is what makes two
environments similar enough to infer the existence
of a common category. There is, again, a large
literature on this question (including the aforementioned work in language modeling, unsupervised
parsing, and alignment), but in the current work we
will make use of a very simple criterion: fragments
are interchangeable if they occur in at least one
lexical environment that is exactly the same.
Given a window size k and sequence of n tokens w = w1w2 · · · wn, deﬁne a fragment as a
set of non-overlapping spans of w, a template as
a version of w with a fragment removed, and an
environment as a template restricted to a k-word
window around each removed fragment. Formally,
(letting [i, j] denote {i, i + 1, . . . , j}) we have:
fragments(w) = {{wa1..b1, wa2..b2, . . .} :
1 ≤ai < bi ≤n, all [ai, bi] disjoint}
tpl(w, f) = (wj : ∀wai..bi ∈f. j ̸∈[ai, bi]) (2)
env(w, f) = {wj :
wj ∈tpl(w, f) and
∃wai..bi ∈f. j ∈[ai −k, bi + k]}
In Figure 1(a), the underlined picks...up is one
possible fragment that could be extracted from the
sentence. The corresponding template is She. . . the
wug . . . in Fresno, and with k = 1 the environment
is She...the wug ...in. As shown in Figure 1(d),
any fragment may be substituted into any template
with the same number of holes. Denote this substitution operation by t/f. The data augmentation
operation that deﬁnes GECA is formally stated as
If the training data contains sequences w = t1/f1,
1/f1 and y = t2/f2, with env(w, t1) =
env(y, t2) and t′
1 ̸= t1, then synthesize a new
training example z = t′
If a fragment occurs multiple times within a given
example, all instances are replaced (see Figure 3).
Linguistic notes
Despite the fact that the above
operation is motivated by insights from generative
syntax and distributional semantics, it should be
emphasized that it is, as a statement of a general
linguistic principle, obviously wrong. Counterexamples abound: in English, stress-derived nouns
(e.g. récord from recórd) will be taken as evidence
that many nouns and verbs are interchangeable; in
Mandarin Chinese, kˇeshì and dànshì both mean
“but”, but kˇeshì alone can be used in particular constructions to mean “very”.
What ultimately matters is the relative frequency
of such errors: if their contribution to an inaccurate
model is less than the inaccuracy caused by the
original shortage of training data, the GECA still
helps. In conditional problems, like the machine
translation example above, such errors may be totally harmless: if we synthesize a new (x, y) pair
with x outside the support of the real training data,
they may not inﬂuence the model’s predictions on
the true support beyond providing useful general
inductive bias.
Implementation
Naïve implementation of the
boxed operation takes O(t3f3) time (where t is
the number of distinct templates in the dataset and
f the number of distinct fragments). This can be
improved to O(ft2e) (where e is the number of
templates that map to the same environment) by
building appropriate data structures (Algorithm 1).
Space requirements might still be considerable
(comparable to those used by n-gram language
models), and strategies from the language modeling literature can be used to reduce memory usage
 . This algorithm is agnostic with
respect to the choice of fragmentation and environment functions; task-speciﬁc choices are described
in more detail for each experiment below.
Diagnostic experiments
We begin with a set of experiments on synthetic
data designed to precisely test whether GECA provides the kind of generalization it was designed for.
Here we use the SCAN dataset , which consists of simple English commands
paired with sequences of discrete actions (Figure 2).
We focus speciﬁcally on the add primitive (jump)
and add template (around right) conditions, which
test whether the agent can be exposed to individual
commands or modiﬁers (e.g. jump ▷JUMP) in isolation at training time, and incorporate them into
more complex commands like the earlier example
at test time.
We extract fragments with one gap and a maximum length of 4 tokens. The environment is taken
to be the complete template. Generated examples
are appended to the original dataset. As an exam-
Algorithm 1 Sample GECA implementation.
f2t = dict(default=set()) # fragment -> template
t2f = dict(default=set()) # template -> fragment
e2t = dict(default=set()) # env -> template
for seq in dataset:
for f in fragments(seq): # Eq. 1
template = tpl(seq, fragment) # Eq. 2
add(f2t[fragment], template)
add(t2f[template], fragment)
add(e2t[env(seq, fragment)], template) # Eq. 3
t2t = dict(default=set())
for fragment in keys(f2t)):
for template in f2t[fragment]:
for template2 in f2t[fragment]:
for new_template in e2t[env(template2)]
add(t2t[template1], new_template)
for template1, template2 in t2t:
for fragment in t2f[template1]
if fragment not in t2f[template2]:
yield template2 / fragment
walk left twice
LTURN WALK LTURN WALK
jump around left
LTURN JUMP LTURN JUMP LTURN JUMP LTURN JUMP
walk right
RTURN WALK
Figure 2: Example SCAN data. Each example consists
of a synthetic natural language command (left) paired
with a discrete action sequence (right).
jump / SCAN
jump / NACS
right / SCAN
right / NACS
0.00 ± 0.00
0.00 ± 0.00
0.00 ± 0.00
0.00 ± 0.00
0.87 ± 0.02
0.67 ± 0.01
0.82 ± 0.04
0.82 ± 0.03
Table 1: Sequence match accuracies on SCAN datasets, in which the learner must generalize to new compositional
uses of a single lexical item (“jump”) or multi-word modiﬁer (“around right”) when mapping instructions to action
sequences (SCAN) or vice-versa . While the sequence-to-sequence model is unable to
make any correct generalizations at all, applying GECA enables it to succeed most of the time. Scores are averaged
over 10 random seeds; the standard deviation across seeds is shown. All improvements are signiﬁcant (paired
binomial test, p ≪0.001).
ple of the effect of this augmentation procedure,
the original jump split has 12620 training examples; GECA generates an additional 395 using 395
distinct templates and 6 distinct fragments.
With the original and augmented datasets, we
train a one-layer LSTM encoder–decoder model
with an embedding size of 64, a hidden size of
512, a bidirectional encoder and an attentional decoder . The model is trained using
ADAM with a step size of
0.001 and a dropout rate of 0.5.
Results are shown in Table 1. In line with the
original experiments of Lake and Baroni, the baseline sequence-to-sequence model completely fails
to generalize to the test set. Applying GECA allows the learned model to successfully make most
tested generalizations across single and multi-word
entries, and in both instruction-to-action and actionto-instruction directions.
Analysis: examples
Some synthesized examples are shown in Figure 3. Success at the add primitive condition stems from the constraint that the
single example usage of the primitive must still be a
valid (command, action) pair, and all verbs are valid
commands in isolation. Only three examples—run
▷RUN, walk ▷WALK and look ▷LOOK—provide the
evidence that GECA uses to synthesize to new usages of jump; if these were removed, the sequenceto-sequence model’s training accuracy would be
unchanged but GECA would fail to synthesize any
new examples involving jump, and test accuracy
would fall to zero. For the add template condition,
GECA correctly replaces all occurrences of LTURN
with RTURN to produce new examples of the around
right template; this example highlights the usefulness of GECA’s ability to discover discontinuous
and non-context-free substitutions.
Analysis: dataset statistics
To further understand the behavior of GECA, we conduct a ﬁnal
add primitive (jump)
walk thrice after walk right
RTURN WALK WALK WALK WALK
jump opposite left thrice after turn opposite right
RTURN RTURN LTURN LTURN JUMP LTURN LTURN JUMP
LTURN LTURN JUMP
add template (around right)
look right twice and turn opposite right twice
RTURN LOOK RTURN LOOK RTURN RTURN RTURN RTURN
run around right and walk opposite right twice
RTURN RUN RTURN RUN RTURN RUN RTURN RUN RTURN
RTURN WALK RTURN RTURN WALK
Figure 3: Examples synthesized for the SCAN tasks.
Underlined words belong to the ﬁlled-in fragment; the
remaining text is the template. GECA synthesizes some
examples that exactly capture the desired generalization, and some examples that are unrelated.
set of analyses quantifying the overlap between the
synthesized data and the held-out data. We ﬁrst
measure full example overlap, the fraction of test
examples that appear in the augmented training set.
(By design, no overlap exists between the test set
and the original training set.) After applying GECA,
5% of test examples for the add primitive condition
and 1% of examples for the add template condition
are automatically synthesized. Next we measure
token co-occurrence overlap: we compute the set
of (input or output) tokens that occur together in
any test example, and then measure the fraction of
these pairs that also occur together in some training
example. For the add primitive condition, GECA
increases token co-occurrence overlap from 83%
to 96%; for the add template condition it is 100%
even prior to augmentation.
It is important to note that GECA, which sees
only the training set, is unaware that some subset
of the data is singled out for generalization testing
at evaluation time. The data augmentation protocol generates a large number of spurious training
examples unrelated to the desired generalization
(e.g. the ﬁrst example in Figure 3); however, it also
generates enough new usages of the target concept
that the learner generalizes successfully.
Semantic parsing
Next we turn to the problem of semantic parsing,
which has also been a popular subject of study for
questions about compositionality, generalization,
and data augmentation. For the reasons discussed
in Section 3, we expect qualitatively different behavior from this approach on real language data
without the controlled vocabulary of SCAN.
We study four versions of the GEOQUERY
dataset , which consists of 880 English
questions about United States geography, paired
with meaning representations in the form of either
logical expressions or SQL queries. The standard
train–test split for this dataset ensures that no natural language question is repeated between the train
and test sets. As Finegan-Dollak et al. note,
this provides only a limited test of generalization,
as many test examples feature a logical form that
overlaps with the training data; they introduce a
more challenging query split to ensure that neither
questions nor logical forms are repeated (even after
anonymizing named entities).
We extract fragments with at most 2 gaps and
at most 12 tokens. On the SQL query split, the
original training set contains 695 examples. GECA
generates an additional 1055 using 839 distinct
templates and 379 distinct fragments. For the question split we use the baseline model of Jia and
Liang ; for the query split we use the same
sequence-to-sequence model as used for SCAN
and introduce the supervised copy mechanism of
Finegan-Dollak et al. . Environments are
again taken to be identical to templates.
Results are shown in Table 2.
On the split
for which Jia and Liang report results,
GECA achieves nearly the same improvements with
weaker domain assumptions. On the remaining
splits it is more accurate.
Analysis: examples
Synthesized examples for
the logical and SQL representations are shown
in Figure 4. Despite the fact that the sequenceto-sequence model uses neither gold entities or
1In some cases these averages are slightly lower than the
single-run results previously reported in the literature. Note
also that the original publication from Jia and Liang reports
denotation accuracies; the results here are taken from their
accompanying code release. Overall trends across systems are
comparable using either evaluation metric.
Logical forms
0.76 ± 0.02
+ Jia et al. 16
0.81 ± 0.01
0.65†‡± 0.06
0.78†± 0.01
+ GECA + concat
0.79†± 0.01
SQL queries
Iyer et al. 17
0.68 ± 0.02
0.49† ± 0.02
0.68 ± 0.02
Table 2: Meaning representation exact-match accuracies on the GEOQUERY dataset.
On logical forms,
GECA approaches the data augmentation approach of
Jia and Liang on the standard split of the data
(“Question”) and outperforms it on a split designed to
test compositionality (“Query”). On SQL expressions,
GECA leads to substantial improvements on the query
split and achieves state-of-the-art results. Scores are
averaged over 10 random seeds; the standard deviation
across seeds is shown.1 †Signiﬁcant improvement over
seq2seq baseline (p < 0.01). ‡Signiﬁcant improvement
over Jia and Liang (p < 0.001). (A t-test is used
for LF experiments and a paired binomial test for SQL.)
specialized entity linking machinery, the augmentation procedure successfully aligns natural language entity names to their logical representations
and generalizes across entity choices. This procedure also produces plausible but unattested entities
like a river named ﬂorida and a state named west
The last example in the “logical forms” section
is particularly interesting. The extracted fragment
contains lowest population density on the natural
language side but only density on the logical form
side. However, the environment constrains substitution to happen where appropriate: this fragment
will only be used in cases where the environment
already contains the necessary smallest.
Some substitutions are semantically problematic:
for example, the ﬁnal datapoint in Figure 4 asks
about the population of a number (because substitution has replaced capital with area); the corresponding SQL expression would fail to execute.
Aside from typing problems, however, the example
is syntactically well-formed and provides correct
evidence about constituent boundaries, alignments
and hierarchical structure within the geography domain. Other synthesized examples (like the secondto-last in Figure 4) have correct meaning representations but ungrammatical natural language inputs.
Logical forms
what is the lowest point in rhode island
( A , lowest ( A , ( place ( A ) , loc ( A , B ) , const ( B , stateid ( rhode island ) ) ) ) )
what states does the ﬂorida run through
( A , ( state ( A ) , const ( B , riverid ( florida ) ) , traverse ( B , A ) ) )
what state borders the state with the lowest population density
( A , ( state ( A ) , next_to ( A , B ) , smallest ( C , ( state ( B ) , density ( B , C ) ) ) ) )
SQL queries
what rivers run through west wyoming
SELECT RIVER0.NAME FROM RIVER AS RIVER0 WHERE RIVER0.TRAVERSE = " west wyoming "
which states have towns major named springﬁeld
SELECT CITY0.STATE_NAME FROM CITY AS CITY0 WHERE CITY0.NAME = " springfield " AND CITY0.POP > 150000
what is the population of the area of the largest state
SELECT CITY0.POP FROM CITY AS CITY0 WHERE CITY0.NAME = ( SELECT STATE0.AREA FROM STATE AS STATE0
WHERE STATE0.AREA = ( SELECT MAX ( STATE1.AREA ) FROM STATE AS STATE1 ) )
Figure 4: Examples synthesized for semantic parsing on GEOQUERY. Substituted fragments are underlined. GECA
aligns named entities to their logical representations and abstracts over predicates. Sometimes (as in the ﬁnal
example) synthesized examples are semantically questionable but have plausible hierarchical structure.
Analysis: dataset statistics
Applying GECA to
the GEOQUERY data increases full example overlap (described at the end of Section 4) by 5% for the
question split in both languages, 6% for the query
split with logical forms, and 9% for the query split
with SQL expressions, in line with the observation that accuracy improvements are greater for the
query split than the question split. Augmentation
increases token co-occurrence overlap by 3–4%
across all conditions.
In a larger-scale manual analysis of 100 synthesized examples from the query split, evaluating
them for grammaticality and accuracy (whether
the natural language captures the semantics of the
logical form), we ﬁnd that 96% are grammatical,
and 98% are semantically accurate.
Negative results
We conclude with a corresponding set of experiments on the SCHOLAR text-to-
SQL dataset of Iyer et al. , which is similar
SQL queries
0.03 ± 0.01
0.57 ± 0.02
0.03 ± 0.01
0.56 ± 0.02
Table 3: Negative results: meaning representation accuracies on the SCHOLAR dataset. For the query split,
synthesized examples do not overlap with any of the
held-out data; for the question split, they provide little
information beyond what is already present in the training dataset. In both cases a model trained with GECA
performs indistinguishably from a the baseline model.
to GEOQUERY in size, diversity and complexity.
In contrast to GEOQUERY, however, application
of GECA to SCHOLAR provides no improvement.
On the query split, there is limited compositional
re-use of SQL sub-queries that average
nesting depth in SCHOLAR is roughly half that of
GEOQUERY). Correspondingly, full example overlap after augmentation remains at 0% and token
co-occurrence overlap increases by only 1%. On
the question split, full example overlap is larger
(8%) but token co-occurrence overlap increases by
less than 1%. These results suggest that GECA is
most successful when it can increase similarity of
word co-occurrence statistics in the training and
test sets, and when the input dataset exhibits a high
degree of recursion.
Low-resource language modeling
Both of the previous sections investigated conditional models. The fragments extracted and reused
by GECA were essentially synchronous lexicon entries, in line with example (4). We originally motivated GECA with monolingual problems in which
we simply wish to improve model judgments about
well-formedness, so we conclude with a set of language modeling experiments.
We use Wikipedia dumps2 in ﬁve languages
(Kinyarwanda, Lao, Pashto, Tok Pisin, and a subset
of English Wikipedia) as well as the Na dataset of
Adams et al. . These languages exhibit the
performance of GECA across a range of morpholog-
2 
# train tokens
Table 4: Perplexities on low-resource language modeling in English (ENG), Kinyarwanda (KIN), Lao, Na, Pashto
(PUS) and Tok Pisin (TOK). Even with a Kneser–Ney smoothed 5-gram model (5-MKN) rather than a high-capacity
neural model, applying GECA leads to small improvements in perplexity. †Signiﬁcant improvement over 5-gram
MKN baseline (paired binomial test, p < 0.05).
ical complexities: for example, Kinyarwanda has a
complex noun class system and
Pashto has rich derivational morphology , while Lao and Tok Pisin are
comparatively simple morphologically . Training datasets range from
10K–2M tokens. Like Adams et al., we found that
a 5-gram modiﬁed Kneser–Ney language model
 outperformed several varieties
of RNN language model, so we base our GECA
experiments on the n-gram model instead. We use
the implementation provided in KenLM (Heaﬁeld,
We extract fragments with no gaps and a maximum size of 2 tokens, with the environment taken
to be a 2-token window around the extracted fragment. New usages are generated only for fragments
that occur fewer than 20 times in the data. In Kinyarwanda, the base dataset contains 3358 sentences.
GECA generates an additional 913, using 913 distinct templates and 199 distinct fragments.
Rather than training directly on the augmented
dataset, as in preceding sections, we found that
the best performance came from training one language model on the original dataset and one on the
augmented dataset, then interpolating their ﬁnal
probabilities. The weight for this interpolation is
determined on a validation dataset and chosen to
be one of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.5.
Results are shown in Table 4. Improvements are
not universal and are more modest than in preceding sections. However, GECA decreases perplexities across multiple languages and never increases
them. These results suggest that the substitution
principle underlying GECA is a useful mechanism
for encouraging compositionality even outside conditional tasks and neural models.
Analysis: examples and statistics
In language
modeling, GECA functions as a smoothing scheme:
its primary effect is to move mass toward n-grams
that can appear in productive contexts. In this sense,
GECA performs a similar role to the Kneser–Ney
smoothing also used in all LM experiments. With
GECA, in contrast to Kneser–Ney, the notion of
“context” can look forward as well as backward,
and capture longer-range interactions.
Examples of synthesized sentences are shown
in Figure 5. Most sentences are grammatical, and
many of the substitutions preserve relevant semantic type information (substituting locations for locations, times for times, etc.). However, some illformed sentences are also generated.
As in Section 5, we manually inspect 100 synthesized sentences. As before, sentences are evaluated
for grammaticality; here, since no explicit semantics were provided, they are instead evaluated for
generic semantic acceptability. In this case, only
51% of synthesized sentences are semantically acceptable, but 79% are grammatical.
Discussion
We introduced GECA, a simple data augmentation
scheme based on identifying local phrase substitutions that are licensed by common contexts, and
demonstrated that extra training examples generated with GECA lead to substantial improvements
on both diagnostic and natural datasets for semantic
various copies of portions of the code of hammurabi
have been found on baked clay tablets , some possibly older than the celebrated basalt stele now in the
night sky .
the work contains , in an appendix , the german equivalents for the technical terms used in the glock $num .
payments system in the aclu proposed new directions for
the organization .
in the late triassic and early nineteenth century , a number of scots-irish traders lived among the choctaw and
married high-status women .
Figure 5: Sentences synthesized for the English language modeling task. Most examples are syntactically
well-formed; some are also semantically plausible.
parsing and language modeling.
While the approach is surprisingly effective in
its current form, we view these results primarily
as an invitation to consider more carefully the role
played by representations of sentence fragments in
larger questions about compositionality in blackbox sequence models. The procedure detailed in
this paper relies on exact string matching to identify
common context; future work might take advantage of learned representations of spans and their
environments . Further improvements are likely obtainable
by constraining the extracted fragments to respect
constituent boundaries when syntactic information
is available.
The experiments presented here focus on rewriting sentences using evidence within a dataset to encourage generalization to new outputs. An alternative line of work on paraphrase-based data augmentation 
uses external, text-only resources to encourage robust interpretation of new inputs corresponding to
known outputs. The two lines of work could be
combined, e.g. by using GECA-identiﬁed fragments
to indicate productive locations for sub-sentential
paraphrasing.
More generally, the present results underline the
extent to which current models fail to learn simple,
context-independent notions of reuse, but also how
easy it is to make progress towards addressing this
problem without fundamental changes in model
architecture.
Reproducibility
Code for all experiments in this paper may be found
at github.com/jacobandreas/geca.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Oliver Adams for assistance with the
language modeling experiments, and to the anonymous reviewers for suggestions in the analysis sections.