Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
 
 
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only.
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their
employer(s) is intended or implied.
L-~~;;:-~,~~
ss~ \ u)?V~ ~, ~
Identification Problems
in the Social Sciences
Charles F. Manski
C'C~~'f,1'1
GIANNINI FOUNDATION OF
AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS
IDENTIFICATION PROBLEMS IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
August 1992
Giannini FDN Library
111111111111111111111111111111 II Ill I IIII
Methodological research in the social sciences aims to learn
what conclusions can and cannot be drawn given empirically relevant
combinations of assumptions and data.
Methodologists have long
found it useful to separate inferential problems into statistical
and identification components.
Studies of identification seek to
characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the researcher
had available a sample of unlimited size.
Studies of statistical
inference seek to characterize the generally weaker concluslons
that can be drawn given a sample of positive but finite size.
Statistical and identification problems limit in distinct ways the
conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
Statistical
problems are most severe when the available sample is small.
Identification problems are most severe when the researcher knows
little about the population under study and the sampling process
yields only weak data on the population.
This paper synthesizes
some of my recent research and thinking on identification problems
in the social sciences. Four problems are discussed: extrapolation
of regressions, the selection problem, identification of endogenous
social effects from outcome data, and identification of subjective
phenomena.
These problems arise regularly in social science
research and are the source of many substantive disputes.
Invited Paper, Section on Methodology, 1992 Annual Meeting of the
American Sociological Association.
1. Introduction
2. Extrapolation of Regressions
2.1. Identification and Consistent Estimation on the Supper~
2.2. Identification off the Support
2.2.1. Local Smoothness Restrictions
2.2.2. Global Restrictions
2.3. Identification of Contrasts
3. The Selection Problem
3.1. Identification in the Absence of Prior Information
3.1.1. Conditional Means of Bounded Functions of y
3.1.2. Conditional Probabilities
3.1.3. Conditional Quantiles
3.1.4. Sample Inference
3.1.5. An Historical Note
3.2. Varieties of Prior Information
3.2.1. Econometric Latent Variable Models
3.2.2. Statistical Mixture Models
3.2.3. Exclusion Restrictions
3.3. Switching Regressions
3.3.1. Shifted Outcomes
3.3.2. Ordered Outcomes
3.3.3. Selection by the Ordering of Outcomes
3.4. Identification of Treatment Effects
3.4.1. In the Absence of Prior Information
3.4.2. With Prior Information
3.4.3. Social Experimentation
4. Identification of Endogeneous Social Effects from Outcome Data
4.1. Endogenous, Contextual, Ecological and Correlated Effects
4.2. Identification of A Linear Model: The Reflection Prpblem
4.2.1. Model Specification
4.2.2. Identification of the Parameters
4.2.3. Parameter Restrictions
4.2.4. Sample Inference
4.3. More General Models
4.3.1. Nonlinear Models
4.3.2. More General Social Effects
4.3.3. Dynamic Models
4.4. Identification of Reference Groups
4.4.1. Tautological Linear Models
4.4.2. Experimental and Subjective Data
5. Identification of Subjective Phenomena: The Use of Intentions Data
5.1. Research Practices in Economics and Sociology
5.2. The Use of Intentions Data to Predict Behavior
5.2.1. Th~ Survey Question and the Best-Case Response
5.2.2. Prediction of Behavior Conditional on Intentions
5.2.3. Prediction Not Conditional on Intentions
5.2.4. Lessons
1. Introduction
The members of our open society often express differing views on
social policy.
Disagreements
presumably arise out of the
conflicting self-interests and ideologies of the population, but
normative differences are not the only contributing force.
controversies reflect divergent beliefs ·about human behavior,
specifically about the effects of government programs on behavior.
Consider, for example, the continuing debate about welfare.
Perspectives on AFDC and other welfare programs appear in part to
reflect beliefs about the way these programs affect marriage,
fertility, and labor supply behavior.
Almost everyone has an
opinion on the matter but the opinions vary widely.
Dive~gent beliefs about human behavior should, one might think,
be reconciliable through empirical social science research.
social scientists rarely seem able to settle questions of public
During the past twenty years researchers have worked hard
to learn how welfare affects behavior and to
evaluate the job training programs that aim to move welfare
recipients into the labor market .
We have similarly worked to understand how neighborhoods influence
their inhabitants , how the threat of
punishment deters crime , how school
attributes affect student learning
 , and how early childbirth affects the lives of
mothers and their children .
these and so many other areas, progress seems painfully slow.
Introduction
Indeed, the cumulative research on a subject only rarely converges
toward a consensus.
Why has empirical research in the social sciences so often
failed to yield clearcut answers to questions of interest?
social sciences may be immature.
or it may just be hard to answer
the questions that the social sciences are asked to address.
I believe the core problem to be the inherent difficulty of the
questions facing the social sciences. The conclusions that one can
draw from an empirical analysis are determined by the assumptions
and the data that one brings to bear.
In social science research,
the available data are typically limited and the range of plausible
assumptions wide; hence the generally accepted conclusions are
necessa~ily weak.
Disagreements about the determinants of human
behavior, the nature of social interactions, and the consequences
of public policy persist because researchers who analyze the same
data under different maintained
assumptions
reach different
logically valid conclusions.
Although the core problem of the social sciences is the difficulty of the enterprise, there is also a problem of immaturity.
Many social scientists do not appreciate the core problem.
seem not to recognize that the interpretation of data requires
assumptions. How often do we see an empirical analysis that applies
some conventional statistical method with little understanding of
the assumptions needed to interpret the results in the conventional
way? Some researchers understand the logic of sc,ien"t:if ic inference
··but nevertheless deny it when reporting their own work.
Introduction
scientific community rewards researchers who produce strong novel
findings and the public, impatient for solutions to its pressing
policy concerns, rewards researchers who offer simple analyses
leading to unequivocal policy recommendations.
These incentives
make it tempting for researchers to maintain assumptions far
stronger t~an they can persuasively defend, in order to draw strong
conclusions.
When this happens, empirical research degenerates
into the advocacy of "forensic" social science, where researchers
sharing the same data but maintaining different assumptions argue
about the interpretation of the data.
With empirical resolution
impossible, scientific inquiry is replaced by debate.
STATISTICAL INFERENCE AND IDENTIFICATION: Methodological research
in the social sciences aims to learn what conclusions can and
given empirically relevant
combinations
assumptions and data.
For at least a century, methodologists have
used statistical theor1 to frame their studies .
One supposes that the empirical problem is to
infer some feature of a population described by a probability
distribution and that the available data are observations extracted
from the population by some sampling process.
One combines the
data with assumptions about the population and the sampling process
to draw statistical conclusions about the population feature of
Working within this familiar framework, methodologists have
found it useful to separate the inferential problem into statis-
Introduction
tical and identification components.
Studies of identification
seek to characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the
researcher had available a sample of unlimited size.
Studies of
statistical inference seek to characterize the generally weaker
conclusions that can be drawn given a sample of posi~ive but finite
Statistical and identification problems limit in distinct
ways the conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
Statistical problems are most severe when the available sample is
small. Identification problems are most severe when the researcher
knows little about the population under study and the sampling
process yields only weak data on the population.
Statistical problems contribute to the difficulty of empirical
researcl'!. but identification is the core problem of the social
sciences. Increasing the sizes of our available data samples would
enable us to sharpen the inferences we now make but would not
enable us to make new kinds of inferences.
New inferences require
either new knowledge of the population under study or new sampling
processes yielding data on different features of the population.
FOCUS ON IDENTIFICATION: Beginning in the early 1980s I have, in my
research and teaching, gradually devoted less time to the study of
statistical questions and more to the analysis of identification.
I now find it natural to study inference in two stages.
determines what restrictions on the population of interest are
implied by the available prior information and by the sampling ~
process generating data.
Then one develops methods for estimating
Introduction
identified population features, usually by treating the sample as
analogous to the population ;
the selection problem (Section 3); identification of endogenous
social effects from outcome data (Section 4); and identification of
subjective phenomena
(Section 5).
These four problems arise
regularly in social science research and are the source of many
substantive disputes.
I would like to call the reader's attention to several themes
that arise in the course of considering these identification
* A fruitful approach to the study of identification is to begin
by asking what can be learned from the data alone, in the absence
of prior information.
Once this is established, one then asks what
more may be learned given various types of prior information (see
Sections 2 and 3).
Introduction
* It may be easier to identify some population features than
For example, the median is easier to identify than the
mean when the data are censored (see Section 3).
* Identification is not an all-or-nothing proposition.
not have enough information to learn the value of a parameter, but
11\p.Y be able to bound it (see Sections 3 and 5).
* Outcome data alone reveal little about the channels through
which society influences the individual (see Section 4) .
Extrapolation
2. Extrapolation of Regressions
The problem of extrapolating regressions is ve-r:y familiar and so
forms a good starting point for our discussions.
Consideration of
extrapolation also serves to introduce basic ideas of nonparametric
regression analysis used repeatedly in Sections 3 through 5.
Informally, extrapolation is prediction of a variable y given a
specified value for another variable x, in the absence of data on
the behavior of y when x takes this value. For:nally, let Yx X be the
space of logically possible values of (y,x).
Assume there is a
probability distribution on YxX and that a random sampling process
yields observations of (y,x).
Suppose that, given a value x 0 in X,
one wishes to make the best prediction of y, in the sense of
minimizing square loss.
As is well-known, the best predictor in
this sense is E(yjx), the mean regression of yon x.
Extrapolation
is the problem of identifying E(yjx=x0 ) when the regressor x 0 is
logically possible but is off the support of x.
(The point x~ is
on the support of x if there is positive probability of observing
x arbitrarily close to x 0 and is off the support if there is zero
probability of observing x within some neighborhood of x 0 .)
Identification of E(y!x) on and off the support of x present
very different challenges.
Minimal prior information about the
population suffices to identify the regression on the support;
indeed, the literature on nonparametric regression analysis shows
that it is easy to estimate E(y!x) on the support. 1
On the other
Extrapolation
hand, extrapolation requires substantial prior information.
matters are explained in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
2.1. IDENTIFICATION AND CONSISTENT ESTIMATION ON THE SUPPORT
There are two cases to consider.
Suppose first that the point
is not only on the support but that Prob (x=x 0 )
E(y!x=x0 )
is identified and can be estimated consistently given
only the assumption that E(y!x=x 0 )
exists and is finite.
obvious estimate is the sample average of y across the obse::r-vations
for which xi= x 0 , namely
y. 1 [x. =x 0
l [xJ. =x 0 ]
(The indicator function l[.] takes the value one if the bracketed
logical condition holds and zero otherwise.)
The strong law of
large numbers implies that the cell average (2.1) is a consistent
estimate of the conditional mean E(ylx=x 0 ).
Now suppose that x 0 is on the support but that Prob(x=x 0 ) = O.
This is the situation when x has a continuous distribution with
positive density at x 0
• The cell-average estimate no longer works;
with probability one, the event xi= x 0 never occurs in the sample.
On the other hand, one can estimate E(ylx=x 0 ) by the sample average
Extrapolation
of y across those observations for which xi is suitably near x 0
that is, by a "local average" of the form
Yi p(xi,xo)<oNJ
l[p(xJ.,X 0 )<oN]
Here p(.,.) is any sensible metric measuring the distance bet~een
x 0 and xi; for example, Euclidean distance will do.
The parameter
oN is a sample-size dependent "bandwidth" chosen by the researcher
to operationalize the idea that one wishes to average over those
observations in which xi is near x 0 •
This simple nonparametric approach to estimation of E(y!x=x 0 )
works, in the sense of providing a consistent estimate, if
(a) E(y!x) is continuous at x = x 0 and Var(y) exists.
(b) one tightens the bandwidth as the sample size increa~es.
(c) one does not tighten the bandwidth too rapidly.
Of these conditions, only (a) requires prior information about the
population and the required information is very weak indeed.
To understand why conditions (a), (b), and (c) suffice, suppose
that oN is kept fixed at some value 5.
Then as N increases, the
strong law of large numbers implies that the estimate
converges to E[ylp(xi'x 0 }<5]; that is, to the mean of y conditional
on x being within 5 of x 0 •
If E(yjx) is continuous at x = x 0 , then
as o approaches zero, E[ylp(x,x 0 )<5] approaches E(ylx=x 0 ).
two facts suggest that an estimate converging to E(ylx=x 0 ) can be
Extrapolation
obtained by adopting a bandwidth-selection rule that makes o N
approach zero as N increases. It can be shown that this heuristic
idea succeeds provided that the variance of y exists and that SN
does not approach zero too quickly.
In particular, the rate at
which o N approaches zero must be slower than l/N 11K, where K is the
dimension of the vector x.
This condition ensures that the number
of observations actually used to calculate the estimate ( 2. 2)
increases with the sample size N. 2
2.2. IDENTIFICATION OFF THE SUPPORT
The local-average estimate (2.2) does not work when x 0 is off
the support of x. Suppose that there is zero probability of observing x within some distance d 0 of x 0 • Then the estimate (2.2) ceases
to exist when one attempts to reduce the bandwidth 6N below d 0 •
The failure of the local-average estimate is symptomatic of a
fundamental problem: in the absence of prior information, the
distribution of y conditional on x 0 is not identified when x 0 is
off the support of x.
The random sampling process alone identifies
the joint distribution of (y,x) but no more.
When x 0 is off the
support, changing the distribution of y conditional on x 0 has no
effect on the joint distribution of (y,x).
Extrapolation
2.2.1. Local Smoothness Assumptions
What kind of prior information does and does not identify the
regression off the support?
An important negative fact is that
local smoothness assumptions on E (y Ix) do not suffice.
that Var(y) exists and that E(ylx) is continuous on all of X.
E(ylx=x1 ) is identified and can be consistently estimated at every
point x 1 on the support of x.
But we have no information about the
value of E(ylx=x 0 ) at points x 0 off the support.
To understand why, let x 1 be the point on the support that is
closest to x 0 •
A continuity assumption implies that E(y!x) is near
E(y!x=x 1 ) when xis near x 1 , but does not tell us how to interpret
the two uses of the word "near" as magnitudes.
In particular, we
do not know whether the distance separating x 0
interpreted as large or small.
2.2.2. Global Restrictions
Identification off the support requires prior information that
restricts the regression globally rather than locally.
traditional practice has been to assert a parametric model for
E(y!x), for example a linear model
Suppose that the components of x are linearly independent, so that
the parameter vector bis identified. Then (2.3) may be applied to
identify E(ylx) at all logically possible values of x, whether on
Extrapolation
or off the support.
Weaker global restrictions allowing partial
extrapolation appear in the literature on semiparametric regression
analysis .
The problem with global restrictions, of course, is that the
assumptions made about the form of the regression may be wrong.
model may fail either on or off the support of x.
Failure on the
support is detectable.
The classical statistical theory of
hypothesis testing was developed for just this purpose.
off the support is a qualitatively different problem as it is
inherently not detectable.
Irresolvable disagreements arise when researchers hypot~esize ·
models that agree with E(ylx) on the support of x but that behave
differe~tly off the support. Given a specified sampling process,
there is no empirical way to discriminate among models all of which
"fit the data."
The only ways to judge the extrapolations implied
by such models are by subjectively assessing the plausibility of
the models or by initiating a new sampling process that gathers
data at values of x where the various models yield different values
for E(ylx).
2.3. IDENTIFICATION OF CONTRASTS
One often wants to contrast the regression at two values of x.
Then the object of interest is E(ylx=x 1 )
E(ylx=x 0 ) for specified
This contrast can sometimes be interpreted as the
Extrapolation
"effect" on y of changing the regressor from x 0 to x 1 (see Section
The discussion of Section 2.1 applies if both x 0 and x 1 are on
the support of x. Otherwise, the discussion of Section 2.2 applies
to either or both of x 0 or x 1 , as the case may be.
There is lit~le
else of a general nature to say about identification of contrasts,
but I would like to call attention to a familiar problem that
arises when the vector of regressors is functionally dependent.
instance of this problem will be seen in Section 4.
where w are v are vectors.
One is often
interested in a contrast of the form E(y!w=w1 ,v) -
E(yjw=w 0 ,v).
That is, vis held fixed and w is varied between the values w0 and
Suppose that the regressor values (w 0 ,v) and (w 1 ,v) are both
logically possible but that w happens to be a function of v within
the population; say w = f(v).
Then (w 0 ,v) and (w1 ,v) cannot both
be on the support of x; at most, [f(v) ,v] is on the support.
Thus, functional dependence implies that identification of· the
contrast E(y!w=w1 ,v) - E(y!w=w0 ,v) requires global restrictions on
the regression.
One might, for example, know that E(ylw,v) is
linear in (w,v).
This information identifies E(y!w=w 1 ,v)
E(y!w=w 0 ,v) provided that the function f(.) is not linear.
3. The Selection Problem
Some respondents to a household survey decline to report their
Some women responding to a longitudinal fertility sur;ey
complete their childbearing after the survey is terminated.
welfare recipients do not enroll in a job training program. These
very different situations share the common feature that a variable
is censored; respondents' incomes, women's completed family sizes,
or welfare recipients' employment status after job training.
Social scientists constantly seek to draw conclusions from
censored data.
We routinely pose and try to answer questions of
What is the effect of
For example,
What is the effect of the AFDC program on labor supply?
What is the effect of schooling on wages?
What is the effect of family structure on children's outcomes?
All efforts to address such "treatment effect" questions must
confront the fact that the data are inherently censored.
to compare outcomes across different treatments but each unit of
analysis, whether a survey respondent or experimental subject,
experiences only one of the treatments under consideration.
Whereas the implications of censoring were not well appreciated
twenty years ago, they are much better understood today.
particular, methodologists have devoted substantial attention to
the selection problem: the problem of identifying regressions from
random samples in which the realizations of regressors are always
observed but the realizations of outcomes are censored.
selection problem . is logically separate from the extrapolation
problem discussed in Section 2.
The extrapolation problem follows
from the fact that a
random sampling process does not yield
observations of y off the support of x.
The selection problem
arises when a censored random sampling process does not fully
reveal the behavior of y on the support of x.
So selection
presents new challenges on top of those faced in extrapolation.
NATURE OF THE PROBLEM: To introduce the selection problem formally,
suppose that each member of the population is characterized by a
triple fy,z,x).
Here y is scalar, xis a vector, and z is a binary
variable taking the value 0 or 1. 3
One draws a random sample from
the population and observes all the realizations of (z,x), but
observes y only when z = 1.
One wants to learn some feature of the
probability distribution of y conditional on x, denoted P (y'I x) ;
that is, one wants to learn some regression of yon x.
The problem is the failure of the censored-sampling process to
identify P(y!x) on the support of x.
To isolate the difficulty,
decompose P(yjx) into the sum
P(yjx,z=l)P(z=ljx) + P(yjx,z=0)P(z=0jx).
The sampling process identifies the selection probability P(z=ll x),
the censoring probability P(z=0I x), and the distribution of y
conditional on selection, P (YI x, z=l). It is uninformative regarding
the distribution of y conditional on censoring, P(yjx,z=O).
the censored-sampling process reveals only that
[P(yl x, z=l) P(z=ll x) + -yP(z=OI x), -y
where r denotes the space of all probability distributions on the
real line.
The logical starting point for investigation of the selection
problem is to characterize the problem in the absence of prior
information; that is, to learn what restrictions on P(ylx) are
implied by (3.2) alone.
Section 3.1 summarizes my recent work on
this subject.
Then Sections 3.2 and 3.3 explore identification
when prior information and/or richer data are available.
3.2 considers various types of prior information brought to bear in
the econometric and statistical literatures. Section 3.3 explains
the additional identification possibilities that arise in· the
"switching regression" setting, where censoring of y is accompanied
by observation of a different outcomes. Section 3.4 applies these
findings to the important problem of identifying treatment effects.
3.1. IDENTIFICATION IN THE ABSENCE OF PRIOR INFORMATION
Inspection of
reveals that, in the absence of prior
information oh the dist~ibution of (y,z,x), one cannot reject the
conditional independence hypothesis
= P(y!x,z=l)
= P(y!x,z=O).
Simply observe that (3.3) holds if one sets--, = P(y!x,z=l) in
Econometricians
conditional
independence hypothesis
"exogenous"
selection while
statisticians refer to it as "ignorable" selection.
In the absence of prior information,
censoring makes it
impossible to learn anything about the mean regression of yon x.
To see this, decompose E(y!x) into the sum
E(ylx,z=l)P(z=l!x) + E(y!x,z=O)P(z=Olx).
The censored-sampling process identifies E(ylx,z=l) and P(z!x) but
provides no information on E(y!x,z=O), which might take any value
below minus and plus infinity.
Hence, when~ver the censoring
probability P(z=Olx) is positive, the sampling process imposes no
restrictions on E(y!x).
These negative results do not, however, imply that the selection
problem is fatal in the absence of prior information.
censored data imply informative, easily interpretable bounds on
many important features of the conditional distribution P (YI x),
including quantiles, probabilities, and the means of bounded
functions of y.
In what follows, I present some of the findings of
Manski .
3.1.1. Conditional Means of Bounded Functions of y
The central result, from which others may be derived, concerns
the mean of a bounded function of y.
Let g(.) be a real-valued
function mapping y into a known bounded interval [K0 ,K1], which may
depend on g(.).
Observe that
(3.5) E[g(y) Ix]
= E[g(y) lx,z=l]P(z=llx) + E[g(y) lx,z=0]P(z=0lx).
The sampling process identifies E[g(y)lx,z=l]
and P(z!x)
provides no information on E[g(y)lx,z=0).
The last quantity,
however, necessarily lies in the interval [Ka, K1]. This simple fact
yields the following:
E[g(y) lx,z=l]P(z=l!x) + KaP(z=0lx)
E[g(y) lx,z=l]P(z=l!x) + K1P(z=0lx).
Thus, a censored-sampling process bounds the mean regression of
any bounded function of y.
The lower bound is the value E[g(y)lxJ
takes if, in the censored subpopulation, g(y) always equals Ka; the
upper bound is the value of E[g(y)lxJ if all the censored y equal
The bound is a proper subset of [Ka,K,J, hence informative,
whenever censoring is less than total. At each regressor value x 0 ,
the bound width (K,-Ka)P(z=0!x=x 0 ) is proportional to the censoring
probability P(z=0jx=x0 ).
It is therefore meaningful to say that
the degree of underidentification of E[g(y) lx=x 0 ] is proportional
to the censoring probability at x 0 •
3.1.2. Conditional Probabilities
The bound (3.6) has numerous applications.
Perhaps the most
farreaching is the bound it implies on the probability that y lies
in any set A c Y.
Let gA (.) be the indicator function gA (y) =
Then E[gA(y) !xJ = P(ye:Alx), K0 = o, and K1 = 1.
(3.5) implies that
P(ye:Alx,z=l)P(z=llx)
P(ye:A!x,z=l)P(z=ljx) + P(z=O!x).
It is often convenient to characterize a probability distribution
by its distribution function P(y~tjx), t
(3.7) that
P(y~t!x,z=l)P(z=ljx)
P(y~t!x,z=l)P(z=llx) + P(z=Ojx).
It follows from
It may seem surprising that one should be able to bound the
distribution function of a random variable but not its mean.
explanation is a fact that is widely appreciated by researchers in
the field of robust statistics: the mean of a random variable is
not a continuous function of· its distribution function.
small perturbations in a distribution function can generate large
movements in the mean.
See Huber(l981). 4
3.1.3. Conditional Quantiles
Let at: (0,1).
By definition, the a-quantile of y conditional on
mint: P(y~tlx) ~ a.
In particular, the .5-quantile is the median. Interest in quantile
regression analysis has developed rapidly over the past fifteen·
years, beginning from the work of Koenker and Bassett .
an expo~itory treatment, see Manski .
The bound (3.8) on P(y~.lx) can be inverted to show that q(a,x)
must lie between two quantiles of the identified distribution
P(yjx,z=l).
[1-(1-a)/P(z=llx)J-quantile of P(yjx,z=l)
if P(z=llx) > 1-a
-00 other.,;ise.
[a/P(z=ljx)J-quantile of P(ylx,z=l)
if P(z=llx)
00 otherwise.
It is proved in Manski that
Moreover, in the absence of prior information, this bound on q(er,x)
cannot be improved upon.
The lower and upper bounds r (er, x) and s (er, x) are increasing
functions of er; hence the bound shifts to the right as er increases.
The lower bound is informative if P(z=llx) > 1-er; the upper bound
if P(z=ljx)
So the bound (3.11) restricts q(er,x) to an
interval of finite length if P(z=llx)
max(er,1-er)
uninformative if P(z=llx) < min(er,1-a).
In particular, the bound
on the median regression is informative if P(z=llx) > 1/2.
3.1.4. Sample Inference
The selection problem is, first and foremost,
a failure of
identification.
It is only secondarily a difficulty in sample
inference.
To keep attention focussed on the central identification question, it is simplest to suppose that the conditional
distributions identified by the sampling process, P(ylx,z=l) and
P(zlx), are known.
But it is also important to recognize that the
population bounds reported above are easily estimable.
For example, estimation of the bound (3.6) is a conventional
problem in nonparametric regression analysis of the type discussed
--in Section 2 .1. Rewrite (3. 6) in the equivalent form
E[g(y)z+K09 (1-z)lxJ
E(g(y)z+K19 (1-z)jx].
The random variables g(y)z+Ka9 (1-z) and g(y)z+K19 (1-z) are both
bounded; hence their variances exist.
It follows that the lower
and upper bounds E[g(y)z+Ka9 (1-z)jx] and E[g(y)z+K19 (1-z)jx] can be
estimated consistently on the support of x as long as these
quantities vary continuously in x.
Given additional regularity
conditions, asymptotically valid sampling confidence intervals can
be placed around estimates of the bounds. An empirical application
reporting bootstrapped confidence intervals is presented in Manski,
Sandefur, McLanahan, and Powers .
3.1.5. An Historical Note
It is of interest to ask why the simple bound results reported
here took so long to appear.
I believe that the explanation has at
least three parts.
Timing has played a role.
The modern literature on selection
took shape in the 1970s, when the frontier of social science
methodology was nonlinear parametric analysis.
At that t"ime,
nonparametric
regression analysis
just beginning to be
developed by statisticians.
Social scientists were not yet aware
that nonparametric estimation of regressions was possible and did
net think in the nonparametric terms needed to derive the bounds.
A second factor is the historical fixation of social scientists
on point identification, which has _inhibited appreciation of the
potential usefulness of bounds.
Estimable bounds on quantities
that are not point-identified have beeri repo_r:ted from time to time;
-a prominent early example appears in Frisch .
conventional wisdom has been that bounds are hard to estimate and
uninformative.
Whatever the validity of this conventional wisdom
in other contexts, it does not apply to the bound (3.6).
The preoccupation of researchers with the estimation of mean
regressions has been a third factor. It has long been known that,
in the absence of prior information, the selection problem is fatal
for inference on the mean of an unbounded random variable.
scientists have, improperly as it turns out, extrapolated that no
inference at all is possible in the absence of prior information.
3.2. VARIETIES OF PRIOR INFORMATION
One can improve on the bounds reported in Section 3.1 if one
possesses suitable prior information restricting the distribution
of (y,z) conditional on x.
A restriction has identifying power if
it implies that P(y!x) belongs to a set of distributions smaller
than ( 3. 2) . Information restricting P (y Ix) , P (y Ix, z=0) , or P ( z I 'x, y)
may have identifying power.
Information restricting P(y!x,z=l) or
P(z!x) is superfluous as the latter distributions are identified by
the censored-sampling process alone. 5
Ideally, we would like to learn the identifying power of all
types of prior information, so as to characterize the entire
spectrum of inferential possibilities.
But there does not appear
to be any effective way to conduct an exhaustive identification
So researchers have investigated the power of specific
bundles of restrictions thought to have application to empirical
problems of interest. Section 3.2.1 describes the latent-variable
models developed by econometricians.
Section 3.2.2 explains the
quite different mixture-model approach favored by some statisticians.
Section 3.2.3 presents my recent finding characterizing
the identifying power of exclusion restrictions.
3.2.1. Econometric Latent Variable Models
applications, econometricians have analyzed the problem in a
sustained way only since the early 1970s. Before then, researchers
generally maintained the exogenous-selection hypothesis (3.3), a
notable exception being Tobin .
The empirical plausibility of (3.3) was eventually questioned
sharply. In particular, researchers observed that in many economic
settings, the process by which observations on y become censored is
related to the value of y . It also became clear
that exogenous selection is not necessary to identify P(ylx) .' An
alternative is
latent-variable
explaining (y,z) conditional on x.
 .
For the past twenty years, econometric thinking on the selection
problem has been expressed primarily through latent-variable models
of the form
= l[f 2 (x) + u 2 > OJ.
Here [f 1 (.),f 2 (.)J are real functions of x and (u 1 ,u 2 ) are random
variables whose realizations are unobserved by the researcher. The
threshold-crossing form of the selection function (3.12b) is wellmotivated in empirical analyses where the observability of y is
determined by the binary choice behavior of a rational decision
In such cases f 2 (x)+u 2 is the difference betNeen the values
of the two alternatives and (3.12b) states that the more highlyvalued alternative is chosen.
Equa~ions (3.12) alone do not restrict the distribution of (y,z)
conditional on x.
A model takes on content when restrictions are
on [f 1 (.) ,f 2 (.) J and on the distribution of
(u1 ,u 2 )
conditional on x.
The overriding concern of the literature has
been to find plausible restrictions that identify the
regression of yon x, although most of the restrictions studied
actually identify the conditional distribution P(ylx) fully.
what follows, I describe three types of restrictions that have
received considerable attention.
These restrictions are neither
nested nor mutually exclusive.
A latent-variable model may impose
any combination of them.
SELECTION:
Many authors assume that u 1
statistically independent conditional on x.
It follows that
P(ylx,z=l)
P[f1 (x)+u1 lx,f 2 (x)+u 2 ~0]
P[f 1 (x)+u 1 Ix]
Thus, independence of u 1 and u 2 conditional on x implies independence of y and z conditional on x, the restriction stated in (3.3).
Given (3.3), identification of P(y!x) does not require restrictions
on [f 1 (.),f 2 (.)], but empirical researchers typically impose such
restrictions anyway.
Most make f 1 (.) linear in x.
PARAMETRIC MODELS: A second type of restriction became prominent in
the middle 1970s.
Suppose that f 1 (.) is known up to a finite
dimensional parameter
finite dimensional
parameter /3 2 , and the distribution of (u1 ,u 2 ) conditional on x up
to a finite dimensional parameter 7.
P(y,z=llx)
P[f 1 (x,/3 1 )+u1 ,f 2 (x,/3 2 )+u 2 ~01x,7].
The left-hand-side of (3.14) is identified by the censored sampling
The right-hand-side is a function of the parameters
(/3 1 ,/3 2 ,7). Ifthereisonlyonevalueof (/3 1 ,/3 2 ,7) solving (3.14),
then P(ylx) is identified.
Parametric latent variable models have usually been studied
through analysis of E (YI x, z=l) . ·
Following the practice in the
literature, assume that E(u 1 ,u 2 lx) = O.
f 1 (x,,8 1 )
E(y!x,z=l)
f 1 {x,/3 1 ) + E[u 1 lx,f 2 (X,/3 2 )+u 2 2:0,--,J
fl (X,/31) + g(X,/32 ,-y) •
The left-hand-side of
(3 .15b) is identified by the censoredsampling process. The parameter p 1 is identified, hence E(ylx), if
there is only one value of (/3 1 ,,8 2 ,-y) solving (3.15b).
The most widely applied model makes f 1 (.) and f 2 (.) linear
functions, (u1 ,u 2 ) statistically independent of x, and the distribution of (u1 ,u 2 ) normal with mean zero and unrestricted correlation; the variance of u 1 is unrestricted but that of u 2 is set
equal to one as a normalization.
In this case,
E(ylx,z=l)
x'/3 1 + -y</J(X'/3 2 )/~(x'/3 2 ),
where~(.) and~(.) are the standard normal density and distribution functions and where
= E (u 1 u 2 ) •
Identification of /3 1
hinges on the fact that the linear function x'~ 1 and the nonlinear
function -y~(x'/3 2 )/~(x'/3 2 ) affect E(ylx,z=l) in different ways.
There is a
common perception that the normal-linear model
generalizes the model assuming exogenous selection.
In fact, the
two models are not nested.
The normal-linear model permits u 1 and
to be dependent but assumes
linearity of
[f 1 (.) ,f 2 (.)],
normality of (u 1 ,u 2 ), and independence of (u 1 ,u 2 )
exogenous-selection model assumes u 1
to be independent
conditional on x but does not restrict P(u 1 Ix) or P(u 2 lx).
does it restrict the form of [f 1 (.) ,f 2 (.)J.
INDEX MODELS: By the early 1980s, parametric models were increasingly criticized.
Several articles reported that estimates of
E(yl x) obtained under the normal-linear model are sensitive to
misspecification of the distribution of (u 1 ,u 2 ) conditional on x.
consequences
heteroskedasticity;
Arabmazar and Schmidt and Goldberger described the
effect of non-normality.
Concern with this led to the development
of a third type of latent-variable model.
Let h(x) be a known index; that is, a many-to-one function of x.
Assume that f 2 (x) and the distribution of (u 1 ,u 2 ) vary with x only
through h(x).
E(yjx,z=l)
f 1 (x) + E{u 1 lx,f 2 [h(x)]+u 2 ~0}
f 1 (x) + g[h(x)].
Let (x 0 ,x 1 ) denote a pair of points in the support of x such that
h(x 0 ) = h(x 1 ).
For each such pair, (3.17) implies that
E(yjx=x 0 ,z=l) -
E(yjx=x 1 ,z=l)
= E(yjx=x 0 )
E(yjx=x 1 ).
The left-hand side of (3.18) is identified by the sampling process;
hence the contrast E(ylx=x 0 )
E(yjx=x 1 ) is identified.
The usefulness of this result depends on the size of the sets
((x 0 ,x 1 ): h(x0 ) = h(x1 )J.
The index assumption with the greatest
identifying power is that in which h(.) is constant on X.
(3.18) identifies E{ylx) up to an additive constant.
At the other
extreme is the trivial case in which h (.) is one-to-one.
h(x0 ) = h(x1 ) if and only if x 0 = x 1 , so (3.18) is uninformative.
The practice has been to combine an index assumption with other
restrictions.
Robinson combines an index assumption with
the assumption that f 1 (.) is linear.
In Ahn and Powell and
Cosslett , the index h(.) is not a priori known but assumptions are imposed that make h(.) nonparametrically estimable from
the available data on (z,x) .
3.2.2. Statistical Mixture Models
Statisticians analyzing censored data often assume that selection
is ignorable; that is, hypothesis (3.3).
The term "nonignorable"
selection is used to cover all situations in which y and z are
dependent conditional on x .
Some statisticians advocate direct imposition of restrictions on
the censored distribution P(y!x,z=O), an approach called "mixture
modelling."
Suppose that P(yjx,z=O) is known to be a member of a
class r 0x of probability distributions.
Then the restriction of
P(y!x) to the set given in (J.2) can be improved to
[P(ylx,z=l)P(z=llx) + 7P(z=Ojx), 7 c r~i-
Rubin suggests that one not only express
prior information by limiting the censored distribution to a set r ox
but also that one might place a subjective probability distribution
on the elements of r ox.
This then induces a subjective distribution
on the elements of the set {3.19) of possible values of P(yjx).
Such Bayesian "sensitivity analysis" is feasible only if the set r ox
is sufficiently small; otherwise a subjective distribution cannot
be placed on r ox.
The practice has been to make r ox a finite set or
at most a finite dimensional set of distributions.
The case of no
prior information, in which r ox is the set of all distributions, has
not received attention in the statistics literature.
TWO WORLD VIEWS: Econometric latent-variable models and statistical
mixture models express different ideas about the nature of the
selection problem and
imply different conclusions about the
appropriate way to assert prior information.
From the latent-
variable-model perspective, the censored distribution is a derived
quantity, not a primitive concept.
Hence, a researcher who thinks
latent-variable
it difficult to
plausibility of restrictions imposed on P(yj x, z=O).
mixture-model perspective,
P (YI x, z=O)
is a primitive so it is
natural to assert prior information through restrictions on this
distribution.
Mixture modellers find it difficult to interpret
prior information stated as restrictions on latent variable models.
The different world views expressed in latent-variable-and mixture
models have been aired in Wainer .
The conflicting econometric and statistical perspectives on the
selection problem recalls a closely related conflict regarding the
analysis of discrete data. Econometricians have typically asserted
prior information through latent-variable models of discrete
Many statisticians have imposed restrictions through the
mixture model,
referred to as discriminant analysis in that
See Manski or Manski and McFadden for a
discussion and references.
3.2.3. Exclusion Restrictions
Empirical analyses often assume that some component of the
regressor vector x has no effect on the outcome y but does affect
whether•y is observed.
To formalize this idea, we let x = (w,v)
and assume that, holding w fixed, P(ylw,v) does not vary with v but
P(zlw,v) does vary with v.
The regressor component vis variously
said to be an "instrumental variable" or to satisfy an "exclusion
restriction."
It has long been recognized that an exclusion restriction may
have identifying power when bundled with other assumptions; an
example will be given in Section 3.3.1. It is also of interest to
determine the identifying power of an exclusion restriction alone,
in the absence of other information.
addressed in Manski {1990a,1992a).
This question has been
The simple result is that an exclusion restriction allows one to
replace the bounds available in the absence of prior informati~D
with the intersection of these bounds across all values of v. -To
see this, let f(w,v) denote the feature of P(y!w,v) that is of
interest, perhaps the conditional distribution function or the
conditional median.
Given an exclusion restriction, f(w,v) must
remain constant as w is held fixed and vis varied.
Hence, f(w,v)
must lie within all of the no-prior-information bounds holding at
the different values of v.
For example, the bound (3.6) on the mean of a bounded function
of y is replaced by the tighter bound
sup E[g(y) z+K09 (1-z) lw,v]
E[g(y) jw]
inf E[g(y) z+K19 (1-z) lw,v:
and the bound (3.11) on the conditional a-quantile is replaced by
sup r[a:,(w,v)J
inf s[a:,(w,v)].
These new bounds improve on those given in Section 3. 1 if the
exclusion restriction is non-trivial, in the sense that P(zlw,v)
does vary with v.
E[g(y)lwJ or q(a:,w).
The new bounds do not, however, identify
To achieve point identification generally
requires prior information stronger than an exclusion restriction.
3.3. SWITCHING REGRESSIONS
In the selection problem, y is observed when z = 1 and no outcome
is observed when z = O.
The literature on switching regressions
considers the somewhat richer sampling process in which y is
observed when z = 1 and another outcome, says, is observed when z
The quantities identified by the switching regression
sampling process are P(z!x), P(ylx,z=l), and P(slx,z=0).
In the absence of prior information, observation of s reveals
nothing about y.
Hence the selection and switching regression
problems are equivalent from the perspective of identification of·
Given prior infor:nation,
observation of
informative regarding P(y!x), as is shown below.
3.3.1. Shifted Outcomes
A rather strong form of prior information that has been applied
frequently assumes that there exists a constant N such that
P(y=s+vlx)
Thus, y ands are assumed to differ by a constant, so that y is a
shifted version of s. The implications of (3.22) have been studied
by Heckman , Heckman and Robb and Robinson .
Their findings are paraphrased here.
It follows from (3.22) that for all t,
P(y::;;t!x,z=O)
= P(s:s;t-vlx,z=O).
P(y:s;tlx)
P(y~tjx,z=l)P(z=llx) + P(y~tlx,z=O)P(z=Ojx)
P(y:s;tlx,z=l)P(z=llx) + P(sst-vlx,z=O)P(z=Olx).
Thus P(ylx) is known up to a family of distributions indexed by the
shift parameter 1.1.
The parameter 1.1 is identified if E(y!x) satisfies an exclusion
restriction.
It follows from {3.22) that
{3.25) •E(ylx)
E(ylx,z=l)P(z=ljx) + E(sjx,z=O)P(z=Olx)
+ vP(z=Ojx).
and suppose it is known that E(y!w,v=v 0 )
E(y!w,v=v 1 ), where v 0 and v 1 are distinct values of v.
Then (3 •. 25)
implies that
v[P(z=Olw,v=v 1 )-P(z=Ojw,v=v0 )]
E(ylw,v=v 0 ,z=l)P(z=ljw,v=v0 ) +E(slw,v=v 0 ,z=O)P(z=Ojw,v=v 0 )
-E(ylw,v=v 1 ,z=l)P(z=llw,v=v 1 ) -E(slw,v=v 1 ,z=O)P(z.=Olw,v=v 1 ).
Hence vis identified provided that P(z=Olw,v=v 1 ) 1 P(z=Olw,v=v 0 ).
3.3.2. Ordered Outcomes
The combination of shifted outcomes and an exclusion restriction
identifying
information.
It is also of interest to learn what can be
accomplished with other, perhaps more plausible assumptions.
Manski , I consider the case in which it is known that
This "ordered outcomes" assumption may be warranted in some
analyses of medical and other treatments.
For example, suppose
that a cancer patient is treated by chemotherapy ( z=l) or by
placebo• (z=0).
Let the outcomes y and s be life-span following
each treatment.
Then it may be warranted to assume that y 2: s for
all patients.
It follows from (3.27) that for all t,
P(y~t!x,z=0)
P(sstjx,z=0).
P(ystlx,z=l)P(z=ljx) + P(yst!x,z=0)P(z=0lx)
P(y~tlx,z=l)P(z=llx) + P(sstlx,z=0)P(z=0jx).
The upper bound on P(ys.lx) given in (3.29) improves on the bound
available ifs were not observed when z = o.
3.3.3. Selection by the Ordering of Outcomes
I also consider the class of problems in which one obser,es
either the smaller or the larger of y ands.
one observes the smaller of y ands, so that
z = 1 [y::::;s].
Suppose first that
Examples include the short-side model of markets in disequilibrium
 and the competing-risks model of sur1ival
analysis .
If (3.30) holds, then z = 0
Hence, for all t,
(3.31) •P(y::::;tlx,z=0)::::;
P(s~tjx,z=0).
This is the same finding as was reported in ( J. 28) under the
assumption that outcomes are ordered.
So here, as there, (3.29) is
an upper bound on P(y::::;tlx).
Now consider the case in which one observes the larger of y and
s, so that
z = 1 [Y?:S] .
Examples of this switching rule include economic models of schooling and occupational choice in which decision makers select the
alternative yielding the higher income.
Here z = 0 <=> y < s so
P(ystjx,z=O)
~ P(s~tjx,z=O)
~ P(ystjx,z=l)P(z=llx) + P(s~tjx,z=O)P(z=Ojx).
This lower bound on P(Ys-lx) improves on that available ifs were
not observed when z = O.
3.4. IDENTIFICATION OF TREATMENT EFFECTS
In the classical formalization of treatment effects, there are
two mut~ally exclusive treatments, labelled o and 1.
Each member
of the population is characterized by values for the variables
(y,s,z,x).
Variable y is the outcome that would be observed if a
person were to receive treatment 1 ands is the outcome that would
be observed if the person were to receive treatment O.
two outcomes, one is realized and the other is latent; y is
realized if z = 1 ands is realized if z = o.
This sampling process is the same as in the switching regression
The analysis of treatment effects differs from that of
switching regressions only in that there is a different object of
The researcher is not concerned with the conditional
distribution P(ylx) per se but rather with the treatment effect
= E(ylx) - E(slx).
Defined in this way, the treatment effect measures the change in
average outcome if one were to replace a hypothetical situation in
which a person with attributes x were exogenously assigned to
treatment O with another hypothetical situation in which a person
with attributes x were exogenously assigned to treatment 1. 6
The identification analysis of Sections 3.1 through 3.3 applies
directly to the treatment effect {3.35).
Section 3.4.1 examines
identification in the absence of prior information.
Section 3.4.2
shows the identifying power of various fonts of prior information
and, in a cautionary vein, illustrates the flawed conclusions that
can result from the imposition of incorrect assumptions.
3.4.3 briefly discusses social experimentation as an approach to
securing identifying information.
3.4.1. In the Absence of Prior Information
If either y ors is unbounded, then the sampling process alone
reveals nothing about the classical treatment effect. On the other
hand, the sampling process alone bounds T(x) if y ands are both
bounded random variables. In particular, suppose that y ands both
lie in the interval [K0 , K 1 ].
(3.6) that
Then it follows immediately from
[K0 P(z=Olx)+E(ylx,z=l)P(z=ljx)-E(sjx,z=O)P(z=Olx)-K1 P(z=llx),
K1 P(z=Ojx)+E(ylx,z=l)P(z=ljx)-E(sjx,z=O)P(z=Ojx)-K0 P(z=llx)J.
The lower bound on T(x) is the difference betNeen the lower bound
on E(y!x) and the upper bound on E(s!x).
The upper bound on T(x)
is determined similarly.
The width of the bound (3. 36) is K1 -K0 •
If no data were
available, T(x) could lie anywhere in the interval [K 0 -K 1 ,K 1 -K 0 J.
Thus, the sampling process alone allows one to restrict the treatment effect to one-half of its logically possible range.
that the sampling process does not identify the sign of the
treatment effect; the bound (3.36) necessarily covers zero.
The case in which y ands are binary outcomes is of particular
practical interest.
In many applications the treat~ent outcome is
a logical indicator taking the value one or zero.
For example, the
outcome,of a medical treatment may be (cured= 1, not cured= O);
the outcome of a job training program may be (employed= 1, not
employed= 0). In such cases, E(y!x) = P(y=llx), E(s!x) = P(s=l!x),
K0 = 0, K1 = 1, and the bound (3.36) becomes
[P(y=llx,z=l)P(z=llx)-P(s=llx,z=0)P(z=0!x)-P(z=llx),
P(z=0!x)+P(y=ljx,z=l)P(z=ljx)-P(s=llx,z=O)P(z=0lx)}.
3.4.2. With Prior Information
The bound of the preceding section can be improved if prior
information is available. For example, an exclusion restriction may
be available or it may be known that subjects are always assigned
the better of the two treatments. In these cases, the same argument
used to derive (3.36) can be used to obtain tighter bounds.
Given enough prior information, the treatment effect is identified.
Suppose that assignment to treatment is exogenous.
E(y!x) - E(s!x)
E(y!x,z=l) - E(slx,z=0).
Or suppose that the shifted-outcomes hypothesis ( 3. 22) holds. Then
the treatment effect is the constant v for all values of x.
shown in Section 3.3, vis identified if an exclusion restriction
is available.
Another route to identification is to invoke a latent-variable
with enough structure to identify E(y!x)
Parametric models suffice, but the index models studied in recent
years do not identify treatment effects.
It was shown in Section
3.2.1 that these models at most identify E(y!x) and E(s!x) up to
additive constants.
So E(ylx) - E(slx) is not identified.
The obvious issue arising with the use of prior information to
identify treatment effects is that different assumptions may yield
different conclusions.
shall give two examples of how a
researcher assuming exogenous selection into treatment can reach
incorrect conclusions if assignment to treatment is not actually
exogenous.
These examples are highly relevant because exogenous
selection is commonly assumed in practice (see the discussion of
regression contrasts following the examples) .
Moreover, as we
observed in Section 3. 1, the hypothesis of exogenous selection
cannot be refuted empirically in the absence of prior information.
This means that if a
researcher believes that selection is
exogenous, no data can persuade him that he is wrong.
EXAMPLE 1: Suppose that outcomes are shifted, with y = s+v and
O; hence T(x) is the same positive value v for all x.
Suppose that
treatments are assigned based on the magnitude of y; for some real
constant k, z = 1 if y < k
and z = O if y ~ k.
Then E(yjx,z=l) =
E(ylx,y<k)
< k and E(slx,z=O)
= E(slx,s~k-v)
E(ylx,z=l) - E(slx,z=O) < v.
Suppose that Prob(k-v~s<kjx) = O. Then E(slx,s~k-v) = E(slx,s2k)
~ k so E(ylx,z=l) - E(slx,z=O) < o.
In this case, a researcher who
believes that assignment to treatment is exogenous would imprope:r-2.y
conclude not only that the treatment effect is less than v but that
it is negative.
EXAMPLE 2: Suppose thats= 0 for all members of the population and
that y is a binary variable taking the value - or 1 with probabilities 1-p and p for all x; thus, T (x) = -oo as long as p < 1.
Suppose that each member of the population selects the better of
the two treatments; thus, z = 1 if y = 1 and z = O if y = -oo.
E(y!x,z=l) - E(slx,z=O) = 1 - O = 1.
So a researcher who believes
that assignment to treatment is exogenous would improperly conclude
that the treatment effect is 1 when it actually is -oo.
REGRESSION CONTRASTS AS TREATMENT EFFECTS: The widespread practice
of interpreting regression contrasts as treatment effects rests on
the assumption that selection into treatment is exogenous.
that, given a random sample of observations of (y,x), one estimates
the regression E(ylx), computes a contrast E(ylx=x 1 )
E(y!x=x0 )
for specified x 0
and interprets the contrast as the
expected change in y if a person with attributes x 0
were to be
given attributes x 1
exogenous-selection assumption.
This interpretation requires an
To see why, let us recast the problem in the language of the
treatment-effects literature by assuming that each member of the
population
characterized
[y(x) ,z{x) ,xeX].
Here z(x) is an indicator function taking the
value 1 at a person's actual regressor value and Oat all other of
the logically possible regressor values X.
Variable y(x) is the
outcome that would be observed if a person were to be assigned
regressor value x.
Of these outcomes, y(x) is realized if and only
if z(x) = 1.
Thus, the function y(.) is latent at all regressor
values except the one that a person actually experiences.
realized outcome is
l: y(x)z(x).
This setup is the same as that of the classical treatment effect
problem except that now there are more than two treatments; each
value of x defines a different treatment.
With this background,. we
may define the treatment effect
E[y(x1 )] -
E[y(x0 )] to be the change in average outcome that would
be observed if one were to replace a hypothetical situation in
which a person were exogenously assigned regressor value x 0 with
hypothetical
exogenously assigned regressor value x 1 •
In general,
(3.40) E(yjx=x1 )
- E(ylx=x0 ) = E[y(x1 ) lz(x1 )=1] - E[y(x0 ) I z(x 0 )=lJ
1' E[y(x1 )] -
E[y(x 0 ) J.
But the second equality does hold if the random outcome function
y (.) is statistically independent of the random treat:nent-selection
function z(.).
3.4.3. Social Experimentation
Recognizing that flawed assumptions may yield flawed conclusions,
some social scientists advocate that researchers take controi of
the sampling process by performing social experiments,
subjects randomly assigned to different treatments.
In principle,
randomization yields exogenous selection of treatments,
researcher analyzing experimental data can feel confident that the
assumption of exogenous selection is valid.
Discussion of social experimentation has at times been highly
contentious. In the mid-1980s, various advocates of experimentation
asserted that, as a consequence of the selection problem,
reliable inferences can be made from empirical analysis of actual
population outcomes.
They recom.inended that efforts to analyze
naturally occurring outcomes be abandoned . This position
has since been embraced by some policymakers.
For example, in a
recently published letter to the General Accounting Office of The
U.S. Congress, an Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of
Heal th and Human Services wrote this about the evaluation of
training programs for welfare recipients:
In fact, nonexperimental research of training programs has
shown such methods to be so unreliable, that Congress and the
Administration have both insisted on experimental designs for
Partnership
Opportunities and Basic Skill (JOBS) programs.
 .
Calls for exclusive reliance on experimentation are unwarranted.
Focussing on the identification problems that arise in the analysis
of actual population outcomes, proponents of social experiments
have ignored the substantial difficulties that arise in executing
experiments of interest and in extrapolating from experiments to
settings of practical concern.
For discussion of these problems,
see Manski and Garfinkel .
Social Effects
4. Identification of Endogenous Social Effects From outcome Data
The broad idea that individuals are influenced by their social
environments covers a wide variety of distinct phenomena, from the
anonymous process
by which markets determine prices to the
intensely personal interactions occurring within families.
important objective of social science research is to learn the
channels through which society affects the individual.
progress has been limited.
Competing hypotheses abound and
empirical analysis seems unable to distinguish among them.
Perhaps most notorious is the longstanding interdisciplinary
split between economists and other social scientists.
sociolocgists and social psychologists hypothesize that society
affects individuals in myriad ways, economists often assume that
society acts on individuals only by constraining their oppor~unities.
Many economists regard such central sociological concepts
as norms and reference groups as spurious phenomena explainabie by
processes operating entirely at the level of the individual.
for example, the Friedman, 1957, criticism of Duesenberry, 1949) . 7
Leaving economists aside and restricting attention to sociologists, one still does not find consensus on the nature of social
Consider the ongoing debate about the meaningfulness of
the concept of the underclass and the related controversy about the
existence and nature of neighborhood effects.
Or consider the
split between those sociologists who take class, ethnic group, or
gender as the fundamental unit of analysis, and those who view
Social Effects
society as a collection of heterogeneous individuals, families, or
households.
Why do such different perspectives on the nature of social
effects persist?
Why do we not converge to common conclusions?
The core problem is that outcome data, which have been our main
source of empirical evidence, can reveal the structure of social
effects only if combined with substantial prior information.
Social scientists have long been aware of some aspects of the
For over fifty years, economists have studied the
conditions under which observations of market-determined prices and
quantities reveal the demand behavior of consumers and the supply
behavior of firms .
Over t-rnnty
years a~o, sociologists were sensitized to the problem of distinguishing contextual effects from correlated individual effects;
Hauser offers an informative and entertaining case study.
Nevertheless, the problem of identifying social effects from
outcome data has many poorly understood aspects.
In recent work,
I have sought to add to our knowledge by analyzing the identifiability of a class of "endogenous" social effects .
I summarize and elaborate on this work here.
Section 4 .1 introduces the question of interest informally.
Section 4.2 uses a simple linear model to examine the identification of endogenous effects relative to contextual effects and nonsocial phenomena.
Section 4.3 briefly considers some more general
Section 4. 4 calls attention to the critical need for
reference-group information to identify social effects.
Social Effects
4.1. ENDOGENOUS, CONTEXTUAL, ECOLOGICAL, AND CORRELATED EFFECTS
Consider the following four distinct phenomena, the first tNO of
which are social in nature and the second two non-social:
endogenous effects, wherein the propensity of an individual to
behave in some way varies with the prevalence of that behavior in
some reference group. 8
contextual effects, wherein the propensity of an individual to
behave in some way varies with the distribution of background
characteristics in the reference group. 9
ecological effects, wherein individuals in the same reference group
tend to behave similarly because they face similar institutional
environments.
correlated individual effects, wherein individuals in the same
reference group tend to behave similarly because they have similar
individual characteristics.
An example may help to clarify the distinction.
Consider the high
school achievement of a teenage youth.
There is an endogenous
effect if, all else equal, individual achievement varies with the
average achievement of the students in the youth's high school,
ethnic group, or other reference group.
There is a contextual
Social Effects
effect if achievement
socioeconomic
composition of the reference group.
There is an ecological effect
if youth in the same school or other reference group tend to
achieve similarly because they receive similar instruction.
is a correlated individual effect if youth in the same school tend
to have similar family backgrounds and these background characteristics affect achievement.
The question of interest is whether the two types of social
effects can be distinguished from one another and from the nonsocial effects.
This question is of practical importance because
the different effects have distinct policy implications. Consider,
for example, an educational intervention providing tutoring to some
of the students in a school but not to the others.
If individual
achievement increases with the average achievement of the students
in the school, then an effective tutoring program not only directly
helps the tutored students but,
as their achievement rises,
indirectly helps all students in the school, with a feedback to
further achievement gains by the tutored students.
effects do not generate this "social multiplier."
Contextual
Although endogenous and contextual effects differ conceptually
and in their policy implications, these two types of social effect
have often been confused.
For example, studies of school integration, typified by Coleman et al. , seem to have in mind an
endogenous social effect, wherein the achievement of each student
is affected by the mean achievement of the students in the same
But these studies generally estimate contextual-effects
Social Effects
models, wherein the achievement of each student is affected by the
racial composition of his school.
The same tension appears in recent analyses of neighborhood
The theoretical section of Crane
"epidemic" model of endogenous neighborhood effects, wherein a
teenager's school dropout and childbearing behavior is influenced
by the neighborhood frequency of dropout and childbearing.
Crane estimates a contextual-effects model, wherein a teenager's
behavior depends on the occupational composition of her neighborhood.
This juxtaposition of endogenous-effect theorizing and
contextual-effect empirical analysis also appears in Jencks and
Mayer .
4.2. IDENTIFICATION OF A LINEAR MODEL: THE REFLECTION PROBLEM
4.2.1. Model Specification
Consideration of a relatively simple linear model suffices to
explain the problems that arise in identifying social effects.
Let each member of the population be characterized by a value for
(y,x,z,u).
Here y is a scalar outcome (e.g. a youth's achievement
in high school), x are attributes characterizing an individual's
reference group (e.g. a set of dummy variables denoting a youth's
high school and/or ethnic group), and (z,u) are attributes that
directly affect y.
A researcher observes a
random sample of
realizations of (y,x,z).
Realizations of u are not observed.
I shall assume that
Social Effects
y =a+ ,BE(y!x) + E(z!x) '-r + x'5 1 + z'11 + u,
E(ulx,z) = x'5 2 ,
where {a,,8,-r,o 1 ,5 2 ,11) is a parameter vector.
Model (4.1) implies
that the mean regression of yon (x,z) has the linear form
E ( y I X, Z)
a + /3 E ( y I X) + E ( z I X) '-y + X' ( 5 1 +5 2 ) + Z 1 17 •
Empirical studies of social effects have generally assumed that
regressors
[E(y!x),E(zlx),x,z]
exogenously to individuals.
Hence the parameters {a,,8,-r,5 1 ,5 2 ,11)
are the treatment effects associated with a unit change in each
regressor, holding the others fixed (see Section 3.4.2) . 10
If ,8, O, the linear regression (4.2) expresses an endogenous
social effect: a person's response y varies with E(ylx), the mean
of the endogenous variable y among those persons in the reference
group described by x. 11 If 1 f o, the model expresses a contextual
effect: y varies with E(zlx), the mean of the exogenous variables
z among those persons in the reference group. If 5 1
f O, the model
expresses an ecological effect: y varies directly with x.
O, the model expresses correlated individual effects: persons in
the reference group x tend to have similar unobserved attributes u.
The parameter 11 expresses the direct effect of z on y.
4.2.2. Identification of the Parameters
We are interested in identification of the parameter vector
(a,,B,-y,5 1 ,5 2 ,11).
To focus attention on this question, I shall
Social Effects
assume that either (i) x has discrete support or (ii) y and z have
finite variances
and the two regressions
appearing as regressors in (4.2) are continuous on the support of
As indicated in Section 2. 1, either of these assumptions
implies that the random sampling process identifies E (Y! x) and
E(zlx) on the support of x.
So we can treat the two regressions as
known and focus attention on the parameters. 12
One aspect of the identification problem can be seen immediately
by inspection of (4.2).
That is, ecological effects cannot be
identified relative to correlated individual effects.
(6 1 +5 2 )
may be identified but net 6 1 and 6 2 separately.
Less obvious is the "reflection" problem that arises out of the
presence of E(yjx) as a regressor in (4.2). Integrating both sides
of (4.2) with respect to z reveals that E(y!x) solves the "social
equilibrium" equation
a +,BE(ylx) +E(zjx)'-y +x'(6 1 +6 2 ) +E(zlx)·,,,.
Provided that ,8, 1, equation (4.3) has a unique solution, namely
Thus, model (4.2) implies that E(y!x) is a linear function of
[l,E(zlx) ,xJ, where "l" denotes the constant. It follows that the
parameters a, ,8, -y,
(S 1 +6 2 ) are all unidentified.
In particular,
endogenous effects cannot be distinguished from contextual effects.
Social Effects
What is identified?
Inserting (4.4) into (4.2) we obtain the
linear reduced form model
= a/(1-,B) + E(zlx) '[-t/(l-,3 1--'7.3/(1-3) J
+ x'[(6 1 +5 2 )/(l-,B)J + Z'l?•
The composite parameters a:/(1-,B), -y/(l-,8)+11;3/(l-,B), (5 1 +5 2 )/(l-;3),
and r, are identified if the regressors [l,E(z!x) ,x,zJ are linearly
independent.
Identification of the composite parameters does not
enable one to distinguish among the various social and non-social
effects but does permit one to test the hypothesis that some social·
or non-social effect is present. If -y/(l-;3)+ry,B/(l-3) is non-zero,
then ei.ther ~ and -y must be non-zero; so some social effect is
must be non-zero; so some non-social effect is present.
Even these relatively weak identification findings are tenuous.
The required linear independence of ( 1, E ( z Ix) , x, z J is a non-trivial
condition that can fail in various ways, including the following:
(a) The attributes x defining reference groups may be a subset of
the attributes z directly affecting outcomes.
Suppose that z
[l,E(zlx) ,x,zJ
[l,{x,E(wlx) },x,{x,w}J
is linearly dependent through the
appearance of x in three locations.
(b) The attributes z directly affecting outcomes may be a subset
of the attributes x defining reference groups.
Suppose that.
some vector w.
[l,E(z!x) ,x,z] =
Social Effects
[1,z,{z,w},z] is linearly dependent through the appearance of
z in three locations.
(c) The attributes z directly affecting outcomes may be meanindependent of the attributes x defining re~erence groups.
Suppose that E(z!x) = z 0 , for some constant vector z 0 •
[1,E(zlx) ,x,z] = [l,z 0 ,x,zJ is linearly dependent through the
appearance of the two constants 1 and z 0
(d) The regression E(zlx) may be a linear function of x as, for
example, occurs if (z,x) are distributed multivariate ncr:nal.
Suppose that E(z!x) = Ax for some parameter matrix A.
[1,E(zlx) ,x,zJ = [1,Ax,x,zJ is linearly dependent through the
appearance of Ax and x.
Taken t-ogether, these conditions say that
iaen-::::. .... ica '-ion fails
unless the attributes z
and x are "moderately" related in a
nonlinear manner.
They must be neither functionally dependent
(conditions a and b), mean independent (condition c), nor linearly
mean-dependent (condition d).
4.2.3. Parameter Restrictions
The possibilities for identification improve if one has prior
information restricting some of the parameters.
The most common
restrictions are assumptions that some parameter values are zero,
so that the corresponding effect is null. Suppose it is known that
fi = 0, so that there is no endogenous effect.
Then the contextualeffect parameter~ is identified if (l,E(zlx) ,x,zJ are linearly
independent.
Or suppose it is known that~= O, so that there is
Social Effects
no contextual effect.
Then the endogenous-effect parameter 3 is
identified if [l,E(zlx) ,x,z] are linearly independent and 11
The only way to relax the linear independence condition is to
impose further parameter restrictions.
Empirical st~dies of
contextual effects generally assume that~= 6 1 = 5 2 = O;
identified if [l,E(z!x),z] are linearly independent.
studies of endogenous effects generally assume that:=
O; then~ is identified if [l,E(zlx) ,zJ are linearly independent
and TJ r 0.
4.2.4. Sample Inference
Our primary concern is with identification of the mcdel (4.2),
but a discussion of sample inference is warranted.
Empirical studies of contextual effects have always applied a
two-stage method to estimate (1 ,ry).
In the first stage, one uses
the sample data on ( z, x) to estimate E ( z Ix) nonpararnetrically;
generally x is discrete and the estimate of E ( z Ix) is a cellaverage of the form given in equation (2.1).
In the second stage,
one estimates h 'ri)
by finding the least squares
[EN(zlx) ,z], where EN(z!x) is the first-stage estimate of E(z!x).
Empirical studies of endogenous effects have also applied a twostage method to estimate (;3, 11), but in the guise of a "spatial
autocorrelation model.
Spatial correlation models have the form
i=l, ... ,N.
Social Effects
Here Y = (Yi, i=l, ... ,N) is the Nx: vec~or of sample realizations
of y and WiN is a specified lxN weighting vector: that is, ::he
components of WiN are non-negative and sum to one.
The disturbances
u are assumed to be normally distributed, independent of x, ar.d the
model is estimated by maximum likelihood.
See, for example, Cliff
and Ord or Case .
Equation (4.6) states that the behavior of each person in t~e
sample varies with a weighted average of the behaviors of the other
sample members.
Thus, the spatial correlation model assumes that
a social effect is generated within the researcher's sample rather
than within the population from which the sample was drawn.
makes sense in studies of small-group interactions,
rt1here t:le
sample is composed of clusters of friends, co-workers, or household
members; see, for example, Duncan, Haller, and Portes .
it does not make sense in studies of neighborhood and other la:::-gegroup social effects, where the sample members are randomly chose~
individuals.
Taken at face value, equation (4.6) implies that the
sample members know who each other are and choose their outcomes
only after having been selected into the sample.
The spatial correlation model does make sense in studies of
large-group interactions if interpreted as a two-stage method for
estimating model (4.2).
In the first stage, one uses the sanple
data on (y,x) to estimate E(y!x) nonparametrically, and in the
second stage, one estimates (~ 1 ry) by finding the least squares fit
of y to [EN(ylx) ,z], where EN(y!x) is the first-stage estimate of
Many nonparametric estimates of E (y I xi) , including the
Social Effects
local average (2.2), are weighted averages of the for:n EN(Y! xi) =
WiNY, with Win determining the specific estimate.
Hence, estimates
of (P,7) reported in the spatial correlation literature can be
interpreted as estimates of (4.2).
THE SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION OF TWO-STAGE ESTIMATES: It is necessary
to point out that empirical studies reporting two-stage estimates
of social-effects models have routinely misreported the sampling
distribution of their estimates.
The practice in t...ro-st.:ige
estimation of contextual-effects models has been to treat the
first-stage estimate EN(zlx) as if it were E(z!x) rather than an
estimate thereof. The literature on spatial correlation models has
presumed that equation (4.6) holds as stated and has net specified
how the weights WiN should change with N.
Two-stage estimation of social-effects models is similar to other
semiparametric two-stage estimation problems whose asymptotic
properties have been studied recently.
Ahn and Manski ( 19'92) ,
Ichimura and Lee , and others have analyzed the asymptotic
behavior of various estimators whose first stage is nonparametric
regression
second stage is parametric estimation
conditional on the first-stage estimate.
It is typically found
that the second-stage estimate is JN-consistent with a limiting
distribution if the
first-stage
estimator is chosen
appropriately.
The variance of the limiting distribution is
typically larger than that which would prevail if the first-stage
Social Effects
regression were known rather than estimated. It seems likely that
this result holds here as well.
4.3. MORE GENERAL MODELS
The analysis of the preceding section sends a strong warning
about the difficulty of inferring social effects from outcome data.
Consideration of richer, more realistic models complicates matters
This section describes several generalizations of model
(4.2) and calls attention to the identification issues that they
4.3.1. Nonlinear Models
There is often no good reason to think that social and nonsocial effects behave linearly.
The basic themes of (4.2) are
captured by the class of models of the form
= f[E(ylx),E(zjx),x,z],
f(.,.) being a member of some family F of functions on YxZxXxZ.
implied that E(ylx)
solved the linear social
equilibrium equation (4.3), (4.7) implies that E(y!x) solves the
possibly nonlinear social equilibrium equation
= ff[E(yjx) ,E(zlx) ,x,z]dP(zlx),
Social Effects
where P(zlx) is the probability distribution of z conditional on x.
The model (4.7) is coherent if equation (4.3) has a solution.
If there is no solution, then the model is internally inconsisten~.
Sometimes, as when f(.) is linear, there is a unique scluticn t~
In these situations, E(ylx) can be expressed as a function
of {P(zjx),x}.
Then the model (4.7) has a reduced for.n
= f[g{P(zlx),x},E(zlx),x,zJ,
where g(.) gives E(ylx) as a function of {P(zlx) ,x).
In Manski , I have studied identification of endogenouseffects models with unique social equilibria. Let it be known that
f[E(ylx),z]
and that there is a unique social equilibrium. It is shown that if
the form of the function f(.) is not known, then one can hope to
identify how f(.) varies with E(ylx) only if z and x are moderately
In particular, identification is not possible if z and x
are either functionally dependent or statistically independent.
This result is a nonparametric extension of the linear-independence
condition studied in Section 4.2.2.
BINARY RESPONSE MODELS: Perhaps the most common non-linear social
effects models in the literature are binary response models.
y be a binary random variable, so that E(ylx,z) = P(y=llx,z) and
Social Effects
E(ylx) = P(y=ljx).
Assume that, for some continuous and strictly
increasing distribution function H(.) on the real line,
P(y=llx,z)
H[a+,8P(y=llx)+E(z!x) 1-.,+x 1 6-z'11J,
where (a,p,-.,,0,17) are parameters.
This model, which includes the
logit and probit models as special cases, has a social equilibrium
if P(y=ljx) solves the equation
)H[a+,8P(y=llx)+E(zlx) 1-.,+x'o+z'11JdP(zlx).
It is shown in Manski that equation (4.12) always has a~
least one solution, so the model is coherent; if p
solution is unique.
The conditions under which the parameters
(a,fi,-y,0,17) are identified have not been established.
Models of form (4.11) have been estimated by two-stage methcds.
One estimates P(y=llx) nonparametrically and then estimates (fi,-y)
by maximizing the quasi-likelihood in which PN (y=ll x) takes the
place of P(y=ll x).
Examples include Case and Katz and
Gamoran and Mare .
A multinomial response model estimated in
this manner appears in Manski and Wise , Chapter 6.
Social Effects
4.3.2. More General Social Effects
So far, we have assumed that social effects are transm.i t~ed
through E(yj x) and E(zl x), but they may be transmitted through
other channels as well.
Three are mentioned here.
incorporating these more general effects bring to bear less prior
information, so the identification problem inevitably worsens.
Endogenous and contextual effects may be transmitted not only
through E(y!x)
and E(z!x)
but through the entire conditional
distributions P(ylx) and P(zlx).
These social forces may affect
not only E(y!x,z) but the entire conditional distribution P(y!x,z).
If $0, then we have the following abstract generalization of (4.7):
(4.13) .P(y!x,z)
= f[P(y!x),P(z!x),x,z].
For example, it is sometimes said that the strength of the effect
of social norms on individual behavior depends on the dispersion of
behavior in the population. The more homogeneous is reference-group
behavior, the stronger the norm.
This idea can be expressed by
models in which individual outcomes vary not only with the mean
outcome of the reference group but also with the variance of the
reference-group outcomes.
Another direction for generalization is to allow individuals to
be influenced by multiple reference groups, giving more weight to
the behavior of some groups than to others.
generalized even further to
Then (4.14) might
Social Effects
{ 4. 14) P ( y ! { xm, m= 1 , ... M} , z) = f [ { P ( y I X ) , P ( z I X ) , Xm , i = 1 , . • • , M } , Z ] •
Here xm characterizes the mth reference group.
Yet another direction for generalization is to let the outcome
y be a vector rather than a scalar.
With this done, we can imagine
a simultaneous system of endogenous effects, with reference-group
outcomes along each dimension affecting individual outcomes along
other dimensions.
4.3.3. Dynamic Models
Some authors, including Alessie and Kapteyn and Borjas
 , have estimated the following dynamic version of the linear
model (4.2):
where Et and Et_, denote expectations taken at periods t and 't-1.
The idea is that non-social forces act contemporaneously but social
forces act on the individual with a lag.
If {E(zjx) ,x,z} are time-invariant and -1 < ~ < 1, the dynamic
process (4.14) has a unique stable temporal equilibrium of the form
If one observes the process in temporal equilibrium, the
identification analysis in Section 4.2 holds without modification.
On the other hand, if one observes the process out of equilibrium,
the recursive structure of ( 4. 14)
opens new possibilities for
Social Effects
identification.
In particular, Et-i (YI x)
is not necessarily a
linear function of [l,Et_ 1 {zjx) ,xt].
One should not, however, conclude that dynamic models solve the
problem of identifying social effects.
To exploit the recursive
structure of (4.14), a researcher must maintain the hypothesis that
the transmission of social effects really follows the assumed
temporal pattern.
But empirical studies typically provide no
evidence for any particular timing.
Some authors assume that
individuals are influenced by the behavior of their contemporaries,
some assume a time lag of a few years, while others assume that
social effects operate across generations.
4.4. IDENTIFICATION OF REFERENCE GROUPS
So far, we have assumed that the researcher knows individuals'
reference groups.
There is substantial reason to question this
assumption. Researchers rarely offer any empirical evidence on how
individuals form reference groups or, for that matter, on whether
the reference-group concept is meaningful to them.
One study that
does attempt to justify its specification is Woittiez and Kapteyn
 , who use individuals' responses to questions about their
"social environments" as evidence on their reference groups.
Researchers do not try to determine whether individuals actually
observe the outcomes of their reference-groups.
They assume that
individuals are influenced by E(ylx) and E(zJx), but offer no
evidence that people perceive these quantities correctly. 13
Social Effects
4.4.1. Tautological Linear Models
If researchers de not know how individuals for:n reference groups
and perceive reference-group outcomes, then it is reasonable to ask
whether outcome data can be used to inf er these unknowns.
Manski , I shewed that the answer is negative.
Suppose one
believes that some vector z directly affects individual outcomes
but one does not know the vector x that defines reference groups.
Then one cannot reject the hypothesis that xis a superset of z and
may not be able to reject the hypothesis that xis a subset of z.
Consider first the hypothesis that xis a superset of z; that is,
x = (z,w) for some vector w. Then E(y!x,z) = E(yjx). So model (4.2)
holds tautologically with~= 1 and a=~= 8 1 = 5 2 = ry = 0.
one cannot reject the hypothesis that xis a superset of z and that
mean reference-group behavior dictates individual behavior.
Now consider the alternative hypothesis that xis a subset of z;
that is, z = (x,w) for some vector w.
Then E(y!x,z) = E(y!z).
E(y!z) is a linear function z'c, c being a parameter vector, then
the linear model (4.2) holds tautologically with ry = c and a=~=
Thus, one cannot reject the hypothesis that xis a
subset of z and that z dictates individual behavior, with no role
for endogenous, contextual, ecological, or correlated effects.
For example, consider a researcher studying student achievement.
Suppose that the researcher observes each student's ability and
ethnicity. If the researcher specifies x to be (ability,ethnicity)
and z to be (ability), he will find that the data are consistent
with the hypothesis that individuals do condition on (ability,
Social Effects
ethnicity)
form their reference
individual
achievement reflects reference-group achievement, and that ability
has no direct effect on achievement.
If the researcher specifies
x to be (ethnicity) and z to be (ability,ethnicity). he will find
that the data are consistent with the hypothesis that referencegroup achievement does not affect individual achievement.
4.4.2. Experimental and Subjective Data
It clearly is very difficult to draw conclusions about
effects from outcome data alone.
If the identification of social
effects is so tenuous,
then why is there such a
widespread
perception that society influences individual behavior in many
~t may be that this common perception is pearly grounded,
fed by flawed interpretations of outcome data.
But outcome data
are not our only source of evidence on social effects.
Prevailing
views also rest on evidence from controlled expe!'."i:ments and on
subjective data, the statements people make about why they behave
as they do.
See Jones for a survey of the experimental
literature.
Our analysis of identification from outcome data suggests that
experimental and subjective data will have to play an important
role in future efforts to learn about social effects.
subjective data are necessary to identify reference
which are a
subjective phenomenon.
The problem of
identifying subjective phenomena is discussed further in Section 5.
Intentions
5. Identification of Subjective Phencmena: The Use of Intentions Data
5. 1. RESEARCH PRACTICES IN ECONOMICS AND SCCIOLoG·z
Policy disputes often reflect disagreement about the roles of
objective and subjective forces in determining behavior.
as do many social scientists, that behavior is determined by
objective opportunities and by subjective preferences and expectations.
Then we may ask politically sensitive questions such as:
young black males have low labor force participation
because (a) jobs are unavailable (opportunities),
believe that jobs are unavailable (expectations), or (c) they
don't want to work (preferences)?
Social scientists and concerned citizens agree that this question
is meaningful and relevant to social policy.
We ha•,e net, however,
been able to reach consensus on the answer.
Distinguishing the objective and subjective determinants of
human behavior may be the most challenging identification problem
facing social scientists.
It is certainly the problem that most
clearly separates the social from the natural sciences, where the
units of analysis are not thought of as possessing free will.
the inherent difficulty of inference on subjective phenomena does
not fully explain our lack of knowledge.
Research practices in the
various social science disciplines also inhibit progress.
many years,
economists have exercised
self-imposed
prohibition on the use of subjective data in empirical analysis. 14
Intentions
Instead, they have sought to infer subjective phenomena from data
on opportunities and choices.
This research approach, referred to
as "revealed preference analysis," cannot be used to jointly infer
expectations and preferences. So economists have typically imposed
assumptions on expectations and attempted to infer preferences from
observed choices. 15
In contrast to economists, social psychologists and sociologists
routinely collect and analyze subjective data of many kinds.
Unfortunately, the prevailing practice has been to pose looselyworded
expectations or preferences.
researchers typically
theorize verbally rather than mathematically.
Hence, it can be
difficult to determine whether different researchers interpret the
terms "preferences" and "expectations" in a common manner.
see it, progress in understanding the objective and
subjective determinants of behavior requires that the various
social sciences break with their conventions.
economists continue to rely exclusively on revealed-preference
analysis, they have no hope of determining whether they are making
empirically valid inferences on preferences or wrong inferences
based on incorrect expectations assumptions.
As long as sociologists continue to reason verbally rather than mathematically,
their empirical analysis will suffer from conceptual ambiguity.
Some of my recent and ongoing work seeks to fuse what I see as
the positive aspects of present economic and sociological research
practices: the use of formal decision theory by economists and the
Intentions
exploitation of subjective data by sociologists.
One completed
paper examines the conditions under which
rat..:.ona..L decis:.on makers
can learn from the experiences of role models .
Another, focussing on the analysis of schooling behavior, c-::-itiques
the conventional economic practice of assuming that youth have
specific expectations of the returns to schooling .
In ongoing work, I am attempting to elicit from youth their actua:
expectations of the returns to schooling.
In this section, I describe my recent work offering a "bestcase" decision theoretic treatment of stated intentions, a familiar
type of subjective data.
The analysis, drawn from Manski ,
shows that intentions data have often been mis-interpreted.
doing so, it illustrates the importance of interpreting subjective
data in a logically coherent manner.
5.2. THE USE OF INTENTIONS DATA TO PREDICT BEHAVIOR
In surveys individuals are routinely asked to predict their
future behavior, that is, to state their intentions. The fertility
question asked female respondents in the June 1987 Supplement to
the Current Population Survey (CPS) is an example:
Looking ahead, do you expect to have any (more) children?
 
Intentions
Responses to such fertility-intentions questions have been used to
predict fertility for over fifty years; Hendershct and Placek
 review the extensive literature.
Data on vccing intentions
have been used to predict A.-rnerican election outc:Jmes si:1ce t.he
early 1900s .
Sur1eys of buying
intentions have been used to predict consumer purchase behavior
since at least the mid 1940s .
Perhaps the most
extensive use
intentions data
psychologists, some of whom view intentions as a well-defined
mental state that causally precedes behavior (see Fishbein and
A j z en, 19 7 5) •
A BEST-CASE ANALYSIS: What information do intentions data convey
about future behavior? The answer depends on how people respond to
intentions questions and on how they actually behave.
In Mansk.i
 , I studied the relationship between stated intentions and
subsequent
"best-case"
hypothesis
individuals have rational expectations and that their responses
intentions questions are best predictors of their behavior.
objective was to place an upper bound on the behavioral information
contained in intentions data and to determine whether prevailing
approaches to the analysis of intentions data respect the bound.
I found that much of the literature interprets intentions data
in ways that are inconsistent with the best-case analysis. Authors
have expected
correspondence between intentions and
the expected correspondence, they have
Intentions
improperly concluded that individuals are poor predictors of their
future behavior.
5.2.1. The Survey Question and the Best-Case Response
My analysis focusses on the simplest intentions questions, these
that call for yes/no predictions of binary outcomes.
Suppose that
a person is asked to make a point prediction of some binary choice;
that is, a yes/no answer is requested.
Let i and y be zero-one
indicator variables denoting the survey response
behavior respectively.
Thus i = 1 if the person responds "yes" to
the intentions question and y =
satisfy the property of interest.
1 if his behavior turns out
To form his response, a person with rational expectations would
begin by recognizing that his future behavior will depend in part
on conditions known to him at the time of the sur1ey and in part on
events that have not yet occurred.
Lets denote the information
available to the respondent at the time of the survey.
denote the events that have not yet occurred but which will affect
his future behavior.
Thus z represents uncertainty which will be
resolved between the time of the survey and the time at which the
behavior is determined.
The behavior y is a function of the pair
(s,z) and so may be written y(s,z).
Let Pzl s denote the objective probability distribution of z
conditional on s.
Let P(yls) denote the objective distribution of
y conditional on s.
The event y = 1 occurs if and only if the
realization of z is such that y(s,z) = 1.
Intentions
= Pz[y(s,z)=llsJ.
The content of the rational-expectations hypothesis is that, at the
time of the survey, the respondent knows y(s, .) and P.i:!s; henc2 he
knows P(y=ljs).
It does not suffice for the respondent to have a
subjective distribution for z, from which he derives a subjective
distribution for y. Rational expectations assumes knowledge of the
actual stochastic process generating z.
The second part of the best-case hypothesis is that the
respondent states his best point prediction of his behavior.
best prediction necessarily depends on the losses the respondent
associates with the two possible prediction errors (i=O,y=l) and
(i=l,y=O).
These losses may be influenced by the wording of the
intentions question; for example, the respondent may interpret
differently questions that ask what he "expects, 11
11 intends," er "is
likely" to do.
Whatever the loss function, however, the intentions
response satisfies the condition
where the threshold probability ,r depends on the loss function.
Note that ,r = .5 if the loss function is symmetric.
Intentions
5.2.2. Prediction of Behavior Conditional on Intentions
Now consider a researcher who wishes to use intentions data to
predict the behavior of some respondent.
The researcher observes
the intentions response i.
Continuing the theme of a best-case
analysis, assume the researcher knows that i satisfies (5.2).
Moreover, assume that~ is the same for all respondents and that
the researcher knows what~ is.
The researcher may observe only a subset of the informations
available to the respondent.
Let x denote the observed component
Suppose that the researcher wishes to predict the behavior
y conditional on the observed variables x and i.
Then he would
like to learn the probability P(y=ljx,i).
Intentions data do not
identify P(y=ljx,i).
They do, however, imply a bound.
Let Psjxi denote the probability distribution of s conditional
on the observed pair (x,i).
It is the case that
P(y=ljx,i)
P(y=lj s)dPsl xi.
It follows directly from this and from (5.2) that
P(y=ljx,i=O)
P(y=ljx,i=l).
This bound expresses all the information about behavior contained
in the intentions data.
Note that the bound varies with i but not
Intentions
The foregoing implies that familiar path models attempting to
explain behavior as a function of intentions are not consistent
with the best-case hypothesis.
Consider a legit model
exp (x,3+-y i}
P(y=llx,i)
1 + exp (x/3+-y i)
where (/3,r) are parameters.
This model has the property
p (y=l Ix, i) < 1/2
xf3 + -y i = 0
p (y=l Ix, i) = 1/2
T' -y i > 0
P 'v=lj x i)
Suppose-t~at rr = 1/2.
Then (5.6) is consistent with (5.4) only if
(x,(3 11 ) satisfies the special property x,3 s Os x,3 + -y.
The problem is, of course, not specific to the legit model and
the case rr = 1/2.
It is characteristic of any path model which
attempts to explain y as a function of a linear index x,3+-yi.
5.2.3. Prediction Not Conditional on Intentions
Often a researcher wants to predict the behavior of a nonsampled
member of the population from which the survey respondents were
Intentions data are available only for the sampled
individuals.
But some background variables x may be observed for
the entire population.
In this setting, one may want to predict
behavior conditional on these x.
Then the quantity of interest is
P(y=ll x).
The bound (5.4) implies a bound on P(y=llx).
Observe that
Intentions
P(y=llx,i=0)P(i=0jx) + P(y=ljx,i=l)P(i=ljx).
It follows from (5.4) and (5.7) that
11". \ ... -.Lj, i
7rP(i=0jx) + P(i=llx).
This bound is useful in practice because P(i=llx) can be estimated
nonparametrically from the sample data.
Observe that the bound (5.8), unlike (5.4), varies with x.
bound width, which is 7rP(i=0jx) + (l-7r)P(i=llx), may take any value
between zero and one, depending on the magnitudes of 71" and P(ilx).
Thus, depending on the application, intentions data may yield a
tight or a weak bound on P(y!x).
If 71" = 1/2, the bound width is
1/2, whatever P(ilx) might be.
It has been known for at least twenty-five years that the sharp
relationship
P ( i = 1 I x)
P ( y= 1 j x)
need not hold . Nethertheless, some of the
literature continues to consider deviations from this equality as
"inconsistencies" in need of explanation. For example, Westoff and
Ryder state:
The question with which we began this work was whether
reproductive intentions are useful for prediction.
finding was that 40.5 percent intended more, as of the end of
Intentions
1970, and 34.0 percent had more in the subsequent five years
In other words, acceptance of 1970 intentions at face
value would have led to a substantial overshooting of the
ultimate outcome. (p. 449)
Seeking to explain the observed "overshooting" of births, the
authors state:
interpretation
respondents failed to anticipate the extent to which the times
would be unpropitious for childbearing, that they made the
understandable but frequently invalid assumption that the
present--the
forecasting error that demographers have often made. (p. 449)
recent demographic work maintains the presumption that
deviations from
( 5. 9) require explanation.
See, for example,
Davidson and Beach and O'Connell and Rogers .
The best-case hypothesis implies that (5.9) should hold in one
very special case; that in which future behavior depends only on
the informations available at the time of the survey.
the respondent can
forecast his future behavior with
certainty. Soi always equals y.
In the nondegenerate case where future events z partially
deter.nine behavior, the best-case hypothesis does not imply (5.9).
A simple example makes the point forcefully.
Let 7f = 1/2 and let
P(y=ljs) = .51 for all values of s.
Then P (y=l Ix) = .51 but
for all values of x.
This demonstrates that
Intentions
individual-level differences between intentions and behavior do
not, in general, average-out in the aggregate.
5.2.4. Lessons
The use of intentions data to predict behavior has been controversial.
At least some of the controversy is rooted in the flawed
premise that divergences between intentions and behavior show
individuals to be poor predictors of their futures.
Divergences
may simply reflect the dependence of behavior on events not yet
realized at the time of the survey.
Divergences will occur even if
responses to intentions questions are the best predictions possible
given the available infor:nation.
The lesson is that researchers
should ~at expect too much from yes/no intentions data.
In principle, the yes/no form of intentions question can be
improved upon by asking the respondent to give his probability for
the behavior in question.
Whereas a yes/no question reveals at
most the bounds (5.4) and (5.8) on P(ylx,i) and P(yjx), probability
elicitation may reveal P(yls). See Juster for an interesting
empirical study eliciting probabilistic intentions.
1. The modern statistical literature uses the term "regression" in
a much more general sense to refer to any feature of the probability distribution of y conditional on x, for example the conditional
median or variance.
So we speak of the mean regression, median
regression, variance regression, and so on .
The extrapolation problem discussed in this section applies to all
of these senses of regression, not just to the familiar mean
regression.
2. The literature on nonparanetric regression analysis refers to
( 2. 2) as a "uniform kernel" estimate.
The reader who wishes
further exposition of this and other nonparametric regression
methods may turn to Manski and to the opening chapters of
Hardle .
I should note that the terms "parametric" and "nonparametric"
are conventionally used to distinguish those problems in which the
regression is known up to a finite-dimensional parameter from those
in which the regression is known to be a member of some non-finitedimensional space of functions of x.
For example, the regression
might be known to be a continuous function of x, as in condition
Use of the term "nonparametric" to mean that the parameter
space is a space of functions is an illogical but firmly entrenched
semantic convention.
3. The assumption that y is scalar will be used only in a few
Most of the analysis extends immediately to situations in
which y is a vector.
4. To obtain some intuition for this fact, consider the following
thought experiment. Let w be a random variable with Prob(w~t] = 1-ry
and Prob(w=s) = ry, wheres> t.
Suppose w is perturbed by moving
the mass at s to some s 1 > s.
Then P(w~r) remains unchanged for r
<sand falls by at most ry for r 2 s.
But E(w) increases by the
amount ry(s 1 -s).
Now let s 1 go to infinity. The perturbed distribution function remains within an ry-bound of the original one but the
mean of the perturbed random variable converges to infinity.
Although information restricting P(yjx,z=l)
and P(zlx) is
superfluous
perspective
identification,
information may still be useful in practice as it may enable one to
obtain more precise sample estimates of P(yjx,z=l) and P(zjx).
6. This classical definition of the treatment effect appropriately
characterizes randomized experiments and mandated policies, but
other definitions may well be more relevant in many social science
applications.
For example, one might want to compare exogenous
assignment to treatment with self-selection of treatment.
variety of treatment effects of potential interest are considered
in Maddala and in Heckman and Robb . our
discussion of identif icaticn can easily be extended from the
classical treatment effects to these variants.
7. Although it is valid to distinguish mainstream economic thinking
on social effects from the perspectives of the other social
sciences, one should not think that economists are concerned only
with the operation of markets.
The field of public economics has
long been concerned with "external effects;" social effects on
opportunities that operate outside markets.
Moreover, some economists have sought to interpret and make use of key sociological
Duesenberry
is one example.
More recently,
Schelling analyzed the residential patterns that emerge when
individuals
choose not to live in
neighborhoods
percentage of residents of their own race is below some threshold.
Conlisk showed that, if decision making is costly, it may be
optimal for individuals to imitate the behavior of other persons
who are better informed.
Akerlof and Jones studied
the equilibria of noncooperative games in which individuals are
punished for deviation from group norms.
Gaertner , Pollak
 , Alessie and Kapteyn
consumer demand models in which, holding price fixed, individual
demand increases with the mean demand of a reference group.
8. The term "endogenous effects" was introduced in Manski 
to describe a broad class of ideas recurring throughout the social
sciences. Sociologists, social psychologists, and some economists
have long been concerned with reinforcina endogenous effects,
wherein the propensity of an individual to behave in some way
increases with the prevalence of that behavior in the reference
A host of terms are commonly used to describe reinforcing
endogenous
"conformity,"
"imitation,"
"contagion,''
"bandwagons," "herd behavior," "norm effects,"
"keeping up with
the Joneses," and, in economics, "interdependent preferences." In
addition, economists have always been fundamentally concerned with
a particular non-reinforcing endogenous effect: an individual's
demand for a product varies with price, which is partly determined
by aggregate demand in the relevant market.
9. Inference on contextual effects became an important concern of
sociologists in the 1960s, when substantial efforts were made to
learn the effects on youth of school and neighborhood environment
 .
The recent
resurgence of interest in spatial concepts of the underclass has
spawned many new empirical studies .
In Manski , I use the term
"exogenous" effect as a synonym for contextual effect, to distinguish the idea from endogenous effects.
10. The three regressors E(ylx), E(zlx), and x are functionally
dependent in the population and so do
not vary separately
empirically.
Nevertheless,
one can contemplate the logical
experiment in which one of these regressors is changed and the
others held fixed.
See the discussion at the end of Section 2.2.3.
11. Beginning with Hyman , reference-group theory has sought
to express the idea that individuals learn from or are otherwise
influenced by the behavior and attitudes of some reference group.
Bank et al.
 give an historical account.
Sociological
writing has remained predominately verbal, but economists have
interpreted reference groups as conditioning variables, in the
manner of (4.2).
See Alessie and Kapteyn or Manski .
12. Assumptions
( i) and ( ii) cover many but not all cases of
empirical interest.
They are not appropriate in studies of smallgroup social interactions,
such as family interactions.
analyses of family interactions, each reference group (i.e. family)
has negligible size relative to the population and random sampling
of individuals only rarely yields multiple members of the 'same
Hence, it is not a good empirical approximation to assume
that x has finite support.
Moreover, unless one can characterize
groups of families· as being similar in composition, it is not
plausible to assume that E(ylx) and E(zlx) are continuous functions
The conclusion to be drawn, not surprisingly, is that random
sampling of individuals is not an effective data gathering process
for the study of family interactions.
families as the sampling unit.
It is preferable to use
13. The same practice is found in empirical studies of decision
making under uncertainty.
Researchers assume they know the
information on which individuals condition their expectations but
offer no evidence justifying their assumptions.
I have recently
criticized this practice in the context of studies of schooling
See Manski .
14. Economists typically assert that respondents to surveys have no
incentive to answer questions carefully or honestly; hence, they
conclude, there is no reason to think that subjective responses
reliably reflect respondents' thinking.
Economists' views on the
use of subjective data have not, however, always been so negative.
In the 1940s, it was common to interview businessmen about their
expectations and decision rules.
In an influential article,
Machlup sharply attacked existing survey practices as not
yielding credible information.
This article apparently played an
important role in eventually damping the enthusiasm of economists
for subjective data. It is revealing that a recent National Academy
of Sciences Panel on Survey Measurement of Subjective Phenomena had
no economist as a member of the panel and cited almost no economics
literature in its report.
See Turner and Martin .
impossibility of jointly inferring expectations and
preferences from data on oppportunities and choices can easily be
seen with a few symbols.
The standard economic model assumes that
an individual's choice c
among specified alternatives c is a
function f(.) of the expected outcomes (ri,ieC) associated with the
various options; that is, c = f(ri'ieC}.
Suppose that one wishes
to learn the decision rule f(.) embodying preferences and mapping
expectations into choices.
If one observes {c,C,(ri,ieC)} for a
sample of individuals, then one may be able to infer the decision
But if one observes only (c,C}, then clearly one cannot
infer f(.).
The most that one can do is infer the decision rule
conditional on maintained assumptions on expectations .
References
References
Ahn, H. and C. Manski , "Distribution Theory for the Analysis
of Binary Choice Under Uncertainty with Nonparametric Estimation of
Expectations," Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
G. ,
Unemployment
may be One
Economics, 94, 749-775.
Consequence,"
Quarterly Journal of
Ahn, H. and J. Powell , "Semiparametric Estimation of Censored
Selection Models with a Nonparametric Selection Mechanism," Journal
of Econometrics, forthcoming.
A:.essie, R. and A. Kapteyn(l991), "Habit Formation, Interdependent
Preferences and Demographic Effects in the Almost Ideal Demand
System," The Economic Journal, 101, 404-419.
Arabmazar,
Schmidt(l982),
"An Investigation of the.
Robustness of the Tobit Estimator to Non-normality," Econometrica
50, 1053-1063.
Bank, B., R. Slavings,
Sociologv of Education,
and B. Biddle(l990), "Effects of Peer,
Influences
Persistence,"
63, 208-225.
Barnhart, J. , letter to Eleanor Chelimsky, in United States
General Accounting Office, Unemploved Parents, GAO/PEMD-92-19BR,
Gaithersburg, Maryland: U.S. General Accounting Office.
Bassi, L., and O. Ashenfelter , "The Effect of Direct.Job
Creation and Training Programs on Low-Skilled Workers," in S.
Danziger and D. Weinberg (editors), Fighting Poverty, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Blumstein, A., J. Cohen, and D. Nagin (editors) , Deterrence
and Incaoacitation: Estimatina the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on
Crime Rates, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Borjas, G. , "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,"
Department of Economics, University of California at San Diego.
A. ,
Econometrica, 59,
Demand, 11
Case, A. and L. Katz , "The Company You Keep: The Effects of
Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youth," Working Paper No.
3705, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
Cliff, A. and J. Ord(l981), Spatial Processes, London: Pion.
References
c. ,
Impact of Sociological Methodology on
statistical Methodology," Statistical Science, 7.
Coleman, J., E. Campbell, C. Hobson, J. McPartland, A. Mood, F.
Weinfeld, and R. York(l966), Eauality of Educational Opportunity,
Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Conlisk, J. {1980), "Costly Optimizers Versus
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
Cheap Imitators, 11
1, 275-293.
Cosslett, s. , "Semiparametric Estimation of a Regression
Medel with Sample Selectivity," in W. Barnett, J. Powell, and G.
Tauchen (editors), Nonparametric and Semiparametric Methods in
Econometrics and Statistics, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Coyle, S., R. Baruch, and C. Turner, (editors) , Evaluating
AIDS Prevention Proarams, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Crane, J. , "The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood
Effects on Dropping Out and Teenage Childbearing," American Journal .
of Sociology, 96, 1226-1259.
Davidson, A. and L. Beach(l981), "Error Patterns in the Prediction
of Fertility Behavior," Journal of Apnlied Social Psvchologv, 11,
Duesenberry,
Consumption,
Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Duncan, O., A. Haller, and A. Portes(l968), "Peer Influences on
Aspirations: A Reinterpretation," American Journal of Sociologv,
74, 119-137.
Fishbein, M. and I. Ajzen(l975), Belief, Attitude, Intention, and
Behavior: An Introduction to Theorv and Research, Reading: Addison-
Fisher, F. , The Identification Problem in Econometrics, New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Consumption
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
R. , Statistical Confluence Analysis by Means of
Complete Regression Systems, Oslo, Norway: University Institute of
Economics.
Gaertner, W. , "A Dynamic Model of Interdependent Consumer
Behavior," Zeitschrift fur Nationalokonomie, 70, 312-326.
References
A. {1992) ,"Social Factors in Education," in M.
(editor), Encyclopedia of Educational Research, 6th Edition, New
York: Macmillan, forthcoming.
Mare , "Secondary School Tracking and
Educational
Inequality:
Compensation,
Reinforcement,
Neutrality?" American Journal of Sociology, 94, 1146-1183.
Goldberger, A. , "Abnormal Selection Bias," in S. Karlin, T.
Amemiya, and L. Goodman (editors), Studies in Econometrics, Time
Series, and Multivariate Statistics, Orlando: Academic Press.
Gronau, R. , "Wage Comparisons - a Selectivity Bias," Journal
of Political Econornv, 82, 1119-1143.
E. ,
Economic Literature,
"The Economics
24, ,1141-1177.
of Schooling," Journal of
W. , Apolied Nonparametric Regression,
Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Hauser, R. , "Context and Consex: A Cautionary Tale," American
Journal of Socioloay, 75, 645-664.
Heck.i.ttan, J. , "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of
Truncation, Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and
a Simple Estimator for Such Models," Annals of Economic and Social
Measurement, 5, 479-492.
Heckman, J. , "Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous
Equation System," Econometrica 46, 931-959.
Heckman, J. and B. Honore, , "The Empirical Content of the Roy
Model," Econometrica 58, 1121-1149.
Heck.i.ttan, J. and R. Robb(l985), "Alternative Methods for Evaluating
Impact of Interventions," in J.
(editors), Longitudinal Analvsis of Labor Market Data, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hendershot, G. and P. Placek (editors) , Predicting Fertilitv,
Lexingon: D. C. Heath.
C. and S. Hof ferth (editors) ( 198 7) , Risking the Future:
Adolescent Sexualitv, Pregnancy,
and Childbearing, Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Huber, P. , Robust Statistics, New York: Wiley.
Hurd, M. ,
"Estimation in Truncated Samples When There is
Heteroskedasticity," Journal of Econometrics 11, 247-258.
References
H. ,
Psychology
Psychology," No. 269.
Lung-Fei(l991),
"Semiparametric
Estimation of Multiple Indices Models: Single Equation Estimation,"
in W. Barnett, J. Powell, and G. Tauchen (editors), Nonparametric
Semiparametric
Econometrics
Statistics,
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Jencks, C. ands. Mayer(l989), "Growing Up in Poor Neighborhoods:
How Much Does it Matter?" Science, 243, 1441-1445.
Economics of Conformism,
Blackwell.
Intentions
Probability: An Experiment in Survey Design," Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 61, 658-696.
Kalbfleisch, J. and Prentice, R. , The Statistical Analysis of
Failure Time Data, New York: Wiley.
Econometrica, 46,
"Regression
Quantiles,"
R. ,
"Evaluating the
Training Programs with Experimental
Review, 76, 604-620.
Econometric Evaluations of
Machlup, F. , "Marginal Analysis and Empirical Research,"
American Economic Review, 36, 519-554.
Maddala, G.S. , Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variable
Models in Econometrics, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
C. , "Structural Models for Discrete Data:
Sociological Methodology 1981, San Francisco: Jessey-Bass.
C. ,
Analog Estimation Methods in Econometrics,
London, England: Chapman and Hall.
C. {1988b), "Identification of Binary Response Models,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83, 729-738.
Manski, C. , "Anatomy of the Selection Problem," Journal of
Human Resources, 24, 343-360.
Manski, C. , "Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects, 11
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 80, 319-323.
References
Manski, C. , "The Use of Intentions Data to Predict Behavior:
A Best Case Analysis," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 85, 934-940.
Manski, C. ( 199 la) , "Regression, 11Journa l of Economic Li teratu, 0
Manski, C. , "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects:
Reflection
Discussion Paper 9127, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Manski, C. , "The Selection Problem," in C. Sims (editor),
Advances in Econometrics: Sixth World Congress of the Econometric
Society, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Manski, C. , "Dynamic Choice in a Social Setting: Learning
Experiences
Econometrics,
forthcoming.
Manski, C. , "Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer.
the Returns to Schooling?" in C. Clotfelter and M.
Rothschild
(editors), The Economics of Hiaher Education, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, forthcoming .
Manski,•c. and Garfinkel, I. (editors) , Evaluatina Welfare
and Training Programs, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
C. and McFadden,
D. , "Alternative Estimators and
Sample Designs for Discrete Choice Analysis, 11 in C. Manski and D.
McFadden (editors), Structural Analysis of Discrete Oat-a with
Econometric Apolications, Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press.
Sandefur, S. McLanahan,
"Alternative Estimates of the Effect of
Adolescence on High School Graduation,"
Statistical Association, 87, 25-37.
Family Structure During
Journal of the American
Manski, C. and D. Wise(l983), Colleae Choice in America, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
S. ,
High School's Racial
Socioeconomic Mix Affect Graduation and Teenage Fertility Rates?"
in C. Jencks and P. Peterson (editors) The Urban Underclass,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Moffitt, R. , "Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System:
A Review," Journal of Economic Literature, 30, 1-61.
O'Connell,
Rogers(l983),
"Assessing
Expectations Data from the Current Population Survey, 1971-1981,"
Demography 20, 369-383.