Dependencies in Formal Mathematics:
Applications and Extraction for Coq and Mizar
Jesse Alama1, Lionel Mamane2, and Josef Urban3
1 New University of Lisbon
2 L-7243 Bereldangem, Luxembourg
3 Radboud University Nijmegen
Abstract. Two methods for extracting detailed formal dependencies
from the Coq and Mizar system are presented and compared. The methods are used for dependency extraction from two large mathematical
repositories: the Coq Repository at Nijmegen and the Mizar Mathematical Library. Several applications of the detailed dependency analysis are
described and proposed. Motivated by the diﬀerent applications, we discuss the various kinds of dependencies that we are interested in, and the
suitability of various dependency extraction methods.
Introduction
This paper presents two methods for extracting detailed formal dependencies
from two state-of-the-art interactive theorem provers (ITPs) for mathematics:
the Coq system and the Mizar system. Our motivation for dependency extraction
is application-driven. We are interested in using detailed dependencies for fast
refactoring of large mathematical libraries and wikis, for AI methods in automated reasoning that learn from previous proofs, for improved interactive editing
of formal mathematics, and for foundational research over formal mathematical
libraries.
These applications require diﬀerent notions of formal dependency. We discuss
these diﬀerent requirements, and as a result provide implementations that in
several important aspects signiﬁcantly diﬀer from previous methods. For Mizar,
the developed method captures practically all dependencies needed for successful re-veriﬁcation of a particular formal text (i.e., also notational dependencies,
automations used, etc.), and the method attempts hard to determine the minimal set of such dependencies. For Coq, the method goes farther towards reveriﬁcation of formal texts than previous methods that relied solely on
the ﬁnal proof terms. For example, we can already track Coq dependencies that
appear during the tactic interpretation, but that do not end up being used in
the ﬁnal proof term.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy discusses the notion of
formal dependency. Section 3 describes the implementation of dependency extraction in the Coq system, and Section 4 describes the implementation in the
Mizar system. Section 5 compares the two implemented approaches to dependency computation. Section 6 describes several experiments and measurements
conducted using our implementations on the CoRN and MML libraries, including training of AI/ATP proof assistance systems on the data, and estimating
the speed-up for collaborative large-library developments. Section 8 concludes.
Dependencies: What Depends on What?
Generally, we say that a deﬁnition, or a theorem, T depends on some deﬁnition,
lemma or other theorem T ′, (or equivalently, that T ′ is a dependency of T ) if
T “needs” T ′ to exist or hold. The main way such a “need” arises is that the
well-formedness, justiﬁcation, or provability of T does not hold in the absence
of T ′. We consider formal mathematics done in a concrete proof assistant so
we consider mathematical and logical constructs not only as abstract entities
depending on each other, but also as concrete objects (e.g., texts, syntax trees,
etc.) in the proof assistants. For our applications, there are diﬀerent notions of
“dependency” we are interested in:
– Purely semantic/logical view. One might claim, for example, that the lambda
term (or proof object in the underlying formal framework) contains all suf-
ﬁcient dependencies for a particular theorem, regardless of any notational
conventions, library mechanisms, etc.
– Purely pragmatic view. Such dependencies are met if the particular item
still compiles in a particular high-level proof assistant framework, regardless of possibly changed underlying semantics. This view takes into account
the proof assistant as the major dependency, with their sophisticated mechanisms like auto hint databases, notations, type automations, deﬁnitions
expansions, proof search depth, parser settings, hidden arguments, etc.
Formal dependencies can also be implicit and explicit. In the simple world
of ﬁrst-order automated theorem proving, proofs and their dependencies are
generally quite detailed and explicit about (essentially) all logical steps, even very
small ones (such as the steps taken in a resolution proof). But in ITPs, which are
generally oriented toward human mathematicians, one of the goals is to allow the
users to express themselves with minimal logical verbosity and ITPs come with a
number of implicit mechanisms. Examples are type mechanisms (e.g., type-class
automations of various ﬂavors in Coq and Isabelle , Prolog-like types in
Mizar ), hint mechanisms (in Coq and Isabelle), etc. If we are interested
in giving a complete answer to the question of what a formalized proof depends
upon, we must expose such implicit facts and inferences.
Formal dependencies reported by ITPs are typically suﬃcient. Depending on
the extraction mechanism, redundant dependencies can be reported. Bottom-up
procedures like congruence-closure and type closure in Mizar (and e.g., type-class
mechanisms in other ITPs) are examples of mechanisms when the ITP uses available knowledge exhaustively, often drawing in many unnecessary dependencies
from the context. For applications, it is obviously better if such unnecessary
dependencies can be removed .
Dependency extraction in Coq
Recall that Coq is based on the Curry-Howard isomorphism, meaning that:
1. A statement (formula) is encoded as a type.
2. There is, at the “bare” logical level, no essential diﬀerence between a deﬁnition and a theorem: they are both the binding (in the environment) of a
name to a type (type of the deﬁnition, statement of the theorem) and a term
(body of the deﬁnition, proof of the theorem).
3. Similarly, there is no essential diﬀerence between an axiom and a parameter: they are both the binding (in the environment) of a name to a type
(statement of the axiom, type of the parameter, e.g. “natural number”).
4. There is, as far as Coq is concerned, no diﬀerence between the notions of
theorem, lemma, corollary, . . .
Thus, in this section, and in other sections when talking of Coq, we do not always
repeat “axiom or parameter”, nor repeat “deﬁnition or theorem or lemma or
corollary or . . . ”. We will use “axiom” for “axiom or parameter” and “theorem”
or “deﬁnition” for “deﬁnition or theorem or lemma or corollary or . . . ”. Similarly
for “proof” and “deﬁnition body”.
There are essentially three groups of Coq commands that need to be treated
by the dependency tracking:4
1. Commands that register a new logical construct (deﬁnition or axiom), either
– From scratch. That is, commands that take as arguments a name and
a type and/or a body, and that add the deﬁnition binding this name to
this type and/or body. The canonical examples are
Definition
Axiom Name
The type can also be given implicitly as the inferred type of the body,
Definition
Name := body
– Saving the current (completely proven) theorem in the environment.
These are the “end of proof” commands, such as Qed, Save, Defined.
2. Commands that make progress in the current proof, which is necessarily
made in several steps:
(a) Opening a new theorem, as in
Theorem Name
Definition
4 As far as logical constructs are concerned.
(b) An arbitrary strictly positive amount of proof steps.
(c) Saving that theorem in the environment.
These commands update (by adding exactly one node) the internal Coq
structure called “proof tree”.
3. Commands that open a new theorem, that will be proven in multiple steps.
The dependency tracking is implemented as suitable hooks in the Coq functions
that the three kinds of commands eventually call. When a new construct is
registered in the environment, the dependency tracking walks over the type
and body (if present) of the new construct and collects all constructs that are
referenced. When a proof tree is updated, the dependency tracking examines
the top node of the new proof tree (note that this is always the only change
with regards to the previous proof tree). The commands that update the proof
tree (that is, make a step in the current proof) are called tactics. Coq’s tactic
interpretation goes through three main phases:
1. parsing;
2. Ltac5 expansion;
3. evaluation.
The tactic structure after each of these phases is stored in the proof tree. This
allows to collect all construct references mentioned at any of these tree levels.
For example, if tactic Foo T is deﬁned as
BolzanoWeierstrass ;
and the user invokes the tactic as Foo FeitThompson, then the ﬁrst level will
contain (in parsed form) Foo FeitThompson, the second level will contain (in
parsed form)
BolzanoWeierstrass ;
FeitThompson
and the third level can contain any of:
– refine (BolzanoWeierstrass ...),
– refine (FeitThompson ...),
– something else, if the proof was found by auto.
The third level typically contains only a few of the basic atomic fundamental
rules (tactics) applications, such as refine, intro, rename or convert, and
combinations thereof.
5 Ltac is the Coq’s tactical language, used to combine tactics and add new user-deﬁned
Dependency availability, format, and protocol
Coq supports several interaction protocols: the coqtop, emacs and coq-interface
protocols. Dependency tracking is available in the program implementing the
coq-interface protocol which is designed for machine interaction. The dependency information is printed in a special message for each potentially progressmaking command that can give rise to a dependency. A potentially progressmaking command is one whose purpose is to change Coq’s state. For example,
the command Print Foo, which displays the previously loaded mathematical
construct Foo, is not a potentially progress-making command6. Any tactic invocation is a potentially progress-making command. For example, the tactic auto
silently succeeds (without any eﬀect) if it does not completely solve the goal it
is assigned to solve. In that case, although that particular invocation did not
make any actual progress in the proof, auto is still considered a potentially
progress-making command, and the dependency tracking outputs the message
‘‘dependencies: (empty list)’’. Other kinds of progress-making commands
include, for example notation declarations and morphisms registrations. Some
commands, although they change Coq’s state, might not give rise to a dependency. For example, the Set Firstorder Depth command, taking only an integer argument, changes the maximum depth at which the firstorder tactic will
search for a proof. For such a command, no dependency message is output.
One command may give rise to several dependency messages, when they
change Coq’s state in several diﬀerent ways. For example, the intuition tactic7
can, mainly for eﬃciency reasons, construct an ad hoc lemma, register it into
the global environment and then use that lemma to prove the goal it has been
assigned to solve, instead of introducing the ad hoc lemma as a local hypothesis
through a cut. This is mainly an optimization: The ad hoc lemma is deﬁned
as “opaque”, meaning that the typechecking (proofchecking) algorithm is not
allowed to unfold the body (proof) of the lemma when the lemma is invoked,
and thus won’t spend any time doing so. By contrast, a local hypothesis is
always “transparent”, and the typechecking algorithm is allowed to unfold its
body. For the purpose of dependency tracking this means that intuition makes
two conceptually diﬀerent steps:
1. register a new global lemma, under a fresh name;
2. solve the current subgoal in the proof currently in progress.
6 Thus, although this commands obviously needs item Foo to be deﬁned to succeed,
the dependency tracking does not output that information. That is not a problem
in practice because such commands are usually issued by a user interface to treat an
interactive user request (for example “show me item Foo”), but are not saved into
the script that is saved on disk. Even if they were saved into the script, adding or
removing them to (from, respectively) the script does not change the semantics of
the script.
7 The intuition tactic is a decision procedure for intuitionistic propositional calculus
based on the contraction-free sequent calculi LJT* of Roy Dyckhof, extended to
hand over subgoals which it cannot solve to another tactic.
Each of these steps gives rise to diﬀerent dependencies. For example, if the
current proof is BolzanoWeierstrass, then the new global lemma gives rise to
dependencies of the form
“BolzanoWeierstrass subproofN depends on . . . ”
where the subproofN suﬃx is Coq’s way of generating a fresh name. Closing
of the subgoal by use of BolzanoWeierstrass subproofN then gives rise to the
dependency
“BolzanoWeierstrass depends on BolzanoWeierstrass subproofN”
Coverage and limitations
The Coq dependency tracking is already quite extensive, and suﬃcient for the
whole Nijmegen CoRN corpus. Some restrictions remain in parts of the Coq internals that the second author does not yet fully understand.8 Our interests (and
experiments) include not only purely mathematical dependencies that can be
found in the proof terms (for previous work see also ), but also fast recompilation modes for easy authoring of formal mathematics in large libraries and
formal wikis. The Coq dependency tracking code currently ﬁnds all logically relevant dependencies from the proof terms, even those that arise from automation
tactics. It does not handle yet the non-logical dependencies. Examples include
notation declarations, morphism and equivalence relation declarations,9 auto
hint database registrations,10 but also tactic interpretation. At this stage, we
don’t handle most of these, but as already explained, the internal structure of
Coq lends itself well to collecting dependencies that appear at the various levels of
tactic interpretation. This means that we can already handle the (non-semantic)
dependencies on logical constructs that appear during the tactic interpretation,
but that do not end up being used in the ﬁnal proof term.
Some of the non-logical dependencies are a more diﬃcult issue. For example, several dependencies related to tactic parametrization (auto hint databases,
firstorder proof depth search) need speciﬁc knowledge of how the tactic is in-
ﬂuenced by parameters, or information available only to the internals of the
tactic. The best approach to handle such dependencies seems to be to change
(at the OCaml source level in Coq) the type of a tactic, so that the tactic itself is responsible for providing such dependencies. This will however have to be
validated in practice, provided that we manage to persuade the greater Coq community about the importance and practical usefulness of complete dependency
tracking for formal mathematics and for research based on it.
Such as when and how dynamics are used in tactic expressions or a complete
overview of all datatype tactics take as arguments.
9 So that the tactics for equality can handle one’s user-deﬁned equality.
10 auto not only needs that the necessary lemmas be available in the environment, but
it also needs to be speciﬁcally instructed to try to use them, through a mechanism
where the lemmas are registered in a “hint database”. Each invocation of auto can
specify which hint databases to use.
Coq also presents an interesting corner case as far as opacity of dependencies
is concerned. On the one hand, Coq has an explicit management of opacity
of items; an item originally declared as opaque can only be used generically
with regards to its type; no information arising from its body can be used, the
only information available to other items is the type. Lemmas and theorems
are usually declared opaque11, and deﬁnitions usually declared transparent, but
this is not forced by the system. In some cases, applications of lemmas need to
be transparent. Coq provides an easy way to decide whether a dependency is
opaque or transparent: dependencies on opaque objects can only be opaque, and
dependencies on transparent objects are to be considered transparent.
Note that the predicative calculus of inductive constructions (pCIC) uses a
universe level structure, where the universes have to be ordered in a well-founded
way at all times. However, the ordering constraints between the universes are
hidden from the user, and are absent from the types (statements) the user writes.
Changing the proof of a theorem T can potentially have an inﬂuence on the
universe constraints of the theorem. Thus, changing the body of an opaque item
T ′ appearing in the proof of T can change the universe constraints attached to
it, potentially in a way that is incompatible with the way it was previously used
in the body of T . Detecting whether the universe constraints have changed or
not is not completely straightforward, and needs speciﬁc knowledge of the pCIC.
But unless one does so, for complete certainty of correctness of the library as a
whole, one has to consider all dependencies as transparent. Note that in practice
universe constraint incompatibilities are quite rare. A large library may thus
optimize its rechecking after a small change, and not immediately follow opaque
reverse dependencies. Instead, fully correct universe constraint checking could
be done in a postponed way, for example by rechecking the whole library from
scratch once per week or per month.
Dependency extraction in Mizar
Dependency computation in Mizar diﬀers from the implementation provided for
Coq, being in some sense much simpler, but at the same time also more robust
with respect to the potential future changes of the Mizar codebase. For comparison of the techniques, see Section 5. For a more detailed discussion of Mizar,
see or .
In Mizar, every article A has its own environment EA specifying the context
(theorems, deﬁnitions, notations, etc.) that is used to verify the article. EA, is
usually a rather conservative overestimate of the items that the article actually
needs. For example, even if an article A needs only one deﬁnition (or theorem,
or notation, or scheme, or. . . ) from article B, all the deﬁnitions (theorems, notations, schemes, . . . ) from B will be present in EA. The dependencies for an article
A are computed as the smallest environment E′
A under which A is still Mizarveriﬁable (and has the same semantics as A did under EA). To get dependencies
11 thereby following the mathematical principle of proof irrelevance.
of a particular Mizar item I (theorem, deﬁnition, etc.,), we ﬁrst create a microarticle containing essentially just the item I, and compute the dependencies
of this microarticle.
More precisely, computing ﬁne-grained dependencies in Mizar takes three
Normalization Rewrite every article of the Mizar Mathematical Library so
– Each deﬁnition block deﬁnes exactly one concept.
Deﬁnition blocks that contain multiple deﬁnitions or notations can lead
to false positive dependencies. For example, if two functions g and g are
deﬁned in a single deﬁnition block, and a theorem φ uses f but not g,
then we want to be able to say that φ depends on f but is independent of
g. Without splitting deﬁnition blocks, we have the specious dependency
of φ upon g.
– All toplevel logical linking is replaced by explicit reference: constructions
whereby the statement ψ is justiﬁed by the statement φ, are replaced by
where Label1 and Label2 are new labels. By doing this transformation,
we ensure that the only way that a statement is justiﬁed by another is
through explicit reference.
– Segments of reserved variables all have length exactly 1. For example,
constructions such as
reserve A for
Cardinal ;
which is a single reservation statement that assigns types to four variables
(A, B, f, and M) is replaced by four reservation statements, each of which
assigns a type to a single variable:
reserve A for
reserve B for
reserve M for
Cardinal ;
When reserved variables are normalized in this way, one can eliminate
some false positive dependencies. A theorem in which, say, the variable
f occurs freely but which has nothing to do with cardinal numbers has
the type Function of A,B in the presence of both the ﬁrst and the
second sequences of reserved variables. If the ﬁrst reservation statement
is deleted, the theorem becomes ill-formed because f no longer has a
type. But the reservation statement itself directly requires that the type
Cardinal of cardinal numbers is available, and thus indirectly requires a
part of the development of cardinal numbers. If the theorem has nothing
to do with cardinal numbers, this dependency is clearly specious. By
rewriting reserved variables in the second way, though, one sees that one
can safely delete the fourth reservation statement, thereby eliminating
this false dependency.
These rewritings do not aﬀect the semantics of the Mizar article.
Decomposition For every normalized article A in the Mizar Mathematical Library, extract the sequence ⟨IA
2 , . . . , IA
n ⟩of its toplevel items, each of
which written to a “microarticle” Ak that contains only IA
k and whose environment is that of A and contains each Aj (j < k).
Minimization For every article A of the Mizar Mathematical Library and every
microarticle An of A, do a brute-force minimization of smallest environment
EAn such that An is Mizar-veriﬁable.
The brute-force minimization works as follows. Given a microarticle A, we
successively trim the environment for all the Mizar environment item kinds.12
Each item kind is associated with a sequence s of imported items ⟨a1, . . . , an⟩
and the task is to ﬁnd a minimal sublist s′ of s such that A is Mizar-veriﬁable.13
We apply a simple binary search algorithm to s to compute the minimal sublist
s′. Applying this approach for all Mizar item kinds, for all microarticles Ak, for
all articles A of the Mizar Mathematical Library is a rather expensive computation (for some Mizar articles, this process can take several hours). It is much
slower than the method used for Coq described in Section 3. However the result
is truly minimized, which is important for many applications of dependencies.
Additionally, we have already developed some heuristics that help to ﬁnd s′, and
these already do perform tolerably fast.
Comparison of the Methods
Some observations comparing the Coq and Mizar dependency computation can
be drawn generally, without comparing the actual data as done in the following
sections. Dependencies in the case of CoRN are generated by hooking into the
actual code and are thus quite exactly mirroring the work of the proof assistant.
In the case of Mizar, dependencies are approximated from above. The dependency graph in this case starts with an over-approximation of what is known to
be suﬃcient for an item to be Mizar-veriﬁable and then successively reﬁnes this
over-approximation toward a minimal set of suﬃcient conditions. A signiﬁcant
diﬀerence is that the dependencies in Coq are not minimized: the dependency
tracking there tells us exactly the dependencies that were used by Coq (in the
particular context) when a certain command is run. Thus, if for example the
context is rich, and redundant dependencies are used by some exhaustive strategies, we will not detect their redundancy. On the other hand, in Mizar we do not
12 Namely, theorems, schemes, top-level lemmas, deﬁnitional theorems, deﬁnientia, patterns, registrations, and constructors. See for a discussion of these item kinds.
13 There is always one minimal sublist, since we assume that A is Mizar-veriﬁable to
begin with.
rely on the proof assistant reporting how it exactly works, and instead try to exhaustively minimize the set of dependencies, until an error occurs. This process
is more computationally intensive, however, it guarantees minimality (relative
to the proof assistant’s power) which is interesting for many of the applications
mentioned below.
Another diﬀerence is in the coverage of non-logical constructs. Practically
every resource necessary for a veriﬁcation of a Mizar article is an explicit part
of the article’s environment. Thus, it is easy to minimize not just the strictly
logical dependencies, but also the non-logical ones, like the sets of symbols and
notations needed for a particular item, or particular automations like deﬁnitional
expansions. For LCF-based proof assistants, this typically implies further work
on the dependency tracking.
Evaluation, Experiments, and Applications
Dependency extraction for CoRN and MML
We use the dependency extraction methods described in 3 and 4 to obtain ﬁne
dependency data for the CoRN library and an initial 100 article fragment of the
MML. As described above, for CoRN, we use the dependency exporter implemented directly using the Coq code base. The export is thus approximately as
fast as the Coq processing of CoRN itself, taking about 40 minutes on contemporary hardware. The product are for each CoRN ﬁle a corresponding ﬁle with
dependencies, which have altogether about 65 MB. This information is then
post-processed by standard UNIX and other tools into the dependency graph
discussed below.
For Mizar and MML we use the brute-force dependency extraction approach
discussed above. This takes signiﬁcantly longer than Mizar processing alone, also
because of the number of preprocessing and normalization steps that need to be
done when splitting articles into micro-articles. For our data this now takes
about one day for the initial 100 article fragment of the MML, the main share of
this time being spent on minimizing the large numbers of items used implicitly
by Mizar. Note that in this implementation we are initially more interested in
achieving completeness and minimality rather than eﬃciency, and a number of
available optimizations can reduce this time signiﬁcantly14. The data obtained
are again post-processed by standard UNIX tools into the dependency graphs.
In order to compare the beneﬁts of having ﬁne dependencies, we also compute
for each library the full ﬁle-based dependency graph for all items. These graphs
emulate the current dumb ﬁle-based treatment of dependencies in these libraries:
each time an item is changed in some ﬁle, all items in the depending ﬁles have
to be re-veriﬁed. The two kinds of graphs for both libraries are then compared
in Table 1.
14 For example a very simple recent optimization done for theorems, deﬁnitions, and
schemes, has reduced the processing time in half.
The graphs conﬁrm our initial intuition that having the ﬁne dependencies
will signiﬁcantly speed up partial recompilation of the large libraries, which is
especially interesting in the CoRN and MML formal wikis that we develop.15
For example, the average number of items that need to be recompiled when a
random item is changed has dropped about seven times for CoRN, and about
ﬁve times for Mizar. The medians for these numbers are even more interesting,
increasing to ﬁfteen for Mizar. The diﬀerence between MML and CoRN is also
quite interesting, but it is hard to draw any conclusions. The corpora diﬀer in
their content and use diﬀerent styles and techniques.
MML-100/item
MML-100/ﬁle
21 082 287
24 385 358
34 974 804
Deps Number of dependency edges
TDeps Number of transitive dependency edges
P Probability that given two randomly chosen items, one depends (directly or indirectly) on the other, or vice versa.
ARL Average number of items recompiled if one item is changed.
MRL Median number of items recompiled if one item is changed.
Table 1. Statistics of the item-based and ﬁle-based dependencies for CoRN and MML
CoRN/item: reverse dependencies
CoRN/ﬁle: reverse dependencies
Fig. 1. Cumulative transitive reverse dependencies for CoRN: ﬁle-based vs. item-based
Another interesting new statistics given in Table 6.1 is the information about
the number and structure of explicit and implicit dependencies that we have done
for Mizar. Explicit dependencies are anything that is already mentioned in the
original text. Implicit dependencies are everything else, for example dependencies on type mechanisms. Note that the ratio of implicit dependencies is very
signiﬁcant, which suggests that handling them precisely can be quite necessary
for the learning and ATP experiments conducted in the next section.
15 
1500 3000 4500 6000 7500 9000
MML/item: reverse dependencies
MML/ﬁle: reverse dependencies
Fig. 2. Cumulative transitive reverse dependencies for MML: ﬁle-based vs. item-based
theorem top-level lemma deﬁnition scheme registration
Table 2. Statistics of Mizar direct dependencies from and to diﬀerent items
Dependency analysis for AI-based proof assistance
The knowledge of how a large number of theorems are proved is used by mathematicians to direct their new proof attempts and theory developments. In the
same way, the precise formal proof knowledge that we now have can be used for
directing formal automated theorem proving (ATP) systems and meta-systems
over the large mathematical libraries. In we provide an initial evaluation of
the usefulness of our MML dependency data for machine learning of such proof
guidance of ﬁrst-order ATPs.
These experiments are conducted on a set of 2078 problems extracted from
the Mizar library and translated to ﬁrst-order ATP format. We emulate the
growth of the Mizar library , by considering all
previous theorems and deﬁnitions when a new conjecture is attempted (i.e., when
a new theorem is formulated by an author, requiring a proof). The ATP problems
thus become very large, containing thousands of the previously proved formulas
as available axioms, which obviously makes automated theorem proving quite
diﬃcult, see e.g. and for details. We run the state-of-the-art Vampire-
SInE ATP system on these large problems, and solve 567 of them (with
a 10-second timelimit). Then, instead of attacking such large problems directly,
we learn proof relevance from all previous ﬁne-grained proof dependencies, using
machine learning with a naive Bayes classiﬁer. This technique works surprisingly
well: in comparison with running Vampire-SInE directly on the large problems,
the problems pruned by such trained machine learner can be proved by Vampire
in 717 cases, i.e., the eﬃciency of the automated theorem proving is raised by
about 30% when we apply the knowledge about previous proof dependencies,
which is a very signiﬁcant advance in the world of automated theorem proving,
where the search complexity is typically superexponential.
In we further leverage this automated reasoning technique by scaling the
dependency analysis to the whole MML, and attempting a fully automated proof
for every MML theorem. This yields the so-far largest number of fully automated
proofs over the whole MML, allowing us (using the precise formal dependencies
of the ATP and MML proofs) to attempt an initial comparison of human and
automated proofs in general mathematics.
Interactive editing with ﬁne-grained dependencies
A particular practical use of ﬁne dependencies (initially motivating the work
done on Coq dependencies in 3) is for advanced interactive editing. tmEgg 
is a TEXmacs-based user interface to Coq.16 Its main purpose is to integrate
formal mathematics done in Coq in a more general document (such as course
notes or journal article) without forcing the document to follow the structure of
the formal mathematics contained therein.
For example, it does not require that the order in which the mathematical
constructs appear in the document be the same as the order in which they are
presented to Coq. As one would expect, the latter must respect the constraints
inherent to the incremental construction of the formal mathematics, such as a
lemma being proven before it is used in the proof of a theorem or a deﬁnition
being made before the deﬁned construct is used.
However, the presentation the author would like to put in the document may
not strictly respect these constraints. For example, clarity of exposition may
beneﬁt from ﬁrst presenting the proof of the main theorem, making it clear how
each lemma being used is useful, and then only go through all lemmas. Or a
didactic presentation of a subject may ﬁrst want to go through some examples
before presenting the full deﬁnitions for the concepts being manipulated.
tmEgg thus allows the mathematical constructs to be in any order in the
document, and uses the dependency information to dynamically — and lazily —
load any construct necessary to perform the requested action. For example, if
the requested action is “check the proof of this theorem”, it will automatically
load all deﬁnitions and lemmas used by the statement or proof of the theorem.
An interactive editor presents slightly diﬀerent requirements than the batch
recompilation scenario of a mathematical library described in 6.1. One such
diﬀerence is that an interactive editor needs the dependency information, as
part of the interactive session, for partial in-progress proofs. Indeed, if any inprogress proof depends on an item T , and the user wishes to change or unload
(remove from the environment) T , then the part of the in-progress proof that
depends on T has to be undone, even if the dependency is opaque.
16 The dependency tracking for Coq was actually started by the second author as part
of the development of tmEgg. This facility has been already integrated in the oﬃcial
release of Coq. Since then this facility was extended to be able to treat the whole of
the CoRN library. These changes are not yet included in the oﬃcial release of Coq.
Related Work
Related work exists in the ﬁrst-order ATP ﬁeld, where a number of systems
can today output the axioms needed for a particular proof. Purely semantic
(proof object) dependencies have been extracted several times for several ITPs,
for example by Bertot and the Helm project for Coq , and Obua and
McLaughlin for HOL Light and Isabelle. The focus of the latter two dependency
extractions is on cross-veriﬁcation, and are based on quite low-level (proof object)
mechanisms. A higher-level17 semantic dependency exporter for HOL Light was
recently implemented by Adams for his work on HOL Light re-veriﬁcation in
HOL Zero. This could be usable as a basis for extending our applications to the
core HOL Light library and the related large Flyspeck library. The Coq/CoRN
approach quite likely easily scales to other large Coq libraries, like for example
the one developed in the Math Components project . Our focus in this work
is wider than the semantic-only eﬀorts: We attempt to get the full information
about all implicit mechanisms (including syntactic mechanisms), and we are
interested in using the information for smart re-compilation, which requires to
track much more than just the purely semantic or low-level information.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have tried to show the importance and attractiveness of formal
dependencies. We have implemented and used two very diﬀerent techniques to
elicit ﬁne-grained proof dependencies for two very diﬀerent proof assistants and
two very diﬀerent large formal mathematical libraries. This provides enough con-
ﬁdence that our approaches will scale to other important libraries and assistants,
and our techniques and the derived beneﬁts will be usable in other contexts.
Mathematics is being increasingly encoded in a computer-understandable
(formal) and in-principle-veriﬁable way. The results are increasingly large interdependent computer-understandable libraries of mathematical knowledge. (Collaborative) development and refactoring of such large libraries requires advanced
computer support, providing fast computation and analysis of dependencies, and
fast re-veriﬁcation methods based on the dependency information. As such automated assistance tools reach greater and greater reasoning power, the cost/beneﬁt ratio of doing formal mathematics decreases.
Given our previous work on several parts of this program, providing exact dependency analysis and linking it to the other important tools seems to
be a straightforward choice. Even though the links to proof automation, fast
large-scale refactoring, and proof analysis, are very fresh, it is our hope that
the signiﬁcant performance boosts already suﬃciently demonstrate the importance of good formal dependency analysis for formal mathematics, and for future
mathematics in general.
17 By higher-level we mean tracking higher-level constructs, like use of theorems and
tactics, not just tracking of the low-level primitive steps done in the proof-assistant’s