2005;14:1847-1850. Published online August 15, 2005.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
Christopher Paul Wild
Measurement in Molecular Epidemiology
Outstanding Challenge of Environmental Exposure
Complementing the Genome with an ''Exposome'': The
Updated Version
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0456
Access the most recent version of this article at:
Cited Articles
 
This article cites 31 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
Citing Articles
 
This article has been cited by 28 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
E-mail alerts
related to this article or journal.
Sign up to receive free email-alerts
Subscriptions
Reprints and
 
Publications Department at
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR
Permissions
 
Department at
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
American Association for Cancer Research
Copyright © 2005
on December 17, 2012
cebp.aacrjournals.org
Downloaded from
DOI:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0456
Complementing the Genome with an ‘‘Exposome’’:
The Outstanding Challenge of Environmental
Exposure Measurement in Molecular Epidemiology
Christopher Paul Wild
Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Leeds Institute of Genetics, Health
and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom
The sequencing and mapping of the human genome
provides a foundation for the elucidation of gene expression
and protein function, and the identification of the biochemical
pathways implicated in the natural history of chronic diseases,
including cancer, diabetes, and vascular and neurodegenerative diseases. This knowledge may consequently offer opportunities for a more effective treatment and improved patient
management. Genetic research of this kind captures the public
imagination in a positive manner and attracts political
attention. For example, the 2003 UK Government White Paper
on genetics (1), entitled ‘‘Our inheritance, our future: realising
the potential of genetics in the National Health Service,’’
highlighted the opportunities for tailored drug treatments and
gene therapy flowing from the sequencing and mapping of the
human genome. However, it was notable that this influential
document also drew attention to the use of genetic testing to
identify individuals at greatest susceptibility to chronic
diseases and the possibilities this raises for disease prevention.
Application of genetics in this context moves away from the
clinic towards the population and the observational methods
of epidemiology. The fruit of this research in terms of reduced
morbidity and mortality is therefore to be predominantly
realized through public health measures.
It is well known that the majority of genetic variants or
single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human genome are of
low penetrance, including genes implicated in metabolism of
environmental chemicals, immunity, lipid metabolism, and
hemostasis among others. The high prevalence of these single
nucleotide polymorphisms means that despite their low
penetrance, they may substantially contribute to population
disease burden (2). Nevertheless, the majority will do so only
in the presence of specific environmental exposures that in
themselves are of low penetrance. Environmental exposures
are acknowledged to play an overwhelmingly important role
in those common chronic diseases mentioned above, which
constitute the major health burden in economically developed
countries (3, 4). Despite this, many exposure-disease associations remain ill defined and the complex interplay with genetic
susceptibility is only beginning to be addressed. This raises the
question as to whether fundamental knowledge about genetics
will improve understanding of disease etiology at the
population level.
The new generation of mega-cohort studies, including the
UK Biobank or similar proposed US and Asian cohorts (5-8),
provides the framework for such investigations of genetic
variation, environment, lifestyle, and chronic disease. At the
same time, they represent substantial investment. For example,
UK Biobank will recruit half a million people at a cost of
around £60 million ($110 million) in the initial phase. The
proposal to establish a ‘‘Last Cohort’’ of 1 million people in the
United States (7) or a similar-sized Asian cohort (8) would
presumably exceed this sum. In each case, the high cost is
heavily influenced by the collection and banking of biological
material. This expense is predicated on the assumption that
biochemical and molecular measures on this material will
resolve the etiologic questions alluded to above. It is selfevident that unraveling of complex environmental and genetic
aetiologies demands that both environmental exposures and
genetic variation are reliably measured. Advances in statistical
methods and in bioinformatics in relation to large data sets are
also of critical importance.
The development of biomarkers is one avenue to improved
measurement of exposure, susceptibility (including genetic),
and disease in population studies, and the field of molecular
cancer epidemiology is founded on this trinity of biomarker
categories (9). The characterization of disease can be improved
by modern histopathology, particularly the application of
sophisticated molecular markers to subcategorize tumors to
homogenous groups within which etiology or therapy can be
better defined (10, 11). In parallel to advances in disease
classification, however, the balance of efforts to improve the
measurement of genetic and environmental risk factors has
dramatically changed over the last 15 years in a way that has
been less than ideal.
The ease of genotyping following the introduction of the
PCR in the late 1980s and 1990s saw a major shift in effort and
resources, away from development of accurate exposure
biomarkers towards the conduct of gene-disease association
studies. Allied to the relatively trivial technical demands of
genotyping, these measures, by consequence of the fact that
they were unchanging over time, were well suited to classic
case-control study design. For laboratories involved in
molecular cancer epidemiology, gene-disease association studies offered rapid gains in research output. The literature is now
replete with meta-analyses of these data. The studies that have
been conducted have, by some accounts, yielded only a
modicum of success with relatively few reproducible findings
(see for example ref. 12). More recently, improvements in
study design have been suggested, notably by increasing
subject numbers and by analyzing multiple polymorphisms, of
functional relevance (13). A more comprehensive coverage of
the genome and the possibility to examine the interplay
between single nucleotide polymorphisms are now feasible
through the application of microarray technology (14). It is
predictable that as costs decrease, there will emerge analyses of
existing studies on a grander scale. The consequence may not
be greater clarity but a greater number of chance findings and
an increasing difficulty of dealing with the sheer volume of
data in the absence of parallel advances in data analysis.
Things may get worse before they get better.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(8):1847 – 50
Grant support: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (USA) grant no. ES06052.
Copyright D 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0456
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(8). August 2005
American Association for Cancer Research
Copyright © 2005
on December 17, 2012
cebp.aacrjournals.org
Downloaded from
DOI:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0456
Partially as a consequence of the emphasis on genotyping,
the accurate assessment of many environmental exposures
remains an outstanding and largely unmet challenge in cancer
epidemiology. As measurement of one half of the gene:environment equation continues to be refined, the other remains
subject to a large degree of misclassification (15). In this
imbalance, we risk adopting the image of the male fiddler crab
(Uca pugnax), a species characterized by one huge welldeveloped claw (growing to 65% of its total body weight)
waved proudly to attract a mate, but contrasting almost
comically with its second, apparently underdeveloped one; the
analogy breaks down of course in that the claws of the fiddler
crab are adapted to purpose.
The imbalance in measurement precision of genes and
environment has consequences, most fundamentally in compromising the ability to fully derive public health benefits from
expenditure on the human genome and the aforementioned
cohort studies. There is a desperate need to develop methods
with the same precision for an individual’s environmental
exposure as we have for the individual’s genome. I would like
to suggest that there is need for an ‘‘exposome’’ to match the
‘‘genome.’’ This concept of an exposome may be useful in
drawing attention to the need for methodologic developments
in exposure assessment.
At its most complete, the exposome encompasses life-course
environmental exposures (including lifestyle factors), from the
prenatal period onwards. Developing reliable measurement
tools for such a complete exposure history is extremely
challenging. Unlike the genome, the exposome is a highly
variable and dynamic entity that evolves throughout the
lifetime of the individual. It is not without good cause that
progress has been limited in meeting this goal. However, the
methodologic challenge may not be more daunting than the one
faced two decades ago of investigating an estimated 10 million
single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human genome.
In addition, as with the genome, even a partial, targeted
understanding of exposure can provide substantial advances; a
prime example is the contribution of aflatoxin exposure
biomarkers to the assignment of hepatocellular carcinoma risk
in developing countries (16). Of course, biomarkers will only
be part of the solution and will need to be coupled with
increasingly refined questionnaire-based approaches. Nevertheless, it is the prospective cohort study design that best suits
the exposure biomarker approach, providing as it does
opportunities for repeat sampling to enable a broader timeframe of exposure assessment, coupled to the avoidance of
reverse causation by the collection of samples in advance of
disease onset.
Infectious disease epidemiology has extensively employed
exposure biomarkers. In the case of infections and cancer,
developmental work to establish validated laboratory assays
for antibodies to viral or bacterial antigens (e.g., hepatitis
viruses, human papilloma virus, and Helicobacter pylori) has
been central to understanding the etiologic role of these
agents in epidemiologic studies. For example, in the case of
H. pylori and gastric cancer, only 11 years elapsed between
identification of the organism in 1983 and its classification as
a human carcinogen by the IARC in 1994 (17). Similarly, in
the case of hepatitis B virus and liver cancer, it was the
availability of a sensitive and specific marker of infection
(hepatitis B surface antigen) that transformed the epidemiology that had earlier relied on less precise markers of
exposure, such as clinical history. These examples illustrate
the value of precise biomarkers of exposure in epidemiology.
The first generation of exposure biomarkers in molecular
cancer epidemiology was predominantly derived from the
paradigm of chemical carcinogenesis. This led to emphasis on
genotoxic chemicals and methods to measure carcinogen-
DNA adducts or carcinogen-protein adducts (as surrogates
for DNA adducts) and carcinogen metabolites in body fluids
(18, 19). There has been less emphasis on biomarkers of
exposure in light of other nongenotoxic, mechanistic paradigms, although many environmental risk factors act through
such mechanisms (e.g., receptor-mediated effects or alterations in cell proliferation).
The emphasis on DNA and protein adducts has undoubtedly
contributed substantially to establishing the biological plausibility of exposure-disease associations. Examples include
investigations of the association between genotypes for
carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes and adduct levels, or the
use of biomarkers as modifiable end points in short-term
intervention studies (20). In contrast, the application of
exposure biomarkers of this nature to etiologic studies is far
more limited. Aflatoxin is perhaps the prime example in which
the exposure biomarker permitted categorization of this
environmental agent as a human carcinogen (21, 22), others
include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in lung
cancer (23) and arylamine-hemoglobin adducts in bladder
cancer (24). Valuable progress is still being made in this area
and some chemical-specific markers have the advantage of
combining information on exposure with insights into individual susceptibility and mechanistic pathways (25). However,
even accepting that researchers in the exposure arena might
have been enticed away to genotype, it is still striking that the
number of successful applications of environmental exposure
biomarkers into etiologic studies is relatively modest. In
addition to the call for more commitment, there is also a need
for novel approaches.
In this context, it is pertinent to ask whether the new
‘‘omics’’ technologies of transcriptomics, proteomics, and
metabonomics can help unlock the problem of environmental
exposure assessment. Currently, these methods are mainly
applied to the understanding of disease mechanisms and
diagnosis. Their validity for exposure assessment primarily
revolves around whether specific exposures will be reflected
by altered levels of mRNA, proteins, or metabolites. Will the
‘‘omics’’ with their thousands of composite parts offer specific
signatures or fingerprints of environmental exposures across a
broad spectrum of mechanisms of action, both genotoxic and
nongenotoxic? Is this new technology in a position to permit a
step-change in exposure assessment?
There are indications that this is a fruitful area of research,
albeit one that to date is relatively unexplored. For example,
with respect to mRNA expression, studies of naturally occurring or industrial compounds with estrogen activity do alter the
expression of similar genes in vitro. A panel of 172 genes were
selected to create a customized DNA microarray that responded
to exposure to this class of compounds in a cell model system
(26). In vitro ionizing irradiation of human lymphocytes
induced alterations in expression of specific genes (27).
Subsequent studies in lymphocytes of patients undergoing
whole body irradiation revealed specific patterns of gene
induction and some of the affected genes were the same as
those identified from the in vitro studies (28). Microarray data
were confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR for specific genes,
illustrating the way in which initial screening can be translated
to low-density arrays of gene subsets for more routine analysis.
It was noteworthy that some genes responded to the first dose of
radiation but not the second, and there was considerable
heterogeneity in response between patients; both these observations are important when thinking of application to environmental exposures. Application of DNA microarray in a
population setting was shown when a panel of 36 candidate
reporter genes were identified that were able to discriminate
between smokers and nonsmokers (29). Importantly, expression
of the reporter genes was not correlated with potential
confounding factors such as alcohol, aspirin use, and vegetable
intake. As with the study of ionizing radiation, analyses of
mRNA were done in peripheral blood cells, suggesting that
such technology might be applicable at the population level.
Complementing the Genome with an Exposome
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(8). August 2005
American Association for Cancer Research
Copyright © 2005
on December 17, 2012
cebp.aacrjournals.org
Downloaded from
DOI:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0456
Both these studies provide some encouragement to the strategy
of identifying panels of genes responsive to specific exposures.
Proteomics, like transcriptomics, is being primarily explored
with a view to disease diagnosis and prognosis, identifying
panels of proteins that permit those with and without disease to
be discriminated. Currently, applications to human exposure
assessment do not seem to be common although investigations
in vitro with mobile-phone radiation have been reported (30).
Examination of the small molecule metabolites that constitute
the metabolome also offers opportunities to address exposure.
Metabolomics currently employs 1H nuclear magnetic resonance or liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry,
and it is estimated that the metabolome comprises of the order
of 3,000 major metabolites (31). One approach is to simply scale
up a metabolic profile by increasing the number of specific known
metabolites analyzed for a given chemical or class of chemical
exposure. The alternative is to use the metabolome to identify
altered patterns of metabolites, a metabolic fingerprint, in
analogous fashion to the gene and protein expression arrays
discussed above. An example comes from a study of mice
exposed to Schistosoma mansoni in which differences in urinary
metabolite fingerprints were obtained (32). The data pointed to
specific pathways (e.g. glycolysis and amino acid metabolism),
being affected by infection, illustrating the potential to also
obtain information on disease mechanisms using these methods. Of particular interest is a recent application to individuals
who changed from a non-soy to a soy-containing diet (33). As
with the patients subject to irradiation mentioned earlier, there
was considerable interindividual and temporal heterogeneity
in the plasma metabolome and this initially obscured any
effect of the dietary change. Principal component analysis
was used (as in the mouse study) to examine the intraindividual variation with consumption of the two diets, and
by this method differences in plasma profiles were seen.
Following further spectral filtering of the data to control for
interindividual variation, effects of the soy diet on plasma
metabolome began to emerge, including changes in metabolites relating to the lipoprotein profile. The potential
application of ‘‘omics’’ technologies to characterize dietary
exposures (34) therefore receives some support from this early
investigation.
This new generation of technologies requires extensive
research before judging whether they can provide the stepchange that is required in human exposure assessment. It
remains to be seen whether, in principle, mRNA, protein, or
metabolite expression can be specific and sensitive enough to
define exposures at low levels in human populations. It will be
important to understand whether complex mixtures or families
of chemicals act through the same pathways and can be
represented by common targets at the mRNA, protein, or
metabolite level on common mechanistic pathways. However,
the dynamic nature of each of these systems may militate
against long-term exposure assessment, unless some of the
changes prove stable over time. In addition to the necessity for
proof of principle, there is also the need for considerable
investment in technology with an eye from the outset to their
eventual application to large numbers of samples, of often
limited quantity. Purification procedures in the case of
metabolomics and proteomics will be essential to measure
rarer, possibly more informative, proteins or metabolites among
the background of quantitatively more dominant species.
Although not explicitly discussed here, the need for sophisticated statistical analysis emerges as crucial to any eventual
application. As with the earlier generation of exposure
biomarkers, a carefully planned strategy, starting with model
systems and small-scale human studies, is likely to be most
successful (20).
In conclusion, by their nature, prospective cohort studies
take time as well as money; given the challenges outlined here,
some of this time would seem to be well spent in developing
reliable exposure assessment tools. The concept of an
exposome may serve to highlight this requirement and to
balance the effort going towards characterization of the
genome. An extension of the current generation of biomarkers,
together with an evaluation of the new generation of ‘‘omics’’
technologies, has a crucial role to play in this regard (35).
However, advances will require increasing collaboration
between epidemiologists, biostatisticians, experts in bioinformatics, and laboratory and environmental scientists. In
addition, funding agencies must take a medium- to long-term
view and encourage research that focuses on improved
measures of environmental risk factors, an area that currently
seems to be less of a priority for support than many others in
the broad domain of medical research.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank his colleagues David Forman, Janet
Cade, Mark Gilthorpe, and Tricia McKinney for their comments on the