ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology
Vol. 18, No. 1, March 2010, 61–70
ISSN 0968-7769 print/ISSN 1741-1629 online
© 2010 Association for Learning Technology
DOI: 10.1080/09687761003657572
 
Self-regulation across time of first-generation online learners
Lucy Barnard-Braka*, Valerie Osland Patonb and William Y. Lanb
aEducational Psychology, Baylor University, Waco, Texas, USA; bTexas Tech University,
Lubbock, Texas, USA
Taylor and Francis
CALT_A_466266.sgm
 
10.1080/09687761003657572
ALT-J Research in Learning Technology
0968-7769 (print)/1741-1629 (online)
Original Article
Taylor & Francis
1000000March 2010
Dr LucyBarnard-Brak
 
Self-regulatory skills have been associated with positive outcomes for learners. In
the current study, we examined the self-regulatory skills of students who are firstgeneration online learners over the course of their first semester of online
instruction. The purpose of this study is to determine whether the online selfregulatory skills of learners changed across time as associated with being
immersed in their first online learning environment. The results of the current
study indicate no significant differences in the online self-regulatory skills of
learners across time. Results suggest that environmental factors such as being
immersed in an online learning environment for the first time is not, in and of
itself, associated with the development of self-regulatory skills of online learners.
We conclude that the design of online courses needs to consider ways of
developing self-regulatory skills as these skills are not automatically developed
with students’ online learning experiences.
Keywords: self-regulation; online learning
Introduction
Today’s students are among the first generation of online learners. First-generation
online learners refer to those learners whose parents and preceding generations did
not learn via the Internet. Given the age frame of the participants in the current study,
none of the parents or preceding generations of the participants could have learnt
online. These first-generation online learners manage issues that their traditional,
face-to-face counterparts do not. One of these issues is the self-regulation of their
learning process. The development of self-regulation skills in online learning is especially crucial for two reasons. First, online learning environments have been noted as
requiring students to employ more self-regulatory skills . Second, self-regulatory skills have been noted as being positively associated
with academic achievement . The engagement of these selfregulatory skills refers to those volitional behaviours on the part of the individual to
regulate, manage, and navigate a situation or environment successfully. Therefore,
the study of self-regulation in online learners is especially relevant to the academic
success of this first generation of online learners.
This study was an examination of the self-regulation of students who are firstgeneration online learners over the period of their first semester of online instruction.
*Corresponding author. Email: 
L. Barnard-Brak et al.
Self-regulation of learning in the online versus face-to-face learning environments is
fundamentally different as these students in the online learning environment must be
more autonomous and proactive in their learning given the decreased interaction with
instructors or peers . Thus, students in the online learning environment
must engage in self-regulated learning behaviours more frequently. As such, there is
a distinct body of literature that examines self-regulation in the online learning environment . The purpose of this study was to determine
whether the online self-regulatory skills of learners changed across time as associated
with being immersed in their first online learning environment. The context of learning, including learning environments, has been suggested as influencing the way
students approach their learning. The effects of environment on learning have often
been assumed and, thus, rarely examined in empirical research . Meece has noted that there is a need to examine the
longitudinal stability of self-regulation in learning over time. Vermetten, Vermunt,
and Lodewijks have echoed this sentiment and documented the scarcity of
longitudinal research regarding the learning strategies of students in higher education. This paucity of research would indicate the need for further examination of selfregulation of online learners across time. However, in measuring a construct related
to the online self-regulation of learners, Arbaugh found “… little to no significant
change in students’ perceptions of online learning between their first online course
and subsequent online courses …” . Students’ perceptions of online
learning may be related to their self-regulatory skills in online learning, but this finding does not provide information as to the development of self-regulatory skills in
online learning.
From a social cognitive perspective, the interaction of personal, behavioural, and
environmental factors have been suggested as influencing the development of selfregulation across time . The
form of the developmental process of self-regulation has been indicated as being
cyclical in nature . The cyclical nature of this process would suggest
that each of these factors (e.g. personal, behavioural, and environmental) would
change and adjust through each cycle. Thus, at each stage of the cycle, students’ learning would interact with these factors, which would lead to changes in their learning
strategies and behaviours . In line with the cyclical view of the
development of self-regulation, Zimmerman proposed a three-phase model.
The first phase, the forethought phase, refers to motivational and strategic processes
that precede and set the stage for performance – including, but not limited to: goalsetting; attribution; self-efficacy of the undertaking tasks; and the intrinsic motivation
to perform the task. The second phase, the performance control or volitional phase,
consists of those processes during learning such as attention, affect, and monitoring
action. In the third and final phase, the self-reflection phase, individuals respond to
their efforts by monitoring the outcomes of their performance. For example, an individual may have the forethought of goal-setting as part of the first phase. Yet, during
the actual performance of the attempted goal-related task, individuals will make social
comparisons by attending to the performance of others they view as similarly situated.
During the third and final self-reflection phase, the individual will self-evaluate based
upon these social comparisons and adjust their forethought for the next task. This
social cognitive perspective on the development of self-regulation in learning presents
a theoretical framework from which these skills may be viewed.
ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology
In viewing the development of self-regulated online learning behaviours from a
social cognitive perspective, Schunk notes that self-regulated learning behaviours in general initially develop from the influence of environmental factors rather
than the influence of personal or behavioural factors. Across time, the influential
source in the development of self-regulation will shift from these environmental
factors to more personal factors as the skill or behaviour becomes more internalised
by the individual rather than being socially or environmentally influenced . Thus, for first-generation online learners in their first semester of their respective online degree programmes, the development of self-regulated learning behaviours
would appear to initially develop from the influence of environmental factors such as
through the online learning environment. Furthermore, Schunk indicates that these
self-regulated behaviours are “highly context dependent” such that the
development of self-regulated learning behaviours in online environments must be
examined exclusively as these behaviours will not develop equally across all domains
or in all learning situations. With regard to the time that these behaviours would take
to develop, a student’s self-regulated learning behaviours would appear to modify as
they receive feedback from their graded assignments, examinations, instructor, and
even other students as to their performance in the course under a social cognitive
perspective. Thus, in view of this theoretical perspective, the self-regulated learning
behaviours of a student could change quite quickly depending upon the context of the
learning environment.
In examining recent extant research regarding self-regulation in the online learning environment, Lynch and Dembo examined the relationship between selfregulation and online learning in a blended learning context. While the results of
Lynch and Dembo did not indicate a strong relationship between self-regulated
learning skills and academic performance in the online learning environment, they
noted that their sample appeared to be highly self-regulated and future research would
have to re-examine this relationship between self-regulation and online learning
performance. Barnard, Paton, and Lan found that these self-regulated learning
skills appeared to function as a mediator in the relationship between course perceptions and academic achievement in the online learning environment. In examining
these skills as a mediator, Barnard, Lan et al. further examined the relationship
between epistemological beliefs and online self-regulated learning skills, indicating
that these self-regulated learning skills in the online learning environment act as a
mediating variable in the relationship between epistemological beliefs and academic
achievement.
The purpose of this study is to examine the development of self-regulated learning
behaviours in an online learning environment across the first semester of enrolment in
an online degree programme. The online course matriculation itself is the intervention
or phenomenon examined as without supplemental intervention with regard to selfregulated learning skills or behaviours. While we assume that these participants
choosing to enrol into a course with an online format would be at least somewhat
familiar and comfortable with the online environment, none of the participants in the
current study had ever enrolled in an online course. In this sense, we examined
the self-regulated learning behaviours of participants before and after matriculating in
the online learning environment without the introduction of any specific intervention
as to these skills. To achieve this purpose, we examined two research questions to
achieve the purpose of the study. The first research question concerns whether the
overall self-regulatory skills of students enrolled in their first semester of online
L. Barnard-Brak et al.
courses would significantly change over the course of the semester. The examination
of this first research question would suggest the importance of the context of the learning environment as influencing the development of self-regulatory skills. This finding
would provide evidence towards the social cognitive perspective of self-regulation as
developing from the cyclical interaction of personal, behavioural, and environmental
factors, especially with respect to those environmental factors such as context of the
learning environment. The second research question concerns whether certain subsets
of self-regulatory skills of students enrolled in their first semester of online courses
would significantly change over the course of a semester. First-generation online
learners were chosen as the unit for analysis as the current generation represents the
first generation of individuals who not only interact with an online environment but
formally learn in this environment. As such, the self-regulation of these individuals
before and after their matriculating online is particularly worthy of study. These firstgeneration online learners are not only the first generation of world web users but also
the first generation of individuals who access formal higher education through the
online learning environment.
Participants
We sampled from a population of all students enrolled in their first semester of
programmes offered online at a large, public university located in the southwestern
United States. This sampling frame consisted of 209 students with unduplicated, deliverable email addresses. These students were contacted to complete a pre survey online
within the first four weeks of the semester and then a post survey online during the
last four weeks of the semester. Of those 209 students, 101 students completed the pre
survey. Of those 101 students who completed the pre survey, 44 also completed the
post survey. Across the two data collection time points, the resulting response rate was
approximately 21%. In performing a priori power analyses for a paired-sample dependent t-test, analyses indicate power (1 – β) of 0.81 and with α = 0.05 may be achieved
by a sample of 34 respondents. Among those students who completed both the pre and
post surveys, approximately 77% (n = 34) were female while approximately 70% (n
= 31) identified themselves as white and approximately 21% (n = 9) identified themselves as Hispanic. The ethnic distribution of students may be considered typical for
students matriculating at the university studied. The student gender distribution may
also be considered representative of those students who are enrolled in programmes
offered online or at a distance across the United States . Respondents were enrolled in 14 different academic degree
programmes and listed home addresses in 21 different US postal zip codes. The average age of students in the sample was approximately 39.55 years old (standard deviation = 10.11), ranging from 18 years old to 55 years old. While students enrolled in
courses offered online or at a distance have been indicated as being typically older than
traditionally enrolled students , age may have
an impact on the self-regulated learning behaviours of students, which we should note.
We should also note that the definition of a generation appears to be very much culturally bound. For instance, in contemporary western culture, women typically start
having children at an older age. As such, the length of a generation is typically longer
(e.g. 25.7 years for the United States and 27.4 years in the United Kingdom) . Thus, in the current study, the age range of
ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology
37 years may be considered one generation or two. For the purposes of the current
study, we will consider this span of 37 years as one generation as these data were
normally distributed.
To measure self-regulation in online learning, the short form of the Online Selfregulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) was employed .
The OSLQ is a 24-item scale with a five-point Likert-type response format having
values ranging from strongly agree (five) to strongly disagree (one). Higher scores on
this scale indicate higher levels of self-regulation in online learning. The short form
of the OSLQ was developed from an 86-item long form of the instrument by examining internal consistency and exploratory factor analyses results for data collected from
the long form . The long form of the instrument was developed to
reflect a multi-dimensional conception of self-regulated learning as derived from the
theoretical framework of Zimmerman . In contrast to the long form of the
instrument, the short form consists of six, important constructs of self-regulation in
online learning, including: environment structuring; goal-setting; time management;
help-seeking; task strategies; and self-evaluation. Table 1 presents the internal consistencies of scores obtained for each subscale for both the pre and post surveys.
Nunnally has suggested that score reliability of 0.70 or better is acceptable
when used in basic social science research, such as in this study. Also presented in
Table 1, the Pearson’s r correlations were calculated across the two surveys for each
subscale as a measure of test–retest reliability.
A copy of the OSLQ administered may be obtained from the first author. Table 2
presents an example item from each subscale.
The current study was conducted at an American university, which typically matriculates on an 18-week semester basis during the North American fall and spring. The
current study was conducted during the spring 2008 semester at a large, public university located in the southwestern United States. The course delivery format service for
this institution was WebCT. WebCT, currently owned by Blackboard, is an online
learning course management and delivery system purchased by institutions of higher
education for the purpose of online learning. Students were contacted via email
address before the study was to take place to inform them of the nature of the study.
Internal consistencies for each subscale.
Pre-survey α
Post-survey α
Environment structuring
Goal-setting
Time management
Help-seeking
Task strategies
Self evaluation
total scale
L. Barnard-Brak et al.
Once contacted about the study, all students were given the choice to opt out of the
study and not to receive further email messages regarding participation. As part of the
pre survey, students were asked to confirm that this was their first semester enrolled
in courses offered online. Data were downloaded from Survey Monkey, a web-based
survey service, into Microsoft Excel format and then imported into SPSS (version
15.0). All analyses were performed in SPSS. The researchers summed the total score
for the online self-regulation learning scale for each individual. Values for any missing data were imputed using a linear trend at point estimation available in SPSS. No
pattern emerged among the missing data, which were subsequently omitted from
To answer the first research question, a paired-sample dependent t-test was performed
to examine whether there were significant differences in overall self-regulatory skills
in online learning across the two points. To answer the second research question,
paired-sample dependent t-tests were performed to examine whether there were
significant differences in self-regulatory skills in online learning across the two points
on a subscale level. For statistically significant results, values for Cohen’s d were
calculated as measures of effect size – where a value of 0.20 may be interpreted as a
small effect, 0.50 as a medium effect size, and 0.80 and greater as a large effect size
 .
In answering the first research question, results indicate no significant difference in
the overall self-regulatory skills of online learners across the two time points, t(43) =
0.404, p = 0.688. In answering the second research question, the results for each
subscale of the self-regulatory skills of online learners will be discussed. With respect
to environment structuring, results indicate no significant difference in this subset
of self-regulatory skills of online learners across the two time points, t(43) = 1.110,
p = 0.273. For the subset self-regulatory skill of goal-setting, results indicate no
significant difference in this subscale of self-regulatory skills of online learners across
the two time points, t(43) = 0.519, p = 0.607. Among the time management subscale
of self-regulatory skills, there was no significant difference in self-regulatory skills of
Example Item from each subscale.
Example item
Environment structuring
I find a comfortable place to study.
Goal-setting
I keep a high standard for my learning in my online courses.
Time management
I allocate extra studying time for my online courses because
I know it is time-demanding.
Help-seeking
If needed, I try to meet my classmates face-to-face.
Task strategies
I prepare my questions before joining in the chat room and
discussion.
Self evaluation
I communicate with my classmates to find out how I am doing
in my online classes.
ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology
online learners across the two time points, t(43) = 0.180, p = 0.858. With respect to
the help seeking subset of self-regulatory skills, results indicate no significant
difference in self-regulatory skills of online learners across the two time points, t(43)
= 0.313, p = 0.755. For the subscale of task strategies, there was no significant difference in self-regulatory skills of online learners across the two time points, t(43) =
0.123, p = 0.903. Among the self-evaluation subscale of self-regulatory skills, results
indicate no significant difference in self-regulatory skills of online learners across the
two time points, t(43) = 0.032, p = 0.975. Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics for
each subscale as well as the total scale for both the pre and post surveys.
Discussion
Results have indicated no significant differences in the online self-regulatory skills
of learners across time overall or on the subscale level. These non-significant results
may reflect a slower or no development at all of self-regulatory skills in online
learners across time. As members of the first generation of online learners, one
academic semester may not be long enough to observe significant differences in the
online self-regulatory skills of learners according to the theoretical perspective
adopted. Additionally, the introduction of a new learning environment alone, the
online learning environment, may not be sufficient to trigger significant change in
the self-regulatory skills of learners online. Vermetten, Vermunt, and Lodewijks
 have indicated that those learners enrolled in their first semester of an online
or distance programme may experience friction and may require time to adapt to the
new learning environment. This period of adaptation to the online learning environment may inhibit the development of self-regulatory skills among online learners as
noted by Vermetten, Vermunt, and Lodewijks . We hypothesise that secondgeneration online learners may be more able to quickly adapt to learning in the
online environment than first-generation online learners given technological
advances and previous exposure to online environments. Thus, the results of the
current study represent basic research indicating that simply immersing a student in
an online learning environment does not automatically help a student develop as a
self-regulated learner.
The results of the current study are particularly relevant as they suggest, at the
very least, the direction of future research with respect to examining the development
of self-regulatory skills across time among online learners. Future research should
consider examining self-regulated learning skills in view of other metacognitive
Descriptive statistics for each subscale.
Pre survey
Post survey
Environment structuring
M = 18.30, SD = 2.14
M = 17.78, SD = 2.27
Goal-setting
M = 23.95, SD = 1.38
M = 24.09, SD = 1.49
Time management
M = 11.22, SD = 2.31
M = 11.30, SD = 2.10
Help-seeking
M = 13.88, SD = 2.78
M = 13.70, SD = 2.34
Task strategies
M = 12.74, SD = 2.87
M = 12.67, SD = 3.07
Self evaluation
M = 13.25, SD = 2.75
M = 13.23, SD = 2.55
total scale
M = 93.68, SD = 8.95
M = 92.90, SD = 9.09
Note: M, mean; SD, standard deviation.
L. Barnard-Brak et al.
factors such as epistemological beliefs. More importantly, the results of the current
study may suggest the diminished impact of a new learning environment as influencing the development of self-regulatory skills of online learners. This possible diminished impact of environment on the development of self-regulated learning suggests
that Zimmerman’s social cognitive perspective as self-regulation being the
product of the interaction of person, the environment, and their behaviour may
require modification. This possible change in theory regarding the development of
self-regulatory skills among online learners may include a re-evaluation of what is
meant by the term, environment. Learners taking courses offered online or at a
distance typically remain in the same physical environment before and after enrolment into an online or distance programme. This lack of having to physically attend
classes is, in fact, one of the many advantages of taking a course online or at a
distance. The term ‘environment’ may not be inclusive of online learning environments in the development of self-regulation for learners. Thus, environmental factors
may not be all that influential in the development of self-regulatory skills for online
learners. These results appear to suggest that personal and behavioural factors may
have more influence on the development of self-regulatory skills of online learners
than environment.
Smart first noted the bias against publishing non-significant results, finding
that only 9% of published studies had non-significant results. Csada, James, and Espie
 have provided two explanations for why non-significant results are so
uniformly not published: these studies are not submitted for publication, or these studies are rejected as result of bias in the review process. While this publication bias may
impede the dissemination of non-significant findings in scholarly journals, this does
not minimise the importance of findings for theory and practice. Csada, James, and
Espie note that the consequence of “not publishing non-significant results can lead to
false decisions as to the warrantability of hypotheses” , such that readers
may be only aware of evidence supporting a hypothesis or theoretical perspective. As
a result, a hypothesis or theoretical perspective can begin to hold a privileged status
in scholarly literature.
While the theoretical implications of this study are important, the implications for
practice for online learning are equally relevant such that Chief Academic Officers at
institutions of higher education as part of the annual Sloan-C Online Survey have
noted that “a barrier to widespread adoption of online learning” was the fact that
“students need more discipline to succeed in online courses” . These findings that indicate a lack of significant development of self-regulatory
skills among first time online learners across time suggest the need for interventions
that foster self-regulatory skills in the online learning environment. The online learning environment can provide opportunities for first-time online learners to develop
self-regulatory skills and thus improve academic outcomes. These opportunities can
include, but are not limited to, providing students with: an editable, online calendar by
which they can note upcoming assignments and deadlines; a blog by which students
can access resources and discuss the course with other students; and a troubleshooting
web page to help students with frequently asked questions. The tools that educators
can provide to first time online learners to foster their self-regulatory behaviours are
limitless as technologies develop. As educators, we must intentionally develop student
self-regulatory skills through the design of the online learning environment. The
results of this study indicate the development of self-regulatory skills in the online
learning environment must not be treated as passive.
ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology