Integrative Methods for Analysing Big Data in
Precision Medicine
Vladimir Gligorijevi´c1,†, No¨el Malod-Dognin1,†, and Nataˇsa Prˇzulj1,*
1Department of Computing, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, United Kingdom
* 
†both authors contributed equally
We provide an overview of recent developments in big data analyses in the context of precision medicine and health informatics.
With the advance in technologies capturing molecular and medical data, we entered the area of Big Data in biology and
medicine. These data offer many opportunities to advance precision medicine. We outline key challenges in precision medicine
and present recent advances in data integration-based methods to uncover personalized information from big data produced
by various omics studies. We survey recent integrative methods for disease subtyping, bio-markers discovery and drug
repurposing, and list the tools that are available to domain scientists. Given the ever-growing nature of these big data, we
highlight key issues that big data integration methods will face.
1 Introduction
Precision medicine, also known as personalized, predictive, preventive and participatory (P4) medicine1, is an emerging
approach for individualizing the practice of medicine2. Prevention and treatment strategies that take into account individual
variability are not new; for example, blood-typing has been used to guide blood transfusion for more than a century, with a total
of 35 human blood groups being recognized by the International Society of Blood Transfusion.3 Similarly, gender, race, time
of ischaemia, cytomegalovirus and sero-type are taken into account to reduce the risk of rejecting organ transplantations4–7.
The challenge in applying the precision medicine concept to omics and clinical data sets of patient features that have become
available and that cannot be interpreted directly by medical practitioners due to their large sizes and complexities.
Big data is a broad term for data sets so large or complex that traditional data processing methods are inadequate. It is
often characterized by three Vs8: volume, which refers to the large size of the data, velocity, which refers to the high speed at
which data are generated, and variety, which refers to the heterogeneity of the data coming from different sources. All these
characteristics apply to currently available biological and medical datasets. Since the beginning of the Human Genome Project9,
novel technological developments led to the era of omics sciences. Using novel high-throughput capturing technologies, we are
now able to access the DNA of an individual (genetic data), the transcribed RNA over time (expression and co-expression data),
proteins (protein proﬁles and protein interaction data), metabolism (metabolic proﬁles) and epigenome (DNA methylation data),
among other data types10. The environment is also taken into account (e.g., nutrition and bacterial environment by nutriomics
and metagenomics, respectively)11,12, and also histopathological and medical imaging data are now subject to high throughput
capturing and analysis methods13–16.
Therefore, we are facing an increasing gap between our ability to generate big biomedical data and our ability to analyse
and interpret them17. In this context, it is not surprising that big data and precision medicine are jointly investigated. In 2011,
the “Big Data Research and Development Initiative” 1 was targeting personalized medicine through the GenISIS program
(Genomic Information System for Integrated Science) to enhance health care for Veterans. In 2012, the US National Institutes
of Health (NIH) launched the “Big Data to Knowledge” initiative, to harvest the wealth of information contained in biomedical
Big Data18. Finally, President Obama recently announced the “Precision Medicine” initiative 2, with an ambitious goal of
driving precision medicine by incorporating many different types of data, from genomes to microbiomes, with patient data
collected by health care providers and patients themselves.
Out of many challenges in precision medicine, here we focus on four related problems: patient sub-typing, bio-marker
discovery, drug repurposing and personalized treatment prediction. We provide a review of methods capable of integrative
analyses of multiple data types in addressing these problems.
1 
2 
Sub-typing and Bio-marker discovery.
Also known as patient stratiﬁcation, sub-typing is the task of identifying sub-populations
of patients that can be used to guide treatment procedures of a given individual belonging to the sub-population, and to predict
the outcomes. Sub-typing identiﬁes endotypes, which refer to sub-types in which patients are related by similarities in their
underlying disease mechanisms (i.e., to explain the diseases mechanisms)19, and verotypes, which refer to true populations of
similar patients for treatment purposes (i.e., to predict therapies for curing the patients)20. However, what precisely constitutes
endotypes and verotypes, as well as how they should be discovered, remains open. Despite varying deﬁnitions, sub-typing
remains a classiﬁcation task and an active and growing area of machine learning research (see Section 3.1). Diseases such
as cancer, autism, autoimmune diseases, cardiovascular diseases and Parkinson’s have all been studied through the lens of
subtyping21–23.
According to FDA, a bio-marker is any measurable diagnostic indicator that is used to assess the risk, or presence of a
disease24. Bio-marker discovery aims at ﬁnding features that are characteristic to particular patient sub-populations (e.g.,
speciﬁc gene mutations in tumour tissues, speciﬁc miRNAs, metabolites, etc.). The goal is that an individual is only tested
for bio-markers to decide whether or not she/he belongs to a speciﬁc patient sub-type. Bio-markers are considered key to
improving health-care and lowering medical costs25.
Drug repurposing and personalised treatment.
Drug repurposing refers to the identiﬁcation and development of new uses for
the existing, or abandoned pharmacotherapies. Capitalising on already known drugs allows for reducing the cost of developing
pharmacotherapies compared with de novo drug discovery and development26. With the availability of various omics data,
computational predictions of new drug candidates for repurposing have necessitated the development of many new methods for
data integration (see Section 3.2).
Drug repurposing is not only about identifying new targets for known drugs; preclinical evaluations also include predicting
therapeutic regimens (i.e., dose and frequency) and safety of the treatment (i.e., side effects). Bringing together patient
sub-typing and precise prediction of therapeutic treatment outcomes is key for deriving personalised treatments. For example,
the American Society of Clinical Oncology estimates that testing colon cancer patients for mutations in K-RAS gene would save
$604 million in drug costs annually; since patients with these mutations do not respond well to EGF inhibitors, it is preferable
to avoid giving them an inefﬁcient and potentially toxic treatment, which is also very expensive ($100,000 per treatment) 3.
In this paper, we give an overview of the available methods for analysing large and diverse biomedical data, introduce
concepts of data integration and classiﬁcation, and elaborate on the successes and limitations of Big Data approaches in
precision medicine.
2 Big Data
2.1 Avalanche of Omics data
With the recent advances in biomedical data capturing technologies, omics sciences produce ever increasing amounts of
biomedical data. We brieﬂy present key available omics data types, which are illustrated in Figure 1.
Genomics and exomics.
Genomics is a part of genetics that focuses on capturing whole genomes. Historically, the Human
Genome Project required 12 years and $3 billion to capture the ﬁrst human genome, with a ﬁnal release in 2003 reporting about
20,500 genes9. The ﬁrst commercial next generation sequencer (NGS), the Roche GS-FLX 454 , allowed
capturing the second human genome in two months27. In comparison, a modern NGS such as the Illumina HiSeq X is capable
of producing up to 16 human genomes worth of data per three-day run. Note that only 1-2% of a human’s genetic material
codes for genes, in DNA regions called exons. Exomics, which focuses on these smaller regions, leads to quicker and cheaper
sequencing28,29. Recently, the ability to perform sequencing of individual cells has provided novel insights into human biology
and diseases30,31. Heterogeneity in DNA sequence from one cell to another has unveiled the concept of mosaicism, i.e., the
presence of two or more populations of cells with different genotypes in one individual32. Cancer in particular has been studied
through the lens of genomic variation to ﬁnd driver mutations.
Epigenomics.
Epigenomics is the study of the complete set of epigenetic modiﬁcations of the genetic material of a cell.
These reversible modiﬁcations on DNA or histones affect gene expression and thus play a major role in gene regulation. High
throughput methods, such as ChipSeq and Bisulﬁt sequencing, allow for detection of epigenetic modiﬁcations, such as DNA
methylation, histone modiﬁcation and chromatin structure33,34. Epigenomics ﬁndings are cell-type speciﬁc and epigenetic
reprogramming has a clear role in cancer35,36.
Transcriptomics.
As opposed to DNA sequence, which is relatively static37, RNA reﬂects the dynamic state of a cell.
Transcriptomics aims at measuring the amount of transcribed genetic material over time. It includes both coding and non-coding
RNAs, whose functions are sometimes unknown38. Co-expressed genes (i.e., with similar expression patterns over time)
3 
Figure 1. Illustration of various omics data types.
have been shown to be likely regulated via the same mechanisms39 and differential expression patterns are used to identify
dysregulated genes in cancer40, predict possible drug-targets41 and cancer outcomes42.
Proteomics and interactomics.
While transcriptomics considers all transcribed RNAs, proteomics focuses on the produced
proteins, after all post-translational modiﬁcations (e.g., phosphorylation, glycolysation and lipidation). The human proteome is
several order of magnitude larger than the human genome; because of alternative promoters, alternative splicing, and mRNA
editing, the ≈25,000 human genes lead to ≈100,000 transcripts; with more than 300 different types of post-translational
modiﬁcations, the number of resulting proteins is estimated to be larger than 1,800,00043. Hight-throughput capture of
protein sequences is done via mass spectrometry experiments44. Interactions amongst proteins, or between proteins and other
molecules, are captured with high-throughput techniques, such as yeast-two-hybrid45 and afﬁnity-captured coupled with mass
spectrometry46. Interactomes and protein-protein interactions in particular, were successfully used to identify evolutionarily
conserved pathways, complexes and functional orthologs47–49.
Metabolomics, glycomics and ﬂuxomics.
A metabolite is any substance produced or consumed during metabolism (all
chemical processes in a cell). Metabolomics studies all chemical processes involving metabolites50. Metabolic proﬁles are
measured with mass-spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry. Glycomics is the branch of metabolomics that
studies glycomes, the sets of all sugars – free or in more complex molecules such as glycoproteins – in cells. Glycosylation is
the most intensive and complex post-translational modiﬁcation of proteins and glycans are known to be involved in cell growth
and development51, in the immune system52, in cell-to-cell communication53, in cancer and microbial diseases54,55. Fluxomics
refers to a range of methods in experimental and computational biology that attempt to identify, or predict the rates of metabolic
reactions in biological systems56.
Phenomics and exposomics.
Phenomics is an area of biology measuring phenomes – physical and biochemical traits of
organisms – as they change in response to genetic mutation and environmental inﬂuences. Genome wide association studies
(GWAS) are commonly used for detecting associations between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and common diseases
such as heart disease, diabetes, auto-immune diseases, and psychiatric disorders57. Exposomics encompasses all human
environmental (i.e. non-genetic) exposures from conception onwards. It includes, amongst others, exposure to toxic molecules,
drugs and radiation. Exposomics beneﬁts from continuous tracking that is now available for most of the key physiological
metrics (blood pressure, heart rhythm, brain waves, etc.) and environmental indices, such as air pollution, pollen count
and radiation. Even medical imaging, which was traditionally manually investigated, is now a subject of high-throughput
capturing14,15. For example, radiomics (the high-throughput capturing and analysis of medical radio images) recently lead to
connectomics, which captures and analyses brain connectivity maps.
Metagenomics.
Metagenomics aims at capturing human microbiomes, usually through 16S rRNA sequencing. Our bacterial
ﬂora has been shown to play an important role in various medical conditions12; for example, the bacterial ﬂora of the intestine is
known to modulate the effects of drugs involved in cancer treatments58. However, taking into account microbiota is challenging,
as human microbiome consists of circa 100 trillion microbial cells, which is about ten times the number of human cells59.
2.2 Biomedical data gets more complex
The complexity of biomedical data grows in two directions: in terms of the number of samples and in terms of heterogeneity.
The growing number of samples.
As capturing technologies are becoming faster and cheaper, the number of individuals for
whom data is available is quickly increasing. For example, the number of available human genomes/exomes increased almost
exponentially during the last decade: the ﬁrst human exome was released in 20039, while in 2012, 1,092 human genomes were
available60. Nowadays, the Exome Aggregation Consortium contains 60,706 unrelated human exomes. 4 The United Kingdom
government recently announced the project to map 100,000 human genomes by 20175 and the precision medicine initiative in
the US plans to map 1 million human genomes. Note that this increasing number of genome samples will also come at the price
of increasing variations in terms of genome quality. Next generation sequencers produce short reads that need to be assembled
into genomes. The quality of the assembled genome highly depends on the ratio between the sum of the short read lengths and
of the target genomic sequence length. This ratio is called the depth of the sequencing and it is expressed in terms of X (e.g.,
2X sequencing means that on average each nucleotide is covered by two short reads). While current sequencing uses ≈30X, a
recent study argues that high quality genomes may require ≈126X (refereed as deep sequencing)61.
Moreover, for the same individual, an increasing number of samples is captured; data can be collected over different
tissues, by using single cell genomics62, or on different conditions (e.g., before and after treatment). Finally, the time span
of available samples is increasing. For example, gene expression can be measured over time to assess the effect of drugs.
Recent developments of non-intrusive capturing techniques (e.g., fetal exome sequencing from maternal blood63 and magneticresonance-imaging (MRI), capturing brain connectivity maps from unborn babies to adults6) will allow collecting information
over the whole life span of an individual, which paves the way to personalized medicine from womb to tomb.
Increasing heterogeneity of captured data.
The number of different biological entities (e.g., genes, RNAs, proteins,
metabolites, drugs, diseases, etc.) for which data can be collected is increasing. The variety of available data is illustrated in
Table 1, which presents some of the well established large scale biomedical databases. The collected data are so large that even
basic data management is becoming challenging. US healthcare was already storing 150 exabytes (1018 Bytes) of data in 2011
and is expected to handle yottabytes of data (1024 Bytes) in the next few years 7.
These datasets are highly heterogeneous; data from the same type can be captured with different technologies having
varying coverage, bias and noise robustness (e.g., the different technologies for capturing protein-protein interactions64), and
the same applies across data types. Moreover, the large number of data sources poses data collection issues coming from the
lack of standard format in data repositories (so-called data-extraction problem in Big Data65).
3 Machine learning techniques
As described in the previous section, Big Data are of large-scale, diversity and complexity, and as such they require efﬁcient
algorithms for extracting knowledge hidden in them. Computational techniques that are used to analyse Big Data are either
based on statistical, machine learning (ML), or network-based (NB) methods104. These methods have already demonstrated
great potential in bridging the gap between production and interpretation of big data in precision medicine, but there is still a lot
of room for their improvements.
ML methods came into focus of Big Data analysis due to their prominent ability to collectively mine (integrate) large-scale,
diverse and heterogeneous biomedical data types, a foremost challenge in precision medicine and medical informatics105. Thus,
in this section, we mostly focus on ML methods for data integration, but we also mention some recent statistical and NB
methods for data integration.
ML methods can be divided into the following classes (see Fig. 2 for an illustration):
• supervised methods, such as classiﬁcation and regression, take as input training data samples with known labels. A
model is learned through a training process that maximises the accuracy of its performance on the training data set. The
model is then used for mapping new data samples to existing labels. For example, an input data can comprise patients
classiﬁed as cases and controls. A model is learned to maximise the difference between cases and controls and then
it is applied in classiﬁcation of new patients. Some of the widely used supervised techniques include Support Vector
Machines (SVM)106, Kernel-based methods107 and Logistic regression108.
4Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), Cambridge, MA ( [09/2015]
5 
6Developing Human Connectome Project, 
7Institute for Health Technology Transformation, 
NCBI Gene66
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene
Atlas of 59,500 human genes
www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA
487,409 Gene Ontology annotations for 48,569 human gene products
www.encodeproject.org
Functional annotations of coding/non-coding DNA elements
epigenomic
NCBI Epigenomics69
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/epigenomics
5,110 epigenetic modiﬁcations
4DGenome70
4dgenome.int-med.uiowa.edu/
3,095,881 experimental and predicted chromatin interactions
www.genboree.org/epigenomeatlas
Atlas of reference epigenomes
MethylomeDB71
www.neuroepigenomics.org/methylomedb
DNA methylomes of human brain cells
transcriptomic
NCBI GEO72
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo
1,912 human gene expression datasets
Expression Atlas73
www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa
Differential and baseline gene expression data
www.broadinstitute.org/cmap
∼7,000 expression proﬁles for 1,309 perturbagen compounds
COXPRESdb75
coxpresdb.jp
Co-expression of 19,803 human genes
GeneFriends76
genefriends.org
Co-expression of 159,184 human genes and transcripts
www.uniprot.org
Information about human proteome (69,693 proteins)
NeXtProt78
www.nextprot.org
Knowledgebase on 20,066 human proteins
RCSB PDB79
www.rcsb.org/pdb
Portal to 113,494 biological macromolecular 3D-structures
www.thehpp.org
Maps of human proteome on 44 normal and 20 cancer type tissues
www.ebi.ac.uk/intact
209,852 human protein-protein interactions
thebiogrid.org
215,952 human protein-protein interactions
ophid.utoronto.ca
183,524 (+ 55,985 predicted) protein-protein interactions
string-db.org
8,548,005 interactions between 20,457 proteins
metabolomic
www.hmdb.ca
Atlas of 41,993 human metabolites
KEGG Pathway86
www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway
298 human pathways
www.smpdb.ca
∼700 human metabolic and disease pathways
Reactome88
www.reactome.org
8,770 reactions in 1,887 human pathways
SugarBindDB89
sugarbind.expasy.org
1,256 interactions between 200 glycans and 551 pathogenic agents
UniCarbKB90
www.unicarbkb.org
3,740 glycan structure entries and 400 glycoproteins
KEGG Glycan91
www.genome.jp/kegg/glycan/
Glycan metabolic pathways
phenomic,exposomic,metagenomic
www.omim.org
Catalog of mendelian disorders and over 15,000 genes
NCBI dbGaP93
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap
Database of genotypes and phenotypes
GWAS Catalog94
www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/
Genome wide association studies, assaying ∼100,000 SNPs
cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic
Somatic mutations in cancer, with 3,480,051 coding mutations
cancergenome.nih.gov
Somatic mutations and expression data for ∼7,000 human tumors
DrugBank97
www.drugbank.ca
∼1,600 approved/illicit/experimental drugs with known gene targets
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
∼2×108 compounds and substances, with 57,335 gene targets.
www.t3db.org
∼3,600 common toxins and environmental pollutants
www.foodb.ca
∼28,000 food components/additives, with presumptive health effects
umcd.humanconnectomeproject.org
1,887 brain connectivity matrices from neuroimaging data
www.humanconnectome.org/data
MRI captured brain connectivity maps of 500 adult individuals
hmpdacc.org
11,000 samples of human microbiomes from 300 adult individuals
Table 1. Available data for human. The databases presented in the ﬁrst row contain genomic data. The databases presented
in the second row contain epigenomic data. The databases presented in the third row contain transcriptomic data. The databases
presented in the fourth row conatain proteomic data. The databases presented in the ﬁfth row contain metabolomic and
glycomic data. The databases presented in the sixth row contain phenomic, exposomic and metagenomic data.
• unsupervised methods, such as clustering and dimensionality reduction, take as input unlabelled data set. A model is
learned by revealing hidden patterns in the data and organising the data into meaningful subsets. These methods are often
used in molecular subtyping of cancer patients, or in discovering of patterns in gene expression data. Some of the widely
used unsupervised methods in precision medicine include hierarchical clustering109, K-means109 and its generalisations
including matrix factorization methods110.
• semi-supervised methods take as input a mixture of labelled and unlabelled samples. A model is learned to explain
the structure in the data as well as to make new predictions of unlabelled samples. For example, in predicting new
drug-disease associations, semi-supervised methods learn known drug-disease associations from labelled samples (i.e.,
prior knowledge), to predict novel drug-disease associations. This strategy is particularly suitable for data integration, as
is can incorporate various data types as prior knowledge. One of the most widely used such method is network-regularised
matrix factorization111.
Based on the type of data they integrate, the integration methods can be divided into homogeneous, where the same type of
data, but across multiple perspectives (e.g., experimental studies) is integrated, and heterogeneous, where multiple data types
in different formats are integrated. The later is computationally more challenging, because it requires a framework that can
Figure 2. A schematic illustration of the two main learning techniques in ML – supervised (left panel) and
unsupervised (right panel) learning. Left: In supervised learning a training dataset consists of samples with known class
labels, e.g., cases and controls. A model is learned by maximizing the difference between cases and controls and then a label
for a new sample is determined. Right: In unsupervised learning all samples are unlabelled. A model clusters samples into
different groups based on their similarity.
deal with heterogeneous data without transforming it and losing any information through the transformation. A majority of
the existing frameworks cannot cope with this issue and they require a pre-processing step prior to integration, where they
transform the data into a single representation. In Section 3.2, we discuss this issue in more detail and identify methods capable
of addressing this problem.
We survey recent integrative methods for disease sub-typing, biomarker discovery and drug repurposing, and provide a
summary listing computational tools that can be used by domain scientists for analysing of Big Data (see Table 2 for the list of
methods). The presented methods are chosen based on the following criteria: (1) the method is integrative (i.e., it considers
more than one data type) and is applied on biomedical Big Data; (2) the method is predominantly based on Machine Learning
(ML) techniques, although we also consider couple of network-based methods; and (3) the method has been used to address
one of the the four different precision medicine challenges (see Section 1).
3.1 Computational methods for disease sub-typing and bio-marker discovery
Disease sub-typing (or disease stratiﬁcation) is a task of grouping patients into subgroups based on genomic, transcriptomic,
epigenomic and clinical data. The main goal of sub-typing is achieving more accurate prognoses of individuals’ expected
outcomes that can be used to improve treatment decisions. Treatments of many diseases have beneﬁted from sub-typing,
including Parkinson’s, cardiovascular, autoimmune diseases and cancer112.
Cancer is one of the most studied diseases by sub-typing. It is a disease in which genome aberrations are accumulating and
eventually leading to dysregulation of the cellular system. Histologically similar cancers are composed of many molecular
subtypes with signiﬁcantly different clinical behaviours and molecular complexity at the genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic
and proteomic levels. Many sub-types have been identiﬁed by utilising techniques for data integration for various cancer types,
including colon and rectal113, breast114 and ovarian cancer115.
Unsupervised clustering ML methods, such as hierarchical clustering116, k-means117, consensus clustering118 and nonnegative matrix factorization119 have mostly been applied to gene expression data, by comparing expression levels of disease
genes across different samples to identify meaningful subgroups. The most recent of such methods propose to divide patients
into clinically relevant subtypes by comparing differentially expressed genes (based on normal and cancer tissue samples)116.
Based on the selected set of differentially expressed genes, they calculate the distance between patients and perform hierarchical
clustering109. Using mRNA expression data of breast and lung cancer patients, they identiﬁed four breast cancer and ﬁve lung
cancer subtypes with signiﬁcantly different survival rates. Moreover, instead of identifying individual driver mutations, they
identify driver mutation modules for each individual subtype. Namely, by using the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
and by mapping the top 15 most frequently mutated genes of each identiﬁed subtype onto the network, they search for an
optimally connected sub-network covering these genes. The identiﬁed sub-networks are postulated as driver modules that
can serve as new targets for repurposing of known drugs and their combinations116. Many other studies have also focused
on developing methods for identifying aberrant network modules and pathways by utilizing molecular networks and other
omics data. For example, Alcaraz et al.120 developed KeyPathwayMiner, a method for extraction of aberrant network modules
from PPI network by integrating gene expression and DNA methylation data. The authors demonstrated the performance of
KeyPathwayMiner on TCGA colorectal cancer patients. The method uses heuristic techniques based on ant colony optimization
to extract maximally connected sub-networks with a certain number of differentially expressed genes in all patients. The
resulting sub-networks was shown to be enriched in genes with over active signalling in colorectal cancer that can be interpreted
as potential therapeutic targets. Similarly, Vaske et al.121 developed PARADIGM, a method for inferring patient-speciﬁc altered
molecular pathways. The methods also allows for identiﬁcation of common altered pathways among different patients and thus
providing patient sub-typing. The authors applied PARADIGM on TCGA gene expression and DNA copy number variations
data of glioblastoma multiform patients; based on the signiﬁcant pathway perturbations the authors divide patient into four
different subgroups with signiﬁcantly different survival outcome.
However, a majority of recent methods use integrative approaches to combine multiple types of molecular data, such as
DNA copy number alteration, DNA methylation, mRNA and protein expression, and molecular interaction data, accounting
for different levels of variations among affected individuals and thereby providing more accurate sub-typing122,123. For
example, Shen et al.124 developed iCluster, an unsupervised learning framework that can simultaneously perform clustering,
data integration, feature selection and dimension reduction of multiple data types. It uses a probabilistic matrix factorization
approach to simultaneously decompose data matrices, representing different data types (e.g., DNA methylation, DNA copy
number variations, mRNA expression data) over the same number of samples (patients), into a common feature space represented
by two low-dimensional matrices (Fig. 3(A)). Speciﬁcally, they decompose the data matrices by simultaneously factorizing each
data matrix into a product of two low-dimensional matrices. The dimensionality of the low-dimensional matrices represents the
number of cancer subtypes and it is a predeﬁned parameter. The ﬁrst matrix, also called the coefﬁcient matrix, is speciﬁc to each
data type, while the second matrix, also called the cluster indicator matrix, is shared across the decomposition. The second
matrix captures the dependencies across the data types, and based on its entries it is used for a single, integrated assignment of
tumor samples to clusters (subtypes). The authors applied iCluster on DNA copy number variation and gene expression data to
stratify breast and lung cancer patients. After obtaining the probabilistic representation of the low-dimensional, cluster indicator
matrix, they assign tumor samples to different subgroups. In both the breast and lung cancer data examples, they identify novel
subgroups with statistically different clinical outcomes as a result of combined information from the both data types124.
Figure 3. Illustration of MF-based methods. (A) Matrix factorization of multiple data matrices, Xi, representing different
data types (e.g., mRNA expression, DNA methylation, copy number variation, etc.) over the same number of samples p. The
matrices are decomposed into a common feature space, represented by matrix Z, that is also a cluster indicator matrix; it is used
for assigning p samples into k clusters. Matrices Wi called coefﬁcient matrices are speciﬁc to each data set i. (B)
Tri-factorization of the data matrix R representing relations between two data sets of sizes n1 and n2 (e.g., drug-target
interactions) into three low-dimensional matrices. Matrices G1 and G2 are cluster indicator matrices for the ﬁrst and second
dataset respectively; matrix G1 (G2) is used for assigning n1 (n2) data points to k1 (k2) clusters. Matrix S is the
low-dimensional representation of R.
iCluster is a widely used tool and it has been applied for subtyping of various cancers. For example, Curtis at al.125, applied
it to breast cancer patients from METABRIC (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium) cohort and
identiﬁed ten subgroups with signiﬁcantly different outcomes. Moreover, they reported signiﬁcant correlation between genome
variations and gene expression data and based on that, they discovered novel putative genes for breast cancer125. iCluster was
also applied on TCGA glioblastoma multiforme (the most common and most aggressive malignant brain tumor) data set by
simultaneous clustering of DNA copy number variation, methylation and gene expression data126. The authors reveal three
distinct tumor subtypes of glioblastoma multiforme, as opposed to the four distinct subtypes reported by previous studies that
used solely gene expression data22. This demonstrates the power of integrative analysis over analyses of single data types in
characterising, classifying and predicting clinical outcomes of cancer patients.
The ﬁrst method that deals with detection of contradictory signals across different data types is proposed by Yuan et al.127.
They propose a Patient Speciﬁc Data Fusion (PSDF) method based on non-parametric Bayesian approach to integrate gene
expression and copy number variation data of prostate and breast cancer patients127. A Bayesian approach is a statistical
ML approach that builds a model of data by constructing conditional dependencies between data variables represented by
conditional probabilities. One of the widely used methods for learning conditional probabilities is Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) technique128. Unlike other methods, this method successfully detects contradictory signals between different data
types arising from different measurement errors. Speciﬁcally, a latent variable is assigned to each patient; it measures whether
or not the patient’s data are concordant (i.e., in agreement) across different data types. This approach allows for contradictory
data information to be suppressed in the patient clustering assignment. The biggest drawback of this approach is that it does
not scale well with the number of data types and thus, the authors restrict their analysis only on two data types. Namely, the
MCMC step is computationally the most intensive and requires around 48 hours for a single MCMC chain to complete. Despite
this drawback, the authors report a novel subtype of prostate cancer patients with extremely poor survival outcome127.
To further take into account data inconsistency across data types, iCluster was further generalised by Ray et al.129 by
introducing Bayesian joint factor model built upon iCluster framework. Namely, instead of having a single cluster indicator
matrix common for all data types, they further decompose it into shared and data-speciﬁc matrix components. Speciﬁcally,
the cluster indicator matrix is represented as a sum of data type speciﬁc and common low-dimensional feature matrices.
The common and speciﬁc low-dimensional matrices are learned jointly via simultaneous decomposition of all data matrices.
This generalisation was shown to be particularly useful for joint analysis of multi-platform genomic data, as it allows more
ﬂexibility in the decomposition of distinct data types. Moreover, the authors reported better performance of their model
compared to iCluster, because unlike iCluster, that enforces all tumor samples to be included into the clustering procedure, the
proposed model can selectively choose between more and less correlated samples across data types when performing clustering
assignment. The authors demonstrated their method on TCGA gene expression, copy number variation and methylation data of
ovarian cancer patients, particularly for uncovering key driver genes in ovarian cancer129. Similarly, Lock et al.130 introduced
JIVE (Joint and Individual Variation Explained), a method which instead of having the same coefﬁcient matrices for shared
and data-speciﬁc components proposed a model with different coefﬁcient matrices corresponding to joint and data-speciﬁc
components capturing low-dimensional joint variations across data types, as well as variations speciﬁc to each data type. With
this extension, JIVE performed a better characterisation of tumor subtypes, as well as a better understanding of the biological
interactions between different data types130.
To overcome scalability drawbacks of the previous ML clustering methods, that operate with high-dimensional gene
× patient matrices, Wang et al.131 proposed a network-based method that integrates data represented by patient × patient
matrices. This method, called Similarity Network Fusion (SNF), combines mRNA expression, DNA methylation and microRNA
expression data for the same set of cancer patients. First, for each data type, it constructs a weighted network of patients, with
nodes being patients and weighted links being similarities between patients. The similarities are computed based on their gene
proﬁles for a particular data type. Second, it normalises weights of each network by taking into account the networks from
all data types. Finally, it fuses all the networks into a single network by performing a diffusion of information within each
network and across different networks. After the convergence of the diffusion process, the authors use a spectral clustering
method132 on the ﬁnal fused network to group patients into clusters. Unlike the previous methods, SNF is more scalable.
Namely, instead of processing large-scale matrices constructed over a large number of genes, SNF method fuses much smaller
matrices representing networks constructed over patients (i.e., samples), which makes the convergence faster. SNF is shown
to be robust to noise and when applied on ﬁve different cancer types from TCGA database, it was shown to be effective in
prediction of patient survival outcomes131.
A majority of studies are based on analysing mRNA expression data from RNA sequencing and microarrays, and DNA copy
number alteration data. Because of noisiness of these data, the patient stratiﬁcation studies for cancer types often do not produce
patient subgroups that agree well with any clinical, or survival data113. To overcome these shortcomings, Hofree et al133
recently proposed the use of somatic mutation data as a new source of information for cancer patient stratiﬁcation. However,
highly heterogeneous somatic mutation proﬁles between different patients make the use of somatic mutations for patient
stratiﬁcation into subtypes much harder115,133,134. Namely, two clinically identical tumors rarely have a large set of common
mutated genes. Moreover, very few genes are frequently mutated across tumor samples. However, despite this genetic diversity
between tumor samples, the perturbed pathways are often similar134. Therefore, Hofree et al.133 proposed to address this
problem by integrating somatic mutations with molecular networks that contain pathways. Their method, called Network-based
Stratiﬁcation (NBS), is based on network-regularised non-negative matrix factorization135. Namely, they factorize patient-gene
binary matrix, encoding patients’ somatic mutation proﬁles, into a product of two low-dimensional, non-negative matrices; the
second of which being the cluster indicator matrix. The non-negativity constraint provides an easier interpretation of clustering
assignment of tumor samples. They further incorporate molecular networks into the clustering procedure by constraining the
construction of the cluster indicator matrix to respect the local network connectivity. This semi-supervised approach uses
molecular networks as prior knowledge about clusters, ensuring that the patients are grouped not only based on the similarity
of their somatic mutation proﬁles, but also based on the proximity of their mutated genes in the molecular network. Using
the consensus clustering method118 applied on the ﬁnal cluster indicator matrix, the authors stratify patients into different
subgroups. The method was applied on ovarian, uterine and lung cancer patients from TCGA database, and it yielded cancer
subtypes with different clinical outcomes, response to therapies and tumor histologies.
MF-based methods are promising for mining heterogeneous datasets. These methods have a potential to incorporate any
number and type of heterogeneous data and to perform comprehensive analyses. We recently made a step towards this goal
and extended the NBS method to incorporate drug data into the framework136. Unlike the previous, our method is more
comprehensive because it can simultaneously perform three tasks: cancer patient subtyping, drug repurposing and biomarker
discovery (driver gene identiﬁcation). We used Graph-regularized Non-negative Matrix Tri-Factorization (GNMTF)111 (see
Fig. 3(B) for an illustration) approach to integrate somatic mutation proﬁles of ovarian cancer patients, molecular networks,
drug-target interactions and drug chemical similarity data. We simultaneously tri-factorize patient-gene and drug-target matrix
by sharing common low-dimensional matrix factors representing cluster indicator matrices. We compute three different cluster
indicator matrices used for clustering assignment of genes, patients and drugs, respectively. The computation of the gene
cluster indicator matrix is constrained by connectivity of integrated molecular network, whereas the computation of the drug
cluster indicator matrix is constrained by drug chemical similarities. The integrated network is composed of three different
molecular networks, namely, PPI, genetic and metabolic interaction networks. Given that GNMTF is both a co-clustering and
dimensionality reduction approach, we use GNMTF to perform the following three tasks; 1) we use the patient cluster indicator
matrix to stratify ovarian cancer patients into different subgroups with different clinical outcomes; 2) we use the gene cluster
indicator matrix to uncover gene modules enriched in driver mutations and postulate new genes as drivers of tumor progression;
and 3) we use the matrix completion property of the drug-target matrix to predict novel drug-target interactions and discover
new drug candidates that can be repurposed to treat ovarian cancer patients.
Challenges and open questions.
Identiﬁcation of disease subtypes has been shown to be both data and method dependent.
Moreover, there is no consensus in the literature about the number of subtypes of a particular cancer type. Depending on the
methods and data types they use, different studies report different numbers of subtypes of a particular cancer type (e.g., breast
cancer). Also, unsupervised methods require the number of subtypes to be predetermined. Determining the number of subtypes
is not a straightforward task and different approaches can be used to discover the correct number of clusters in the data. For
example, iCluster uses a cross-validation technique124, while NBS determines the number of subtypes based on the stability of
the consensus clustering133. Furthermore, there is an urgent need for a reference data set that should be used in future studies
for systematic evaluation and comparisons of methods.
Moreover, many of the above mentioned integrative methods for subtyping are incapable of simultaneously considering
different data types. For example, SNF method can only integrate data types given by continuous variables (e.g., mRNA
expression levels), as they can be easily used for construction of similarity networks. However, SNF cannot incorporate somatic
mutation proﬁles, as it cannot construct a similarity network from highly heterogeneous somatic mutation proﬁles. Namely,
due to the small overlap between somatic mutation proﬁles across different patients, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne a proper similarity
measure between patients. Approaches such as NBS and GNMTF are more convenient for integration of somatic mutation
proﬁles. Very few studies integrate somatic mutation data with mRNA and methylation data, due to the difﬁculty in integrating
binary with continuous data types137.
A proper normalisation of different data types is another issue in integrative data analyses. If not properly accounted for it
often results in cases where the largest data set wins. Unlike iCluster, JIVE properly takes into account the data normalisation
problem130.
3.2 Computational methods for drug repurposing and personalised treatments
Various computational methods for drug repurposing have been proposed and they can be classiﬁed under different criteria.
For example, from the data viewpoint, Dudley et al.148 suggested classiﬁcation into drug-based and disease-based methods.
The ﬁrst group of methods uses some notion of similarity between drugs (e.g., chemical similarity149, similarity between gene
expressions induced by drug actions74, or drug-side effect similarity150) to group drugs and infer a novel drug candidate for
repurposing from the group that can perform the same action as other drugs in the group. The second group of methods uses
similarities between diseases (e.g., phenotype similarity151, or similarity between disease symptoms152) to group diseases
and to infer a novel drug for repurposing by expanding known associations between the drug and some members of the
group to the rest of the group. Other approaches use target-based similarities153, i.e., protein sequence similarity154, or 3D
structural similarity155, to infer novel drugs. On the other hand, all three approaches can be classiﬁed as similarity-based
approaches153. They often use either machine-learning, or network-based methods in the drug inference process. Other
computational approaches include molecular docking simulation approaches that deal with prediction of a binding place of
a drug within protein 3D structure156. However, the biggest limitations of these methods are the lack of knowledge of 3D
structures for many protein targets and extensive computational costs for testing a single drug-target interaction.
A full review of similarity-based and molecular docking approaches for single data type analyses is beyond the scope of
this article and we refer the reader to recent review articles by Li et al.157 and Ding et al.153. Here, we focus on integrative
Method name
Description
Underlying method
Learning strategy
Patient stratiﬁcation by integrating DNA copy number variation and mRNA
expression data.
Bayesian model
unsupervised
KeyPathwayMiner120
Identiﬁcation of aberrant sub-networks by integrating PPI network with gene
expression and DNA methylation data.
Network-based
semi-supervised
PARADIGM121
Inference of patient-speciﬁc pathways and patient stratiﬁcation by integrating
DNA copy number variations and mRNA expression data.
Network-based
unsupervised
iCluster124
Cancer patient stratiﬁcation by integrating copy number variation and mRNA
expression data.
Matrix factorization
unsupervised
Joint Bayesian factor129
Driver genes identiﬁcation by integrating mRNA expression and methylation
Matrix Factorization
unsupervised
Cancer patient stratiﬁcation by integrating mRNA expression and miRNA
expression data.
Matrix factorization
unsupervised
Patient subtyping by integrating patient similarity networks constructed from
mRNA expression, DNA methylation and miRNA expression data.
Network-based
unsupervised
Cancer patient stratiﬁcation by integrating somatic mutation data with
molecular networks.
Matrix factorization
semi-supervised
Patient stratiﬁcation, drug repurposing and identiﬁcations of driver mutations
by integrating of somatic mutations, molecular networks, drug-target interactions
and drug chemical similarity data.
Matrix factorization
semi-supervised
Joint kernel matrices138
Drug repurposing by integrating of drug chemical structures, PPI network and
drug induced gene expression data.
Kernel-based
supervised
Drug repurposing and prediction of novel drug-disease associations by integrating
drug chemical structures, drug side-effects and protein target structures.
Kernel-based
supervised
Drug-target interaction prediction by integrating known drug-target interactions
along with multiple drug and target similarities.
Matrix factorization
semi-supervised
Drug-disease association prediction by integrating known drug-disease association
along with multiple drug and target similarities.
Matrix factorization
simi-supervised
PREDICT142
Inference of novel drug indications by integrating multiple drug and target
similarities.
Logistic regression
supervised
Coupled network
propagation143
Drug-disease network inference by integrating drug, disease and gene interaction
network, as well as drug-gene and gene-disease association network
Network-based
unsupervised
Network completion144
Drug repurposing by integrating drug-target, drug-disease and disease-target
Network-based
unsupervised
Inference of drug-miRAN network by integrating cancer related miRNA target
gene expression and transcriptional responses to drug compounds.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov
unsupervised
Inference lncRNA-disease network by integrating miRNA-disease associations
and lncRNA-miRNA interactions.
Hyper geometric test
unsupervised
Regularised NMF147
Disease causing lncRNA prioritisation by integrating lncRNA-disease associations,
along with lncRNA and coding gene expression data and lncRNA-coding gene
association data.
Matrix factorization
semi-supervised
Table 2. Summary of methods for integrative analyses in precision medicine. The ﬁrst group of methods is used for
sub-typing and biomarker discovery; the second group is used for drug repurposing and therapy prediction. Some methods can
be belong to both categories (e.g., GNMTF).
methods capable of integrating various similarities from different data types containing complementary information, such
as pharmacological, chemical, genetic and clinical data. Namely, due to heterogeneity and complexity of many diseases
characterised with different subtypes, drugs are not always equally efﬁcient in treatment of the same disease. Thus, the
overarching goal of precision medicine is to take into account molecular diversity between individuals when diagnosing patients
and prescribing drugs speciﬁc to each individual158. With the Big Data initiative (see Section 2), integrative computational
approaches have started attracting more attention due to their ability to address this goal.
For example, Napolitano et al.138 used a kernel-based (KB) method106 to integrate drug chemical similarity, PPI network
and drug induced gene expression data after a patient treatment. Each data is represented by a kernel matrix in a drug-centered
feature space. Particularly, the three kernel matrices represent drug-drug similarities based on: 1) drug chemical structures from
DrugBank; 2) proximity of their targets in the PPI network; and 3) correlations between gene proﬁles under the drug’s inﬂuence
retrieved from CMap database. After combining these kernel matrices into a single kernel matrix, the authors applied a Support
Vector Machine (SVM), a supervised machine learning method for classiﬁcation. They trained the SVM on the existing drug
classiﬁcation achieving 78% of classiﬁcation accuracy and they used the top scoring misclassiﬁed drugs as new candidates
for repurposing138. A similar approach was used by Wang et al.139, who developed a PreDR (Predict Drug Repurposing)
method where drug-centered kernel matrices represent: 1) drug chemical similarities obtained from PubChem database; 2)
target (protein) sequence similarities retrieved from KEGG BRITE and DrugBank; and 3) drug side-effect similarities for
SIDER database. The disease-centered kernel matrix represents disease similarities measured by their semantic similarity of
disease phenotypes retrieved from OMIM database. The authors trained the SVM classiﬁer on the combined kernel matrix and
reported accuracy in identifying novel drug-disease interactions.
Zheng et al.140 developed an integrative framework called Multiple Similarities Collaborative Matrix Factorization
(MSCMF) for drug-target prediction. It takes as an input a matrix representing drug-target interactions, as well as multiple
matrices representing different types of similarities between drugs and targets constructed from various databases. MSCMF
projects drugs and targets into a common low-dimensional feature space by factorizing the drug-target matrix into a product of
two low-dimensional matrices representing drug and target low-dimensional feature vectors, respectively. The computation
of low-dimensional matrices of drugs and targets is done in a semi-supervised manner by constraining their values to be
consistent with drug-drug and target-target similarity matrices, respectively. Namely, the similarity between two drugs is
approximated by the inner product of their corresponding feature vectors. The same is applied on target feature vectors. The
authors mathematically formulated the factorization condition and constraints within the same objective function, which they
minimise by applying the Alternating Least Squares (ALS) algorithm159. After convergence, they reconstructed the drug-target
matrix from the obtained low-dimensional matrices (i.e., from matrix completion) and extracted new, previously unobserved
entries representing predicted drug-target interactions. MSCMF is shown to perform better than the previous state-of-the-art
methods for drug-target prediction. Moreover, the big advantage of MSCMF over the previous methods is the fact that it can
integrate similarities from multiple data sources over the same set of drugs or targets and estimate their inﬂuence onto the
quality of the drug-target prediction.
Similar to MSCMF, Zhang et al.141 proposed DDR (Drug Disease Repositioning), a semi-supervised, matrix tri-factorizationbased framework for novel drug-disease association prediction. It takes as input known drug-disease associations, as well as
multiple drug and multiple disease similarity networks and generates new drug-disease associations. In particular, it constructs
three drug similarity matrices based on their chemical structures, side-effects and target proteins and three disease similarity
matrices based on their phenotypes, Disease Ontology and disease genes. The predicted associations are validated in clinical
trial databases. Unlike MSCMF, DDR factorizes drug-disease associations into a product of three low-dimensional matrices,
where the ﬁrst and the last matrices can be interpreted as cluster assignment matrices of drugs and diseases, respectively. These
matrices can be used to identify subgroups of highly correlated drugs and diseases, thus providing additional insights for drug
repurposing by identifying a group of similar drug candidates that can be used in clinical trials.
Gottlieb et al.142 developed a supervised method, called PREDICT (PREdicting Drug IndiCaTions). First, it computes
drug-drug and disease-disease similarity measures from ﬁve and six different drug and disease data sources, respectively.
Second, based on these similarities, it constructs an overall similarity for each drug-disease pair. Finally, based on the
drug-disease similarity, it trains a logistic regression classiﬁer on correctly classifying known drug-disease associations. The
authors demonstrated a great accuracy of PREDICT in identifying novel indications of drugs with Area Under the ROC curve
(AUC)160 of 0.92. Moreover, they propose PREDICT as a general framework that can be used in future personalized drug
treatments by incorporating gene expression data of disease patients into the framework.
All previous methods use either supervised, or semi-supervised strategy in predicting drug-target, or drug-disease associations and thus, they require a gold standard (i.e., a set of known associations) to train their models. For many speciﬁc
diseases, that data set is unknown, or incomplete, which makes the use of the methods more difﬁcult. To overcome this, Huang
et al.143 proposed a completely unsupervised integrative method that can infer drug-disease associations without any prior
associations. They used coupled network propagation161 on drug-drug chemical similarity, disease-disease phenotype similarity
and gene-gene co-expression similarity homogeneous networks, connected by drug-gene and gene-disease heterogeneous
networks. They applied their method on data for prostate and colorectal cancer patients. They identiﬁed top scoring drugs
predicted to be used in treatment of these groups of patients. Another unsupervised, network-based method for heterogeneous
network integration and drug repurposing was introduced by Daminelli et al.144. They predicted novel drug-target associations
by completing incomplete bi-cliques in the integrated drug–target–disease network. They demonstrate the power of their method
by predicting novel drugs for cardiovascular and parasitic diseases, as well as by predicting novel drugs for cancer-related
kinases. For other network-based methods for drug repurposing we refer a reader to a recent review paper by Wu et al.162.
Non-coding RNAs, in particular microRNAs (or miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), have recently started
attracting attention due to their involvement in various diseases, including cancer and autoimmune disorders163 and thus, have
been proposed as potential biomarkers146,164 and drug targets165,166. Due to large collections of transcriptional and drug data
being available, new computational methods for identiﬁcation of miRNAs as potential drug targets have recently been proposed.
For example, Jiang et al.145 proposed a framework for construction of a network, SMirN, of interactions between small
drug molecules (compounds) and miRNAs using data from different human cancers. Speciﬁcally, they used transcriptional
responses to compounds and differentially expressed miRNA target genes in 23 different human cancers. For each miRNA,
they partitioned their target genes into GO modules, and for each GO module they evaluated the association between its
differentially expressed target genes and the transcriptional response to the compound by using Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. If
these associations are conﬁrmed for a signiﬁcant number of GO modules of a particular miRNA, then the authors hypothesized
a link between the miRNA and the corresponding drug compound. They analysed the SMirN network and separately grouped
miRNAs and compounds into modules, based on which they infer novel potential miRNA targets, as well as novel drug
compounds that can be used in drug repurposing for cancer therapy. Chen167 developed a novel model of HyperGeometric
distribution for lncRNA-Disease Associations (HGLDA) inference. The model integrates known miRNA-disease associations
and lncRNA-miRNA interactions and without a gold standard data set, it infers a network of lncRNA-disease associations with
AUC of 0.76 in the leave-one-out cross validation. Based on the top 19 predicted associations, they reported novel lncRNAs
involved in breast, lung and colorectal cancer that can be used as novel biomarkers for diagnosis of these cancers. A more
sophisticated integrative method, based on non-negative matrix factorizaton, was recently proposed by Biswas et al.,147. They
factorize lncRNA-disease association matrix into a product of two non-negative, low-dimensional matrices speciﬁc to lncRNAs
and diseases, respectively. The non-negativity of the obtained, low-dimensional matrices allows for easier extraction of lncRNA
and disease subgroups in the data. They can also be interpreted as cluster assignment matrices for lncRNAs and diseases,
respectively. The factorization of the lncRNA-disease association matrix was done in a semi-supervised way, by constraining
the construction of the low-dimensional matrices with additional data, including coding gene and lncRNA expression data, as
well as lncRNA-coding gene association network. The authors identiﬁed several biologically relevant lncRNA and disease
groups. Based on the membership scores in the lncRNA low-dimensional matrix, they ranked disease causing lncRNAs for each
particular disease. They identiﬁed a prominent group of lncRNAs associated with heart diseases, as well as a group of lncRNAs
strongly associated with neurological disorders that can be used in future experimental testing as biomarkers of these disorders.
Challenges and open questions.
Many of the methods presented in this section require different data types to be represented
in common feature space. For example, KB methods (e.g., PreDR) require the matrices of all data types to be constructed over
the same set of entities (e.g., drugs, or diseases). This often requires transforming the data that may lead to information loss.
On the other hand, MF-based methods (e.g., MSCMF) can handle these heterogeneous data without any data transformation
and thus, without any information loss. Also, many methods require choosing an appropriate similarity measure to integrate
various data types. This is not always a straightforward task and different measures may results in different ﬁnal conclusions.
Similar to the methods described in section 3.1, the methods for drug-target (and drug-disease) prediction and drug
repurposing are lacking a reference corpus of data for comparing their performances.
4 Challenges and perspectives
As presented in Section 2, biomedical data are increasingly becoming available and dealing with their “three V” components will
impose many challenges and open questions. For example, in addressing Big Data’s volume (i.e., high dimensionality), many
dimensionality reduction techniques have been devised, reviewed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. However, they are all computationally
intensive on large-scale data sets and devising techniques that are both efﬁcient and accurate in revealing hidden substructures
in them is still an open question. One of the possible solutions to addressing this question might be Topological Data Analysis
methods (TDAs)168,169. TDAs use mathematical concepts developed in algebraic topology. TDAs analyse Big Data by
converting them into low-dimensional geometric representations from which they extract shapes (patterns) and obtain insight
into them. These methods have been shown to be more efﬁcient in ﬁnding substructures in large-scale data sets than standard
methods, such as clustering, or principal component analysis methods. Moreover, they succeed in ﬁnding hidden structures in
the data that standard methods failed to discover169.
Dealing with Big Data’s velocity (i.e., coping with its growth over time) is particularly challenging and poorly addressed
in the literature on precision medicine. One of the possible future directions in addressing this challenge is the utilisation of
so-called “anytime algorithms”170 that can learn from streaming data (e.g., time-dependent Bayesian classiﬁers)171 and that still
return a valuable result if their execution is interrupted at any time. Moreover, in the future, we will have access to more and
more time series data. At the moment, such times series are either pre-processed to ﬁnd patterns, e.g., time series of expression
data are either used to ﬁnd genes with time-correlated expression (co-expression network), or used to study the effect of drugs
on short time scales by differential expression analysis. With the increasing number of measured features and the increasing
time span of the measurements, a key challenge will be to ﬁnd a data integration model that will directly mine time series
measurements for which the time spans and frequencies of measurements vary greatly.
The Big Data’s variety (i.e., heterogeneity) has been addressed by many methods as presented in Section 3.2. MF-based
methods are promising for mining heterogeneous datasets. Although GNMTF is a versatile data integration framework136,
its computational complexity increases with the number of data types to be integrated. Thus, integrating large numbers of
heterogeneous data types within the MF-based framework necessitates novel algorithmic improvements.
Extracting complementary information conveyed in data of different formats and types is another challenge that is partially
addressed by the presented integrative methods. For example, proteomics data have been shown to be a good complement to
other omics data. Namely, many studies have conﬁrmed that proteins having physical interactions in a PPI network are more
likely to have correlated co-expression proﬁles of their corresponding genes172. On the contrary, protein physical interactions
are less likely to coincide to genetic interactions (GI) of the their corresponding genes173. Thus, integrating GI network with
PPI network and other molecular networks has been shown to be beneﬁcial in many biological problems133,136,174.
Moreover, many data types including exposomics and metagenomics data are yet to be analysied and their integration
with other data will be a focus of future studies. For example, much of an individual’s health data, such as demographic
data, personal and family medical history, vaccination records, laboratory tests and imaging results are systematically being
collected and stored in Electronic Health Records (EHR). EHR data are increasingly becoming available for academic research
purposes and they present numerous computational challenges that are yet to be addressed. Two major computational challenges
include developing algorithms for: 1) individual phenotyping (i.e., annotating patient records with disease conditions)175 and
2) integration of EHR data with omics data for better understanding of disease mechanisms and treatments176. The biggest
obstacles of the ﬁrst challenge are nosiness and incompleteness of the EHR data that needs to be properly taken into account. On
the other hand, the biggest obstacles of the second challenge are heterogeneity and different format types of EHR and genomic
data. Some steps towards addressing these challenges have been made175,176, but developing methods that can overcome these
obstacles are yet to come.
Finally, while we focus on the four challenges of precision medicine, big data integration also opens novel opportunities in
bioinformatics and in other data sciences. For example, it can be used to reprocess raw data in more coherent way, or with
novel research questions in mind177.