American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
The Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
JOSHUA CLINTON
Princeton University
SIMON JACKMAN and DOUGLAS RIVERS
Stanford University
e develop a Bayesian procedure for estimation and inference for spatial models of roll call
voting. This approach is extremely ﬂexible, applicable to any legislative setting, irrespective of
size, the extremism of the legislators’ voting histories, or the number of roll calls available for
analysis. The model is easily extended to let other sources of information inform the analysis of roll call
data, such as the number and nature of the underlying dimensions, the presence of party whipping, the
determinants of legislator preferences, and the evolution of the legislative agenda; this is especially helpful
since generally it is inappropriate to use estimates of extant methods (usually generated under assumptions
of sincere voting) to test models embodying alternate assumptions (e.g., log-rolling, party discipline). A
Bayesian approach also provides a coherent framework for estimation and inference with roll call data
that eludes extant methods; moreover, via Bayesian simulation methods, it is straightforward to generate
uncertainty assessments or hypothesis tests concerning any auxiliary quantity of interest or to formally
compare models. In a series of examples we show how our method is easily extended to accommodate
theoretically interesting models of legislative behavior. Our goal is to provide a statistical framework for
combining the measurement of legislative preferences with tests of models of legislative behavior.
odern studies of legislative behavior focus
upon the relationship among the policy preferences of legislators, institutional arrangements, and legislative outcomes. In spatial models of
legislatures, policies are represented geometrically, as
points in a low-dimensional Euclidean space. Each legislator has a most preferred policy or ideal point in this
space and his or her utility for a policy declines with
the distance of the policy from his or her ideal point;
see Davis, Hinich, and Ordeshook for an early
The primary use of roll call data—the recorded
votes of deliberative bodies1—is the estimation of ideal
points. The appeal and importance of ideal point estimation arises in two ways. First, ideal point estimates let
us describe legislators and legislatures. The distribution
ofidealpointsestimatesrevealshowcleavagesbetween
legislators reﬂect partisan afﬁliation or region or become more polarized over time . Roll call data serve similar purposes for interest groups, such as Americans for Democratic Action, the National Taxpayers Union, and the
Sierra Club, to produce “ratings” of legislators along
differentpolicydimensions.Second,estimatesfromroll
call analysis can be used to test theories of legislative
behavior. For instance, roll call analysis has been used
Joshua Clinton is Assistant Professor, Department of Politics,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540 ( ).
Simon Jackman is Associate Professor and Director of the Political Science Computational Laboratory, Department of Political
Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-6044 (jackman@
stanford.edu).
Douglas Rivers is Professor, Department of Political Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-6044 , state legislatures , courts , comparative politics , and international relations . In short, roll call
analysis make conjectures about legislative behavior
amenable to quantitative analysis, helping make the
study of legislative politics an empirically grounded,
cumulative body of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Current methods of estimating ideal points in political science suffer from both statistical and theoretical
deﬁciencies. First, any method of ideal point estimation
embodies an explicit or implicit model of legislative behavior. Generally, it is inappropriate to use ideal points
estimated under one set of assumptions (such as sincere voting over a unidimensional policy space) to test
a different behavioral model (such as log-rolling). Second, the computations required for estimating even the
simplest roll call model are very difﬁcult and extending
these models to incorporate more realistic behavioral
assumptions is nearly impossible with extant methods.
Finally, the statistical basis of current methods for ideal
point estimation is, to be polite, questionable. Roll call
analysis involves very large numbers of parameters,
since each legislator has an ideal point and each bill
has a policy location that must be estimated. Popular
methods of roll call analysis compute standard errors
that are admittedly invalid and one cannot appeal to standard statistical theory to ensure the consistency and other properties of
estimators (we revisit this point below).
In this paper we develop and illustrate Bayesian
methods for ideal point estimation and the analysis of
roll call data more generally. Bayesian inference provides a coherent method for assessment of uncertainty
and hypothesis testing in the presence of large numbers of parameters, and recent advances in computing
put Bayesian modeling (via Monte Carlo simulation)
well within the reach of social scientists. Using our
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
approach, we show how it is possible to extend the
standard voting model to accommodate more complex
behavioral assumptions. Our goal is to provide a statistical framework for combining the measurement of
legislative preferences with tests of models of legislative behavior.
A STATISTICAL MODEL FOR ROLL CALL
In theoretical work on spatial voting models, utility
functions are usually deterministic and the precise
functional form, aside from an assumption of quasiconcavity, is not speciﬁed. For empirical work, it is
convenient to choose a parametric speciﬁcation for the
utilities and to add a stochastic disturbance. Several
different speciﬁcations have been used, but all are quite
similar. We assume a quadratic utility function for legislators with normal errors. Poole and Rosenthal assume Gaussian utilities with extreme value
errors. Heckman and Snyder assume quadratic
utilities with uniform errors for one of the alternatives
and nonstochastic utility for the other. See Table 2 for
a comparison of the speciﬁcations.
The data consist of n legislators voting on mdifferent
roll calls. Each roll call j = 1, . . . , mpresents legislators
i = 1, . . . , n with a choice between a “Yea” position ζ j
and a “Nay” position ψ j, locations in Rd, where d
denotes the dimension of the policy space. Let yi j = 1
if legislator i votes Yea on the jth roll call and yi j = 0
otherwise. Legislators are assumed to have quadratic
utility functions over the policy space, Ui(ζ j) =
−∥xi −ζ j∥2 + ηi j,
Ui(ψ j) = −∥xi −ψ j∥2 + νi j,
where xi ∈Rd is the ideal point of legislator i, ηi j and νi j
are the errors or stochastic elements of utility, and ∥·∥is
the Euclidean norm. Utility maximization implies that
yi j = 1 if Ui(ζ j) > Ui(ψ j) and yi j = 0 otherwise. The
speciﬁcation is completed by assigning a distribution
to the errors. We assume that the errors ηi j and νi j
have a joint normal distribution with E(ηi j) = E(νi j),
var(ηi j −νi j) = σ 2
and the errors are independent
across both legislators and roll calls. It follows that
P(yi j = 1) = P(Ui(ζ j) > Ui(ψ j))
= P(νi j −ηi j < ∥xi −ψ j∥2 −∥xi −ζ j∥2),
= P(νi j −ηi j < 2(ζ j −ψ j)′xi
jxi −α j),
where βj = 2(ζ j −ψ j)/σ j, α j=(ζ′
jψ j)/σ j, and
Φ(·) denotes the standard normal distribution function. This corresponds to a probit model with an unobserved regressor xi corresponding to the legislator’s
ideal point (a logit model results if the errors have
extreme value distributions). The coefﬁcient vector βj
is the direction of the jth proposal in the policy space
relative to the Nay position.
Given the assumptions of independence across legislators and roll calls, the likelihood is
L(B, α, X | Y) =
iβj −α j)yi j
× (1 −Φ(x′
iβj −α j))1−yi j,
where B is an m× d matrix with jth row β′
(α1, . . . , αm)′, X is an n × d matrix with ith row x′
Y is the n × m matrix of observed votes with (i, j)th
element yi j.
The model, as described above, is the simplest possible form and is a convenient starting point for more
elaborate models. For instance, we show later how it
is possible to add party effects to this speciﬁcation.
Clinton and Mierowitz modify this framework
to study agenda dependence. It is also possible to incorporate vote trading and cue-taking into the model
by making the utility of one legislator dependent upon
either the utility or the voting behavior of another.
The spatial voting model is equivalent to the twoparameter item response model used in educational
testing,2 where βj is the item discrimination parameter
and α j is the item difﬁculty parameter, but in the roll
call context the latent trait or “ability” parameter xi
is the ideal point of the ith legislator. There is a large
literature in psychometrics on estimation of these models , but
the focus is usually on estimation of the βj (the item
parameters), which are used for test equating. In roll
call analysis, however, primary interest almost always
centers on the xi (the ideal points), while in psychometrics the x j (ability parameters) are usually treated
as random effects.
Identiﬁcation
As it stands, model (2) is not identiﬁed. For example,
suppose that we transform the matrix of ideal points
X by premultiplying by an invertible d × d matrix R
and apply the inverse transformation to the direction
vectors B, X∗= XR and B∗= BR−1. Then the likelihood L(B, α, X | Y) = L(B∗, α, X∗| Y) for all possible
voting patterns Y: no data can distinguish between the
different parameter values because any translation or
rotation of the ideal points and proposals leaves the
distances between ideal points and alternatives unchanged.
Identiﬁcation is essential for standard methods of
estimation, such as maximum likelihood, which are inconsistent when the model is unidentiﬁed. The role
of identiﬁcation in Bayesian estimation is more controversial. Bayesian procedures can be applied to
unidentiﬁed models, though the data are only informative about identiﬁed parameters . However, in many cases it is difﬁcult
to formulate a reasonable prior for problems involving
2 This equivalence has been noted by several authors, including
Bailey and Rivers , Londregan , and Poole and
Rosenthal .
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
arbitrary rescalings. For example, we may have some
prior information about tomorrow’s temperature, but
it is very difﬁcult to quantify this information unless we
agree in advance whether temperature is measured on
the Fahrenheit, the celsius, or some other scale. This is
a simple example of normalization. The same problem
occurs in policy spaces since both the origin and the
metric are arbitrary.
Rivers derives necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for identiﬁcation of multidimensional spatial
models based upon a priori restrictions on the ideal
point matrix X. In the case of a unidimensional policy
space, the identifying conditions are straightforward:
Two linearly independent restrictions on the ideal point
matrix X are required. One possibility is to constrain
the positions of two legislators at arbitrary positions,
e.g., Kennedy at −1 and Helms at +1. Alternatively,
we can constrain the ideal points to have mean zero
and standard deviation one across legislators. This is
sufﬁcient for local, but not global, identiﬁcation (since
the left–right direction can be reversed by reﬂecting the
ideal points around the origin and reversing the policy
directions).
In d-dimensional choice spaces, d(d + 1) linearly independent a priori restrictions on the ideal points X are
required for identiﬁcation. Thus, in two dimensions, it is
necessary to ﬁx the positions of three legislators (three
ideal points, each with two elements). In general, local
identiﬁcation can be achieved by ﬁxing the positions
of d + 1 legislators. Estimation becomes progressively
more difﬁcult in higher dimensions. In addition to the
necessary identifying restrictions, it is also beneﬁcial to
add other a priori information .
ESTIMATION AND INFERENCE
The classical or frequentist approach treats ideal points
as ﬁxed but unknown parameters. An estimation technique, such as maximum likelihood, is evaluated by
considering its sampling distribution. We imagine the
ideal points and other parameters to be ﬁxed and draw
repeated samples from the same data generating process. Each of these samples is a hypothetical roll call
governed by the same ideal points and bill parameters. Because voting is probabilistic (see equation ),
each sample yields different votes and hence different
estimates of the ideal points and other parameters. The
sampling distribution of an estimated ideal point is its
distribution across a set of hypothetical roll calls.
Number of Parameters in Roll Call Analyses
Dimensions (d )
Legislators
Roll Calls
Legislature
U.S. Supreme Court, 1994–97
105th U.S. Senate
93rd U.S. House
U.S. Senate, 1789–1985
U.S. House, 1789–1985
The Bayesian approach, in contrast, treats the unknown ideal points and other parameters as random
variables and conditions upon the observed roll call
data. We represent any a priori information by a prior
distribution over the parameters. Bayes’ formula describes how to combine the prior information with the
observed data to obtain a posterior distribution which
summarizes our information about the parameters having seen the roll call data. The Bayesian approach, as
we will see, allows us to make probability statements,
such as “Kennedy is more likely than O’Connor to be
the median justice on the Supreme Court.” Of course,
this kind of statement is meaningless from the frequentist perspective, which treats the ideal points as
Bayesian methods are often thought of primarily as a
way to use nonsample information in estimation. Our motivation for using Bayesian
methods in roll call analysis, however, is rather different. Roll call data sets are usually very large, so in most
casesthebeneﬁttointroducingadditionalaprioriinformationisslight.Instead,therealbeneﬁttotheBayesian
approach is that it turns a very difﬁcult classical estimationproblemintoafairlyroutineapplicationofMarkov
chainMonteCarlo(MCMC)simulation.Moreover,the
Bayesian approach lets us make inferences about ideal
pointsandsubstantivehypothesesthatwereintractable
with classical techniques. And in addition, the Bayesian
model and estimation procedures are easily extended
to handle more complex formulations.
To understand better the computational challenge
that roll call analysis presents for classical estimation,
consider the number of parameters that need to be estimated in some typical applications. With data from
n legislators voting on m roll calls, a d-dimensional
spatial voting model gives rise to a statistical model
with p= nd + m(d + 1) parameters. Table 1 presents
values of p for ﬁve different data sets. A moderately
sized roll call data set (say the 105th U.S. Senate) with
n = 100, m= 534 nonunanimous roll calls, and d = 1
yields p= 1,168 unknown parameters, while a twodimensional model has p= 1,802 parameters. A typical
House of Representatives (e.g., the 93rd House) set has
n = 442 and m= 917, so a one-dimensional model has
p= 2,276 parameters, while a two-dimensional model
has p= 3,635 parameters. Pooling across years dramatically increases the number of parameters: For instance, Poole and Rosenthal report that ﬁtting a
two-dimensional model to roughly 200 years of U.S.
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
House of Representatives roll call data gave rise to an
optimization problem with p> 150,000 parameters.
The proliferation of parameters causes several problems. The usual optimality properties of conventional
estimators, such as maximum likelihood, may not hold
when, as in this case, the number of parameters is a
function of the sample size . In particular, the customary asymptotic
standard error calculations, using the inverse of the information matrix, are not valid. As a practical matter,
the size of the information matrix is too large for direct
inversion. Poole and Rosenthal take the
obvious shortcut of ﬁxing the bill parameters at their
estimated values before calculating standard errors for
the ideal point estimates. They point out that this is
invalid, but it reduces the computational burden by an
order of magnitude.
The Bayesian methods of estimation and inference
proposed here are valid for ﬁnite samples and do not
rely any large sample approximations. The number of
parameters is ﬁxed for any particular estimation problem by the actual number of legislators and roll calls
and Bayes’ theorem gives the posterior distribution of
the parameters conditional upon the observed data.
The only approximation involved is the simulation
of the posterior distribution and this approximation
can be made to any desired degree of accuracy by increasingthenumberofsimulations(n.b.,notthesample
size, which is ﬁxed for any given data set).
Details of the Bayesian simulation procedure we
adopt are provided in the Appendix, but a brief heuristic explanation may be useful. The fundamental difﬁcultyinrollcallanalysisisthateverythingotherthanthe
Comparison of Ideal Point Estimation Methods
W-NOMINATE
Heckman–Snyder
Legislators’ utilities, deterministic component
Gaussian, with ﬁxed scale parameter
Legislators’ utilities, stochastic components
Normal (yielding a probit model
Type 1 extreme value (logit)
Difference of utilities for “Yea” and
or Type 1 extreme value
“Nay” alternatives has a stochastic
(yielding logit)
component with U distribution,
yielding a linear probability model
Identiﬁcation for one-dimensional case
Fix two legislators ideal points
Constrain legislators’ ideal points
Identiﬁed only up to scale or
at −1 and 1, or constrain ideal
to [−1, 1]
points to have mean zero and
unit variance
Estimation
Exploration of posterior density
Alternating conditional maximum
FGLS factor analysis
via Markov chain Monte Carlo
likelihood
Uncertainty assessments/standard errors
Arbitrarily precise; can be
Approximate for ideal points, after
approximated to any desired
conditioning on estimates
degree of accuracy via additional
for bill parameters
samples from joint posterior
density of model parameters
votes is unobservable: The ideal points, bill parameters,
and utilities are unknowns. But if it were possible to impute values to the bill parameters and utilities, then the
ideal points could be estimated by regression. By the
same logic, if we were able to impute values for the ideal
points and utilities, the bill parameters could also be
estimated by regression. The MCMC algorithm repeatedly performs these imputations and regressions, starting from an arbitrary point and alternating between
simulation of the ideal points, bill parameters, and utilities. Under a wide set of conditions 
MCMC algorithms are guaranteed to generate samples
from the posterior density of the model parameters, regardless of where in the parameter space the algorithm
is initialized. In principle, MCMC algorithms are not
hampered by the large number of parameters encountered in roll call analysis, although obviously computational time increases with the number of legislators
and/or roll calls (see the Appendix) and monitoring the
performance of the algorithm is more costly.
We use intentionally vague priors for most of the
parameters.Foreachapplicationbelow,wedescribethe
actual prior used, but except where noted, the results
appear to be insensitive to choice of prior.
COMPARISON WITH OTHER METHODS OF
IDEAL POINT ESTIMATION
Having detailed our approach, Table 2 provides a
summary of the differences between our approach,
W-NOMINATE, and the factor-analytic approach of
Heckman and Snyder. Our approach has more in common with W-NOMINATE than the Heckman–Snyder
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
factor analysis approach. The Heckman–Snyder factoranalyic approach is distinctive in that the relatively
simple statistical model (factor analysis) does not follow neatly from a formal model of legislative voting as
our quadratic-probit model or the normal-logit model
underlying W-NOMINATE3 but provides ideal point
estimates relatively cheaply; indeed, factor analysis
supplies starting values for both the NOMINATE algorithms and our Bayesian simulation approach.
Example 1: 106th U.S. House of
Representatives
To illustrate the differences and similarities between
approaches
simulation-based
Bayesian estimator, we ﬁrst analyze roll calls from the
106th U.S. House of Representatives via the several
methods. We ﬁt a one-dimensional model to these
data using principal components (extremely similar to
the Heckman–Snyder estimator),4 W-NOMINATE,
as well as our Bayesian approach. We use the probit
version of our model and impose the identifying constraint that the legislators’ ideal points have mean zero
and unit variance across legislators. After discarding
lop-sided votes, W-NOMINATE uses 871 roll calls and
does not ﬁt an ideal point for Livingston (R-LA), who
resigned from Congress in February 1999 after voting
on 19 roll calls in the 106th House. Lop-sided votes and
short voting records pose no problems in the Bayesian
approach; we estimate ideal points for all legislators
and include all but unanimous roll calls, yielding
m= 1,073 roll calls in all, comprising 444,326 individual
voting decisions. With predicted probabilities of .5 as
a classiﬁcation threshold we correctly classify 89.9%
of the individual voting decisions5 and ﬁnd that 1,007
of the 1,073 (93.8%) roll calls discriminate with respect
to the single latent dimension.6 Of the 66 roll calls that
3 The issue is that the Heckman–Snyder factor analytic statistical
model results from a linear probability model for roll call voting, in
turn driven by the assumption that the stochastic component of the
legislators utility differential (the net utility a legislator has for voting
Yea over voting Nay) follows a uniform distribution. In turn, the utility functions that rationalize this statistical model have unspeciﬁed
stochastic components, since there does not exist a distribution such
that the difference of two independent realizations from it yield a
quantity with a uniform distribution. While no more ad hoc than
the usual stochastic assumptions (normal or Type-1 extreme value
errors), the H–S assumptions are somewhat idiosyncratic. This technical point aside, there are other more practical reasons to prefer our
approach over factor-analytic approaches, such as the availability of
standard errors and the extensibility of the model.
4 We implement the principal components estimator as follows: (1)
compute an n × m matrix D by double-centering the roll call matrix,
(2) compute P, an n × n correlation matrix (the correlation matrix
of D′, using pairwise deletion of missing data), and (3) take the ﬁrst
d eigenvectors of P as the ideal point estimates for a d-dimensional
5 This classiﬁcation rate is a function of the unknown model parameters and, so, is itself subject to uncertainty; here we report the classiﬁcation rate averaging over uncertainty in the model parameters.
See the discussion of auxiliary quantities of interest in section.
6 That is, these 1,007 roll calls all had slope coefﬁcients (βj, the
equivalent of item discrimination parameters) whose 90% posterior
conﬁdence intervals did not cover zero.
failtodiscriminatewithrespecttotherecovereddimension, only two roll calls were decided by margins closer
than 60%–40%. In short, a one-dimensional model appearstobeaverygoodcharacterizationoftheserollcall
Figure 1 plots the three sets of ideal point estimates against one another. This ﬁgure exempliﬁes a
pattern we have seen in many other roll call data
sets: When n and m are both reasonably large and a
low-dimensional model ﬁts the data well, there is extremely little difference in the ideal point estimates
produced by W-NOMINATE and our Bayesian estimator. In this speciﬁc example, n = 440, m= 1,073, and
a one-dimensional model gives an extremely good ﬁt to
the data (as is typical of recent U.S. Congresses), and
the ideal point estimates correlate at .996. Nonetheless, by retaining more of the lop-sided votes than
W-NOMINATE, our Bayesian estimator can discriminate among extremist Democrat legislators (in the left
tail), effectively “stretching” the distribution of the
Democrats ideal points relative to W-NOMINATE’s
estimates. The comparison of both W-NOMINATE
and our Bayesian estimator with the principal components estimator reveals the linearity of the factor
analytic model, with the two nonlinear models both
generating more discrimination among extremist legislators.
ESTIMATION AND INFERENCE FOR
AUXILIARY QUANTITIES OF INTEREST
An advantage of the Bayesian approach is that it is
straightforward to estimate posterior distributions over
any auxiliary quantity of interest that is a function of
the model parameters. These quantities of interest can
be any function of the model parameters, as we now
demonstrate.
Example 2: Pivotal Senators in the 106th
U.S. Senate
The notion of pivotal legislators is critical to many
theories of legislative behavior. For instance, supermajorities are often needed for extraordinary legislative
action, such as the two-thirds majority required to override a presidential veto or the 60 votes needed to pass
cloture motions in the U.S. Senate. Order statistics of
ideal points play a prominent role in theories of legislative politics: e.g., the “gridlock interval” is deﬁned
as the region between the ﬁlibuster pivot and the veto
pivot, and in the case of a liberal president the gridlock
interval is bounded on the left by the veto pivot (the
33rdsenator)andontherightbytheﬁlibusterpivot(the
60th senator) . Formal
theories of legislative politics make sharp and exact
predictions on the basis of these pivotal locations: e.g.,
proposals that attempt to change status quo policies
located in the gridlock interval will not succeed. To operationalize these theoretical predictions, the gridlock
interval is usually computed using the estimated ideal
points of the corresponding legislators . Similarly, Schickler characterizes
the parties’ ideological positions with the ideal points of
the median legislator within each party. Given the importance of individual legislators such as the chamber
median or the “ﬁlibuster pivot” (i.e., the 40th senator),
it is straightforward to generate posterior estimates for
both the identity and the spatial location for such legislators in our Bayesian simulation approach.
Consider the task of uncovering the identity of the
“pivotal”senatorsinthe106thSenate(n = 102,m= 596
nonunanimous roll calls; there are 102 senators because
of the replacement of John Chafee (RI) by his son
Lincoln Chafee and the replacement of Paul Coverdell
(GA) by Zell Miller, although in assessing rank order
we ignore the “replacement senators”). We ﬁt a unidimensional model to these data, again with the identiﬁcation constraint that the ideal points have mean zero,
variance one across legislators. To determine which
senators are critical for invoking cloture or which are
the median senators requires recovering the posterior
distribution of the rank of each senator’s ideal point.
We compute this by repeating the following scheme an
arbitrarily large number of times: (1) sample the legislators’ ideal points xi from their joint posterior density; (2) rank order the sampled ideal points; (3) note
which legislator’s occupies a particular pivot or order
statistic of interest. We then report the proportion of
times the ith legislator’s ideal point is the pivot or order
statistic of interest over these repeated samples from
the posterior of the ideal points. Since we are working
with an arbitrarily accurate approximation of the joint
posterior density for the ideal points, inferences as to
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
the ranks and the identity of the legislators occupying
particular ranks are also arbitrarily accurate.7
Figure 2 summarizes the posterior densities over the
identities and locations of the senators at key pivot
points.Weomitthe“replacementsenators”Chafeeand
Miller from these calculation. There is almost no doubt
as to identity of the chamber median: Republican Senators Snowe and Collins are the only senators with positive probability of being the 50th senator, with Collins
overwhelmingly most likely to be the 50th (p= .98).
Twenty-two senators have discernible probability of
being the veto pivot (the 33rd senator), with 10 senators having probabilities greater than 5% of being the
veto pivot: Senators Baucus (p= .12), Biden (p= .11),
Johnson (p= .08), Graham (p= .08), Bayh (p= .08),
and Cleland (p= .08) account for roughly half of the
uncertainty as to the identity of the veto pivot, but
clearly no one senator is unambiguosly the veto pivot.
Thirteen Republican senators have positive probability
of being the ﬁlibuster pivot (the 60th Senator), ﬁve
of whom have p> .05, with Stevens the most likely
candidate for the ﬁlibuster pivot (p= .41), followed by
Warner (p= .26) and Campbell (p= .09).
A similar computation can be performed to recover
the estimated spatial location of pivotal legislators. The
right-hand panels in Figure 2 show the location of the
median, veto pivot, and ﬁlibuster pivot (with conﬁdence intervals), along with the estimated ideal points
(posterior means) and 95% conﬁdence intervals of adjacent senators. Again, it is apparent that there is little
uncertainty as to the median (Senator Collins). But an
interesting result arises for the veto pivot: Although
we are unsure as to the identity of the veto pivot, we
are quite sure as to the veto pivot’s location. A similar
result is also apparent for the ﬁlibuster pivot. While we
may be able to pin down the location of either pivot
with some precision, we do not know which legislators
will be the veto and ﬁlibuster pivots on any given vote.
This is a seldom noticed feature of contemporary U.S.
Congresses, but one with implications for lobbying and
legislative strategy; i.e., relatively precise knowledge of
wherethepivotsliedoesnotcorrespondtoknowingthe
identityofpivotallegislators,whosevotesarenecessary
to guarantee cloture or veto-proof majorities.
Example 3: Party Switchers and the “Party
Inﬂuence” Hypothesis
A major advantage of our modeling approach is the
ability to extend the model to encompass alternative models of legislative behavior. For instance, thus
far we assumed a Euclidean spatial voting model,
in which, conditional on legislators’ unobserved ideal
points (which are considered constant over the period
7 In principle, one could implement a similar procedure with
W-NOMINATE estimates, but two complications arise: (1) all
covariances among ideal points are implicitly set to zero since
W-NOMINATE only reports pointwise standard errors on each ideal
point and (2) an asymptotically valid normal approximation is assumed to characterize ideal point uncertainty (less pressing when
working with large roll call data sets). Lewis and Poole use
parameteric bootstrapping.
spanned by the roll call data), voting is independent
across legislators and roll calls. In the next set of examples we consider alternatives to this basic setup, all of
which are easily accommodated in our approach.
A question of particular interest to congressional
scholars is the inﬂuence of political parties on the
voting records of legislators. Party switchers—that
is, legislators who change parties between elections,
while continuing to represent the same geographic
constituency—provide something akin to a natural experiment: The switcher’s change in party afﬁliation
helps identify a “party effect,” since many other determinants of roll call voting remain constant (e.g., characteristics of the legislators’ constituency). The typical
investigation of party switchers 
uses a “pre/post” or “differences-in-differences” design, comparing changes in ideal point estimates for
the party switcher relative to the changes among the
switcher’s fellow legislators or a random selection of
nonswitchers .8
By deﬁnition, splitting the roll call data into “pre” and
“post” switching periods gives us fewer data than in the
entire legislative session, and, as a consequence, ideal
point estimates based on the pre and post sets of roll
calls will be less precise than those based on all roll calls.
Any comparison of change in the ideal points ought to
properly acknowledge the relative imprecision arising
from the smaller sets of roll calls available for analysis. A strength of our Bayesian simulation approach
is that we routinely obtain uncertainty assessments for
all model parameters, and all inferences will reﬂect the
drop in precision occasioned by slicing the roll call matrix around the party switch.
Theﬂexibilityofourapproachletsusformallyembed
a model for change in ideal points in a statistical model
for roll call data, greatly facilitating investigation of
the party switching hypothesis. Let s ∈{1, . . . , n} designate the party switcher and xi1 and xi0 be the ideal
points of legislator i in the postswitch and preswitch
periods, respectively. Then a weak form of the party
switcher hypothesis is that δs ≡xs1 −xs0 ̸= 0 (i.e., the
party switcher’s ideal point changes, presumably in
a direction consistent with the change in parties). A
strict form of the party switcher hypothesis involves
the n −1 additional restriction δi ≡xi1 −xi0 = 0, if i ̸= s
(i.e., the party switcher is the only legislator whose
preswitch and postswitch ideal points differ). An intermediate version of the switching hypothesis maintains that legislative ideal points may “drift” but that
the party switcher’s δs is larger than the nonswitchers’
δi. In any event, we require estimates of each legislators’ δ, either by running two separate analyses (splitting the roll call data around the time of the party
switch) or by a more direct (but equivalent) approach
8 An obvious threat to this approach is self-selection into the “treatment” of party switching, say, if party switching is motivating by
change in the personal preferences of the legislator; in this case we
could not distinguish any party effect from an effect due to the personal preferences of the legislator, but we do not pursue this issue
here. Other analyses of party switchers have also noted this problem:
See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal .
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
Uncertainty Over Identity and Location of Pivots, 106th U.S. Senate
Note: Left panel, summarizes uncertainty as to the identity of each pivot, Indicating the posterior probability that a particular senator
occupies the pivot. Right panel summarizes the uncertainty in the location of the pivot, the point indicating the posterior mean and the
bars covering a 95% conﬁdence interval.
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
in which we parameterize the postswitch ideal points
as xi0 + δi, i = 1, . . . , n.
Since the pre- and post-switch roll calls do not refer
to identical proposal and status quo positions, some
normalization is required to compare the resulting
ideal point estimates. Our solution is to focus on relative changes, since without further assumptions, any
“global” or “uniform” shift in the legislative agenda
or preferences around the party switch is unidentiﬁed.
That is, the average postswitch legislative proposal may
be more liberal than the average preswitch proposal
by distance ω, or (observationally equivalent) all legislators may move ω to the right (put simply, there is
no guarantee that the pre and post ideal point estimates are comparable). Solutions to this scaling problem abound: One could try to ﬁnd bills with identical “Yea” and “Nay” locations in both periods, or
assert that particular legislators do not move across
the party switch. The identifying restriction we adopt
is to estimate subject to the constraint that the legislators’ ideal points have mean zero and unit variance
in each period and that we interpret the δi as relative
We illustrate our method with the 107th U.S. Senate.
On May 24, 2001, Senator James M. Jeffords (VT)
announced that he would leave the Republican party
and become an independent. The switch was particularly consequential, giving the Democrats control
of the Senate: The postswitch partisan composition
was 50 Democrats, 49 Republicans, and 1 Independent (Jeffords). One hundred forty-eight nonunanimous votes were recorded in the 107th Senate prior
to Jeffords’s switch, and 349 were recorded postswitch.
Figure 3 summarizes the preswitch and postswitch
ideal point estimates (top panels) and rank orderings
(lower panels). We ﬁnd that the ideal points underlying Jeffords’ voting behavior differ across the switch:
The estimate of Jeffords’s postswitch ideal point is
statistically distinguishable and more liberal than the
preswitch estimate, indicating that a shift in Jeffords’s
preferred policy position accompanied his switch in
party afﬁliation.
But of course, there are numerous other senators
who do not switch parties but whose ideal points do
move markedly. Points above (below) the 45◦lines in
the left-hand panels in Figure 3 indicate senators moving in a conservative (liberal) direction. The 10 largest
changers in terms of ideal points are presented in the
top-right panel; the 10 largest changers in terms of rank
order appear in the lower-right panel (horizontal bars
indicate 95% conﬁdence intervals). The largest changer
in terms of spatial location is Wellstone (D, MN), with a
jump to the left estimated to be about .75 on the recovered scale. Since Wellstone is a preference outlier, his
ideal points (and hence change in ideal point) are estimated with considerable imprecision. Jeffords’s change
is almost as large, but estimated with considerably more
precision. However, even after taking into account uncertainty in the magnitude of the changes, there is no
disputing that Wellstone’s change is larger: The probability that Wellstone’s change is the largest change is
.284, while the probability that Jefford’s change is the
largest is only .068.9
Intriguingly, other large changers in terms of spatial
location are the two party leaders, Daschle (D, SD)
and Lott (R, MS). With Jeffords leaving the Republicans, Daschle becomes majority leader while Lott becomes minority leader. Both Daschle and Lott move
in a conservative direction, and are the third and ﬁfth
largest changers, respectively. When we trun to a consideration of ranks (lower panels in Figure 3; Daschle is
the largest switcher, moving 31 places to the right and
becoming markedly more moderate relative to other
senators. Daschle changes from about the 10th senator
(95% bound: 2nd–21st) to the 41st (35th–45th) senator (arraying senators from left to right, or liberal to
conservative), jumping from being unambiguously on
one side of the Democratic senate median to the other.
Lott is the fourth largest changer in terms of ranks (20
places), jumping from the 77th senator (68th–87th) to
the 97th (95th–100th). Jeffords, the party switcher, is
only the seventh largest switcher in terms of ranks and
is the largest switcher with probability .01. Daschle is
the largest switcher in terms of rank, with probability
.786. We would reject any hypothesis that the party
switcher’s change was the largest change we observe,
in terms of either spatial location or ranks.
These results are based on a unidimensional ﬁt to
a single congress, and, fortuitously, a party switch that
brought about a change in party control of the Senate,
and so we are cautious about reaching for any broad
conclusion. Nonetheless, these results are consistent
with policy moderation by majority leaders, perhaps in
order to more effectively represent and articulate party
policy positions, or even so as to secure the majority
leadership in the ﬁrst instance.
This example models change in ideal points around
a recent, vivid instance of party switching. But other
models of change in ideal points can be easily ﬁt into
this framework. Party switchers perhaps provide the
most direct evidence of party effects, but the methodology can be used to examine changes elsewhere (e.g.,
across congressional sessions, congresses, or politically
consequential “shocks” in American political history).
Example 4: A Two-Cutpoint, “Party
Inﬂuence” Model
Our ﬁnal example again examines the question of party
pressure in legislative behavior. The standard model
assumes that conditional on a legislator’s ideal point xi
and the vote parameters βj, vote yi j is independent of
yi′j′, for all i ̸= i′, j ̸= j′: e.g., shocks making legislator
i more likely to vote Yea do not make legislator i′ any
9 The probability that Senator X is the biggest changer is computed
as the proportion of times a particular senator’s change is the largest
change, over many draws from the posterior density of the preswitch
and postswitch ideal points (i.e., we induce a posterior density on
the identity of the largest switcher. This example again highlights the
ﬂexibility and ease of the Bayesian simulation approach to estimation
and inference for roll call analysis. See also the earlier example where
we induce posterior densities over the identity of critical pivots.
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
Comparison of Ideal Point Estimates and Ranks, 107th U.S. Senate, Pre and Post
Jeffords Switch
Note: For the panels on the left, the preswitch estimates (posterior means) are plotted against the horizontal axis, and the postswitch
quantities are plotted against the vertical axis; squares indicate signiﬁcant change and the diagonal line is a 45◦line (i.e., if there was
no relative change, then all the data points would lie on the line).
more or less likely to vote Yea. Accordingly, the recovered ideal points need to be interpreted with some
caution. Party inﬂuence or “whipping” is one way that
conditionalindependencecanbebreached:e.g.,legislators whose preferences might lead them to vote Yea are
persuaded to vote Nay, and vice versa. Modeling roll
call data without considering these possibilities leads to
ideal point estimates that absorb a shock common to
members of a given party (or, say, a whipped subset of
a party’s members); to the extent that party inﬂuence
is an unmodeled common shock, then the recovered xi
display greater partisan polarization than exists in the
“true” xi. Note that while party inﬂuence is a plausible mechanism for generating party-speciﬁc utility
shocks, we are wary of inferring the presence of party
pressure given evidence of party-speciﬁc utility shocks;
we acknowledge that other mechanisms may generate
party-speciﬁc utility shocks (e.g., lobbying by activists
orinterestgroupsthattargetslegislatorsfromoneparty
more than the other) and so we refer to “party-speciﬁc
inducements” rather than “party-pressure.”
It is straightforward to augment the standard voting model to allow for party-speciﬁc inducements. For
instance, suppose that in addition to the standard
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
quadratic spatial utilities, legislator i receives δPi
net incentive to vote Yea vis-`a-vis Nay on vote j, but
where the net incentive is speciﬁc to i’s party afﬁliation, Pi = D if i is a Democrat and Pi = R if i is a Republican. If there are only two parties, then α j and δPi
are unidentiﬁed. At best we can estimate a net difference in party-speciﬁc inducements, δ j = δD
also Krehbiel 2003): i.e., we estimate y∗
i j ≡Ui j(“Yea”)
−Ui j(“Nay”) = xiβ j −α j + δ j Di + εi j, where Di is a
binary indicator coded one if legislator i is a Democrat
and zero otherwise, and for this example we assume
that the εi j are iid logistic (logit rather than probit).10
Since the standard model nests as a special case of
the two-cutpoint model, it is straightforward to assess
whether the restrictions implicit in the standard model
are valid, by testing the joint null hypothesis H0: δ j = 0,
for all j.
In addition, we also need to deﬁne a set of votes in
which the net party-speciﬁc inducements are not relevant (or can be reasonably assumed to be zero), since
if every roll call was assumed to be potentially subject
to party inﬂuence, then there is no way to compare the
recovered ideal points of Democrats and Republicans.
By way of analogy, consider standardized test items
that (say, due to cultural biases) are suspected to be
easier for group A than for group B: a phenomenon
known as differential item functioning (DIF); e.g., see
Holland and Wainer . Does better test performance by group A reﬂect higher ability than group
B, or DIF? Unless we can identify a set of test items
that are known to be DIF-free and use these items to
pin down ability, then there is no way to distinguish
apparent differences in ability from DIF.
Several implementations of party inﬂuence models
appear in the literature. Snyder and Groseclose 
use a two-stage procedure: First, using lop-sided votes
(thosedecidedbymorethan65/35margins),estimate xi
via the standard model using the linear factor-analysis
model due to Heckman and Snyder ; second,
on non-lop-sided votes, estimate the linear regression
of votes on xi and a dummy variable for Democratic
legislators, with the coefﬁcient on the dummy variable
interpreted as a coefﬁcient of party inﬂuence. Aside
from (1) equating net party-speciﬁc inducements with
party inﬂuence and (2) assuming no net party-speciﬁc
inducements for lop-sided votes, this approach makes
some strong additional assumptions: (3) the use of the
Heckman–Snyder factor-analytic estimator in the ﬁrst
stage; (4) the use of a linear regression model with the
binary dependent variables (Yeas and Nays) in the second stage (Synder and Groseclose use a Huber–White
robust variance–covariance estimator to correct for
the resulting heteroskedasticity); and (5) the fact that
the xi result from a measurement procedure (the ﬁrst
stage) and generate an “errors-in-variables” problem,
10 McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal refer to this class of model
as a “two-cutpoint” model, since it implies separate points where
legislators of each party are indifferent between voting “Yea” and
voting “Nay.”
which Synder and Groseclose tackle via instrumental
variables.11
In contrast, our approach provides a direct way to
test for party inﬂuence; our modeling approach is easily extended to let us embed parameters tapping party
inﬂuence. That is, we ﬁt one model to the data, with
the statistical speciﬁcation following directly from augmenting the utility functions with inducements speciﬁc
to each vote, by party afﬁliation. In this way there is
no need to break the estimation into separate pieces
(one to recover ideal point estimates free of party effects, the other to recover estimates of effects, conditional on the ideal points recovered from the ﬁrst
stage): Uncertainty in the recovered ideal points estimates propagates into uncertainty in the estimates of
the vote-speciﬁc parameters (β j, α j, and δ j), and vice
versa. The two-stage approach has been criticized for
generating baised estimates of the ideal points of moderate legislators in the ﬁrst stage . But with our approach
we use all votes to learn about the legislators’ ideal
points—even those votes thought to be subject to party
pressure—and so we are less prone to this source of
Note that in our parameterization the δ j are net
utility shocks speciﬁc to Democratic senators and, so,
alternate sign depending on whether the net partyspeciﬁc inducement was for Democrats to vote Yea
(δ j > 0) or Nay (δ j < 0). In addition, for perfect party
line votes, the likelihood for the data attains a maximum at δ j = ± ∞(i.e. votes with perfect separation by
party are consistent with an inﬁnite amount of party
pressure!), causing classical estimation procedures to
break down. Party pressure may be large or small, but
certainty not inﬁnite, and we express this belief via
proper prior densities on the δ j that assign inﬁnitesimal probability to inﬁnite party pressure, and bound
the posterior densities for δ j away from ±∞.12
We estimate our expanded model with 534 nonunanimous roll calls from the 105th U.S. Senate (55 Republicans, 45 Democrats). To identify the model we
constrain Senators Kennedy and Helms to have ideal
points of −1 and 1, respectively. The two-cutpoint
model requires the additional identifying constraint
δ j = 0 among roll calls decided with majorities of
65% or more (“lop-sided” votes), consistent with the
Snyder and Groseclose approach: 257 of the 534
nonunanimous roll calls meet this criteria. Vague normals prior distributions are used for the δ j parameters
(mean zero, variance 16) for the remaining 277 “close”
roll calls (decided by margins closer than 65–35). Of
these close roll calls, 93 (33.6%) have net party-speciﬁc
inducements that are signiﬁcantly different from zero
(again, in the sense that the 95% conﬁdence interval on the corresponding δ j does not overlap zero).
11 Another implementation of the two-cutpoint approach appears in
McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal , using a nonparametric optimal classiﬁcation algorithm : they compare the increase
in classiﬁcation success in moving from one to two cutpoints.
12 Note that Snyder and Groseclose effectively sidestep this
issue by ﬁtting the binary roll data by least-squares linear regression.
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
Net Party-Speciﬁc Inducements, 105th U.S. Senate, by Roll Call Margin and Party
Note: Each point represents posterior means of the net party-speciﬁc inducements parameters (δ j ), plotted against roll call margin
and party cohesion (number of Democrats voting with majority of Democrats plus number of Republicans voting with majority of
Republicans, as a proportion of all votes cast). Solid points indicate parameters signiﬁcantly different from zero at conventional 95%
levels. Unsurprisingly, the largest and most consistently signiﬁcant net party-speciﬁc inducement estimates occur when the Senate splits
on (or close to) party lines (55 R–45 D).
Figure 4 plots the means of the posterior density of
each δ j parameter against the margin of victory (left
panel) and party cohesion (right panel) per “close” roll
call. Our analysis shows that net party-speciﬁc inducements are at their largest for roll calls decided along
party lines and decline as the votes become more lopsided. Nonetheless, the extent of party line voting we
ﬁnd here is smaller than those reported by Snyder
and Groseclose and closer to the proportions
found by Cox and Poole , although the latter
analysis considered voting in the House of Representatives.
The actual magnitudes of the δ j warrant elaboration
as well. The smallest, statistically signiﬁcant δ j we obtain are roughly ±2.0. To assess the magnitude of this
effect, consider a moderate Republican and Democrat
who ex ante are indifferent between voting Yea and
voting Nay. A net party-speciﬁc inducement corresponding to δ j = 2 makes the probability of the Democrat voting Yea about .73 and the corresponding probability for the Republican .27. If the net party pressure
is all one-sided, say all Democratic, then the probability of the Democrat voting Yea goes up to .88; conversely, if the party pressure is all Republican, then the
probability of the Republican voting Yea is .12. Note
that these are the smallest statistically signiﬁcant estimates of δ j we obtain, with estimates of ±4 being more
common. That is, although we ﬁnd evidence consistent
with party pressure on just one-third of close votes, the
magnitude of that pressure seems large and politically
consequential.
We can compare the ideal point estimates produced
by our augmented model with those from the standard model. A standard one-dimensional spatial voting
model ﬁnds absolutely no overlap between the ideal
points of Democrats and Republicans in the 105th U.S.
Senate. This complete separation between the parties
arises in part because any voting on close votes driven
by party-speciﬁc inducements is attributed wholly to
differences in the legislators’ ideal points. Once we admit the possibility of party-speciﬁc inducements, the
two partisan groupings actually overlap: Breaux, the
most conservative Democrat, has roughly the same
ideal point as the most liberal Republicans, Specter
and Jeffords. Even after estimating net party-speciﬁc
inducements speciﬁc to each roll call, we still ﬁnd considerable partisan polarization but substantially less
polarization than the levels recovered from a conventional statistical analysis using the standard model.
CONCLUSION
Roll call analysis and the statistical operationalization
of the Euclidean spatial voting model is a critical component of the scientiﬁc study of legislative politics. Although existing methods for the statistical analysis of
roll call data have been employed in many settings and
produced important insights, the Bayesian simulation
approach we present builds upon and improves extant
methods in several ways. First, Bayesian methods permit auxiliary information to be brought to bear on roll
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
call analysis in a straightforward and theoretically consistent way; this auxiliary information may include (but
is not restricted to) expert judgments about dimensional structure, the location of extremist legislators,
legislator-speciﬁccovariates,ortheevolutionofthelegislative agenda. Second, the methodology we present is
sufﬁciently ﬂexible so as to easily accommodate alternative models of legislative behavior. For example, it
is possible to permit ideal point estimates to change
over time by modeling the process associated with that
change (e.g., legislators switching afﬁliations between
political parties). Finally, Bayesian simulation exploits
tremendous increases in computing power available
to social scientists over the last decade or so: Estimation and inference via simulation—long known to be
an attractive statistical methodology —is now a reality. Consequently, our
model works in any legislative setting, irrespective of
the size of the legislature or its agenda.
Thus Bayesian methods can make roll call analysis
less a mechanical scaling exercise in which scholars
simply feed roll call data to a “black box” algorithm
and more a way to test theoretically interesting models
of legislative behavior. In sum, the Bayesian simulation methodology we present lets scholars (1) incorporate substantive information about the proposals being
voted upon or (2) about the prefenences that structure
the ideal points being estimated, (3) impose theoretically implied constraints on the standard model, and
(4) easily estimate and test alternative and models of
legislator voting.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithm
The difference between the utilities of the alternatives on
the jth roll call for the ith legislator is y∗
i j ≡Ui(ζ j) −
Ui(ψ j) = β′
jxi −α j + εi j, where, for simplicity, we have set
σ j = 1. If βj and α j are given, then xi is a vector of “regression coefﬁcients” that can be imputed from the regression of
i j + α j on βj using the m votes of legislator i. If xi is given,
then we use the votes of the n legislators on roll call j to
impute βj and α j. Then given xi, βj, and α j, the latent utility
differences y∗
i j are simulated by drawing errors from a normal
distribution subject to the constraints implied by the actual
votes (if yi j = 1, then y∗
i j > 0, and if yi j = 0, then y∗
i j < 0), and
the process repeats.
In our Bayesian approach, priors are required for all parameters: βj and α j, j = 1, . . . , m and xi, i = 1, . . . , n. For the
probit version of our model we have standard normal errors
εi j and normal priors for the ideal points and the βj and α j
parameters, leading to simple expressions for the conditional
densities that drive the MCMC algorithm. For βj and α j, we
denote the priors N(T0, T0); we generally choose vague priors by setting T0 = 0 and T0 = κ · Id+1, with κ a large positive
quantity (e.g., κ = 52). For the legislators’ ideal points, we
use the normal prior xi
iid∼N(vi, Vi), where usually vi = 0 and
Vi = Id (an identity matrix of order d), but for legislators we
are ﬁxing to an set location (e.g., Kennedy and Helms, so as
to normalize the scale of the latent traits), we use the prior
N(xi, ν · Id), where ν is an arbitrarily small, positive quantity
(i.e., a “spike prior” at xi).
The goal is to compute the joint posterior density for
all model parameters βj and α j, j = 1, . . . , m and xi, i =
1, . . . , n. A MCMC algorithm provides a computer-intensive
exploration or “random tour” of this joint density, by successively sampling from the conditional densities that together
characterize the joint density. The model here is isomorphic
with a two-parameter item–response theory model: Albert
 showed how an MCMC algorithm can be used to explore the posterior density of this model; see also Patz and
Junker and Johnson and Albert . Augmenting
the MCMC algorithm with the latent y∗
i j greatly simpliﬁes
the computation of the probit version of the model, letting
us exploit standard results on the Bayesian analysis of linear
regression models as we show below; we obtain y∗
i j by sampling from its predictive density given the current values of
the other parameters and the roll call data. Letting t index iterations of the MCMC algorithm, iteration t of the algorithm
comprises sampling from the following conditional densities.
i j | yi j, x∗
i , βjα j). At the start of iteration t, we have
and x(t−1)
. We sample y∗(t)
from one of the two
following densities, depending on whether we observed a
Yea (yi j = 1) or a Nay (yi j = 0):
yi j = 0, x(t−1)
(truncated normal),
yi j = 1, x(t−1)
(truncated normal),
where µ(t−1)
and I(·) is an indicator function. For abstentions and other missing roll calls
we sample y∗(t)
from the untruncated normal density
, 1), effectively generating multiple imputations
for these missing data over iterations of the MCMC algorithm.
2. g(βj, α j | X, y∗
i j). For j = 1, . . . , m, sample β(t)
from the multivariate normal density with mean vector
[X∗′X∗+ T−1
[X∗′y∗(t) + T−1
covariance matrix [X∗′X∗+ T−1
0 ]−1, where X∗
n × (d + 1) matrix with typical row x∗
i = (x(t−1)
, −1), y∗(t)
an n × −1 vector of sampled latent utility differentials for
the jth roll call, and recalling that N(T0, T0) is the prior for
βj and α j. This amounts to running “Bayesian regression”
and a negative intercept and then sampling
from the posterior density for the coefﬁcients βj and α j,
for j = 1, . . . , m.
3. g(xi | y∗
i j, β j, α j). Rearranging the latent linear regression yields wi j = y∗
i j + α j = x′
iβj + εi j. Collapse these equations over the j subscript, to yield the n regressions
wi = Bxi + εi, where B is the m× d matrix with the
jth row given by β′
j. That is, we have n regressions,
with the ideal points xi as parameters to be updated.
Again exploiting conjugacy, the update is performed by
sampling each x(t)
from the d-dimensional normal density with mean vector (B′B + V−1
i )−1(B′w j + V−1
variance–covariance matrix (B′B + V−1
j )−1. After updating all xi(i = 1, . . . , n), we optionally renormalize the xi
to have zero mean and unit variance, say, when ﬁtting
a unidimensional model without a Kennedy-Helms type
restriction.
Sampling from these distributions updates all the unknown
quantities in the probit model. At the end of iteration t,
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
denote the current values of the parameters of interest as
ξ(t) = (B(t), α(t), X(t)). Iterating the MCMC algorithm produces a sequence ξ(1), ξ(2), . . . that comprises a Markov chain,
with the joint posterior density for ξ as its limiting distribution. That is, after a large number of iterations of the algorithm, successive samples of ξ are drawn from its posterior
density. These samples are saved and summarized for inference. Any function of these parameters can also be computed
and saved, such as rank orderings of the legislators, pairwise
comparisons of legislators, or the separating hyperplanes for
particular roll calls.
The MCMC algorithm is initialized as follows. For the
ideal points, we perform the eigen-decomposition described
in footnote 4. These initial values are the estimates we would
get from treating the ideal-point estimation problem as a
principal-components factor analysis problem, ignoring the
fact that the roll call data are not continuous variables (the
binary character of the roll call data becomes less problematic
as m→∞, and so for large roll call data sets from contemporary U.S. Congresses this procedure yields excellent start
values). We are grateful to Keith Poole for suggesting this
procedure, which is also used to generate start values for
NOMINATE. For the bill-speciﬁc parameters βj and α j we
obtain start values by running probits of the observed votes
y j on the start values for the ideal points, j = 1, . . . , m.
With any MCMC approach, diagnosing convergence of the
Markov chain is critical. Our experience is that the MCMC
algorithm performs reasonably well for the roll call problem,
moving away from start values to the neighborhood of a posterior mode quite quickly. For simple unidimensional ﬁts, we
usually let the sampler run for anywhere between 50,000 and
500,000 iterations and then thin the output (storing the output
of every 100th to every 1,000th iteration) so as to produce a
reasonable number of approximately independent samples
from the posterior for inference (say, between 250 and 1,000
Figure 5 shows trace plots of the MCMC algorithm for
single parameters (the ideal points of Kennedy, Collins, and
Helms, from a unidimensional model ﬁt to 106th U.S. Senate) in the top three panels and for the joint density of selected pairs of legislative ideal points in the lower panels.
The identifying restriction is that the ideal points have mean
WinBUGS Code, Implementing Standard Euclidean
Spatial Voting Model Via Logit
for(i in 1:N){
## loop over legislators
for(j in 1:M){
## loop over roll calls
## model for roll calls
logit(pi[i,j]) <−x[i]∗beta[j,1] −beta[j,2]
y[i,j] ∼dbern(pi[i,j])
## priors over model parameters
for(i in 3:100){
x[i] ∼dnorm(0, .01)
## vague normal priors
## Kennedy constrained to −1
## Helms constrained to 1
for(j in 1:M){
beta[j,1] ∼dnorm(0,. 04) ## vague normal priors
beta[j,2] ∼dnorm(0,. 04) ## mean zero, variance 25
Note: This code presumes that the roll call matrix has been sorted such that the voting
histories of Kennedy and Helms are in the ﬁrst and second rows, respectively.
zero and variance one across legislators. In the upper panels, the MCMC algorithm is approximately a random walk
without drift in the parameter space, consistent with the sampler behaving well, randomly traversing the posterior density; the gray line indicates the posterior mean based on the
post “burn-in” samples, and the dotted lines indicate 95%
conﬁdence intervals. The snaking solid lines are smoothed
or moving averages and a cumulative mean; note that after
sufﬁcient iterations, the cumulative mean of the MCMC algorithm becomes indistinguishable from the posterior mean,
and the running mean slowly undulates about the posterior
mean, indicating lack of drift (consistent with the sampler
having converged on the posterior density). Half a million
iterations were computed; so to as produce approximately
independent samples from the posterior density, only every
1,000th iteration is retained for making inferences and the
thinned iterations have AR(1) parameters averaging about
.06 (maximum AR = .23, for Boxer). In the lower panels,
each joint posterior mean is indicated by an open circle,
and joint 95% conﬁdence intervals are indicated by ellipses, the latter computed assuming that the joint posterior densities can be approximated with bivariate normal
densities.
For small roll call data sets, the free, general-purpose MCMC
package WinBUGS can be used
to implement our approach: only a few lines of WinBUGS
commands are needed. For instance, the WinBUGS code
for a simple unidimensional model ﬁtted via logit and the
Kennedy–Helms identiﬁcation constraint is given in Table 3.
Elaborations on this basic setup are available at Jackman’s
Web site ( Given the computational burden of analyzing larger roll call data sets, we use
a C program, authored by Jackman, implementing the MCMC
algorithm for the probit model discussed above. In turn, this
program can be called directly from the (free) R statistical
program. We also use R for preparing roll call data sets for
analysis, inspecting the output of the MCMC algorithm, and
producing the graphs and tables in the body of the paper. All
code is available upon request.
American Political Science Review
Vol. 98, No. 2
Iterative History of the MCMC Algorithm, 106th U.S. Senate
Note: For the top three panels, the light gray horizontal line is the posterior mean (based on the post-burn-in iterations), the dark solid line
undulating around the posterior mean is a moving average, and the dotted horizontal lines indicate the width of a 95% conﬁdence interval
around the posterior mean; for the bottom three graphs, the open circle is the joint posterior mean and the grey ellipse approximates a
joint 95% conﬁdence interval (both based on the post-burn-in iterations).
Computing time is clearly a relevant consideration for
simulation-based methods. Our experience is that computing
time increases in nmT, where n is the number of legislators
and m is the number of bills, and so nm is the number of
individual voting decisions being modeled (assuming no abstentions or missing data), and T is the number of MCMC iterations desired. The computational cost of moving to higher
dimensions is surprisingly small. The unidimensional 106th
U.S. Senate example involved modeling n = 102 ideal points
and m= 596 pairs of bill (or item) parameters, with 58,156
nonmissing individual voting decisions. Half a million iterations of the MCMC algorithm required just over three hours
on a Dell PC with a 3.0 GHz Intel processor, or about 2,650
iterations per minute. For a one-dimensional ﬁt to the 106th
Statistical Analysis of Roll Call Data
House (n = 440, m= 1,073, with 444,326 nonmissing individual voting decisions), a 150,000-iteration run took 6.4 h,
or about 391 iterations per minute, on the same hardware.
For a one-dimensional ﬁt to the U.S. Supreme Court (n = 9,
m = 213, with 1,907 nonmissing individual voting decisions),
a 500,000-iteration run took 15 min, or about 33,250 iterations
per minute. These extremely long runs are usually not necessary, but we were being especially cautious about ensuring
that the MCMC algorithm had converged on and thoroughly
explored the posterior density.