XAI Metrics
Metrics for Explainable AI:
Challenges and Prospects
Robert R. Hoffman
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition [ ]
Shane T. Mueller
Michigan Technological University [ ]
Gary Klein
Macrocognition, LLC [ ]
Jordan Litman
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition [ ]
The question addressed in this paper is: If we present to a user an AI system that
explains how it works, how do we know whether the explanation works and the
user has achieved a pragmatic understanding of the AI? In other words, how do
we know that an explanainable AI system (XAI) is any good? Our focus is on the
key concepts of measurement. We discuss specific methods for evaluating: (1) the
goodness of explanations, (2) whether users are satisfied by explanations, (3) how
well users understand the AI systems, (4) how curiosity motivates the search for
explanations, (5) whether the user's trust and reliance on the AI are appropriate,
finally, (6)
recommendations we present derive from our integration of extensive research
literatures and our own psychometric evaluations.
1 Introduction
For decision makers who rely upon Artificial Intelligence (AI), analytics and data science,
explainability is an issue. If a computational system relies on a simple statistical model, decision
makers can understand it and convince executives who have to sign off on a system that it is
reasonable and that seems fair. They can justify the analytical results to shareholders, regulators,
etc. But for Machine Learning and Deep Net systems, they can no longer do this. There is a need
for ways to explain the computational system to the decision maker so that they know that their
full process is going to be reasonable.
___________________________________________________________________________
This material is approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. This material is based on research sponsored
by the Air Force Research Lab (AFRL) under agreement number FA8650-17-2-7711. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
thereon. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of AFRL or the U.S.
Government.
XAI Metrics
... current efforts face unprecedented difficulties: contemporary models are more
complex and less interpretable than ever; [AI is] used for a wider array of tasks,
and are more pervasive in everyday life than in the past; and [AI is] increasingly
allowed to make (and take) more autonomous decisions (and actions). Justifying
these decisions will only become more crucial, and there is little doubt that this
field will continue to rise in prominence and produce exciting and much needed
work in the future .
This quotation brings into relief the importance of "Explainable AI" (XAI.) A proposed
regulation before the European Union prohibits "automatic
processing" unless user's rights are safeguarded. Users have a "right to an explanation"
concerning algorithm-created decisions that are based on personal information. Future laws may
restrict AI, which represents a challenge to industry.
Expert Systems researchers have previously implemented methods for explanation . In a sense, explanation is
what and Intelligent Tutoring Systems were (and are) all about . AI systems are receiving considerable attention in the recent popular
press . Reporting and opinion pieces have discussed social justice, equity, and
fairness issues that are implicated by AI .
The goals of explanation involve answering questions such as, "How does it work?" and "What
mistakes can it make?" and “Why did it just do that?” The question addressed in this paper is: If
we present to a user an AI system that explains how it works, how do we go about measuring
whether or not it works, whether it works well, and whether the user has achieved a pragmatic
understanding? Our focus in this paper is on the key concepts of measurement for the evaluation
of XAI systems and human-machine performance.
1.1 Key Measurement Concepts
The concept or process of explanation or understanding has been explored in one way or another
by scholars and scientists of all schools and specializations, spanning all of human civilization.
To say that the pertinent literature is enormous is an understatement. In modern times, the
concept is a focus in Philosophy of Science, Psychology (Cognitive, Developmental, Social,
Organizational), Education and Training, Team Science, and Human Factors.
While explainable AI is only now gaining widespread visibility, [there is a]
continuous history of work on explanation and can provide a pool of ideas for
researchers currently tackling the task of explanation and Hoffman, Klein and Mueller .
A conceptual model of the XAI explaining process is presented in Figure 1. This diagram
highlights four major classes of measures. Initial instruction in how to use an AI system will
enable the user to form an initial mental model of the task and the AI system. Subsequent
experience, which can include system-generated explanations, would enable to participant to
refine their mental model, which should lead to better performance and appropriate trust and
Figure 1. A conceptual model of the process of explaining, in the XAI context.
By hypothesis, explanations that are good and are satisfying to users enable users to develop a
good mental model. In turn, their good mental model will enable them to develop appropriate
trust in the AI and perform well when using the AI. To evaluate this model of the explanation
process, a number of types of measures are required . In the remainder of this
report we detail each of the four classes of measures and offer specific methodological
suggestions.
2 Explanation Goodness and Satisfaction
The property of "being an explanation" is not a property of statements, it is an interaction. What
counts as an explanation depends on what the learner/user needs, what knowledge the user
(learner) already has, and especially the user's goals. This leads to a consideration of function
and context of the AI system (software, algorithm, tool), That is, why does a given user need an
XAI Metrics
explanation? In the various pertinent literatures, this is expressed in terms of the different kinds
of questions that a user might have. These “triggers” for explanation are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Triggers and goals.
USER/LEARNER’S GOAL
How do I use it?
Achieve the primary ask goals
How does it work?
Feeling of satisfaction at having achieved an
understanding of the system, in general (global
understanding)
What did it just do?
Feeling of satisfaction at having achieved a
understanding of how the system made a particular
decision (local understanding)
What does it achieve?
Understanding of the system's functions and uses
What will it do next?
Feeling of trust based on the observability and
predictability of the system
How much effort will this take?
Feeling of effectiveness and achievement of the
primary task goals
What do I do if it gets it wrong?
Desire to avoid mistakes
How do I avoid the failure modes?
Desire to mitigate errors
What would it have done if x were
different?
Resolution of curiosity at having achieved an
understanding of the system
Why didn’t it do z?
Resolution of curiosity at having achieved an
understanding of the local decision
Thus, the seeking of an explanation can tacitly be an expression of a need for a certain kind of
explanation, to satisfy certain user purposes of user goals.
2.1 Explanation Goodness
Looking across the scholastic and research literatures on explanation, we find assertions about
what makes for a good explanation, from the standpoint of statements as explanations,. There is a
general consensus on this; factors such as clarity and precision. Thus, one can look at a given
explanation and make an a priori (or decontextualized) judgment as to whether or not it is
"good." Appendix A presents a Goodness Checklist that can be used by XAI researchers to either
try and design goodness into the explanations that their XAI system generates, or to evaluate the
a priori goodness of the explanations that an XAI system generates. In a proper experiment, the
researchers who complete the checklist, with reference to some particular AI-generated
XAI Metrics
explanation, would not be the ones who created the XAI system under study. Using the
Goodness checklist, those independent judges ask, Are the researchers right in claiming that their
explanations are good?
2.2 Explanation Satisfaction
While an explanation might be deemed good in the manner described above, it may at the same
time not be adequate or satisfying to users-in-context. Explanation Satisfaction is defined as the
degree to which users feel that they understand the AI system or process being explained to
them. Compared to Goodness, as we defined it above, satisfaction is a contextualized, a
posteriori judgment of explanations.
Based on our review of the psychological literature on explanation, including theoretical and
empirical work by Muir and by Cahour and Forzy , we identified several key
attributes of explanations: understandability, feeling of satisfaction, sufficiency of detail,
completeness, usefulness, accuracy, and trustworthiness. These terms were incorporated into an
initial pool of Likert scale items that we constructed for review and evaluation.
Standard practice in psychometrics involves assuring that a scale is internally consistent or
reliable (evaluated primarily by the method of Cronbach's alpha, which is based on inter-item
covariance). For the XAI context, it is immediate importance to determine the validity of an
Explanation Satisfaction scale.
2.3 Scale Validation: Content Validity
Psychometric theory describes several methods for evaluating validity, all of which ultimately
refer to the question, Does the scale measure what it is intended to measure? Two distinct kinds
of validity are immediately pertinent to the development of a scale of Explanation Satisfaction.
These are described in Table 2.
Table 2. Types of validity that are immediately pertinent to an evaluation of the Satisfaction Scale.
Surface (i.e., “face”) Validity
This is a judgment that the items appear to measure what they are intended to measure because they refer
literally and explicitly to the conceptual measurables that the instrument is supposed to measure. For
example, a questionnaire item that asks you to rate how smart you think you are compared to the average
person would have surface validity as a measure of self-perceived intelligence since it refers explicitly to
the concept of intelligence, and asks for a rating that treats intelligence as a scalar variable. (Setting aside
for now the fact that the rating might be biased.)
Construct Validity
XAI Metrics
Construct validity is the analysis of the test in terms of some theoretical framework, or the reliance on an
accepted theoretical framework in the construction of the test and the individual items. "[It] reflects the
degree to which the measurement instrument spans the domain of the construct’s theoretical definition; it
is the extent to which a measurement instrument captures the different facets of a construct"
 . Thus, the measurements fall on a measurement scale that is interpreted as
a measure of the theoretical concept .
These aspects of validity can be evaluated by having domain experts make judgments as to
whether the scale items are meaningful and measurable indicators of the relevant psychological
construct, and consistent with the accepted theoretical framework for the construct. We
conducted a validation study with the cooperation of participants and attendees at a recent
DARPA-sponsored meeting of XAI researchers. The participants could express their judgments
by rating the degree to which each scale item is essential to measuring the construct.
Participants were asked to evaluate the scale using the Content Validity Ratio (CVR) method
 . The CVR is useful for quantitatively assessing the strength of each scale item
with a small group of raters. The scale that was presented to participants is presented in Table 3.
Table 3. The CVR version of the Explanation Satisfaction scale.
For each item listed below, please indicate whether you believe that the item is:
Essential for measuring Explanation Satisfaction,
Useful but not Essential, or
Not Necessary for measuring Explanation Satisfaction.
Indicate your response by circling the appropriate number.
Useful but
not essential
I understand this explanation of how the [software,
algorithm, tool] works.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works is satisfying.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works has sufficient detail.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works contains irrelevant details.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works seems complete.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works tells me how to use it.
This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool]
works is useful to my goals.
XAI Metrics
This explanation of says how accurate the [software,
algorithm, tool] is.
This explanation lets me judge when I should trust and
not trust the [software, algorithm, tool]
In order to get reasonably stable psychometric estimates for evaluating the items' communality, a
rule of thumb (in the psychometric literature) is that one wants 5-10 respondents. At the DARPA
PI meeting we received responses from 35 domain practitioners.
Six of the participants identified as software engineers, four self-identified as graduate students
(primarily in computer science or engineering), one as a test pilot, and three did not specify their
profession. Fifteen individuals self-identified as computer scientists (Ph.D. and BS/MS degrees).
Three participants self-identified as psychologists. The remaining 21 participants self-identified
as researchers, professors, or research managers (fields including computer science, engineering,
psychology, and mathematics).
In keeping with recommendations on using the CVR method for item selection , items that are rated as either "essential" or "useful" by more
than 50% of the professionals were selected for further analysis; items that did not meet this
criteria were dropped from further consideration. For each selected item, the CVR was calculated
by dividing the number of respondents who rated the item as "essential" or "useful" to the total
number of participants. CVR ratios are calculated for each item separately, by dividing the
number of raters who rated an item as either "essential" or "useful" to the total number of
participants. The resulting ratio values for all scale items are aggregated and transformed to a
scale that ranges between −1 (perfect disagreement) and +1 (perfect agreement), with CVR
values above zero indicating that over half of our domain professionals judged the item to be a
highly valid indicator of ES as a psychological construct.
The average CVR for all participants who self-identified as having Ph.D. degrees was 0.43. The
CVR for the computer scientists was 0.60. The average CVR for the self-identified
"Researchers" was 0.43, and for "Others" was 0.57. According to Ayre and Scally the
Critical Value of the average CVR should be 0.50 or greater. Given our relatively large sample
size, we take our results (positive CVRs in the range of 0.43 to 0.60) to indicate reasonably high
agreement as to the validity of the scale items.
Many participants reported that they found item number 4 to be confusing. This is the only item
that would be reverse scored (i.e., an explanation would be unsatisfying if it contained irrelevant
details). For this reason, we recalculated the Critical Values after dropping this scale item. All
other items were rated as either "Essential" or "Useful" measures of Explanation Satisfaction. It
is interesting to note the Computer Scientists and Electrical Engineers collectively showed higher
agreement than the Psychologists. This seems to be due to the high ratings given to scale item
number 7 by the individuals who self-identified as psychologists. They appear to have been
emphasizing the importance of the goal relevance of explanations.
XAI Metrics
We assessed the internal consistency of the ES scale. Cronbach's alpha was 0.86; ES items had
item-total correlations ranging from 0.41 to 0.76 and an average inter-item correlation of 0.71,
indicative of excellent internal consistency reliability, especially for such a brief scale that is
very easy to administer and score .
2.4 Scale Validation: Discriminant Validity
Our next step was to test the discriminant validity of the ES scale, that is, does it differentiate
between relatively good and poor explanations. The scale resulting from the CVR analysis was
subjected to analysis of its discriminant validity using three test cases (How does a cruise control
work? How do computers predict hurricanes? How do cell phones find directions?). For each test
case, a small group of experts were employed to generate what they felt were "good"
explanations, and the researchers themselves developed what they felt were "bad" versions. The
"bad" versions were sparse, had irrelevant details, and some incorrect statements. The materials
are presented in Appendix B.
Eight volunteers (students and junior researchers at IHMC) were asked to use the Explanation
Satisfaction Scale to rate “good” and “bad” explanations. We calculated a 2 (Explanation
Quality: “Good” vs. “Bad”) x 2 (Object to be explained) mixed model ANOVA, for which the
scale ratings were treated as a repeated measure. The main effect for ratings of Explanation
Quality was only marginally significant [F (1,6) = .455; p < .08], but the size of the effect was
quite large (Cohen’s d = 1.5, equivalent to a r2 = .36) indicating that, in general, scale ratings
corresponded to higher values being awarded to good explanations (M = 42.75; SD = 3.40) and
lower values being given for bad explanations (M = 30.00; SD = 11.46). No statistically
significant effect was found for giving repeated scale ratings or for the interaction with
Explanation Quality.
In conclusion, results from the content validity analysis and discriminant validity analysis show
that the ES scale is valid. The Explanation Satisfaction Scale is presented in Appendix C. Like
the Explanation Goodness Checklist (Appendix A), the Explanation Satisfaction Scale was based
on the literatures in cognitive psychology, philosophy of science, and other pertinent disciplines
regarding the features that make explanations good. Thus, the Explanation Satisfaction Scale is
very similar to the Explanation Goodness Checklist. However, the application context for the
two scales is quite different.
• The Explanation Goodness Checklist is intended to be used by researchers or their XAI
systems that have created explanations. The Explanation Goodness Checklist is intended
for use as an independent evaluation of explanations by other researchers. The reference
is to the properties of explanations.
• Explanation Satisfaction is an evaluation of explanations by users. The Explanation
Satisfaction Scale is for collecting judgments by research participants after they have
worked with the XAI system that is being explained, and have been the beneficiaries of
one or more explanations.
XAI Metrics
3. Measuring Mental Models
A methodology is needed for eliciting, representing, and analyzing users' mental models of
intelligent systems or decision aid systems. In cognitive psychology, "mental models" are
representations or expressions of how a person understands some sort of event, process, or
system . In the XAI context, a mental model is basically a user’s
understanding of the AI system.
3.1 Users' Models of the Computer ("Mental Models") versus the Computer's
Models of Users ("User Models")
In current parlance, the user's "mental model" is distinguished from what is called a "user
model." The latter is a computer model of a user's mental model. The AI employs user models to
adapt its operations and interactions. User models might consist of formalisms, such as
production rules and semantic networks, which may represent a person’s preferences and
emulate some aspects of his or her knowledge and reasoning about some situation. User models
for intelligent tutoring systems were aimed at understanding a learner's understanding so as to
tailor instructional materials and exercises . User models
are also referenced in the design of human-machine systems . User models for AI and expert
systems were aimed at emulating human cognition and thereby replicating performance on
various tasks . Mental models,
including the person’s beliefs and conceptual processes, may be represented as computational
cognitive models using similar formalisms.
In this report, we do not review attempts to automatically generate user models (that is, formal
instantiations of mental models). Friedman, Forbus and Sherin present present a
computational cognitive model that creates and evaluates models based on fragmentary and
inconsistent information. Their formalism is predicate calculus, and the assertion is that the
system is capable of abductive inference, that is, inference to a best explanation. Our focus is on
methods for eliciting information about users' mental models.
3.2 Empirical Assertions
There is a large body of research by experimental psychologists on mental models . Praetorious and Duncan present an elegant treatment of methodology for
eliciting mental models. Staggers and Norco provide a good summary of the conceptual
and theoretical issues.
There is a consensus that mental models can be inferred from empirical evidence. People may
not be able to tell you “everything” about their understanding, and they may not be able to tell it
well. But with adequate scaffolding by some method of guided task reflection, people can tell
you how they understand an event or system, they can describe their knowledge of it, and the
concepts and principles that are involved. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that different
XAI Metrics
methods for eliciting mental models can converge .
For many people, mental imagery is involved in reasoning and dynamical and complex systems
 . This assertion is supported by studies showing that diagrams can
contribute significantly to the understanding of dynamic and complex systems .
These ideas pertain directly to how people understand machines, spanning simple devices,
process control systems, complex computational systems, and intelligent systems .
3.3 Overview of Mental Model Elicitation Methods
Referring again to the historical differences between concepts of user models, cognitive models,
and mental models, there are associated differences in how models of human cognition are
elicited and represented. There are also differences in the emphasis placed on elicitation
methods. For example, some of the work on user and cognitive models focuses on formal
methods and languages for modeling beliefs and/or problem solving (e.g., procedural rules),
These are researchers’ computational models of what a user’s mental model might be .
Table 4 lists some methods that have been used to elicit mental models in fields such as
cognitive psychology, knowledge acquisition for expert systems, instructional design, and
educational computing. Table 5 lists some strengths and weaknesses of various methods.
XAI Metrics
Table 4. Some methods that can be used to elicit mental models.
ILLUSTRATIVE REFERENCES
Think-Aloud Problem Solving Task, in which
participants think aloud during a task.
Reports by Pjtersen and Goodstein and
Williams, Hollan and Stevens, are good
illustrations of the task to elicit mental models
specifically of devices. See also Beach, 1992;
Ericsson and Simon, 1984; Gentner and Stevens,
1983; Greeno, 1983; Rasmussen, Pejtersen &
Goodstein, 1994; Ward, et al., in press.
Think-Aloud Task with Concurrent Question
Answering.
Gentner and Gentner, 1983; Williams, Hollan and
Stevens, 1983
Task Reflection or Retrospection Task, in which
participants describe their reasoning after
conducting a task (e.g., fault diagnosis). The
retrospection can be based, for example, on a replay
of their task performance such as in a video.
Fryer provides a clear and succinct
presentation of a method that combines
retrospection with Likert scale questionnaire to
quantify participants’ reasoning. See also
Frederick, 2005; Lippa, Klein & Shalin, 2008;
Praetorious & Duncan, 1988
Structured interview, essentially Retrospection
Task with Question-Answering.
Friedman, Forbus & Sherin, 2017; Fryer, 1939
Card Sorting Task (also "Pathfinder"), based on the
semantic similarity among a set of domain
The review article by van der Veer & Melguzio
 highlights this method. See also Chi,
Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; St.-Cyr and Burns,
2002; Evans, et al., 2001; van der Veer &
Melguzio, 2003
Nearest Neighbor Task, in which participants select
the explanation or diagram that best fits their
Hardiman, Dufresne and Mestre, 1989; Klein and
Militello, 2001
Self-Explanation Task (also called "Teach-back"),
in which the user/learner expresses their own
understanding. Similar to the
Retrospection/Reflection Task
Cañas et al., 2003; Ford, Cañas, & Coffey, 1993;
Fermbach, et al., 2010; Molinaro & Garcia-
Madruga, 2011; van der Veer & Melguzio, 2003
Glitch Detector Task (also called “accident-error
analysis”), in which people identify the things that
are wrong in an explanation.
Hoffman, Coffey, Ford & Carnot, 2001; Taylor,
Prediction Task, in which users are presented test
cases and are asked users to predict the results and
then explain why they thought the predicted results
would obtain.
Muramatsu & Pratt, 2001
Diagramming Task (also "Concept Mapping"), in
which users create a diagram that lays out their
knowledge of processes, events and other relations.
Cañas, et al., 2003; Evans, et al., 2001; Hoffman
et al., 2017; Moon, et al., 2011; Novak & Gowin,
ShadowBox Task, in which learners compare their
understandings to those of a domain expert.
Klein & Borders, 2016
XAI Metrics
Table 5. Methods strengths and weaknesses.
Concurrent Think-
Aloud Problem
Can provide rich information about
mental models.
Transcription and protocol analysis can
be time consuming, result in a great
deal of data, require much analysis.
Think-Aloud Task
with Concurrent
Question Answering
Enables the researcher to present
targeted probes to the user during task
performance.
Highly dependent on the
researcher/interviewer’s skill at
question design and interviewing.
Task Reflection or
Retrospection
Can be conducted as a structured
interview, as a questionnaire task, or as
a post-task verbalization of a selfexplanation. Can provide rich
information about mental models, or a
quick window into mental models. The
process of self-explanation itself has
learning value.
People can overestimate how well they
understand complex systems.
Transcription and protocol analysis can
be time consuming, result in a great
deal of data, require much analysis.
Less effort would be required in a
questionnaire method, though
questionnaire design would be nontrivial.
Card Sorting
Can provide information about domain
concepts and their relations.
Can provide sparse data about events
or processes.
Primary data consists only of similarity
ratings (i.e., semantic nets)
Nearest Neighbor
Can provide a quick window into
mental models.
People overestimate how well they
understand complex systems.
Glitch Detector
Can support users to discover and
explain aspects of their mental model
that are reductive or incorrect.
Glitches have to be built-in.
Knowledge shields may inhibit the
awareness of reductive tendencies.
Answering/Structured
Enables researcher to probe selected
aspects of a user’s mental model.
Highly dependent on the
researcher/interviewer’s skill at
question design and interviewing.
Prediction Task
Can provide a quick window into
mental models. The predictions should
be accompanied by a confidence rating
and an free response elaboration that
explains or justifies the predictions.
The free responses require content
analysis. Requires clear rationale for
the choice of instances or cases to be
the focus of the predictions.
Diagramming Task
Can provide a rich and thorough
representation of the user’s mental
model. Relations are not restricted to
similarity . Knowledge shields are arguments
that learners make that enable them to preserve their reductive understandings. A focus for
instructional design has been to develop methods to get people to recognize when they are
employing a knowledge shield that prevents them from developing richer mental models .
What is most desirable for XAI is a method that can elicit mental models quickly, and result in
data that can be easily scored, categorized, or analyzed.
It is important that the method provide some sort of structure or “scaffolding” that supports the
user in explaining their thoughts and reasoning. One method is Cued Retrospection. Probe
questions are presented to participants about their reasoning just after the reasoning task has been
performed (see Ward, et al, in press). For instance, they might be asked, "Can you describe the
major components or steps in the [software system, algorithm]." The probes can also reference
metacognitive processes, for example by asking, "Based on the explanation of the [software,
algorithm], can you imagine circumstances or situations in which the [software, algorithm] might
lead to error conditions, wrong answers, or bad decisions?"
Instances of explanation are often expressions of what will happen in the future . Prediction Tasks have the
user predict what the AI will do, such as the classification of images by a Deep Net. A prediction
task might be about "What do you think will happen next? but it can also be about "Why
wouldn't something else happen?" Explanation and counterfactual reasoning are co-implicative.
Instances of explanation often are expressions of counterfactual reasoning . A
prediction task might serve as a frugal method for peering into users' mental models, but its
application should be accompanied by a confidence rating and a free response elaboration in
which the users explain or justify their predictions, or respond to a probe about counterfactuals
Diagramming can be an effective way for a user to convey the understanding to the researcher,
and it also supports an analytical process in which diagrams are analyzed in terms of their
proposition content . A diagramming task, along
with analysis of concepts and relations (including causal connections or state transitions) has
been noted in education as a method for comparing the mental models of students to those of
experts or their instructor ; noted in social studies as a method for
comparing individuals' mental models of social groups , and in operations research as a method for comparing mental
models of dynamical systems .
Explicit Explanation improves learning and understanding. This holds for both deliberate selfmotivated self-explanation and also self-explanation that is prompted or encouraged by the
XAI Metrics
instructor. Self-explanation has a significant and positive impact on understanding. Selfgenerated deductions and generalizations help learners refine their knowledge . Having learners explain the answers of "experts"
also enhances the learner's understanding .
This said, people sometimes overestimate how well they understand complex causal systems.
This can be corrected by asking the learner to explicitly express their understanding or reasoning
 . "ShadowBox Lite" is a specific self-explanation task that is applicable to the XAI
context, and may provide a quick window into user mental models: It avoids the necessity of
eliciting and analyzing an extensive recounting of the user’s mental model. In the method, the
user is presented a question such as "How does a car's cruise control work?" Accompanying the
question is a proposed explanation. The task for the user is to identify one or more ways in which
the explanation is good, and ways in which it is bad. After doing this, the participant is shown a
Good-Bad list that was created a domain expert. The participant's comparison of the lists can
lead to insights.
3.5 Design Considerations
Referencing these four kinds of tasks, and the other tasks listed in Table 1, it is recommended
that the evaluation of user mental models within the XAI context should employ more than one
method for eliciting mental models. Performance on any one type of task might not align with
performance at some other task. For instance, adequacy of a user-generated diagram did not
match to better performance at a prediction task . Performance on a
simulated industrial process control task can be good and yet the operator’s understanding can be
limited and even incorrect .
Not all of the participants in a study have to be presented with a mental model elicitation task.
Indeed, a reasonably sized and representative set of 10 to 12 participants can be presented one or
more mental model elicitation tasks. If the analysis of the goodness of the mental models aligns
with measures of performance, then subsequent studies might use performance measures as a
surrogate for mental model analysis.
3.6 Analysis of User Mental Models
An empirically-derived expression of the content or the ebbs and flows that compose a user’s
mental model must permit evaluation of mental model goodness (i.e., correctness,
comprehensiveness, coherence, usefulness). For illustrative purposes, Table 3 presents a simple
example of an Evaluation that is usually based on proposition analysis. Carley and Palmquist
 provide illustrative examples of propositional coding for transcripts of interviews of
students by their teachers. The user model developed by Friedman, Forbus and Sherin is
XAI Metrics
based on propositional encoding of interview transcripts. In this report we illustrate propositional
analysis using the framework of the ShadowBox Lite Task. Table 6 presents an "expert"
explanation, although this might just as easily be thought of as an explanation generated by an
XAI system.
Table 6. An example of propositional coding using the ShadowBox Lite Task.
The control unit detects the rotation of the drive shaft from a magnet mounted on the drive
shaft, and from that can calculate how fast the car is going.
The control unit controls an electric motor that is connected to the accelerator linkage.
The cruise control adjusts the engine speed until it is disengaged.
What is right and helpful about this
explanation?
The cruise control unit has to know how fast
the car is going.
The cruise control has to control the engine
throttle or accelerator.
What is problematic or wrong about this
explanation?
It seems overly technical, with some concepts
left unexplained.
I do not think the cruise control detects the
engine speed.
Results from a number of elicitation tasks will generally be sets of sentences, which can be recast
as propositions, broken out by the concepts — the relations. The products from a diagramming
task can also be recast as a set of propositions. The explanation can be decomposed into the
component concepts, relations and propositions. In the case of the cruise control example, the
expert's explanation has ten concepts (drive shaft rotation, car speed, etc.) seven relations
(mounted on, disengage, etc.), and six propositions (e.g., Magnet is mounted on the drive shaft,
Control unit calculates car speed).
The counts for concepts, relations and propositions can be aggregated and analyzed in a number
of ways. For instance, one can calculate the percentage of concepts, relations, and propositions
that are in the user’s explanation that are also in the expert’s explanation. This could suggest the
completeness of the user’s mental model.
3.7 Hypothesis Testing
Based on the model in Figure 1, a primary hypothesis for XAI is that a measure of performance
is simultaneously a measure of the goodness of user mental models. As our discussion (above) of
the multi-method approach suggests, this hypothesis is not to be taken for granted. It can be
empirically investigated to see if it is confirmed. It may be especially revealing to compare
results from participants who perform the best and participants who perform the worst.
Comparison of their models, and those with an expert model would affirm the hypothesis that a
XAI Metrics
measure of performance can be simultaneously a measure of the goodness of the user mental
4. Measuring Curiosity
4.1 Introduction
There are theoretical and empirical reasons why curiosity could be considered an important
factor in Explainable AI. One of the most important reasons is that the act of seeking an
explanation is driven by curiosity. Therefore, it is important that the XAI systems harness the
power of curiosity. Explanations may promote curiosity and set the stage for the achievement of
insights and the development of better mental models.
On the other hand, explanations can actually suppress curiosity and reinforce flawed mental
models. This can happen in a number of ways:
• An explanation might overwhelm people with details,
• The XAI system might not allow questions or might make it difficult for the user to pose
questions,
• Explanations might make people feel reticent because of their lack of knowledge,
• Explanations may include too many open variables and loose ends, and curiosity
decreases when confusion and complexity increase.
For these reasons, the assessment of users' feelings of curiosity might be informative in the
evaluation of XAI systems.
4.2 The Nature of Curiosity
"Epistemic curiosity" is the general desire for knowledge, a motive to learn new ideas, resolve
knowledge gaps, and solve problems, even though this may entail effortful cognitive activity
 . Stimulus novelty,
surprisingness, or incongruity, can trigger curiosity. All of these features refer to circumstances
when information is noted as being missing or incomplete.
Curiosity is also triggered in circumstances where one experiences a "violated expectation"
 . Violated expectations essentially reflect the discovery that
events anticipated to be comprehensible are instead confusing – more information and some sort
of change to one's understanding will be needed to make sense of the event and thus resolve the
disparity between expectation and outcome. Such situations lead people to engage in effortful
processing, and motivates them to seek out additional knowledge in order to gain an insight and
resolve the incongruency .
XAI Metrics
This is directly pertinent to XAI. Curiosity is stimulated when learner recognizes that there is a
gap in their knowledge or understanding. Recognizing a knowledge gap, closing that gap, and
achieving satisfaction from insight make the likelihood of success from explanations or selfexplanations seem feasible. This leads to the question of how to assess or measure curiosity in
the XAI context, and what to do with the measurements.
Figure 2 presents a conceptual model of the explanation process from the perspective of the
learner who is using an XAI system. This diagram shows the role and place of curiosity, noting
that some learners may not feel curious.
Figure 1. A model of the explanation process in the XAI context from the perspective
of the learner, showing the role of curiosity.
4.3 Measuring Curiosity in the XAI Context
XAI Metrics
A number of psychometric instruments have names that at first glance make them seem pertinent
to XAI, such as Frederick's "Cognitive Reflection Test" . But this taps numerical fluency
and competence. Available scales of curiosity, such as Kashdan's "Curiosity Exploration
Inventory" , the Cacioppo "Need for Cognition" scale , and Litman's "I-Type/D-Type Curiosity Scales" 
consider curiosity to be a pervasive style or personality trait. As such, the instruments ask
questions such as:
I actively seek as much information as I can in a new situation,
I feel stressed or worried about something I do not know,
I like to discover new places to go.
Such items are barely applicable in the XAI context, in which curiosity is situation or task
specific, and refers to the workings of computational devices, rather than daily life or
experiences.
The above discussion of the knowledge gap theory of curiosity implies that the evaluation of
XAI systems can benefit from basically asking users to identify the triggers that motivated them
to ask for an explanation. As for the other measurement classes we have discussed, it is valuable
for the curiosity measurement method to present a "quick window." Table 7 presents a simple
questionnaire that can be administered to research participants whenever they ask for an
explanation.
Table 7. A Curiosity Checklist.
Why have you asked for an explanation? Check all that apply.
I want to know what the AI just did.
I want to know that I understand this AI system correctly.
I want to understand what the AI will do next.
I want to know why the AI did not make some other decision.
I want to know what the AI would have done if something had been different.
I was surprised by the AI’s actions and want to know what I missed.
Responses will be informative with regard to these things:
(1). Responses may serve as parameters or constraints that the XAI system uses to generate
explanations.
(2) Responses may provide a window into aspects of the AI system's operations that need
explaining.
(3). Responses may reveal ways in which the AI's explanation method might suppress or inhibit
curiosity, and
(4). Responses may make it possible to use depth of curiosity (i.e., more triggers are checked) as
an independent variable.
XAI Metrics
5 Measuring Trust in the XAI Context
5.1 Introduction
Trust in automation is of concern in computer science and cognitive systems engineering, as well
as the popular media .
Some users may take the computer's assertions (data, claims) as valid and true because they
come from a computer. But other users may require some sort of justification ⎯ empirical reasons
to believe that the computer's presentations or assertions are valid and true. Just as there are
varieties of trusting, there are varieties of negative trusting (mistrust, distrust, etc.). Trust in
automation can rapidly break down under conditions of time pressure, or when there are
conspicuous system faults or errors, or when there is a high false alarm rate . The trusting of machines can be hard to reestablish once
However trust is measured, in the XAI context, the measurement method must be sensitive to the
emergence of negative trusting states. XAI systems should enable the user to know whether,
when, and why to trust and rely upon the XAI system and know whether, when, or why to
mistrust the XAI and either not rely upon it, or rely on it with caution. People always have some
mixture of justified and unjustified trust, and justified and unjustified mistrust in computer
systems. A user might feel positive trust toward an AI system with respect to certain tasks and
goals and simultaneously feel mistrusting or distrusting when other tasks, goals or situations are
involved. Indeed, in complex sociotechnical work systems, this is undoubtedly the norm in the
human-machine relation ,
Ideally, with experience the user comes to trust the computer with respect to certain tasks or
goals in certain contexts or problem situations and appropriately mistrusts the computer with
respect to certain tasks or goals in certain contexts or problem situations. Only if this trusting
relation is achieved can the user's reliance on the computer be confident .
5.2 Explanation as Exploration
Trusting of XAI systems will always be exploratory. Active exploration of trusting–relying
relationships cannot and should not be aimed at achieving single stable states or maintaining
some decontextualized metrical value, but must be aimed at maintaining an appropriate and
context-dependent expectation. Active exploration will involve:
• Verifying the reasons to take the computer's presentations or assertions as true,
• Enabling the user to understand and anticipate circumstances in which the machine’s
recommendations will not be trustworthy, and the computer's recommendations should
not be followed even though they appear trustworthy.
XAI Metrics
• Assessing the situational uncertainty that might affect the probability of favorable
• Enabling the user to identify and mitigate Unjustiﬁed Trusting and Unjustiﬁed
Mistrusting situations.
• Enabling the user to discover and appreciate indicators to mitigate the impacts and risks
of unwarranted reliance, or unwarranted rejection of recommendations, especially in
time-pressured or information-challenged (too much, too little, or uncertain) situations.
• Enabling the user to understand and anticipate circumstances (i.e., unforeseen variations
on contextual parameters) in which the XAI should not be trusted even if it is working as
it should, and perhaps especially if it is working as it should .
There are many possible trajectories in this exploration. For example, a user who is initially
cautions or skeptical may benefit from a good explanation and move into a region of justified
trust. Subsequent use of the XAI system, however, may result in an automation surprise. For
example, a Deep Net might make a misclassification that no human would make. This might
swiftly move the user into a state of unjustified mistrust, in which the user is skeptical of any of
the classifications that the Deep Net makes. Following that, the XAI system may provide
additional explanations and the user may explore the performance of the XAI, converging in the
region of appropriate trust and reliance.
5.3 Trust Measurement Scales
The scientific literature on trust (generally) presents a number of scales for measuring trust. The
majority of trust scales have been developed for the context of interpersonal trust. We focus on
scales designed for use in the assessment of human trust in automation. A synopsis of
representative trust scales is presented in Appendix D.
Minimally, a trust scale can ask two questions: Do you trust the machine's outputs? (trust) and
Would you follow the machine's advice? (reliance). Indeed, these two items comprise the scale
developed by Adams, et al. . The scale developed by Johnson asks only about
reliance and the rareness of errors.
Some scales for assessing trust in automation are highly specific to particular application
contexts. For example, the scale developed by Schaefer refers specifically to the context
of human reliance on a robot, and thus asks Does it act as part of a team? and Is it friendly? As
another example, the trust in automation scale developed by Adams, et al. refers
specifically to the evaluation of simulations. It asks only two questions, one about trust (Do you
trust it?) and one about reliance (Are you prepared to rely on it?), although it is noteworthy that
this is the only scale that has a free response option associated with the two scale item questions.
To be sure, some research on trust in automation is clearly inapplicable to the XAI context. For
example, Heerink, et al. were interested in the acceptance of an assistive/robotic
technology by the elderly. The questionnaire they utilized has such items as I feel the robot is
nice, and The robot seems to have real feelings.
XAI Metrics
Montague presented a study aimed at validating a scale for trust in medical diagnostic
instruments, but all of the items actually refer to trust in the health care provider and positive
affect about the provider. Abstracting from that reference context, the other items ask about
reliability, correctness, precision, and trust. Thus, we see essential similarity to the items in the
Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
Some scales for assessing trust in automation are highly specific to particular experimental
contexts. Hence, the items are not applicable to the XAI context, or to any generic trust-inautomation context. For example, the scale by Dzindolet, et al. was created for
application in the study of trust in a system for evaluating terrain in aerial photographs, showing
images in which there might be camouflaged soldiers. Thus, the hypothetical technology was
referred to as a "contrast detector." The experiment was one in which the error rate of the
hypothetical detector was a primary independent variable. As a consequence, the scale items
refer to trials e.g., How well do you think you will perform during the 200 trials? (Not very well-
Very well), and How many errors do you think you will make during the 200 trials? Some of the
scale items can be adapted to make them appropriate to the XAI context, but the result of this
modification is just a few items, which are ones that are already in the Cahour-Fourzy Scale
(e.g., Can you trust the decisions the [system] will make?)
Of those scales that have been subject to psychometric analysis of reliability, results suggest that
trust in automation scales can be reliable. Of those scales that have been subject to validity
analysis, high Cronbach alpha results have been obtained. The report by Jian, et al. 
illustrates these psychometric analyses.
5.4 Recommendations
Looking across the various Scales (see Appendix D), there is considerable overlap, and cross-use
of the scale items. We have distilled a set of items that might be used in XAI research. This is
presented in Appendix E. Most of the items are from the Cahour-Fourzy scale (some of which
are also in the Jian et al. scale), but the recommended scale incorporates items from other scales.
None of the scales that have been reviewed treat trust as a process; they treat it as a static quality
or target state, that is measured after the research participants have completed their experimental
tasks. In contrast, it is recommended for the XAI Program that trust measurement be a repeat
measure. The scale or selected scale items can be applied after individual trials (e.g., after
individual XAI categorizations or recommendations; after individual explanations are provided,
etc.). The full scale could be completed part way through a series of experimental trials, and at
the conclusion of the final experimental trial. Multiple measures taken over time could be
integrated for overall evaluations of human–machine performance, but episodic measures would
be valuable in tracking such things as: How do users maintain trust? What is the trend for
desirable movement toward appropriate trust?
XAI Metrics
6 Measuring Performance
The goal of performance measurement is to determine the degree of success of the humanmachine system at effectively conducting the tasks for which the technology is designed. Based
on the conceptual model in Figure 1, the key hypotheses are:
• User performance (including measures of joint user-system performance) will improve as
a result of being given satisfying explanations.
• User performance will be a function of the qualities of their mental model (e.g.,
correctness, completeness, etc.)
• User performance may be affected by their level of epistemic trust
• User performance (that is, reliance) will be appropriate if the user has been able to
explore the competence envelop of the AI system.
The evaluation of the performance of an XAI system cannot be neatly divorced from the
evaluation of the performance of the user, or from the performance of the human-machine
system as a whole.
6.1 Performance with Regard to the Primary Task Goals
The AI system will have some primary task goal. This might be to correctly categorize images,
correctly identify certain kinds of actions in videos, or conduct an emergency rescue operation.
Performance can be measured in terms of the number of trials on which the user met with
success, within some pre-specified time period. In a search-and-rescue use case, work system
performance might be measured in terms of the number of trials that a user has to work in order
to reach some pre-determined criterion. Basic measures of efficiency can be applied, expressing
the ratio of the number of tasks or sub-tasks completed per some period of time.
6.2 Performance with Regard to the User
A second aspect of performance measurement is the quality of the performance of the user, such
as the correctness of the user's predictions of what the AI will do. For these aspects of
performance, just like performance with regard to primary ask goals, one can measure response
speed and correctness (hits, errors, misses, false alarms), but in this case the user's predictions of
the machine outputs. Examination can be made for both typical and atypical cases/situations.
Additionally, one can measure the correctness and completeness of the user's explanation of the
machine’s output for cases that are rare, unusual, or anomalous.
XAI Metrics
6.3 Performance with Regard to the Work System
With regard to performance at the work system level, considerations other than raw efficiency
come into play . For example, an XAI
system that drives the work efficiency (say, to deal with data overload issues) may not make for
a very contented workplace . The complexity of performance at the work system
level requires analysis based on trade-off functions .
Work system level performance would be reflected when scores on a measure of explanation
satisfaction correlate highly with evaluations of the goodness of the users' mental models or with
scores on some other performance measure.
At the work system level, appropriate trust and reliance emerge from the user's experience,
especially as the user encounters tough cases or cases that fall at the boundary of the work
system's competence envelope. Appropriateness refers to the fact that mistrust, as well as trust,
can be justified. Presumably, appropriate reliance (knowing when and when not to rely on the
system’s outputs) hinges on appropriate trust.
The analysis of work system level performance may employ some measure of controlability, that
is, the extent to which the human can produce an intended set of outcomes based on given inputs
or conditions. Analysis may employ some measure of correctability. This is a measure of the
extent or ease with which the user can correct the machine’s activities so as to make the machine
outputs better aligned with either objective states of affairs or the user's judgments of what the
machine should be determining.
The analysis of work system level performance can involve comparing the work productivity of
the XAI-User work system to productivity in current practice (baseline). A related method is to
look at learning curves. This involves establishing a metric on a productivity scale, a metric that
identifies when performance is satisfactory. How many trials of test cases must a user work
successfully in order to reach that learning criterion? Is the learning rapid? Why do some people
take a long time to reach criterion? The advantage of a trials-to-criterion approach to
measurement is that it could put the different XAI systems on a “level playing field” by making
the primary measure a derivative of task completion time. A variation on this method is to
compare performance in this way with performance when the Explanation capability of the XAI
is somehow hobbled.
Perhaps the most powerful and direct way of evaluating the performance of a work system that
includes an XAI is to evaluate how easy or difficult it is to get prospective users (stakeholders) to
adopt the XAI system. In discussing early medical diagnosis systems, van Lent et al 
stated, “Early on the developers of these systems realized that doctors weren’t willing to accept
the expert system’s diagnosis on faith” (p. 904), which led to development of the first
explanation-based AI systems. Many users may be satisfied with shallow explanations in that
they will be willing to adopt the system that has “XAI” or may prefer it over another non-XAI
system when making adoption decisions. Measures of choice behavior were also advocated by
Adams et al. as a way of measuring human trust in automation.
XAI Metrics
7. Prospects
Measurement is the foundation of empirical inquiry. As a form of exploration, one of the
purposes of making measurements is to improve the measures. We do not regard the ideas and
methods discussed in this paper as being final.
It was from our own empirical inquiry that emerged our distinction between explanation
goodness as an a priori evaluation by researchers versus explanation satisfaction as an a
posteriori evaluation by learners.
We look forward to refinements and extensions of all the ideas presented in this article.
Also foundational to empirical inquiry is a theoretical foundation. The one on which we have
relied is the conceptual model presented in Figure 1 (above), which references measures of
explanations, user models, and performance. Other measurable theoretical concepts might be of
value for XAI research and development. As our discussion suggests, we advocate for a multimethod approach. Such an approach seems mandated by the fact that the human-XAI interaction
is a complex cognitive system.
An important measurement topic that we have not addressed is that of "metrics." In modern
discourse, the word "metric" often carries a dual meaning. One is "measure" or "measurement."
The other is the notion of some sort of threshold on a measurement scale that is used to make
evaluations or decisions. In this article we have discussed measurement, not metrics. A simple
example of the measure-metric distinction might clarify this. If a surgeon specializing in carpal
tunnel syndrome has a success rate less than 90 percent, he or she might well be in trouble. On
the other hand, a specialist in spinal surgery with a 90% success rate would be considered a
miracle worker. The measurement scale in both contexts is surgery success rate. The metric that
is laid on that scale depends on the application context . Trust in automated systems. Report, Ministry of
National Defence, United Kingdom.
Alang, N. . Turns out algorithms are racist. The New Republic. Retrieved from
 
Anderson, J., Boyle, C.F., Corbett, A.T., and Lewis, M.W. . Cognitive modeling and
intelligent tutoring. In W. J. Clancey and E. Soloway (Eds.) Artificial intelligence and learning
environments (pp. 7–49). Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books.
Ayre, C., & Scally, A.J. . Critical values for Lawshe’s Content Validity Ratio: Revisiting
the original methods of calculation. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 47, 79-86.
Bainbridge, L. . Verbal reports as evidence of process operator’s knowledge. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 11, 411-436.
Bainbridge, L. . Types of representation. In I.P. Goodstein, H.B. Andersen, and S.E.
Olsen, (Eds.) Tasks, errors and mental models (pp. 70-91). New York: Taylor and Francis.
Beach, L. R. . Epistemic strategies on causal thinking in expert and nonexpert judgment.
In G. Wright & F. Bolger (Eds.), Expertise and decision support (pp. 107-127). New York:
Berlyne, D.E. . Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Berlyne, D.E. . Curiosity and learning. Motivation and Emotion, 2, 97-175.
Berry, D. C., and Broadbent, D. E. . Interactive tasks and the implicit-explicit distinction.
British Journal of Psychology, 79, 251–272.
Biran, O., & Cotton, C. . Explanation and Justification in Machine Learning: A Survey.
Explainable
Artificial
Intelligence
 
0XAI-17)%20Explanation%20and%20Justification%20in%20ML%20-%20A%20Survey.pdf
Bjork, R.A., Dunlosky, J., & Kornell, N. . Self-regulated learning: Beliefs, techniques, and
illusions. Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 417–444.
Bogacz, S. and Trafton, J.G. . Understanding dynamic and static displays: Using images to
reason dynamically. Cognitive Systems Research, 6, 312-319.
Bornstein, A.M. . Is Artificial Intelligence Permanently Inscrutable?
Retrieved August 29, 2017, from 
Byrne, R.M. . Counterfactual Thinking: From Logic to Morality. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 26(4), 314–322.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. . The efficient assessment of need for cognition.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 48(3), 306-307.
XAI Metrics
Cahour, B., and Forzy, J. F. . Does projection into use improve trust and exploration? An
example with a cruise control system. Safety Science, 47, 1260-1270.
Calin-Jageman, R. J., & Ratner, H. H. . The role of encoding in the self-explanation effect.
Cognition and Instruction, 23, 523-543.
Cañas, A.J., Coffey, J.W., Carnot, M.J., Feltovich, P., Hoffman, R., Feltovich, J. and Novak, J.D.
 . A summary of literature pertaining to the use of concept mapping techniques and
technologies for education and performance support. Report to The Chief of Naval Education
and Training, prepared by the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola, FL.
Carberry, S. . Second International Workshop on User Modeling. The AI Magazine, 11 (5)
Carley, K, and Palmquist, M. . Extracting, representing and analyzing mental models.
Social Forces, 70 (3), 601-636
Carroll, J.M. . Minimalist training. Datamation, 1, 125-126.
Champlin, C., Bell, D., & Schocken, C. . AI medicine comes to Africa’s rural clinics.
IEEE Spectrum, 54(5), 42–48.
Chancey, E.T., Bliss, J.P., Proaps, A.B., and Madhavan, P. . The role of trust as a mediator
between system characteristics and response behaviors. Human Factors, 57, 947–958.
Chi, M. T. H, Feltovich, P. J., and Glaser, R. . Categorization and representation of
physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121–152.
Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. . Self-explanations:
How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13(2),
Chi, M.T., Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.-H., & LaVancher, C. . Eliciting self-explanations
improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439–477.
Chi, M.T., & Van Lehn, K.A. . The content of physics self-explanations. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 69–105.
Clancey, W.J. . Methodology for building an intelligent tutoring system. In Kintsch, W.,
Miller, J. R., and Polson, P. G. (Eds.), Method and tactics in cognitive science (pp. 51–83).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clancey, W.J. . From GUIDON to NEOMYCIN and HERACLES in twenty short lessons.
AI Magazine, 7(3), 40-60.
Clement, J. . Imagistic simulation and physical intuition in expert problem solving. In
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 201-205).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Comrey, A. L. . Factor-analytic methods of scale development in personality and clinical
psychology. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 754-761.
Cortina, J. M. . What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 98-104.
XAI Metrics
Davis LL. . Instrument review: Getting the most from a panel of experts. Applied Nursing
Research, 5(4),194-7.
de Kleer, J., and Brown, J.S. . Assumptions and ambiguities in mechanistic mental
models. In D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental models (pp. 155-190). New York:
Psychology Press.
de Kleer, J., Doyle, J., Steele, G.L., and Sussman, G.J. . Artificial intelligence: An MIT
perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Doyle J.K., Ford D.N,. Radzicki, M.J., & Trees, W.S. . Mental models of dynamic
systems. In System Dynamics and Integrated Modeling, Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems,
Barlas Y(ed.). EOLSS Publishers: Oxford.
Dzindolet, M.T., Peterson, S.A., Pomranky, R.A., Pierce, L.G., and Beck, H.P. . The role
of trust in automation reliance. International Journal of Human–Computer Studies, 58, 697–718.
Ericcson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. . Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Evans, A. W., Jentsch, F., Hitt, J.M., Bowers, C, & Salas, E. . Mental model assessments:
Is there convergence among different methods? In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society 45th Annual Meeting (pp. 293-298). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society.
Felten, E. . What does it mean to ask for an “explainable” algorithm? Retrieved August
 
Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., and Spiro, R. J. . Learners’(mis) understanding of
important and difficult concepts: A challenge to smart machines in education. In K.D. Forbus
and P.JK. Feltovich (Eds.), Smart machines in education (pp. 349–375). Menlo Park, CA:
AAAI/MIT Press.
Fernbach, P. M., Sloman, S. A., Louis, R. S., and Shube, J. N. . Explanation fiends and
foes: How mechanistic detail determines understanding and preference. Journal of Consumer
Research, 39(5), 1115–1131.
Fitzhugh, E.W., Hoffman, R.R., and Miller, J.E. . Active trust management. In N.
Stanton (Ed.) Trust in Military Teams (pp. 197–218). London: Ashgate.
Forbus, K. D., & Feltovich, P. J. (Eds.) . Smart machines in education. Menlo Park, CA:
AAAI/MIT Press.
Ford, K.M., Cañas, A.J., and Coffey, J. . Participatory explanation. Presented at the
FLAIRS 93: Sixth Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium (FLAIRS) (pp. 111–115),
Pensacola, FL: Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.
Frederick, S. . Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Friedman, S., Forbus, K., & Sherin, B. . Representing, running and revising mental
models: A computational theory. Cognitive Science, 1-36 [ 
XAI Metrics
Fryer, D. . Post quantification of introspective data. American Journal of Psychology, 52,
Gentner, D. and Gentner, D.R. . Flowing waters or teem crowds: Mental models of
electricity. In D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental models (pp. 99-129). New York:
Psychology Press.
Gentner, D. & Stevens, A.L. . Mental models. New York: Psychology Press.
Gilbert, G.E., & Prion, S. . Making sense of measurement: Lawshe's Content Validity
Index. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 12, 530-531.
Glenberg, A.M., & Langston, W.E. . Comprehension of illustrated text: Pictures help to
build mental models. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 129-151.
Goodman, B., & Flaxman, S. . European Union regulations on algorithmic decisionmaking and a “right to explanation.” Presented at the ICML Workshop on Human
Interpretability in Machine Learning, New York, NY.
Goodstein, I.P., Andersen, H.B. and Olsen, S. E. (Eds.) . Tasks, errors and mental models.
New York: Taylor and Francis.
Greeno, J.G. . Conceptual entities. In D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental models
(pp. 227-252). New York: Psychology Press.
Hardiman, P.T., Dufresne, R., & Mestre, J.P. . The relation between problem
categorization and problem solving among experts and novices. Memory and Cognition, 17, 627-
Harford, T. . Big data: Are we making a big mistake? The Financial Times.
Harris, S.D., and Helander, M.G. . Machine intelligence in real systems: Some ergonomic
issues. In G. Salvendy (Ed.), Human-computer interaction (pp. 267-277). Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Hawkins, J. . Can we copy the brain? What intelligent machines need to learn from the
Neocortex. IEEE Spectrum, 54(6), 34–71.
Heerink, M., Kröse, B., Evers, V., and Wielinga, B. . Assessing acceptance of assistive
social agent technology by older adults: The Almere model. International journal of social
robotics, 2(4), 361-375.
Hilton, D.J. . Mental models and causal explanation: Judgements of probable cause and
explanatory relevance Thinking and Reasoning, 2(4), 273-308.
Hilton, D.J., & Erb, H.-P. . Mental models and causal explanation: Judgements of
probable cause and explanatory relevance. Thinking and Reasoning, 2(4), 273–308.
Heiser, J., & Tversky, B. . Arrows comprehending and producing mechanical diagrams,
Cognitive Science, 30, 581-592.
Hoff, K.A., and Bashir, M. . Trust in automation: Integrating empirical evidence on
factors that inﬂuence trust. Human Factors, 57, 407–434.
XAI Metrics
Hoffman, R.R. . A Taxonomy of Emergent Trusting in the Human–Machine
Relationship. In P. J. Smith and R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), Cognitive systems engineering: The
future for a changing world (pp. 137-163). Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis.
Hoffman, R. R. . Theory → Concepts → Measures but Policies → Metrics. In E. Patterson
and J. Miller (Eds.), Macrocognition metrics and scenarios: Design and evaluation for realworld teams (pp. 3-10). London: Ashgate.
Hoffman, R.R. . Whom (or what) do you trust: Historical reﬂections on the psychology
and sociology of information technology. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Symposium on
Human Interaction with Complex Systems (pp. 28–36). New York: IEEE Computer Society.
Hoffman, R.R., Coffey, J.W., Ford, K.M. and Carnot, M.J. STORM-LK: A
human-centered knowledge model for weather forecasting. In J.M. Flach (Ed.), Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (p. 752). Santa Monica,
CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Hoffman, R.R., and Hancock, P.A. . Measuring resilience. Human Factors, 59, 564-581.
Hoffman, R.R., Johnson, M., Bradshaw, J.M., and Underbrink, A. .
Trust in automation. IEEE: Intelligent Systems, 84–88.
Hoffman, R.R., Klein, G., & Mueller, S.T. . Literature Review and Integration of Key
Ideas for Explainable AI. Report to the DARPA XAI Program.
Hoffman, R.R., Lee, J.D., Woods, D.D., Shadbolt, N., Miller, J. and Bradshaw, J.M. . The dynamics of trust in cyberdomains. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 5–11.
Huynh, T.D., Jennings, N.R., and Shadbolt, N.R. . An integrated trust and reputation
model for open multi-agent systems. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 13, 119–154.
Jian, J. Y., Bisantz, A. M., and Drury, C. G. . Foundations for an empirically determined
scale of trust in automated systems. International Journal of Cognitive Ergonomics, 4(1), 53-71.
Johnson, D.S. . Achieving customer value from electronic channels through identity
commitment, calculative commitment, and trust in technology. Journal of Interactive
Marketing, 21(4), 2-22.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. . Mental models in cognitive science. Cognitive Science, 4, 71-115.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. . Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language,
inference, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. . Mental models. In M.I. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive
science (pp. 469-499). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kashdan, T.B., Rose, P., & Fincham, F.D. . Curiosity and exploration: Facilitating
positive subjective experiences and personal growth opportunities. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 82, 291-305.
Kintsch, W., Miller, J. R., and Polson, P. G. (Eds.) . Methods and tactics in cognitive
science. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klein, G., and Borders, J. . The ShadowBox approach to cognitive skills training: an
empirical evaluation. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, 10, 268-280.
XAI Metrics
Klein, G. and Hoffman, R.R. . Macrocognition, mental models, and cognitive task analysis
methodology. In J.M. Schraagen, L.G. Millitello, T. Ormerod and R. Lipshitz (Eds.),
Naturalistic decision making and macrocognition (pp. 57-80). Aldershot, England: Ashgate.
Klein, G., & Milltello, L.G. . some guidelines for conducting a cognitive task analysis. In
E. Sales (Ed.), Human/technology interaction in complex systems, vol 1 (pp. 161-197). Oxford:
Elsevier Science Ltd.
Koehler, D. . Explanation, imagination , and confidence in judgement. Psychological
Bulletin, 110(3), 499–519.
Koopman, P., and Hoffman, R.R. . Work-arounds, make-work, and
kludges. IEEE: Intelligent Systems, 70–75.
Kuang, C. . Can A.I. be taught to explain itself? The New York Times.
 
Kucala, D. . The truthiness of trustworthiness. Chief Learning Ofﬁcer, 57–59.
Lawshe, C. H. . A quantitative approach to content validity. Personnel Psychology, 28,
Lee, J.D., and See, K.A. . Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance. Human
Factors, 46, 50–80.
Lesgold, A. M., Lajoie, S. P., Bunzo, M., and Eggan, G. . SHERLOCK: A coached
practice environment for an electronics troubleshooting job. In J. Larkin and R. Chabay (Eds.),
Computer assisted instruction and intelligent tutoring systems: Shared issues and
complementary approaches (pp. 201-238). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lippa, K., Klein, H.A. & Shalin, V.L. . Everyday expertise: Cognitive demands in
diabetes self-management. Human Factors, 50, 112-120.
Litman, J.A. & Lunsford, G.D. . Incurious motives to seek information about potential
threats. European Journal of Personality, 24, 1–17.
Litman, J.A., & Jimerson, T.L. . The measurement of curiosity as a feeling-of-deprivation.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 82, 147-157.
Loewenstein, G. . The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation.
Psychological Bulletin, 116, 75-98.
Lombrozo, T. . Explanatory preferences shape learning and inference. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 20(10), 748–759.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. . Functional explanation and the function of explanation.
Cognition, 99, 167–204. 
Lynn M.R. . Determination and quantification of content validity. Nursing Research, 35
(6), 382-385.
Madhavan, P., and Wiegmann, D.A. . Effects of information source, pedigree, and
reliability on operator interaction with decision support systems. Human Factors, 49, 773–785.
XAI Metrics
Maheswaran, D., and Chaiken, S. . Promoting systematic processing in low-motivation
settings: Effect of incongruent information on processing and judgment. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61,13-25.
May, J., Barnard, P.J., and Blandford, A. . Using structural descriptions of interfaces to
automate the modeling of user cognition. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 3, 27-
McKeown, K.R., & Swartout, W. R. . Language generation and explanation. Annual
Review of Computer Science, 2(1), 401–449.
Merritt, S. M. . Affective processes in human–automation interactions. Human
Factors:, 53(4), 356-370.
Merritt, S.M., Heimbaugh, H., LaChapell, J., and Lee, D. . I trust it, but don’t know why:
Effects of implicit attitudes toward automation in trust in an automated system. Human Factors,
55, 520–534.
Merritt, S.M., and Ilgen, D.R. . Not all trust is created equal: Dispositional and historybased trust in human–automation interactions. Human Factors, 50, 194–201.
Merritt, S.M., Lee, D., Unnerstall, J.L., and Huber, K. . Are well-calibrated users effective
users? Associations between calibration of trust and performance on an automation- aided task.
Human Factors, 57, 34–47.
Miller, T. . Explanation in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Social Sciences.
 
Mills, C. M., & Keil, F. C. . Knowing the limits of one’s understanding: The development
of an awareness of an illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
87(1), 1–32.
Mitchell, D., Russo, E., & Rennington, N. . Back to the future: Temporal perspective in
the explanation of events. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2, 25–38.
Molinaro, R.I., and Garcia-Madruga, J.A. . Knowledge and question asking. Psicothema,
23, 26-30.
Montague, E. . Validation of a trust in medical technology instrument. Applied
ergonomics, 41(6), 812-821.
Moon, B.M., Hoffman, R.R., Cañas, A.J., and Novak, J.D. (Eds.) . Applied concept
mapping: Capturing, Analyzing and Organizing Knowledge. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and
Moore, J. D., & Swartout, W. R. . Pointing: A Way Toward Explanation Dialogue. In
Proceedings of AAAI, 90, 457–464. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI.
Moray, N. . Intelligent aids, mental models, and the theory of machines. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 7, 619-629.
Mueller, S.T. and Klein, G. . Improving users’ mental models of intelligent
software tools. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 77–83.
XAI Metrics
Muir, B.M. . Trust between humans and machines, and the design of decision aids.
International Journal of Man–Machine Studies, 27, 527–539.
Muir, B.M. . Trust in automation Part 1: Theoretical issues in the study of trust and human
intervention in automated systems. Ergonomics, 37, 1905–1922.
Muir, B.M. and Moray, N. . Trust in automation. Part II Experimental studies of trust and
human intervention in a process control simulation. Ergonomics, 39, 429–460.
Muramatsu, J., and Pratt, W. . Transparent Queries: investigation users’ mental models of
search engines. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 217–224). New York: Association for
Computing Machinery.
Naone, E. . Adding trust to Wikipedia, and beyond. Technology Review
[ 
Novak, J. D., and D. B. Gowin. . Learning how to learn. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
O’Reilly, T., Symons, S., & MacLatchy-Gaudet, H. . A comparison of self-explanation
and elaborative interrogation. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23(4), 434–445.
Pavlus, J. . Stop pretending you really know what AI is and read this instead.
Retrieved from 
Pinker, S. . Uncommon insights into common knowledge. In APS Observer, 30.
 
Polson, M.C., & Richardson, J.J. (Eds.). . Foundations of intelligent tutoring systems.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pop, V.L., Shrewsbury, A., and Durso, F.T. . Individual differences in the calibration of
trust in automation. Human Factors, 57, 545–556.
Praetorious, N., and Duncan, K.D. . Verbal reports: A problem in research design. In I.P.
Goodstein, H.B. Andersen, and S.E. Olsen, (Eds.) Tasks, errors and mental models (pp, 293-
324). New York: Taylor and Francis.
Prietula, M., Feltovich, P., & Marchak, F. . Factors influencing analysis of complex
cognitive tasks: A framework and example from industrial process control. Human Factors,
42(1), 54–74.
Psotka, J., Massey, L.D., & Mutter, S.A. . Intelligent tutoring systems: Lessons learned.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Qin, Y., and Simon, H.A. . Imagery as a process representation in problem solving. In
Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1050-
1055). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rasmussen, J. . Information processing and human-machine interaction. Amsterdam,
North-Holland.
XAI Metrics
Rasmussen, J., Pejtersen, A.M., and Goodstein, L.P. . Cognitive systems engineering. New
York: John Wiley.
Riley, V. . Operator reliance on automation: Theory and data. In R. Parasuraman and M.
Mouloua (Eds.), Automation Theory and Applications (pp. 19–35). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ritter, F., & Feurzeig, W. . Teaching real-time tactical thinking. Intelligent Tutoring
Systems: Lessons Learned, 285–301.
Rittle-Johnson, B. . Promoting transfer: Effects of self-explanation and direct instruction.
Child Development, 77(1), 1–15.
Rosenblit, L. & Kein, F. . The misunderstood limits of folk science: An ilklusion of
explanatory depth. Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Rungtusanatham, M. . Let’s not overlook content validity. Decision Line, pp. 10-13.
Samurcay, R., and Hoc, J.-M. . Causal versus topographical support for diagnosis in a
dynamic situation. Le Travail humain, 59, 45-68.
Sarter, N., Woods, D.D., and Billings, C.E. . Automation surprises. In G. Salvendy (Ed.),
Handbook of Human Factors/Ergonomics, 2nd ed. . New York, NY: Wiley.
Schaefer, K. E. . The perception and measurement of human-robot trust. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Central Florida Orlando, Florida.
Schaffernicht, M., and Groesser, S.N. . A comprehensive method for comparing mental
models of dynamical systems. European Journal of Operational Research, 210, 57-67.
Schwiep, J. . The state of explainable AI. [ 
Shadbolt, N. . A matter of trust. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2–3.
Sleeman, D., & Brown, J. S. . Intelligent tutoring systems. London: Academic Press.
St.-Cyr, O., and Burns, C.M. . Mental models and ecological interface design: An
experimental investigation. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomic Society Annual
Meeting (pp. 270-274). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Staggers, N., and Norcio, A.F. . Mental models: concepts for human-computer interaction
research. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 38, 587-605.
Streiner, D. L. . Starting at the beginning: An introduction to coefficient alpha and internal
consistency. Journal of Personality Assessment, 80(1), 99-103.
Taylor, J.R. . Using cognitive models to make plants safer: Experimental and practical
approaches. In I.P. Goodstein, H.B. Andersen, and S.E. Olsen, (Eds.) Tasks, errors and mental
models (pp. 233-239). New York: Taylor and Francis.
Tullio, J., Dey, A. K., Chalecki, J., and Fogarty, J. . How it works: a field study of nontechnical users interacting with an intelligent system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 31–40). New York: Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved from 
XAI Metrics
van der Veer, G.C., Melguzio, M. . Mental models. In J.A. Jacko & A. Sears (Edfs.), The
human-computer interaction handbook (pp. 52-80). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Lehn, K., Ball, W., & Kowalski, B. . Explanation-based learning of correctness:
Towards a model of the self-explanation effect. Report, Department of Psychology, Carnegie
Mellon University. Retrieved from
van Lent, M., Fisher, W., & Mancuso, M. . An explainable artificial intelligence system
for small-unit tactical behavior. In Proceedings of the 19th National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 900–907). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Voosen, P. . How AI detectives are cracking open the black box of deep learning. Science,
357 (No. 6346), 22–27.
Ward, P. Wilson, K, Suss, J., Woody, W.D., and Hoffman, R.R. (in press). An historical
perspective on introspection: Implications and guidelines fort eliciting verbal and introspectivetype reports. To appear in P. Ward, J.M. Schraagen, T.C. Ormerod, and E. Roth, (Eds), The
Oxford Handbook of Expertise. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weinberger, D. . Our machines now have knowledge we’ll never understand.
Retrieved from 
Wickens, C.D., Clegg, B.A., Vieane, A.Z., and Sebok, A.L. . Complacency and
automation bias in the use of imperfect automation. Human Factors, 57, 728–739.
Williams, M.D., Hollan, J.D., and Stevens, A.L . Human reasoning about a simple
physical system. In D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental models (pp. 131-154). New
York: Psychology Press.
Woods, D.D. . Reﬂections on 30 years of picking up the pieces after explo-
sions of technology. Presentation at the AFRL Autonomy Workshop, Air Force Research
Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH.
Woods, D.D., and Hollnagel, E. . Joint Cognitive Systems: Patterns in Cognitive Systems
Engineering. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Young, R.M. . Surrogates and mappings: Two kinds of conceptual models of interactive
devices. In D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens (Eds.) Mental models (pp. 35-52). New York:
Psychology Press.
Zhang, KL, & Wickens, C.D. . A study of the mental model of a complex dynamic
system: The effect of display aiding and contextual system training. In Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 31st Annual Meeting (pp. 102-107). Santa Monica, CA:
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
XAI Metrics
Appendix A
Explanation Goodness Checklist
This checklist is a list of the features that make explanations good, according to the research
literature. The reference is to the properties of explanations.
The intended use context is for researchers or domain experts to provide an independent, a priori
evaluation of the goodness of explanations that are generated by other researchers or by XAI
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The explanation helps me understand how the [software, algorithm, tool] works.
The explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works is satisfying.
The explanation of the [software, algorithm, tool] sufficiently detailed.
The explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works is sufficiently complete.
The explanation is actionable, that is, it helps me know how to use the [software, algorithm, tool]
The explanation lets me know how accurate or reliable the [software, algorithm] is.
The explanation lets me know how trustworthy the [software, algorithm, tool] is.
XAI Metrics
Appendix B
Materials used in the Evaluation of the Discriminant Validity
of the Explanation Satisfaction Scale
How do cell phones provide directions?
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Good"
Cell phones use the Global Positioning System of satellites to determine the exact location of the
A web-based service (such as Google Maps, Apple Maps, etc.) identifies the phone's coordinates
along with the desired destination entered by the phone user.
This information is transmitted to a computer, where The Map Service calculates the best route
based on shortest path, but also traffic and other variables.
The instructions are then sent back to the phone.
The Map Service monitors the phone's location in real-time, and each step is given to the user
based on the phone’s proximity to the next step (or checkpoint).
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Bad"
Cell phones can provide good directions because they have really accurate maps on them.
The phone downloads the maps from the internet.
The phone knows where it is and it calculates the shortest route.
It tries to give step-by-step directions.
XAI Metrics
How does automobile cruise control work?
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Good"
The speed of the car at the moment you turn on the cruise control is stored in a memory circuit.
The cruise control device reads the car’s speed by a speed sensor that is on the car’s drive shaft.
The cruise control is linked to the engine accelerator, and accelerates the car when it falls below
the speed you set, such as when you start to go uphill, for example.
It can stop accelerating the car when the car is going downhill, but does not apply the brakes to
decelerate the car.
The cruise control also senses when the brake pedal has been depressed, and disengages from the
accelerator.
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Bad"
The vacuum control unit reads the pulse frequency from a magnet mounted on the drive shaft
to figure out how fast the car is going.
A bidirectional screw-drive electric motor that is connected to the accelerator linkage
receives the control signal and transmits it to the throttle.
When you set the cruise control, the engine detects the engine RPM at that point and tries to
maintain that engine speed until it is disengaged.
The cruise control detects the car gear, which it adjusts to allow the engine to maintain a
constant RPM.
XAI Metrics
How do computers predict hurricanes?
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Good"
Computers have a mathematical model of the atmosphere that divides the world into many small
regions, each just a few square kilometers.
Each region is defined in terms of its air pressure, temperature, winds, and moisture.
The computer calculates what will happen at the boundaries of each region. For example, strong
winds in one region will move air into an adjacent region.
These calculations must be performed for every boundary between all the regions. This allows
the prediction of the path a hurricane will take.
Explanation Judged a priori to be Relatively "Bad"
The computers have a database of all previous hurricanes and the paths that they followed.
Once a hurricane is located, using a satellite image, the computer accesses the database and
determines the path that was most frequently taken by hurricanes having that initial location.
This process is repeated once every hour, tracking the hurricane as it moves.
The computers can also tell when the winds and rain will impact the land, and that is when the
hurricane warnings are issued.
XAI Metrics
Appendix C
Explanation Satisfaction Scale
1. From the explanation, I understand how the [software, algorithm, tool] works.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
2. This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works is satisfying.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
3. This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works has sufficient detail.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
4. This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works seems complete.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
5. This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works tells me how to use it.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
6. This explanation of how the [software, algorithm, tool] works is useful to my goals.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
XAI Metrics
7. This explanation of the [software, algorithm, tool] shows me how accurate the [software,
algorithm, tool] is.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
8. This explanation lets me judge when I should trust and not trust the [software, algorithm,
I agree strongly I agree somewhat
I’m neutral
I disagree
I disagree
XAI Metrics
APPENDIX D
Synopsis of Representative Trust Scales
Cahour-Forzy Scale; Adams, et al. Scale
Trust (and distrust) are defined as a sentiment resulting from knowledge, beliefs, emotions and
other aspects of experience, generating positive or negative expectations concerning the reactions
of a system and the interaction with it. The scale was developed in the context of learning to use
a cruise control system. Trust was analyzed into three factors: reliability, predictability, and
efficiency. The scale asks users directly whether they are confident in the XAI system, whether
the XAI system is predictable, reliable, safe, and efficient.
The scale assumes that the participant has had considerable experience using the XAI system.
Hence, these questions would be appropriate for scaling after a period of use, rather than
immediately after an explanation has been given and prior to use experience. In the original
scale, the items are rated on a bipolar scale going from "I agree completely" to "I do not agree at
all." The items we present below have been slightly modified to fit the general Likert form
developed for the XAI Explanation Satisfaction Scale. In addition to conforming to psychometric
standards, consistency of format will presumably make the ratings tasks easier for participants.
1. What is your confidence in the [tool]? Do you have a feeling of trust in it?
trust it at
I trust it
completely
2. Are the actions of the [tool] predictable?
It is not at all
predictable.
completely
predictable.
3. Is the [tool] reliable? Do you think it is safe?
It is not at
XAI Metrics
completely
4. Is the [tool] efficient at what it does?
It is not at all
efficient.
completely
efficient.
Adams, et al. actually developed two scales. One was for the evaluation of simulations but the
other was generic, intended for the evaluation of any form of automation. Apart from the item
about liking, the items show overlap with items in the Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
Each item is accompanied by a bipolar rating scale (e.g., Useful-Not Useful; Reliable-Not
reliable) on which the participant makes a tick mark on a -5 to +5 delineation. Following the
Likert items, the Scale asks participants to rank the importance of the six item factors.
Is the automation tool useful?
How reliable is it?
How accurately does it work?
Can you understand how it works?
Do you like using it?
How easy is it to use?
Jian, et al. Scale 
Trust is regarded as a trait. It is analyzed into six factors: Fidelity, loyalty, reliability, security,
integrity, and familiarity. Factors were developed from cluster analysis on trust-related words.
This scale is one of the most widely used, especially in the field of human factors. Indeed, a
number of other scales have used items, or have adapted scale items, from the Jian, et al. Scale.
The item referencing "integrity" is problematic as the concept that a machine can act with
integrity is not explicated. The final item, about familiarity, would not be relevant in the SAI
context, since the participants' degree of experience with the XAI system will be known
objectively.
Items 1, 2, 3, and 4 all seem to be asking the same thing.
XAI Metrics
The other items items in this scale show considerable overlap with items in the Cahour-Fourzy
scale. However, item 4 is particularly interesting and is does not have a counterpart in the
Cahour-Fourzy Scale. We are inclined to recommend that the Jian, et al., item 4 be incorporated
into the XAI version of the Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
1. The system is deceptive.
2. The system behaves in an underhanded manner.
3. I am suspicious of the system's intent, action, or outputs.
4. I am wary of the system.
5. The system's actions will have a harmful or injurious outcome.
6. I am confident in the system.
7. The system provides security.
8. The system has integrity.
9. The system is dependable.
10. I can trust the system.
11. I am familiar with the system.
Madsen-Gregor Scale 
Trust is defined as being both affective and cognitive. Trust was analyzed into five factors:
reliability, technical competence, understandability, faith, and personal attachment. Their focus
was not just trust in a decision aid but trust in an intelligent decision aid. As such, their scale
deserves our particular attention. Unfortunately, reports on their work are not accompanied by
information about the precise method for administering the scale (i.e., whether or not it used a
Likert method). That said, their results show very high reliabilities (alpha = 0.94) and a factor
analysis that accounts for about 70% of the variance.
Reliability
The system always provides the advice I require to make my decision.
The system performs reliably.
The system responds the same way under the same conditions at
different times.
I can rely on the system to function properly.
The system analyzes problems consistently.
Competence
The system uses appropriate methods to reach decisions.
The system has sound knowledge about this type of problem built into
The advice the system produces is as good as that which a highly
competent person could produce.
The system correctly uses the information I enter.
The system makes use of all the knowledge and information available to
it to produce its solution to the problem.
Understandability
I know what will happen the next time I use the system because I
understand how it behaves.
XAI Metrics
I understand how the system will assist me with decisions I have to
Although I may not know exactly how the system works, I know how to
use it to make decisions about
the problem.
It is easy to follow what the system does.
I recognize what I should do to get the advice I need from the system
the next time I use it.
I believe advice from the system even when I don’t know for certain
that it is correct.
When I am uncertain about a decision I believe the system rather than
If I am not sure about a decision, I have faith that the system will
provide the best solution.
When the system gives unusual advice I am confident that the advice is
Even if I have no reason to expect the system will be able to solve a
difficult problem, I still feel certain
that it will.
Attachment
I would feel a sense of loss if the system was unavailable and I could
not longer use it.
I feel a sense of attachment to using the system.
I find the system suitable to my style of decision making.
I like using the system for decision making.
I have a personal preference for making decisions with the system.
It is noteworthy that the Scale refers to understandability but does not explicitly reference trust.
Upon close examination, it seems that the reliability factor has some redundant items. The
factors titled "perceived technical competence" and "perceived understandability" might be
interpreted as referencing the user's mental model of the system. For example, the item Even if I
have no reason to expect the system will be able to solve a difficult problem, I still feel certain
that it will clearly is asking about the user's mental model. Indeed, the Madsen-Gregor Scale as a
whole can be understood as referring as much to evaluating the user's mental model as it does to
trust. The mere fact that this distinction is fuzzy is a testament to the notion that XAI evaluation
must have measures of both trust and of mental models, since the two are causally related.
One can question the appropriateness of referring to a "faith" factor. Items in this factor seem to
refer to reliance and uncertainty. One can question the appropriateness of referring to a "personal
attachment" factor rather than a "liking" factor.
As with other Scales, multiple interpretations are possible. For instance, the Madsen-Gregor
item I believe advice from the system even when I don’t know for certain that it is correct asks
essentially the same thing as the Cahour-Fourzy item I am confident in the tool; it works well.
XAI Metrics
A number of individual items are of interest, such as "It is easy to follow what the system does"
and "I recognize what I should do to get the advice I need from the system." These seem to
reference usability. Up to this point, issues of XAI system learnability and usability have not
been considered in the XAI Program.
Merritt Scale 
Trust is regarded as an emotional, attitudinal judgement of the degree to which the user can rely
on the automated system to achieve his or her goals under conditions of uncertainty. Trust was
initially broken into three factors: belief, confidence, and dependability. Factor Analysis revealed
two other factors: propensity to trust and liking. The scale was evaluated in an experiment in
which participants conducted a baggage screen task using a fictitious automated weapon detector
in a luggage screening task. Chronbach’s alpha ranged from a = .87 to a = .92.
Items in this Scale are all similar to items in the Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
1. I believe the system is a competent performer.
2. I trust the system.
3. I have confidence in the advice given by the system.
4. I can depend on the system.
5. I can rely on the system to behave in consistent ways.
6. I can rely on the system to do its best every time I take its advice.
Schaefer Scale 
This scale was developed in the context of human-robot collaboration. Thus, trust was said to
depend on both machine performance and team collaboration. Trust was analyzed into two
factors: ability and performance. This scale is unique in that it is long and has a format different
from all the other scales. Specifically the participant is asked to estimate the amount of time that
the machine (in the study, a robot) would show each of a number of possible behaviors. In this
scale format, some items are troublesome. For example, if the machine acts consistently, what is
the point of asking about the percentage of time that it asks consistently? Many of the items
anthropomorphize the machine (robot) and do so in ways that seem inappropriate for the XAI
application (e.g., "know the difference between friend and foe," "be supportive," "be
responsible," "be conscious"). For example, the point of XAI is to communicate richly and
meaningfully with the participant. Thus, asking about the percentage of time that the XAI
"openly communicates" or "clearly communicates" seems redundant to the evaluation of
Explanation Satisfaction. In the list below, we place in the left those items that seem appropriate
to XAI and in the right those that do not. The items in the left align fairly well to items in the
Cahour-Fourzy Scale. One of these items "Perform a task better than a novice human user" is
particularly interesting and might be added into the Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
XAI Metrics
What percentage of the time will this machine (robot)…
Act consistently
Function successfully
Have errors
Perform a task better than a novice human user
Possess adequate decision-making capability
Perform exactly as instructed
Make sensible decisions
Tell the truth
Perform many functions at one time
Follow directions
Incompetent
Dependable
Predictable
Protect people
Act as part of the team
Malfunction
Clearly communicate
Require frequent maintenance
Openly communicate
Know the difference between friend and foe
Provide feedback
Warn people of potential risks in the
environment
Meet the needs of the mission
Provide appropriate information
Communicate with people
Work best with a team
Keep classified information secure
Work in close proximity with people
Considered part of the team
Unresponsive
Autonomous
A good teammate
Led astray by unexpected changes in the
environment
Singh, et al. Scale 
This scale presupposes a context in which the participant is evaluating a device with which they
have prior experience or have general familiarity with (ATMs, medical devices, etc.). Trust was
defined as an attitude toward commonly encountered automated devices that reflect a potential
for complacency. Trust was analyzed into five factors: confidence, reliance, trust, safety,
complacency. Since the scale merges trust and reliance, it presupposes prior experience and
would not be appropriate for use when a user is first learning to use an XAI. For these reasons,
we feel that this scale is not appropriate for use in the XAI context. Items that might be modified
to make them appropriate reference factors that are already covered in the Cahour-Fourzy Scale
(i.e., trust, reliance).
XAI Metrics
Factor 1: Confidence
1. I think that automated devices used in medicine, such as CT scans and ultrasound, provide
very reliable medical diagnosis.
2. Automated devices in medicine save time and money in the diagnosis and treatment of
3. If I need to have a tumor in my body removed, I would choose to undergo computer-aided
surgery using laser technology because it is more reliable and safer than manual surgery.
4. Automated systems used in modern aircraft, such as the automatic landing system, have made
air journeys safer.
Factor 2: Reliance
1. ATMs provide a safeguard against the inappropriate use of an individual's bank account by
dishonest people.
2. Automated devices used in aviation and banking have made work easier for both employees
and customers.
3. Even though the automatic cruise control in my car is set at a speed below the speed limit, I
worry when I pass a police radar speed trap in case the automatic control is not working
Factor 3: Trust
1. Manually sorting through card catalogues is more reliable than computer-aided searches for
finding items in a library.
2. I would rather purchase an item using a computer than have to deal with a sales representative
on the phone because my order is more likely to be correct using the computer.
3. Bank transactions have become safer with the introduction of computer technology for the
transfer of funds.
Factor 4: Safety
1. I feel safer depositing my money at an ATM than with a human teller.
2. I have to tape an important TV program for a class assignment. To ensure that the correct
program is recorded, I would use the automatic programming facility on my VCR rather than
manual taping.
Wang, et al. Scale 
This scale was used to evaluate trust in a hypothetical "combat identification system" that
participants used in a simulated task. All of the items were taken form or adapted from the Jian,
et al. Scale. The reliability of the decisions generated by the hypothetical decision aid was a
primary independent variable, in an effort to study response bias inducted by automation
reliability. The scale items are reported in the paper, but not the format for the scale (e.g., was it
a Likert scale?). Some items are context specific (e.g., The aid provides security; The blue light
indicates soldiers"). What is noteworthy about some of the items is that they refer explicitly to
XAI Metrics
deception and mistrust. Other items in the Wang, et al., Scale refer to trust and reliability and are
covered by items in the Cahour-Fourzy Scale.
The aid is deceptive.
The aid behaves in an underhanded (concealed) manner.
I am suspicious of the aid’s outputs.
I am wary of the aid.
The aid’s action will have a harmful or injurious outcome.
I am confident in the aid.
The aid provides security.
The aid is dependable.
The aid is reliable.
I can trust the aid.
I am familiar with the aid.
I can trust that blue lights indicate soldiers.
I can trust that red lights indicate terrorists.
XAI Metrics
Appendix E
Trust Scale Recommended for XAI
This Trust Scale asks users directly whether they are confident in the XAI system, whether the
XAI system is predictable, reliable, efficient, and believable.
The scale assumes that the participant has had considerable experience using the XAI system.
Hence, these questions would be appropriate for scaling after a period of use, rather than
immediately after an explanation has been given and prior to use experience.
A majority of the items are adapted from the Cahour-Fourzy Scale , just as they have been
adapted for use in other scales (e.g., Jian, et al.). In the original scale, the items are rated on a
bipolar scale going from I agree completely to I do not agree at all. We have modified the items
to fit the general Likert form developed for the XAI Explanation Satisfaction Scale. In addition
to conforming to psychometric standards, this consistency of format will presumably make the
ratings tasks easier for participants.
Item 6 was adapted from the Jian, et al. Scale, item 7 was adapted from the Schaefer Scale, and
item 8 was adapted from the Madsen-Gregor Scale.
We can assert that the Recommended Scale is reliable based on these two facts:
(1). The majority of the items in this Recommended Scale essentially overlap with items in the
Jian, et al. scale, which was shown empirically to be highly reliable.
(2) Items in the Recommended Scale bear overall semantic similarity to items in the Madsen-
Gregor-Scale, and that scale too was also shown to have high reliability coefficients.
We can assume that the Recommended Scale has content validity Given the essential overlap of
items in the Recommended Scale with items in most of the existing scales, we can safely assume
that the Recommended Scale has content validity.
1. I am confident in the [tool]. I feel that it works well.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
2. The outputs of the [tool] are very predictable.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
3. The tool is very reliable. I can count on it to be correct all the time.
XAI Metrics
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
4. I feel safe that when I rely on the [tool] I will get the right answers.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
5. The [tool] is efficient in that it works very quickly.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
6. I am wary of the [tool]. (adopted from the Jian, et al. Scale and the Wang, et al. Scale)
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
7. The [tool] can perform the task better than a novice human user. (adopted from the Schaefer
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree
8. I like using the system for decision making.
I agree strongly
I agree somewhat I’m neutral about
I disagree
I disagree