The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Neural Correlates
of Attentive
for Color or Luminance
Extrastriate
Brad C. Motter
VA Medical Center, and Departments
of Physiology
and Neurosurgery,
SUNY Health Science Center, Syracuse,
York 13210
on a conditional
orientation
discrimination
task in order
for a color or luminance
processing
in extrastriate
area V4. The task required
a bar stimulus
on its color
and then to discriminate
the angular
tilt of the se-
The majority
of neurons
tively activated
or luminance
of the stimulus
in the receptive
field matched
or luminance
cue. The activity was attenuated
when there was not a match
the stimulus
and tke cue. The differential
activation
on the presence
or absence
of the stimulus
independent
of spatial
population
of V4 neurons,
that matched
or luminance
the activity
as stimuli
that did not match
the selected
ture-selective
in activity were
to develop
200 msec after the stimulus
onset and were
maintained
over the remainder
of the behavioral
trial. In this
task the activity
of V4 neurons
a selection
on the cued
and not simply
the physical
of the receptive
field stimulus.
Under these
the topographic
representation
of the neural
in area V4 highlights
the potential
in the visual scene
at the expense
of background
observations
offer a physiological
counterpart
to psychophysical
suggesting
that stimuli
can be preferentially
allel across
the visual
field on the basis
of a unique
[Key words:
visual search,
preattentive
vision, color, area
V4, single
unit, attention,
conditional
discrimination]
Investigations of visual processing in area V4 have provided a
number ofstriking findings relating behavioral relevance to neu-
ronal activity. Previous studies have looked at the effects of
attention on the processing of stimulus properties in terms of
either the enhanced processing of stimulus features or the limitation of processing to small areas during
focal attentive tasks .
This report addresses
a different aspect ofattention in V4, name-
June 25, 1993; revised
Sept. 13, 1993; accepted Sept. 29, 1993.
was supported
by the VA Medical
Research program.
Correspondence
should be addressed to Brad C. Motter,
Research Service 15 I,
VA Medical
800 Irving
Syracuse, NY 132 IO.
0 1994 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/94/142178-12.$05.00/O
ly, the selection of stimuli based on their possession of a par-
ticular stimulus feature, in this case color or luminance.
One of the simplest cognitive acts we perform is the selection
of relevant information from our cluttered visual environment.
The selective task is enormous, yet we do it with remarkable
efficiency. Psychophysical experiments have suggested
that early
in visual processing the incoming information is sorted and
grouped according to the similarity of simple surface features,
such as color, luminance, or texture, or simple shape features,
such as orientation or size . These sets of features may be
organized into separate topographic representations or maps.
This segmentation of the scene into what are essentially feature
maps is considered to occur in parallel across the visual scene
and to occur preattentively or at least before focal attentive
take place .
Objects whose locations do not “pop out” in the feature maps
by their possession of unique features are found by an active
focal attentive search that can be drawn or guided to locations
in the feature maps that contain matches with prominent fea-
tures of the goal object . The focal attentive
process may serve to bind together feature information from
different maps at each spatial location attended .
The separate feature maps indicated psychophysically invite
a comparison with the physiological feature sensitivities and
retinotopic maps that exist in primary and extrastriate visual
areas. Physiological and anatomical studies have supported the
idea that early visual cortical areas provide a general low-level
processing of visual information that is then distributed into a
hierarchy of visual pathways that are selectively engaged de-
pending upon the processing requirements . Clinical
reports of rather specific visual feature defects that result from
discrete brain lesions have given support to the distributed pro-
cessing concept . Human studies using positron emis-
sion tomography not only have supported this concept , but also have
provided evidence that different attentive strategies selectively
engage different parts ofthe visual system (Corbetta et al., 199 1).
This suggests
that higher-order processes
dynamically create and
govern linkages between various brain areas for the purpose of
solving different types of perceptual challenges.
Area V4 has received particular interest because ofits position
in the chain of pathways leading to the temporal lobe and be-
cause of physiological studies suggesting that V4 has an impor-
tant role in the process of color perception .
The Journal of Neuroscience,
April 1994,
In addition
to studies that have quantitatively
assessed the re-
sponse sensitivities
of V4 neurons
to color and form dimensions
and Schein,
1987; Schein
physiological
have demonstrated
several neural
correlates
of focal attentive
processing
area V4 task that required
them to select a bar stimulus based on its color or luminance and then
to discriminate the angular tilt ofthe selected stimtius. They first fixated
a sniall circular fixation spot whose color or luminance provided the
conditional
cue for the trial. After establishing fixation of the spot and
signaling readiness by pulling back a behavioral
key, they were next
presented with an array of four or six stimulus bars composed of com-
binations of two orientations
and two colors or luminances (Fig. 1).
During the array presentation the subject could select a subset of bar
stimuli that matched the color or luminance of the fixation spot. How-
ever, because of the multiple color matches, a final orientation
ment could not be made or predicted until thk array was reduced to
just two stimuli, only one of which matched the fixation cue color or
luminance. The full array lasted for a variable period of time (I SOO-
2700 msec), and was then reduced to two stimuli for 200 msec before
being blanked out entirely. The monkey made its orientation judgement
of the matching bar stimulus by pushing either a righthand
button for
rightward tilts of the bar stimulus or a lefthand button for leftward tilts.
Steady fixation of the central fixation spot without eye blinks and eye
movements to peripheral sites was required during the entire stimulus
sequence. An infrared comeal reflection oculometer was used to monitor
eye position .
Prior to studying each neuron in the conditional
discrimination
adigm, the neuron’s receptive field was located and mapped and the
response preferences for stimulus size, color, and orientation
termined using a simple orientation
discrimination
paradigm. This par-
adigm required the monkey to ignore peripheral
stimuli while fixating
a central spot and then to make an orientation
discrimination
of a small
bar flashed directly over the fixation spot (see Fig. I).
Stimulus presentation. Stimuli were generated using a Raster Tech-
nologies model l/10 display unit hosted by a PDP-I l/34 computer and
were displayed on a Mitsubishi
C6922 monitor located 60 cm in front
of the monkey. Stimulus timing and eye position sampling were syn-
chronized to the 60 Hz frame rate of the display system. The time of
occurrence of those events and the neural activity were recorded with
Conditional
Discrimination
Discrimination
‘I . . . . . ‘. 0
Behavioral paradigms. Each frame represents a field of view,
with the fixation spot in the center and the neuron’s receptive field
indicated by the dotted circle. For either task the subject initially fixates
the small fixation spot, is then presented with an array of stimuli (left)
or a single stimulus (right), and then in a final period must make an
orientation
discrimination.
For the conditional
discrimination
the left the discrimination
is made when the array is reduced to two bar
stimuli, and the monkey reports the orientation
of the remaining bar
that matches the fixation spot in color. Match and nonmatch conditions
are distinguished by whether or not a color or luminance match occurs
between the fixation spot and the stimulus in the receptive field during
the stimulus presentation period. For the SD task on the right the mon-
key ignores peripheral stimulus presentations and makes an orientation
discrimination
of a bar flashed directly over the fixation spot. The
stimuli and their locations in the array are randomized
from trial to
trial. Note that in the conditional
discrimination
tasks the receptive
field stimulus is not necessarily one of the two stimuli remaining at the
end of the trial.
The figure is not scaled proportionately.
a precision of 100 rsec. Each series of stimulus conditions used a pseu-
dorandomized
sequence of stimulus selection so that the monkey could
not predict stimulus selection or target location. The stimuli consisted
of rectangular bars of various sizes, orientations,
and colors presented
against a background gray of 7.5 cd/m*. The fixation target was a small
filled circle (0.2”). Stimulus arrays contained either four or six bar stimuli
equally spaced along an imaginary circle centered on the fixation spot.
The array was placed so that one bar stimulus was centered in the
receptive field of the neuron being studied. Consequently, the eccen-
tricity and the rotation of the array as a whole changed slightly from
neuron to neuron but the overall display remained consistent. A stan-
dard set ofcolors based on the individual
RGB guns ofthe color monitor,
or equal additions of any two guns, was used. These colors were adjusted
to an average value of 34 cd/m* by comparisons of the frame-averaged
values obtained from integrating the analog output of a EC&G model
450 photometer fitted with a photometric
filter. No attempt was made
to select isoluminant
colors for individual
animals or neurons. Con-
sequently, although it is considered unlikely, it is possible that luminance
differences alone could account for the effects observed and therefore
the use of the term “color”
should be viewed as descriptive.
Each animal viewed the display monitor binocularly
through an in-
frared reflecting mirror placed directly in front of its eyes. Eye position
of the left eye was recorded with an infrared cornea1 reflection oculom-
eter . Computer software monitored
sition and immediately terminated
any trial in which eye position ex-
ceeded a 1” window
centered on the fixation spot. The behavioral key
and push buttons were located in front of the monkey at waist and
midchest levels and were blocked from view by a partition. The monkeys
worked daily for about 1200-1400 trials at a performance level ofabout
85% correct. Correct responses were rewarded after each trial. Animals
were maintained
on a controlled
liquid intake schedule and received
their baseline amount each day either in the course of working on the
* Attentive
or Luminance
condition that was related to the receptive field position or the stimulus
in it. Thus, only by chance was the receptive field stimuli one of the
final two stimuli. After an initial study using the paradigm in Fiaure 1.
other control paradigms were tested. -
Three animals were trained and prepared for behavioral neurophys-
Locations of the penetrations
into V4 in two of the four
hemispheres studied. Line drawings were made from photographs.
reference grid was positioned to align with the histological guide pins,
and the dots marking the locations of penetrations
were placed with
respect to the coordinates of the reference grid during the experiments.
LS, lunate sulcus; STS, superior temporal sulcus; IOS, inferior occipital
tasks or supplemented
afterward. Animals
received weekly holidays
from the schedule.
Data analysis. The spike rate activity was measured within
periods oftime during each trial. Averages ofactivity for each condition
and for each neuron were combined in a repeated-measures analysis of
variance (RM-ANOVA)
design. Comparisons
between specific condi-
tions were obtained
using a Stud&-it-Neuman-Keuls
(SNK) multiple
comparison procedure. Student t tests were used during the experiments
and in the final analyses to identify the presence of effects within in-
dividual neurons. Several indexes of activity differences are employed
in the presentation of the data using the standard contrast index method
that divides the difference between conditions
y the sum of the con-
ditions: (A - &/(A + B). Background activity
as not subtracted from
any of the response rates in this report.
Procedure. Single neurons were initially
s ected for study if they
responded well to flashed stimulus bars of vario s colors and luminances
that were about 2.5” x 0.5” in size. After quickly
stimating the response
properties, the receptive fields were mapped wi
flashed stimuli. The
orientation and color/luminance
preferences were th n determined. Small
adjustments of stimulus size were occasionally made o obtain optimal
responses. From these results two orientations
lors/lumi-
nances were chosen to form four possible stimuli. For neurons with
clear orientation
preferences the preferred orientation
and the orthog-
onal nonpreferred orientation were chosen; the 45” oblique orientations
were used when no clear orientation
preference was present. For neurons
with clear color preferences, the two “best” colors or the best color and
the best gray scale luminance were chosen. For neurons without clear
color/luminance
preferences, either a gray scale luminance
combined color/luminance
difference pair was chosen; often the latter
was a color paired with black. The primary stimulus, composed of the
preferred orientation
and best color, was then used to redefine the edge
of the receptive field nearest the fixation point and to examine the
borders of the receptive field along an arc equidistant from the fixation
target and passing through the receptive field center. Based on this
mapping the spacing of stimuli in the array of the conditional
ination paradigm was then determined
so that only one stimulus was
presented in the receptive field on any trial.
After all stimulus parameters were defined, the monkey was switched
to the conditional
discrimination
paradigm described in Figure 1. The
final two bar stimuli were chosen according to a random permutation
sequence for color, orientation,
and location in the array. The receptive
field stimulus was also chosen from a permutation
sequence, although.
this sequence was often actively biased during the experiment against
stimulus parameters that were ineffective in driving the neuron. It is
important to note that the receptive field stimulus was not necessarily
one of the final two stimuli presented; that is, there was no behavioral
iological recording. Standard electrophysiological
techniques were used
to obtain recordings from cortical area V4 during the course of several
months . The impulse
activity of single cortical neurons was recorded with glass-coated Elgiloy
microelectrodes inserted transdurally into the cortex. Because recordings
were to be made over several months and thus reconstruction
vidual electrode penetrations would not be possible directly from his-
tological sections, care was taken to define the extent of the prelunate
gyrus in each hemisphere by a progression
of penetrations from Vl
across the lunate sulcus and prelunate gyrus and into the posterior bank
of the superior temporal sulcus. Histological
examination
was used to
confirm the neurophysiological
localizations.
After the last recording
session the animals were deeply anesthetized with pentobarbital,
dura was opened within the recording chamber, and reference pins were
inserted into the cortex using the positioning
devices that set the co-
ordinate grid for the microelectrode
recording. The animal was then
given a lethal overdose of pentobarbital
and perfused with saline fol-
lowed by buffered formalin. Photographs of the reference pins and brain
were made through the recording chamber, and the brain was removed
and prepared for histology. Reconstruction
ofthe penetrations
on the observed physiology and construction of topographic
maps using receptive field locations referenced to the grid defined by
the reference pins in the photos. All experimental
protocols were ap-
proved by the Animal
Care and Use Committees at the VA Medical
Center and SUNY-HSC.
In each hemisphere
the visual field representation
of the lower
contralateral quadrant extending out to lo” was located on the
crown of the prelunate gyrus. The location of the penetrations
in two of the four hemispheres investigated is shown in Figure
2. Within area V4, 188 neurons with receptive fields centered
3-6” from the fovea were fully studied with the simple discrim-
ination (SD) paradigm. Neurons with receptive fields that did
not extend to the fixation point were selected and of those 109
neurons were studied using the CD paradigm. Based on phys-
iological signatures of cellular boundaries and on the measures
of electrode position, neurons were sampled from both super-
ficial and deep layers of V4. No correlations were observed
between the cell depth and the physiological observations re-
ported below.
The stimulus feature preferences of the V4 neurons were de-
termined during an initial characterization of each neuron using
200 msec flashed stimuli presented one at a time in the SD
paradigm (Fig. 1). Although the examinations were necessarily
brief, the neuronal responses generally agreed with previous
reports . Sixty-nine percent of the neurons
displayed clear color preferences [(best - worst)/(best + worst)
> 0.331 among the six colors tested. The colors were photo-
metrically equated for luminance and to the human observer
appeared closely matched in brightness. Most of the V4 neurons
also responded to white light, as has been previously noted
 . The response to luminance-
equated white stimuli averaged 70% of the response to the “best”
color stimulus. Most neurons also responded to black stimuli,
with population average response to black stimuli being about
90% of the response to the best color stimulus. The represen-
tations of black and white responsiveness could have been se--
lectively biased in the population studied as the result of the
routine use ofblack and white stimuli as the initial search stimuli
during most electrode penetrations.
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Figure 3. Responses of V4 neuro2s in the CD paradigm. The raster displays show the differences between match (M) and nonmatch (NM)
conditions for four V4 neurons. Each horizontal
row represents a portion of a single behavioral trial synchronized in time to the onset of the array
of stimuli indicated by the long vertical
bars on the left. The short
represent the times of neural discharges. For each neuron the
trials were run in an interleaved fashion and are sorted here according to stimulus conditions
and trial length. The short
edge mark the time of release of the behavioral
key near the end of the trial. The upper
of each pair depicts the neuron’s
to a stimulus when it matches (M) the fixation spot color. The lower
in each pair is the response to the identical stimulus when it
does not match (NM) the fixation spot color. Only the responses to the optimal stimulus (color and orientation)
are shown; the responses to the
other stimulus combinations
that were interleaved in the experiment are not shown.
in the CD paradigm
A large majority (8 1 of 109) ofthe V4 neurons were differentially
activated in the CD paradigm, as identified by individual t tests
< 0.05). All 81 neurons
a maintained
activation
when there was a match between the color/luminance of the
receptive field stimulus and the color/luminance of the fixation
spot. The same neurons displayed only a phasic activation if
the color of the bar stimulus in the receptive field did not match
the fixation spot color. The reverse was never observed; that is,
match was always associated with activation, nonmatch with
inactivation, or suppression. These observations were made for
each of the four stimuli used in the CD paradigm. Each of the
four stimuli, made from combinations of two colors and two
orientations, usually elicited different responses with the pre-
dominant response difference occurring between stimuli of dif-
ferent orientations. The presentation of the results will be sim-
plified by presenting only data for the two stimuli having the
preferred orientation but different colors. Furthermore, the
stimulus with the optimal color or luminance will be referred
to as the primary stimulus, whereas the other stimulus of the
pair having the same orientation will be referred to as the set--
ondary stimulus.
Figure 3 illustrates the range of the differential effect. The
responses to the primary stimulus for the matching (M) and
nonmatching (NM) conditions are shown for four V4 neurons.
The trials displayed in each raster have been sorted according
to the presentation duration of the array that varied from trial
to trial. The trials are synchronized to the onset of the array
indicated by the vertical bar on the left. The short, staggered
set of vertical bars on the right mark the time of the release of
the key by the monkey after the array had been reduced to two
stimuli for 200 msec and then blanked. In each case the M
condition results in a strong maintained activation and the NM
condition results in a substantially reduced response. These dif-
ferences were observed for pairings of different colors or grays
of different luminances and for pairs of mixed color and lu-
minance, studied in approximately three equal groups across
the population. When the receptive field stimulus matched the
conditional cue, and was therefore a potential discriminative
target, the neurons responded with a prolonged discharge until
the discriminative target was revealed. On the other hand, when
the receptive field stimulus did not match the cue and was
therefore not a candidate for the final conditional discrimina-
tion, the neural activity was abbreviated.
The illustrations in Figure 3 are for the primary stimuli in
each case, but the response to the secondary stimulus (same
orientation, opposite color/luminance) also displayed the same
effect, ifthat stimulus produced a response in the neuron. Figure
4 illustrates the responses to both sets of stimuli for one V4
neuron. This neuron had a strong color and luminance prefer-
ence for blue and an equally strong preference for dark stimuli.
* Attentive
Selection for Color or Luminance
in Area V4
BLACK (NM)
Responses to both primary
and secondary stimuli in one V4 neu-
ron during the CD paradigm. Presen-
tation format is as in Figure 3. This
neuron was responsive to both blue and
black, but in the CD paradigm the re-
sponses were expressed differentially
depending on the-M condition.
Responses to both a blue (Fig. 4A,B) and a black (Fig. 4C,D)
receptive field stimulus are shown for both conditions. Only the
responses to the preferred orientation (70”) are shown. In Figure
4A both the fixation spot color and the stimulus in the receptive
field were blue. In Figure 4B the fixation spot was black and
did not match the blue stimulus in the receptive field. In the
presence of a blue fixation spot, this neuron was strongly acti-
vated if a blue stimulus was within its receptive field (Fig. 4,4).
Similarly, this neuron was also activated in the presence of a
black fixation spot when a black stimulus was within its recep-
tive field (Fig. 4C). The neuron was markedly less active when
the color of the stimulus in its receptive field did not match the
color of the fixation spot (Fig. 4B,D). It is clear that under these
conditions the activity of the neuron is not specific for a par-
ticular color or luminance, per se, but for stimuli with a selected
color or luminance. It appears that the neuron is not “coding”
for color or luminance but rather for a selection based on color
or luminance.
Population measures
The mean discharge rate for each of the 109 V4 neurons during
the last second of the array presentation was calculated for each
condition. Figure 5 summarizes the results by plotting the match
and nonmatch rates for the responses to the primary stimulus
300 msec/div
for each neuron. Differences as a function of match condition
for the population studied were significant for both the primary
and secondary stimuli (RM-ANOVA,
P < 0.00 1). To establish
the prevalence of the differences in the population, the responses
of each neuron were examined with individual t tests. By this
measure 8 1 of the 109 neurons showed significant differences
(p < 0.05). For purposes of display clarity the 8 1 neurons were
broken into two groups and plotted on the left and middle in
Figure 5. The remaining 28 neurons not showing a clear differ-
ence between the matching conditions are plotted separately on
the right in Figure 5. The difference between the activation in
the match condition and the attenuated responses in the non-
match condition are clear in most neurons. No examples were
encountered in which the response to an NM condition was
significantly greater than the response to the M condition. An
estimate of the magnitude of the differential effect within the
population of V4 neurons was obtained by calculating the ratio
of the firing rates in the match condition over the rates in the
nonmatch condition for each neuron. The mean of the distri-
bution of these ratios is 2.3 and the median is 1.7. Thus, the
activity associated with the primary stimulus in the match con-
dition is about twice the activity elicited by the same stimulus
in the nonmatch condition.
Both the primary and the secondary stimulus produced com-
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Mean discharge rates for match (M) and nonmatch
conditions
for the mimarv stimulus for each of the 109 neurons. The
8 1 neurons having &nificant
differences between conditions were ranked
by difference between conditions and divided by rank into two groups,
plotted here on the left and in the middle. The data for the remaining
28 neurons are plotted on the right. The average firing rate for each
condition is joined by a line for each neuron. Discharge rates in match
conditions exceeded those in nonmatch conditions for each significantly
different case.
parable outcomes in the M conditions. The match versus NM
comparison was significantly different for both sets of stimuli
(RM-ANOVA,
SNK comparisons,
P < 0.05). Comparisons
individual neurons were made for the 96 neurons that had de-
tectable responses to the secondary stimulus (p < 0.05, t test,
response vs baseline). A response index comparing the M con-
ditions for each stimulus was calculated using the response rates
from the final 1 set of the array presentation. A standard contrast
index of the form (M - NM)/(M + NM) was used, where M
is the response in the match condition and NM is the response
in the nonmatch condition. Figure 6 shows a scatter histogram
of these indexes for the primary and secondary stimuli. The
average index was 0.29 for the primary stimulus and 0.22 for
the secondary stimulus. As shown in Figure 6, the differential
activation that occurs during the trial is based on whether or
not the receptive field stimulus matches the conditional cue.
Stimulus-stimulus
interactions
With multiple stimuli in the visual field one of the obvious
considerations is whether the observed effects could be ex-
plained by interactions between stimuli either within the clas-
sical receptive field or between the classical receptive field and
the suppressive surrounds that have been observed in V4. In-
Distribution
of the contrast indexes for the responses to
primary and secondary stimuli during the CD paradigm. Positive con-
trast values indicate that the match condition produced a larger response
than the nonmatch condition.
Each data point represents one neuron.
teractions between the array stimuli in the CD paradigm can
be ruled out because the same stimulus sets could be observed
to result in different responses depending on the color of the
fixation spot. The array stimuli were randomly chosen on a trial-
by-trial basis and therefore the number of instances of exact
replication of the arrays was fairly small in the standard CD
paradigm. However, sufficient comparisons were available be-
tween any two stimulus locations to rule out simple interactions.
Furthermore, the cue switching paradigm presented in the fol-
lowing companion article provides a complete
control for interactions between array stimuli, as well as pre-
senting further experiments examining the relationship between
stimulus positions in the array and the classical receptive field.
Although the fixation spot was carefully determined to lie
outside the classical receptive field of the neurons studied, the
possibility remained that the fixation spot was in a subthreshold
area or located in the suppressive surround area. This possibility
was examined using the SD task shown in Figure 1 (right) to
present the same color or luminance combinations under dif-
ferent conditions. For 66 of the 109 neurons a variation of the
SD paradigm was used to present the stimulus combinations
for a duration of 2 set in order to match the duration of the CD
task. The SD task provided the same physical stimulus rela-
tionships between the fixation spot and the receptive field stim-
ulus, but the viewing conditions did not require the subject to
process actively information about the peripheral stimulus. The
SD task required the monkey to ignore peripheral stimuli while
fixating a central spot and to make an orientation discrimination
of a small bar flashed directly over the fixation spot irrespective
of the color or luminance of the fixation spot or of the bar flashed
over the fixation spot. Thus, the animal was required to perform
the same type of task, an orientation discrimination, but was
required only to attend to the location of the fixation spot.
Under these conditions two general classes of responses
observed for V4 neurons. Neurons displayed either a maintained
or a phasic response during the 2 set stimulus period. Examples
are shown in Figure 7 for two neurons whose responses in the
- Attentive
or Luminance
, Receptive
in the SD para-
digm to the same color combinations
used in the CD paradigm. In the SD
paradigm there was no required behav-
ioral response
based on color or lumi-
nance, and only the fixation spot and
receptive field stimulus were presented.
Onset and offset of the 2.0 set stimulus
period are marked by the vertical bars
on the /eft and right. In contrast to the
CD paradigm, the responses
are denendent onlv uvon the
;ecepti\e field siimulus.
CD paradigms are shown in Figures 3 and 4. Both of these
neurons were studied with a black and blue stimulus combi-
nation. For each of the four pairs of rasters the upper part is
the response during a match (M) condition where the fixation
spot and the receptive field stimulus have the same color. The
lower raster of each of the four pairs shows the response when
there is a nonmatch (NM) between fixation spot and stimulus
color. In each case the responses during this simple task appear
to be dependent upon the stimulus in the receptive field and
show little correlation to the color of the fixation spot. The
response rate during the last second of the stimulus period was
measured for M and NM conditions of the primary stimulus in
a subset of 66 of the neurons fully studied in the CD paradigm.
The M and NM conditions for the SD were not significantly
different (P > 0.05, RM-ANOVA
SNK comparisons). T tests
again were used to identify the effects in‘individual neurons.
For 60 of the 66 neurons the simple pairings of central and
peripheral stimuli were not able to reproduce the selection effect;
instead the responses were determined by the receptive field
stimulus alone. Six of the 66 neurons had small but significant
differences (t test, p < 0.05) between M and NM conditions of
the SD task; however, only three of these six neurons displayed
significant differences in the CD paradigm. These results indi-
cate that the feature-selective effect seen in the CD paradigm is
not a simple interaction of central and peripheral stimulus col-
Activation
versus suppression
The differences in discharge activity during the CD paradigm
result from both activation and suppression relative to the dis-
charge during the SD paradigm. Activation during the match
condition can be clearly seen in neurons with normally phasic
responses that then develop a maintained activation like that
shown for the neuron (372) in Figures 4 and 7. Suppression or
inactivation can be clearly seen for neurons with normally main-
tained activity that is depressed during the nonmatch condition
as shown for the neuron (362) in Figures 3 and 7. To quantify
these observations a contrast index was calculated for match
and nonmatch conditions comparing the response in the CD
paradigm with the response in the SD paradigm. These data
were obtained for the same 66 neurons studied with 2 set stim-
ulus periods in the SD paradigm described above. Response
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
rates were based on activity in response to the primary stimulus
during the last second of each condition. A contrast index value
for each neuron was obtained for the match condition according
to (M - B)/(M
+ B) where M is the response in the match
condition of the CD paradigm and B is the simple average of
the responses to match and nonmatch conditions
paradigm. Because the latter responses were not significantly
different, the average response was used to establish a single
baseline for the comparisons.
A contrast index value for the
nonmatch condition was obtained in a similar manner: (NM -
+ B), where NM is the response in the nonmatch con-
dition of the CD paradigm. The resulting indexes for each neu-
ron are plotted in Figure 8. Positive values for the match con-
dition indicate an activation in the CD paradigm relative to the
“baseline”
response in the SD paradigm. Negative values for
the nonmatch condition indicate a suppression during the CD
paradigm relative to the response in the SD paradigm. The data
points for those neurons that had significant differences between
conditions in the CD paradigm are shown as solid circles; those
that did not are shown as open circles. Many neurons, those in
the upper left quadrant, show both activation during match and
suppression
during nonmatch conditions
in the CD paradigm.
For a few neurons the differences in the CD paradigm apparently
reflect a relative difference in an overall pattern of response
activation or suppression.
The few cases that were below the
diagonal where the response to an NM condition was greater
than the response to the M condition
were not significantly
different.
Temporal development of the dtferential
It has been demonstrated that cuing information from nonvisual
sources can influence V4 neuronal activity prior to the presen-
tation of visual stimuli . Therefore, the data were examined for evidence that
neural activity was biased by the cue color/luminance
the interval before the array was presented. In the present ex-
periments the conditional color cue, the fixation spot, was avail-
able from the start of the trial for a period greater than 0.5 set
before the peripheral stimuli were presented. The activity in this
prearray period was grouped according to the conditional cue
and differences tested on an individual cell basis. None of the
109 cells showed a significant difference in activity related to
cue color or luminance during this period (t test, p < 0.05).
Thus, the data provide no indication that the discharge activity
of the neurons was sensitive to the cuing conditions prior to the
presentation of the stimulus arrays.
The time course of the development of the differential re-
sponse during the array presentation was examined for the pop-
ulation of 109 V4 cells. First the average discharge rate for each
neuron was determined in sequential 10 msec intervals during
the presentation of the array for each separate condition. Then
the response rate for each neuron was normalized with respect
to the interval with the highest response rate across all condi-
tions. The normalized data from different neurons were then
averaged for each 10 msec interval and for each stimulus con-
dition. Figure 9A plots the results obtained for the primary
stimulus of each color/luminance
pair. The upper line is the
average response ofthe 109 neurons during the match condition;
the lower line, the average response during the nonmatch con-
dition. The population latency to the presentation of the array
can be seen to be about 50 msec. Although
differences
conditions
could be seen to occur in individual
Comparison
of activation and suppression in CD paradigm.
Each data point compares the response in the CD paradigm with the
response in the baseline SD paradigm for both M and NM conditions.
Values are expressed in terms of a contrast index, with positive values
indicating activation and negative values
indicating suppression relative
to the SD task. Solidcircles
represent neurons with significant differences
between M and NM conditions in the CD task; O&I circles represent
neurons showing no differences between those conditions.
onset of the response (see Fig. 3) for the population response
both conditions result in comparable initial activations. The
differential
activation
over the first few hundred
liseconds of the response. Because the comparison in Figure 9A
was created from the responses to stimuli optimized for each
neuron, it should represent an optimal temporal response profile
for the emergence of the feature-selective effect in area V4. The
responses to the secondary stimulus of each color or luminance
pair, on the other hand, might provide a more general profile
because they represent the response to less than optimal stimuli.
The temporal profiles of the responses to secondary stimuli are
plotted in Figure 9B. The profiles of temporal development of
the differential responses were similar with both stimuli. Dif-
ferentiation between match and nonmatch conditions begins to
occur about 150-200 msec after the array is presented. Although
the population response declines after the initial appearance of
the stimulus array, the difference between match and nonmatch
conditions gradually increases during the first 500 msec and
then remains relatively constant for the remainder of the trial.
The data,in Figure 9 model the time course of the net acti-
vation of area V4 neurons during the conditional discrimination
trial. The data show that after about 150-200 msec the stimuli
that are potential targets for a discriminative task begin to be
represented by a greater level of activity in the population than
other stimuli. After 400-500 msec the stimuli that are potential
targets are evoking about twice the level of activity above back-
ground as the nontargets.
Stimulus feature preferences
Quantitative examination of stimulus preferences were not at-
tempted in the CD paradigm in this series of experiments, but
qualitative comparisons could be made between the responses
to the colors or luminances and the orientations used in the
* Attentive
or Luminance
development
of the differential
response: nor-
0 ..,....1.,~.1.1.~..~~~1.“.,.‘~‘1””1
malized population
histograms of the response to primary (A) and sec-
ondary (B) stimuli during match (M) and nonmatch (NM) conditions
in the CD paradigm. The differential response develops over the first
few hundred milliseconds.
The differences between the two M condi-
tions and the two NM conditions are shown in C. The response differ-
ence between primary and secondary stimuli persists throughout
trial for M but not for NM conditions.
Histograms are based on 10
msec bins. For each neuron the bin with the greatest activity across all
conditions was set to 100 and the remaining bins normalized
value. Data were then averaged across the 109 neurons. The nbscissa
represents time synchronized to the onset of the stimulus array.
and secondary stimulus choices. Neurons that were
selectively responsive to particular colors, luminances, or ori-
entations in the SD paradigm remained sensitive to those same
parameters in the CD paradigm. This was clearly true for the
match condition in the CD paradigm, as can be judged from
the difference between the population response to the primary
and secondary stimuli in the match condition of Figure 9C.
While it remains possible that quantitative measures could re-
veal shifts in preference between stimulus parameters that were
judged to be near equivalent at the time of the experiment, it
is clear that the basic response differences were maintained in
the CD paradigm. On the other hand, distinct sensitivity dif-
ferences were more difficult
to observe
in the nonmatch
ditions. This can be seen in the population response in Figure
9C, where differences in the response to the primary and sec-
ondary stimuli gradually disappeared during the trial. These
distinctions were significant in that the RM-ANOVA SNK com-
parisons (SNK p < 0.05) showed differences between all com-
parisons (color vs matching) except for the comparison between
NM conditions. The relative lack of stimulus feature selectivity
in the nonmatch level of activity suggests
a possible distinction
between the processes
that control the mechanisms of activation
and those that govern inactivation or suppression within V4
during the CD paradigm. Within the CD paradigm, the atten-
uation associated with the nonmatch condition occurred re-
gardless ofwhether the neuron was sensitive to the fixation point
color itself (when presented within the receptive field).
The relationship between color, luminance, or orientation
sensitivity and the occurrence of a differential response in the
CD paradigm was examined. Response contrast indexes for col-
or, luminance, and orientation sensitivity were derived from
the responses in the SD paradigm and were compared with the
response indexes describing the matching condition of the CD
paradigm. For the color values the best and worst responses to
the six colors tested were used. For the luminances the responses
to the black and white stimuli were used. For the orientation
values the responses
to the preferred and orthogonal orientations
were used. These values are plotted in Figure 10 against the
contrast index calculated for the response to the primary stim-
ulus in the CD paradigm for 100 of the neurons. No clear general
relationship between color, luminance, or orientation sensitivity
and the presence of the effect is evident. Exploratory multiple
linear regressions using these indexes and others representing
ratios of black:color and white:color responses did not reveal
any meaningful predictive relationships. What is clear, however,
is that the behavioral modulation attributable to the selective
attentive effect is of a comparable magnitude to the level of
control exerted by the stimulus characteristics themselves. The
median index value for color was 0.43, for luminance 0.2 1, for
orientation 0.25, and for the matching effect 0.27 (the median
for the 8 1 neurons with a significant difference between M con-
ditions was 0.32).
Discussion
The results of the present study indicate that a behaGiora1 re-
quirement for the selection of a stimulus with a particular fea-
ture, either color or luminance, can determine the responsive-
ness of V4 neurons to stimuli presented within their classical
receptive field areas. The selection is based on the presence or
absence of the stimulus feature and is independent of spatial
location. The activity reflects a selection based on the cued
feature and not simply the physical color or luminance of the
receptive field stimulus. Across the population of V4 neurons,
stimuli that match the selected color or luminance elicit about
twice the activity as stimuli that do not match the selected color
or luminance. These feature-selective changes in activity were
observed to develop fully over a period of about 500 msec and
to be maintained over the remaining l-2 set of the behavioral
trial. These physiological observations suggest that stimuli that
a unique color or luminance feature can be preferentially
selected in parallel across the visual field.
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Feature sensitivity versus feature selection
The feature-specific
modulatory
processes demonstrated
Haenny and Schiller for V4 neurons were associated with
the neuronal sensitivity to a particular stimulus dimension that
was relevant to the completion of an alternating sequence task.
When the animal was required to attend to changes in orien-
tation or color, the respective sensitivities
for those receptive
field characteristics
were sharpened; thus, increased responses
were observed for preferred stimulus parameters and decreased
responses were observed for nonpreferred stimulus parameters.
The degree of feature-specific
modulation was correlated with
how sharply tuned the neuron was for that particular stimulus
dimension. A sharpening of sensitivity
to the appropriate stim-
ulus dimension as a function of task difficulty was also reported
by Spitzer et al. for V4 neurons. They demonstrated
task conditions that were more difficult and therefore demanded
a higher level of attention were associated with higher rates of
neural activity and narrower
orientation bandwidths.
trast, the feature-selective
activity reported in this article ap-
pears to have little to do with either the task difficulty or the
particular sensitivity to the stimulus dimension per se, but rather
appears to be associated with the act of selection of stimuli
having a particular stimulus feature.
In other studies Haenny et al. and Maunsell et al.
(199 1) reported that the responses of V4 neurons to visual stim-
uli in a delayed match-to-sample
task could be modulated by
either visual or somatosensory
sample cues. Their task required
the detection of a cued grating orientation in a sequential series
of grating presentations.
The interactions
between the sample
cue (delivered at the onset of the trial) and the visual receptive
field stimuli in those studies were quite different than those
reported here. They reported a wide mixture
of results from
various cue and stimulus combinations.
Some V4 neurons re-
sponded best to any of the visual grating orientations whenever
the sample cue had a specific orientation, while other V4 neurons
responded best to particular but not necessarily matching com-
binations of cue and receptive field stimuli, and still others were
selectively responsive to the sample cue information even before
the visual stimuli were presented. Although there was no special
relationship
between M conditions and neural activity across
the set of observations,
their results clearly indicated that in-
provided by the cue sample did differentially
the later neural processing of visual grating patterns. Maunsell
et al. (199 1) further demonstrated
that the particular form of
the modulation that occurs is not dependent upon the modality,
either visual or somatosensory,
of the cue.
The feature selectivity
observed in the present report was
quite different from that described in the above studies. Unlike
the pairing of a particular cue orientation with a particular effect
in any given neuron in the studies of Haenny et al. and
Maunsell et al. , the selectivity
effect observed in the
present study was generalized for each neuron. What was im-
portant was the match, not the particular color or luminance of
the stimulus. Also differing from the above studies, the feature
selectivity effect was always the same in the present study. The
match condition determined the activity. A match between cue
and receptive field stimulus
was associated with
activation,
a nonmatch
was associated with
an attenuated re-
sponse. While the effects in the present study are more uniform,
it is clear that the V4 studies have used quite different tasks to
address the role of attention in information
processing and have
Orientation
Relationships between color, luminance, and orientation
sensitivity and the differential response associated with the color or
luminance M condition. Color, luminance, and orientation sensitivity
were assessed from the responses to 200 msec flashes presented in the
SD paradigm. The differential responses were measured over a 1 set
interval in the CD paradigm.
assessed the effects during quite different time frames within the
Moran and Desimone reported that spatially restricted
focal attention suppresses responses to irrelevant stimuli within
the receptive fields of V4 neurons when both relevant and ir-
- Attentive
or Luminance
relevant stimuli are located within the receptive field. However,
uli (that are relevant because they are potential discriminative
when only one of the two simultaneous
stimuli was presented
in the receptive field, either the relevant or the irrelevant stim-
targets) and an attenuated response to nonmatching stimuli (ir-
ulus, the responses were equivalent and not suppressed. From
these data they formed the hypothesis that focal attention di-
relevant stimuli) are observed when either set is presented alone
rected at a particular spatial location acts to filter out irrelevant
stimuli at that location. Physiologically
this was seen in terms
in the receptive field. The feature-selective responses are thought
of the suppression
of responses to irrelevant stimuli that were
present in the receptive fields of individual V4 neurons, but only
to occur in parallel across the visual field. This seems a reason-
when focal attention was directed to other (relevant) stimuli in
the receptive field. Recently it has been shown that within
able conclusion given that the positions of the final two stimuli
context of an array of competing stimuli, focal attention needs
only to be directed to the receptive field location, not necessarily
in the CD paradigm were not correlated with the receptive field
to a second stimulus in the receptive field (Motter,
contrast to the spatial selectivity seen with directed focal atten-
location being studied and that the responses were consistent
tion, the feature selectivity described in this article is not spa-
tially selective. The stimulus feature match (color or luminance)
occurs between a cue at the fixation point (or held in memory
as reported in the accompanying article) and the stimulus in the
receptive field. Both an activated response to matching stim-
role V4 may play in the discrimination
of color and form and
the recognition
of color constancies
1983; Schein and
Desimone, 1990). While the emphasis of the present results and
discussion
is placed on the selection of items by color, it is
recognized that the observations
made in the CD paradigm are
during periods of time before spatially directed focal attention
is required. The change from one attentive state to the other
results in major changes in the processing of visual information
in V4 both in the area of directed attention and in peripheral
areas away from the area of focal attention . It is therefore reasonable
to expect that the role V4 plays in color perception may vary
considerably
with the processing requirements
of the task.
processes may work over a more localized area with other fea-
tures being emphasized in other locations. Interpreted
manner, the results suggest that lesions of V4 may not result in
straightforward
deficits in color discrimination
but may present
deficits in tasks requiring higher-order
types of comparisons or
searching skills. The deficits resulting from lesions of V4 have
in fact been quite varied in their detection of perceptual loss
The present data suggest that the major role area V4 plays in
 ofobjects based
on color or luminance. Within the CD paradigm this appears
to be nearly a bistable process resulting in a figure/ground-like
representation
of matching versus nonmatching
stimuli across
the population
of V4 neurons. In other circumstances
across trials. The data therefore are taken to indicate that all
matching stimuli in the visual field result in neural activation
in V4 at the appropriate topographic locations. The consequence
of the selective process is that on any given trial the clear ma-
jority of the highly activated V4 neurons preferentially represent
those separate stimuli in the visual scene that correspond
potential targets as defined by their match to the cue’s color or
luminance. A sequential combination
of these two processes,
initially a full-field prefocal attentive selection based on features
followed by a spatially restricted focal attentive process , offers an interesting
physiological model of selective attention expressed within sin-
gle neurons in V4.
Color sensitivity versus color selection
Many neurons were sensitive to a restricted
set of colors or
luminances that were defined during the initial classification of
the neurons in the SD paradigm. These sensitivities are retained
during the match condition of the CD paradigm, as can be seen
in the average population response. The results also clearly in-
dicate that in the CD paradigm the activity of the V4 neuron
is not controlled by the presence of a particular stimulus wave-
length or apparent color but instead the response is gated by
the selection of a particular stimulus color or luminance. The
data suggest that the range of colors or luminances to which a
neuron can respond is limited by the sensitivities
measured in
the SD paradigm, but the response on any given trial in the CD
task is gated by the conditional cue. Thus, on one trial a neuron
may be highly activated by a white stimulus but poorly activated
by black or red stimuli, on the next trial it might be activated
by a black but not white or red stimuli, and on the next trial it
might be activated by red but not black or white, all depending
upon which color or luminance is cued for that trial.
physiological
studies have emphasized
the potential
Heywood et al., 1992) and have implied a more complex role
for V4 than the discrimination of basic visual features (Schiller
and Lee, 199 1).
In summary, the attentive pressures imposed by the CD task
used here create conditions for visual processing within area V4
that are not present under passive viewing conditions, as evi-
denced by a lack of response differentiation for matching con-
ditions during the SD paradigm. This process appears to occur
in parallel across the visual field and requires several hundred
milliseconds to achieve the maximum separation of matching
classifications. Thus, the observed feature-selective processing
appears not to be automatic but rather an active condition,
perhaps requiring feedback control. These observations indicate
a process with properties that are somewhere between the pas-
sive preattentive grouping processes and the focal attentive,
spatially restricted, serial processes described in psychophysical
studies of visual search. The consequence of the selective pres-
sure is that the population of V4 neurons that are highly acti-
vated represents the stimuli in the visual scene that correspond
to potential targets. Under these conditions the scene is not
segmented into many “color” maps, but into two maps, poten-
tial targets and background objects.