The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)
Pruning from Scratch
Yulong Wang,1 Xiaolu Zhang,2 Lingxi Xie,3 Jun Zhou,2 Hang Su,1 Bo Zhang,1 Xiaolin Hu1∗
1Tsinghua University, 2Ant Financial, 3Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
 , {yueyin.zxl, jun.zhoujun}@antﬁn.com, ,
{suhangss, dcszb, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Network pruning is an important research ﬁeld aiming at reducing computational costs of neural networks. Conventional
approaches follow a ﬁxed paradigm which ﬁrst trains a large
and redundant network, and then determines which units
(e.g., channels) are less important and thus can be removed.
In this work, we ﬁnd that pre-training an over-parameterized
model is not necessary for obtaining the target pruned structure. In fact, a fully-trained over-parameterized model will
reduce the search space for the pruned structure. We empirically show that more diverse pruned structures can be directly pruned from randomly initialized weights, including
potential models with better performance. Therefore, we propose a novel network pruning pipeline which allows pruning
from scratch with little training overhead. In the experiments
for compressing classiﬁcation models on CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets, our approach not only greatly reduces the
pre-training burden of traditional pruning methods, but also
achieves similar or even higher accuracy under the same computation budgets. Our results facilitate the community to rethink the effectiveness of existing techniques used for network pruning.
Introduction
As deep neural networks are widely deployed in mobile devices, there has been an increasing demand for reducing
model size and run-time latency. Network pruning techniques are proposed to achieve model compression and inference acceleration by removing redundant structures and parameters. In addition to the early
non-structured pruning methods , the structured pruning
method represented by channel pruning has been widely adopted in recent years because of its easy deployment on general-purpose GPUs.
The traditional network pruning methods adopt a three-stage
pipeline, namely pre-training, pruning, and ﬁne-tuning , as shown in Figure 1(a). The pre-training and
∗Corresponding Author
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Pre-trained
Structure Learning
Weight Optimization
Fine-tuning
Pruned Model
Pre-trained
Structure Learning
Weight Optimization
Pruned Model
Structure Learning
Weight Optimization
from Scratch
Pruned Model
(a) traditional network pruning pipeline
(b) network pruning pipeline in 
(c) our pre-training-free network pruning pipeline
from Scratch
Figure 1: Network pruning pipelines. (a) Traditional network pruning needs pre-trained weights and certain pruning strategy for pruned structure learning, and ﬁne-tuning
on full model weights. (b) Recent work 
shows that the pruned model can be trained from scratch
without ﬁne-tuning to reach comparable performance. However, the pruned model structure still needs to be obtained by
traditional pruning strategies. (c) We empirically show that
the pruned model structure can be directly learned from randomly initialized weights without the loss of performance.
pruning steps can also be performed alternately with multiple cycles . However, recent study has shown that the pruned model can be trained
from scratch to achieve a comparable prediction performance without the need to ﬁne-tune the inherited weights
from the full model (as shown in Figure 1(b)). This observation implies that the pruned architecture is more important for the pruned model performance. Speciﬁcally, in the
channel pruning methods, more attention should be paid to
searching the channel number conﬁgurations of each layer.
Although it has been conﬁrmed that the weights of the
pruned model do not need to be ﬁne-tuned from the pretrained weights, the structure of the pruned model still needs
to be learned and extracted from a well-trained model according to different criteria. This step usually involves cumbersome and time-consuming weights optimization process.
Then we naturally ask a question: Is it necessary for learning
the pruned model structure from pre-trained weights?
In this paper, we explored this question through extensive
experiments and found that the answer is quite surprising: an
effective pruned structure does not have to be learned from
pre-trained weights. We empirically show that the pruned
structures discovered from pre-trained weights tend to be
homogeneous, which limits the possibility of searching for
better structure. In fact, more diverse and effective pruned
structures can be discovered by directly pruning from randomly initialized weights, including potential models with
better performance.
Based on the above observations, we propose a novel network pruning pipeline that a pruned network structure can
be directly learned from the randomly initialized weights
(as shown in Figure 1(c)). Speciﬁcally, we utilize a similar technique in Network Slimming to
learn the channel importance by associating scalar gate values with each layer. The channel importance is optimized
to improve the model performance under the sparsity regularization. What is different from previous works is that
we do not update the random weights during this process.
After ﬁnishing the learning of channel importance, we utilize a simple binary search strategy to determine the channel
number conﬁgurations of the pruned model given resource
constraints (e.g., FLOPS). Since we do not need to update
the model weights during optimization, we can discover the
pruned structure at an extremely fast speed. Extensive experiments on CIFAR10 and
ImageNet show that our method
yields at least 10× and 100× searching speedup while
achieving comparable or even better model accuracy than
traditional pruning methods using complicated strategies.
Our method can free researchers from the time-consuming
training process and provide competitive pruning results in
future work.
Related Work
Network pruning techniques aim to achieve the inference
acceleration of deep neural networks by removing the redundant parameters and structures in the model. Early
works proposed to remove individual weight values, resulting in non-structured sparsity in the
network. The runtime acceleration cannot be easily achieved
on a general-purpose GPU, otherwise with a custom inference engine . Recent works focus more on
the development of structured model pruning , especially pruning weight channels. ℓ1-norm based criterion 
prunes model according to the ℓ1-norm of weight channels.
Channel Pruning learns to obtain sparse weights by minimizing local layer output reconstruction error. Network Slimming uses
LASSO regularization to learn the importance of all channels and prunes the model based on a global threshold. Automatic Model Compression (AMC) explores the pruning strategy by automatically learning the
compression ratio of each layer through reinforcement learning (RL). Pruned models often require further ﬁne-tuning
to achieve higher prediction performance. However, recent
works have challenged this paradigm and show that the compressed model
can be trained from scratch to achieve comparable performance without relying on the ﬁne-tuning process.
Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) provides another perspective on the discovery of the compressed model
structure. Recent works follow the top-down pruning process by trimming out a small network from a supernet. The
one-shot architecture search methods further develop this idea and conduct architecture search only once after learning the importance of
internal cell connections. However, these methods require a
large amount of training time to search for an efﬁcient structure.
Rethinking Pruning with Pre-Training
Network pruning aims to reduce the redundant parameters
or structures in an over-parameterized model to obtain an
efﬁcient pruned network. Representative network pruning
methods utilize channel importance to evaluate whether a speciﬁc weight channel
should be reserved. Speciﬁcally, given a pre-trained model,
a set of channel gates are associated with each layer to learn
the channel importance. The channel importance values are
optimized with ℓ1-norm based sparsity regularization. Then
with the learned channel importance values, a global threshold is set to determine which channels are preserved given
a predeﬁned resource constraint. The ﬁnal pruned model
weights can either be ﬁne-tuned from the original full model
weights or re-trained from scratch. The overall pipeline is
depicted in Figure 1(a) and (b).
In what follows, we show that in the common pipeline
of network pruning, the role of pre-training is quite different from what we used to think. Based on this observation,
we present a new pipeline which allows pruning networks
from scratch, i.e., randomly initialized weights, in the next
Effects of Pre-Training on Pruning
The traditional pruning pipeline seems to default to a network that must be fully trained before it can be used for
pruning. Here we will empirically explore the effect of the
pre-trained weights on the ﬁnal pruned structure. Speciﬁcally, we save the checkpoints after different training epochs
when we train the baseline network. Then we utilize the
weights of different checkpoints as the network initialization
weights, and learn the channel importance of each layer by
adopting the pipeline described above. We want to explore
whether the pre-trained weights at different training stages
have a crucial impact on the ﬁnal pruned structure learning.
Pruned Structure Similarity
First, we compare the structure similarity between different pruned models. For each
Random Seed: 1
Random Seed: 5
Random Weights
Figure 2: Exploring the effect of pre-trained weights on the pruned structures. All the pruned models are required to reduce
50% FLOPS of the original VGG16 on CIFAR10 dataset. (a) (Top-left) We display the correlation coefﬁcient matrix of the
pruned models directly learned from randomly initialized weights (“random”) and other pruned models based on different
checkpoints during pre-training (“epochs”). (Right) We display the correlation coefﬁcient matrix of pruned structures from
pre-trained weights on a ﬁner scale. (Bottom-left) We show the channel numbers of each layer of different pruned structures.
Red line denotes the structure from random weights. (b) Similar results from the experiment with a different random seed. (c)
We display correlation coefﬁcient matrices of all the pruned structures from ﬁve different random seeds. We mark the names of
initialized weights used to get pruned structures below.
pruned model, we calculate the pruning ratio of each layer,
i.e., the number of remaining channels divided by the number of original channels. The vector formed by concatenating the pruning ratios of all layers is then considered to
be the feature representation of the pruned structure. Then
we calculate the correlation coefﬁcient between each of the
two pruned model features as the similarity of their structures. In order to ensure the validity, we randomly selected
ﬁve sets of random seeds for experiments on CIFAR10
dataset with VGG16 network. We include more visualization results of ResNet20
and ResNet56 in the supplementary material.
Figure 2 shows the correlation coefﬁcient matrices for
all pruned models. From this ﬁgure, we can observe three
phenomena. First, the pruned structures learned from random weights are not similar to all the network structures obtained from pre-trained weights (see top-left ﬁgures in Figure 2(a)(b)). Second, the pruned model structures learned
directly from random weights are more diverse with various correlation coefﬁcients. Also, after only ten epochs of
weights update in the pre-training stage, the resulting pruned
network structures become almost homogeneous. (see Figure 2(c)). Third, the pruned structures based on the checkpoints from near epochs are more similar with high correlation coefﬁcients in the same experiment run (see right ﬁgures in Figure 2(a)(b)).
The structure similarity results indicate that the potential
pruned structure space is progressively reduced during the
weights update in the pre-training phase, which may limit
the potential performance accordingly. On the other hand,
the randomly initialized weights allow the pruning algorithm
to explore more diverse pruned structures.
Performance of Pruned Structures
We further train each
pruned structure from scratch to compare the ﬁnal accuracy.
Table 1 summarizes the prediction accuracy of all pruned
structures on the CIFAR10 test set. It can be observed that
the pruned models obtained from the random weights can
always achieve comparable performance with the pruned
structures based on the pre-trained weights. Also, in some
cases (such as ResNet20), the pruned structures directly
learned from random weights achieves even higher prediction accuracy. These results demonstrate that not only the
pruned structures learned directly from random weights are
more diverse, but also that these structures are valid and can
be trained to reach competitive performance.
The pruned model accuracy results also demonstrate that
the pruned structures based on pre-trained weights have little
advantages in the ﬁnal prediction performance under mild
Table 1: Pruned model accuracy (%) on the CIFAR10 test
set. All models are trained from scratch based on the training
scheme in . We report the average accuracy
across ﬁve runs. “Rand” stands for pruned structures from
random weights. “RN” stands for ResNet.
Pre-training Epochs
VGG16 93.68 93.60 93.83 93.71 93.69 93.64 93.69 93.58
90.57 90.48 90.50 90.49 90.33 90.42 90.34 90.23
92.95 92.96 92.90 92.98 93.04 93.03 92.99 93.05
pruning ratio scenario. Considering that the pre-training
phase often requires a cumbersome and time-consuming
computation process, we think that network pruning can directly start from randomly initialized weights.
Our Solution: Pruning from Scratch
Based on the above analysis, we propose a new pipeline
named pruning from scratch. Different from existing ones, it
enables researchers to obtain pruned structure directly from
randomly initialized weights.
Speciﬁcally, we denote a deep neural network as
f(x; W , α), where x is an input sample, W is all trainable
parameters, and α is the model structure. In general, α includes operator types, data ﬂow topology, and layer hyperparameters as modeled in NAS research. In the network
pruning, we mainly focus on the micro-level layer settings,
especially the channel number of each layer in the channel
pruning strategies.
To efﬁciently learn the channel importance for each layer,
a set of scalar gate values λj are associated with the j-th
layer along the channel dimension. The gate values are multiplied onto the layer’s output to perform channel-wise modulation. Therefore, a near-zero gate value will suppress the
corresponding channel output, resulting in a pruning effect.
We denote the scalar gate values across all the K layers as
Λ = {λ1, λ2, · · · , λK}. The optimization objective for Λ is
L(f(xi; W , Λ), yi) + γ
∀j = 1, 2, · · · , K,
where yi is the corresponding label, L is cross-entropy loss
function, γ is a balance factor. Here, the difference from previous works is two-fold. First, we do not update the weights
during channel importance learning; Second, we use randomly initialized weights without relying on pre-training.
Following the same approach in Network Slimming, we
adopt sub-gradient descent to optimize Λ for the non-smooth
regularization term. However, the naive ℓ1-norm will encourage the gates to be zeroes unconstrainedly, which does
not lead to a good pruned structure. Different from the original formulation in Network Slimming, we use the elementwise mean of all the gates to approximate the overall sparsity
ratio, and use the square norm to push the sparsity to a predeﬁned ratio r . Therefore, given a target
sparsity ratio r, the regularization term is
where Cj is the channel number of the j-th layer. Empirically, we ﬁnd this improvement can obtain more reasonable pruned structure. During the optimization, there can be
multiple possible gates for pruning. We select the ﬁnal gates
whose sparsity is below the target ratio r while achieving the
maximum validation accuracy.
After obtaining a set of optimized gate values Λ∗=
2, · · · , λ∗
n}, we set a threshold τ to decide which
channels are pruned. In the original Network Slimming
method, the global pruning threshold is determined according to a predeﬁned reduction ratio of the target structure’s
parameter size. However, a more practical approach is to
ﬁnd the pruned structure based on the FLOPS constraints
of the target structure. A global threshold τ can be determined by binary search until the pruned structure satisﬁes
the constraints.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the searching strategy. Notice
that a model architecture generator G(·) is required to generate a model structure given a set of channel number con-
ﬁgurations. Here we only decide the channel number of each
convolutional layer and do not change the original layer connection topology.
Algorithm 1 Searching For Pruned Structure
Require: Optimized channel gate values Λ∗, maximum
FLOPS C, model architecture generator G(Λ), iterations T, relative tolerance ratio ϵ, τmin = 0, τmax = 1
Ensure: Final threshold τ ∗, pruned model architecture A∗
1: for t ←1 to T do
2(τmin + τmax)
Get pruned channel gates Λt by threshold τt
Get pruned model architecture At = G(Λt)
Ct = calculate FLOPS(At)
if |Ct −C|/C ≤ϵ then
τ ∗= τt, A∗= At
if Ct < C then τmin = τt else τmax = τt
11: end for
Implementations
Channel Expansion
The new pruning pipeline allows us
to explore a larger model search space with no cost. We
can change the full model size and then obtain the target
pruned structure by slimming network. The easiest way to
change model capacity is to use uniform channel expansion,
which uniformly enlarges or shrinks the channel numbers of
all layers with a common width multiplier. As for the networks with skip connection such as ResNet ,
the number of ﬁnal output channels of each block and the
number of channels at the block input are simultaneously
expanded by the same multiplier to ensure that the tensor
dimensions are the same.
Budget Training
A signiﬁcant ﬁnding in 
is that a pruned network can achieve similar performance to
a full model as long as it is adequately trained for a suf-
ﬁcient period. Therefore, the authors in 
proposed “Scratch-B” training scheme, which trains the
pruned model for the same amount of computation budget with the full model. For example, if the pruned model
saves 2× FLOPS, we double the number of basic training
epochs, which amounts to a similar computation budget.
Empirically, this training scheme is crucial for improving
the pruned model performance.
Experiments
We conduct all the experiments on CIFAR10 and ImageNet
datasets. For each dataset, we allocate a separate validation
set for evaluation while learning the channel gates. Specifically, we randomly select 5,000 images from the original CIFAR10 training set for validation. For ImageNet, we
randomly select 50,000 images (50 images for each category) from the original training set for validation. We
adopt conventional training and testing data augmentation
pipelines .
When learning channel importance for the models on CI-
FAR10 dataset, we use Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01 with a batch-size of 128. The balance factor
γ = 0.5 and total epoch is 10. All the models are expanded
by 1.25×, and the predeﬁned sparsity ratio r equals the percentage of the pruned model’s FLOPS to the full model. After searching for the pruned network architecture, we train
the pruned model from scratch following the same parameter settings and training schedule in .
When learning channel importance for the models on ImageNet dataset, we use Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01 and a batch-size of 100. The balance factor
γ = 0.05 and total epoch is 1. During training, we evaluate
the model performance on the validation set multiple times.
After ﬁnishing the architecture search, we train the pruned
model from scratch using SGD optimizer. For MobileNets,
we use cosine learning rate scheduler with an initial learning rate of 0.05, momentum of
0.9, weight-decay of 4 × 10−5. The model is trained for 300
epochs with a batch size of 256. For ResNet50 models, we
follow the same hyper-parameter settings in .
To further improve the performance, we add label smoothing regularization in the total loss.
CIFAR10 Results
We run each experiment ﬁve times and report the “mean ±
std.” We compare our method with other pruning methods,
including naive uniform channel number shrinkage (uniform), ThiNet , Channel Pruning (CP) , L1-norm pruning , Network Slimming (NS) ,
Discrimination-aware Channel Pruning (DCP) , Soft Filter Pruning (SFP) , rethinking the value of network pruning (Rethink) , and Automatic Model Compression (AMC) (He et al.
Table 2: Network pruning results on CIFAR10 dataset. “Ratio” stands for the percentage of the pruned FLOPS compared to the full model. Larger ratio stands for a more compact model. “Baseline” and “Pruned” columns stand for the
accuracy of baseline and pruned models in percentage. “Δ
Acc” stands for the difference of the accuracy level between
baseline and pruned model, and larger is better.
Ratio Baseline (%) Pruned (%) Δ Acc (%)
90.83±0.31
91.07±0.23
91.14±0.32
90.55±0.14
93.35±0.31
93.07±0.25
93.05±0.19
93.86±0.30
93.92±0.13
93.69±0.28
93.63±0.06
93.60±0.16
93.81±0.14
93.71±0.08
2018b). We compare the performance drop of each method
under the same FLOPS reduction ratio. A smaller accuracy
drop indicates a better pruning method.
Table 2 summarizes the results. Our method achieves less
performance drop across different model architectures compared to the state-of-the-art methods. For large models like
ResNet110 and VGGNets, our pruned model achieves even
better performance than the baseline model. Notably, our
method consistently outperforms Rethink method, which
also utilizes the same budget training scheme. This validates that our method discovers a more efﬁcient and powerful pruned model architecture.
ImageNet Results
In this section, we test our method on ImageNet dataset. We
mainly prune three types of models: MobileNet-V1 , MobileNet-V2 , and
ResNet50 . We compare our method with
uniform channel expansion, ThiNet, SFP, CP, AMC, and NetAdapt . We report the top-1 accuracy of
Table 3: Network pruning results on ImageNet dataset. For
uniform channel expansion models, we expand the channels
of each layer with a ﬁxed ratio m, denoted as “m×”. “Baseline 1.0×” stands for the original full model. “Params” column summarizes the sizes of the total parameters of each
pruned models.
Params Latency FLOPS Top-1 Acc (%)
MobileNet-V1
Uniform 0.5×
Uniform 0.75×
Baseline 1.0×
Ours 0.75×
MobileNet-V2
Uniform 0.75×
Baseline 1.0×
Uniform 1.3×
Ours 0.75×
Uniform 0.5×
Uniform 0.75×
Uniform 0.85×
Baseline 1.0×
Ours 0.75×
Ours 0.85×
each method under the same FLOPS constraint.
Table 3 summarizes the results. When compressing the
models, our method outperforms both uniform expansion
models and other complicated pruning strategies across
all three architectures. Since our method allows the base
channel expansion, we can realize the neural architecture
search by pruning the model from an enlarged supernet. Our
method achieves comparable or even better performance
than the original full model design. We also measure the
model CPU latency under batch size 1 on a server with two
2.40GHz Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 v4. Results show
that our model achieves similar or even faster model inference speed than other pruned models. These results validate
that it is both effective and scalable to prune model from a
randomly initialized network directly.
Comparison with Lottery Ticket Hypothesis
According to the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) , a pruned model can only be trained
to a competitive performance level if it is re-initialized to
the original full model initialization weights (“winning tick-
Table 4: We compare the pruned model performance under the same pruning ratio (PR). All the models are trained
for ﬁve runs on CIFAR10 dataset. “Random” stands for
our method. “Lottery” stands for lottery-ticket hypothesis,
which uses the original full model initialization for pruning
when re-training the pruned model from scratch.
Random (Ours)
Lottery (Frankle’19)
91.14±0.32
90.94±0.26
90.44±0.14
90.34±0.36
93.05±0.19
92.85±0.14
93.69±0.28
93.55±0.37
93.63±0.06
92.95±0.22
93.71±0.08
93.51±0.21
ets”). In our pipeline, we do not require that the pruned
model has to be re-initialized to its original states for retraining the weights. Therefore, we conduct comparison experiments to testify whether LTH applies in our scenario.
Table 4 summarizes the results. We trained all the models for ﬁve runs on CIFAR10 dataset. From the results, we
conclude that our method achieves higher accuracy of the
pruned models in all the cases. For Lottery Ticket Hypothesis, we do not observe the necessity of its usage. Similar
phenomena are also observed in . There are
several potential explanations. First, our method focuses on
structured pruning, while LTH draws conclusions on the unstructured pruning, which can be highly sparse and irregular, and a speciﬁc initialization is necessary for successful
training. Second, as pointed by , LTH uses
Adam optimizer with small learning rate, which is different
from the conventional SGD optimization scheme. Different
optimization settings can substantially inﬂuence the pruned
model training. In conclusion, our method is valid under the
mild pruning ratio in the structured pruning situation.
Computational Costs for Pruning
Since our pruning pipeline does not require updating
weights during structure learning, we can signiﬁcantly reduce the pruned model search cost. We compare our approach to traditional Network Slimming and RL-based
AMC pruning strategies. We measure all model search time
on a single NVIDIA GeForce GTX TITAN Xp GPU.
When pruning ResNet56 on the CIFAR10 dataset, NS and
AMC take 2.3 hours and 1.0 hours, respectively, and our
pipeline only takes 0.12 hours. When pruning ResNet50 on
ImageNet dataset, NS takes approximately 310 hours (including progressive training process) to complete the entire
pruning process. For AMC, although the pruning phase takes
about 3.1 hours, a pre-trained full model is required, which is
equivalent to about 300 hours of pre-training. Our pipeline
takes only 2.8 hours to obtain the pruned structure from a
randomly initialized network. These results illustrate the superior pruning speed of our method.
Visualizing Pruned Structures
Figure 3 displays the channel numbers of the pruned models
on CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets. For each network ar-
MobileNet-V1
Figure 3: Visualization of channel numbers of the pruned models. For each network architecture, we learn the channel importance and prune 50% FLOPS compared to the full model under ﬁve different random seeds. VGG16 and ResNet56 are trained
on CIFAR10, and MobileNet-V1 and ResNet50 are trained on ImageNet.
MobileNet-V1
MobileNet-V2
Figure 4: Pruned model structure compared with AMC. Both
models are trained on the ImageNet dataset. We include the
top-1 accuracy and FLOPS of each model in the legend.
chitecture, we learn the channel importance and prune 50%
FLOPS compared to the full model under ﬁve different random seeds. Though there are some apparent differences in
the channel numbers of the intermediate layers, the resulting pruned model performance remains similar. This demonstrates that our method is robust and stable under different
initialization methods.
We also compare the pruned structures with those identi-
ﬁed by AMC , which utilizes a more complicated RL-based strategy to determine layer-wise pruning
ratios. Figure 4 summarizes the difference. On MobileNet-
V1, our method intentionally reduces more channels between the eighth and eleventh layers, and increases channels
in the early stage and the ﬁnal two layers. The similar trend
persists in the last ten layers of MobileNet-V2. This demonstrates that our method can discover more diverse and efﬁcient structures.
Discussion and Conclusions
In this work, we demonstrate that the pipeline of pruning
from scratch is efﬁcient and effective through extensive experiments on various models and datasets. An important observation is that pre-trained weights reduce the search space
for the pruned structure. Meanwhile, we also observe that
even after a short period of pre-training weights, the possible pruned structures have become stable and limited. This
perhaps implies that the learning of structure may converge
faster than weights. Although our pruning pipeline ﬁxes the
random initialization weights, it needs to learn the channel
importance. This is equivalent to treating each weight channel as a single variable and optimizing the weighting coef-
ﬁcients. The pruned structure learning may become easier
with reduced degree of variables.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the
National Key Research and Development Program of
China (No. 2017YFA0700904), NSFC Projects (Nos.
61620106010, 61621136008, 61571261, 61836014), Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BAAI), the JP Morgan Faculty Research Program and Huawei Innovation Re-
search Program.