Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The uselessness of AI ethics
Luke Munn1
Received: 6 June 2022 / Accepted: 2 August 2022 / Published online: 23 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
As the awareness of AI’s power and danger has risen, the dominant response has been a turn to ethical principles. A flood
of AI guidelines and codes of ethics have been released in both the public and private sector in the last several years. However, these are meaningless principles which are contested or incoherent, making them difficult to apply; they are isolated
principles situated in an industry and education system which largely ignores ethics; and they are toothless principles which
lack consequences and adhere to corporate agendas. For these reasons, I argue that AI ethical principles are useless, failing
to mitigate the racial, social, and environmental damages of AI technologies in any meaningful sense. The result is a gap
between high-minded principles and technological practice. Even when this gap is acknowledged and principles seek to be
“operationalized,” the translation from complex social concepts to technical rulesets is non-trivial. In a zero-sum world,
the dominant turn to AI principles is not just fruitless but a dangerous distraction, diverting immense financial and human
resources away from potentially more effective activity. I conclude by highlighting alternative approaches to AI justice that go
beyond ethical principles: thinking more broadly about systems of oppression and more narrowly about accuracy and auditing.
Keywords  AI · Artificial intelligence · Ethics · Ethical principles · Morality · Social ills · Research
1  Introduction
Artificial intelligence technologies are increasingly being
deployed in a range of sectors, from healthcare to human
resources, education, agriculture, manufacturing, and law
enforcement. However, as the pervasiveness of AI grows,
so does its capacity to damage lives and livelihoods. Within
welfare and social support systems, automated decision
making systems can exacerbate inequality and punish the
poor . Racialized assumptions can be embedded in information infrastructures, perpetuating stereotypes and prejudice . Data-driven models can be opaque and biased,
making detrimental choices in high stakes areas and undermining democratic and egalitarian conditions . And all
of these technologies operate on people and spaces that are
already economically and socially stratified , elevating
the importance and the difficulty of operating in ways that
contribute to human rights and dignity. The promises of AI
have been tempered by its potential for harm .
As the awareness of AI’s power and danger has risen,
the dominant response has been a turn to AI ethics—ethics
being understood here in the narrow but well-established
sense as “a set of moral principles” according to both the
OED and Merriam-Webster dictionaries. The public and
private sectors have released guidelines, frameworks, and
principles that are meant to apply when creating new AI
technology. Over 50 of these have been issued by government agencies, including national frameworks produced by
the UK, the USA, Japan, China, India, Mexico, Australia,
and New Zealand, amongst others . There are the Beijing
AI Principles, DeepMind’s Ethics, and Society Principles
 , IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design , the Guidelines
for Artificial Intelligence by Deutsche Telekom , and
the Vatican AI Principles known as the Rome Call for AI
Ethics . Indeed, the list of AI Principles at AI Ethicist
now stretches to over 80 entries, with more being constantly
added .
This article argues that this deluge of AI ethical principles is largely useless. While this view is provocative, it is
hardly alone: a growing sea of voices have begun critiquing
the de-facto turn to AI ethical principles as ineffective . In the first three sections, I lay out three causes
for this failure: meaningless principles, isolated principles,
* Luke Munn
 
Institute for Culture and Society, Western Sydney University,
Sydney, NSW, Australia
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
and toothless principles. The result of this failure is a gulf
between high-minded ideals and technological development on the ground—a gap between principles and practice. While recent work has aimed to address this gap by
operationalizing principles , this work is fraught in
attempting to translate contested social concepts to technical rules and featuresets. The final section argues that, in
a zero-sum world, the obsession with AI principles is not
just useless but dangerous in funneling human and financial resources away from more productive approaches. The
article thus concludes by highlighting alternatives: the first
thinks more broadly about AI justice, considering sociopolitical dynamics and systems of oppression ; the second thinks more narrowly, focusing on concrete issues like
accuracy, auditing, and governance .
2  Meaningless principles
The deluge of AI codes of ethics, frameworks, and guidelines in recent years has produced a corresponding raft of
principles. Indeed, there are now regular meta-surveys which
attempt to collate and summarize these principles .
However, these principles are highly abstract and ambiguous, becoming incoherent. Mittelstadt [45, p 501] suggests
that work on AI ethics has largely produced “vague, highlevel principles, and value statements which promise to be
action-guiding, but in practice provide few specific recommendations and fail to address fundamental normative and
political tensions embedded in key concepts.” The point here
is not to debate the merits of any one value over another, but
to highlight the fundamental lack of consensus around key
terms. Commendable values like “fairness” and “privacy”
break down when subjected to scrutiny, leading to disparate
visions and deeply incompatible goals.
What are some common AI principles? Despite the mushrooming of ethical statements, Floridi and Cowls suggest many values recur frequently and can be condensed
into five core principles: beneficence, non-maleficence,
autonomy, justice, and explicability. These ideals sound
wonderful. After all, who could be against beneficence?
However, problems immediately arise when we start to
define what beneficence means. In the Montreal principles
[77, p 545] for instance, “well-being” is the term used, suggesting that AI development should promote the “well-being
of all sentient creatures.” While laudable, clearly there are
tensions to consider here. We might think, for instance, of
how information technologies support certain conceptions of
human flourishing by enabling communication and business
transactions—while simultaneously contributing to carbon
emissions, environmental degradation, and the climate crisis
 . In other words, AI promotes the well-being
of some creatures (humans) while actively undermining the
well-being of others.
The same issue occurs with the Statement on Artificial
Intelligence, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems . In
this Statement, beneficence is gestured to through the concept of “sustainability,” asserting that AI must promote the
basic preconditions for life on the planet. Few would argue
directly against such a commendable aim. However, there
are clearly wildly divergent views on how this goal should
be achieved. Proponents of neoliberal interventions (free
trade, globalization, deregulation) would argue that these
interventions contribute to economic prosperity and in that
sense sustain life on the planet. In fact, even the oil and gas
industry champions the use of AI under the auspices of promoting sustainability . Sustainability, then, is a highly
ambiguous or even intellectually empty term that
is wrapped around disparate activities and ideologies. In a
sense, sustainability can mean whatever you need it to mean.
Indeed, even one of the members of the European group
denounced the guidelines as “lukewarm” and “deliberately
vague,” stating they “glossed over difficult problems” like
explainability with rhetoric .
If sustainability is ambiguous, so are many of the key
terms used in AI ethics frameworks. Safety, well-being,
autonomy, and justice are contested concepts and often shift
in significant ways depending on the context. Privacy, for
example, has long overflowed with competing and contradictory definitions, with scholarship noting the lack of clarity
and accepted consensus around their term . Even the most
influential conceptions of privacy characterize it as a big
tent, housing a diverse group of interests and a diverse array
of meanings . Many key concepts in AI frameworks,
then, are overburdened, brimming with contradictory meanings. Floridi has suggested that developers of AI may
conduct ethics shopping, borrowing liberally from different
frameworks to arrive at a set of easy-to-implement norms.
However, the fuzziness of AI principles outlined above suggests that this cynical mix-and-match approach may not even
be necessary. Instead, terms like “beneficence” and “justice” can simply be defined in ways that suit, conforming to
product features and business goals that have already been
decided. Such ambiguity facilitates ethical “box ticking,”
allowing a company to claim adherence to a set of principles or ideals without engaging in any meaningful degree of
reflection or reconfiguration.
3  Isolated principles
AI development does not take place in a vacuum. The development and adoption of technology is always highly social
and cultural , embedded within a rich network of human
and non-human actors . This means that technology is
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
influenced by existing practices and structures, whether
that is company cultures or organizational norms . To
suggest that an AI model is “biased” and only needs to be
tweaked is to adopt a far too narrow scope, missing out on
broader or more systemic issues. As Lauer suggests,
“the failure to build ethical AI can be traced to an organization-wide failure of ethics.” In this sense, the lack of meaningful engagement with ethical issues from engineers is a
symptom of a deeper problem. Unethical AI is the logical
byproduct of an unethical industry.
The toxicity of tech culture and its propagation of sexism
and misogyny is well documented . This is a culture
known for the hypermasculine coder or “brogrammer,” for
using “booth babes” to attract attention at conventions, and
for its celebrated company founders who regularly drop porn
references . One global ride-share company, renowned
for its innovation and financial success, was long helmed by
a man who penned a sex memo for a company celebration
and who described his ability to pick up women as “boober”
 . This type of activity, openly flaunted by some of the
most worshiped companies and founders, has contributed
to a highly misogynistic environment. In a survey of over
200 female tech workers with over 10 year experiences in
Silicon Valley, 60% of women reported unwanted sexual
advances .
The same toxic conditions can be seen when it comes
to race. A recent class action lawsuit has accused a widely
celebrated tech company of fostering racist conditions
for years, including daily subjection to racial slurs, being
assigned menial jobs in a segregated area of the factory,
and being passed over in promotions for management .
Or we might think of the ten page “anti-diversity” memo
that circulated at another major tech company renowned for
its work in artificial intelligence, a screed suggesting white
men were being marginalized and oppressed . Despite
claims of being a postracial meritocracy, tech culture is still
one marked by white, male, heteronormative values—and
those who fail to conform to this identity are discriminated
against in subtle but material ways .
If the tech industry lacks ethics, so does the education of
the software engineers and technologists who will soon join
it. Undergraduate data science degrees emphasize computer
science and statistics but fall short in ethics training .
Software engineering, computer science, and other degrees
that lead into AI development are tightly focused on technical challenges and their solutions. But there is little to
no consideration of ethical challenges—how technology
intersects with race, class, and culture and how these might
introduce new harms or exacerbate existing inequalities .
Despite the clear ethical dilemmas presented by emerging
technologies, García-Holgado et al. have observed
a lack of integration of computer ethics in the computer
science curriculum in Spanish universities. Similarly in
Australia, Gorur et al. surveyed 12 curricula in universities, finding that they focused on micro-ethical concepts
like professionalism while lacking macro-ethical agendas
such as betterment of society and the planet. Ethics units
are rarely included in computer science courses, and several
of these are even shunted into the last few sessions if time
allows , demonstrating the lowly status of ethics in AI
education.
The lack of ethical training in education, combined with
the lack of ethical application in the industry, suggests that
AI development takes place in an ethically empty milieu. AI
technologists cannot be said to be “unethical” because that
would imply an awareness of ethical norms and a decision
to actively ignore or violate them. Instead, these technologies are conceptualized, developed, and brought to market
in an “a-ethical” space, a realm where ethical dilemmas
never even enter the frame. In this sense, the problem-space
considered when developing a technology is far too narrow,
failing to encompass the ethical, moral, and social impacts
of designing a product in a particular way . Given these
conditions, the presence of an AI code of ethics which
is tightly focused on a digital product or service appears
entirely insufficient. Such an ethical framework, situated
“downstream” from company culture, will fail to address the
more fundamental inequalities and underlying social issues
that shape technological development.
4  Toothless principles
Finally, AI ethical principles have failed due to the lack of
consequences. Rességuier and Rodrigues argue that
currently AI ethics has no teeth, and this is because ethics
is being used in place of regulation. Ethics is being asked to
do something it was never designed to do. AI ethical frameworks can set normative ideals but lack the mechanisms to
enforce compliance with these values and principles .
After surveying 22 sets of guidelines, Hagendorff concludes that AI ethics is failing on many levels; they lack any
enforcement mechanisms and their values are easily overwritten by economic incentives, often becoming little more
than marketing devices.
Principles are not “self-enforcing,” notes Calo , “and
there are no tangible penalties to violating them.” In 2019,
for instance, Google announced the creation of a new independent body to review the company’s AI practices. The
Advanced Technology External Advisory Council, composed of philosophers, engineers, and policy experts, would
review the company’s projects and evaluate whether they
contravened their AI principles. However, the group would
have no actual power to veto projects or halt them in any
meaningful way .
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
The dominant focus on (toothless) ethics is a boon to
technology companies, who have long attempted to outrun
or avoid legislation. Uber outpaced regulation by expanding
rapidly into cities across the globe with a business model
designed to bypass labor responsibilities and protections
 . Similarly, Airbnb swiftly expanded worldwide, running for years in major centers before eventually confronting
regulation around house rental and hotels. When legislation
does catch up, companies attempt to impede, resist, or overturn regulations, as high profile legal cases involving Apple,
Google, Facebook, and others demonstrate.
Legislation takes time to draft, pass, and enforce, and
in this sense, Nemitz describes the focus on AI ethics
and the subsequent deferral of regulation as a genius move
by corporations. Placing the production of ethical statements into the limelight allows tech operations to continue
unchecked, unhindered by lawsuits, fines, or other penalties.
Ochigame concurs, asserting that ethical AI is “aligned
strategically with a Silicon Valley effort seeking to avoid
legally enforceable restrictions of controversial technologies.” Nemitz thus calls for ethics to be swiftly followed
by legislation: the law has democratic legitimacy and can be
enforced, producing a credible threat that AI powerhouses
would need to take into account.
Toothlessness is not just about lack of penalties, but
also about the lack of friction between ethical principles
and existing business principles. Green [27, p 209] suggests that ethics is “vague and toothless” and is “subsumed
into corporate logics and incentives.” Values listed in AI
ethics statements and proposed by AI ethics organizations
adhere closely to corporate values (or as the first section
demonstrated, can be interpreted in ways that align with
them). Such principles slot neatly into existing corporate
playbooks, rarely questioning “the business culture, revenue
models, or incentive mechanisms that continuously push
these products into the markets” . The Partnership
on AI, for instance, touts itself as a non-profit community
of diverse stakeholders ranging from academia and civil
society to industry and media. The implicit claim of such
an organization is to give a voice to the people and in this
way counter corporate overreach or at least keep it in check.
However, Ochigame observes that the Partnership’s
recommendations “aligned consistently with the corporate
agenda” and essentially served to legitimize the activity of
AI powerhouses.
Toothlessness means that corporations can buffer their
reputation by carrying out high profile work on ethical
frameworks, confident in the fact that such ethics will not
fundamentally alter their product affordances, organizational
hierarchies, or quarterly earnings. In other words, companies
can enjoy the appearance of ethics without the substance.
Borrowing from the well-known concept of “green washing,” this phenomenon of “ethics washing” as a means of
dodging regulation has risen to prominence in debates on
AI ethics .
5  The principles/practice gap
The failure of AI ethical principles is not spectacular but
silent, resulting in the desired outcome: business as usual. In
his AI Debate statement, Calo highlights this paradox.
AI is hailed as revolutionary, a transformation that will disrupt work and life in myriad ways—and yet there has been
significant resistance to updating legislation and regulation
to manage this shift. The obsession with AI ethics perpetuates this paradox, upholding the rhetoric of AI innovation
while never allowing AI’s transformative potential to alter
legal frameworks or impinge on technical operations in any
meaningful way.
Business as usual suggests a gulf between ethical guidelines and practical implementation, a gap between principles
and practice. This chasm becomes clear when we turn to the
production environments where AI technologies are developed. Industry bodies such as the Association for Computing
Machinery have adopted codes of ethics that are meant to
guide and govern engineering practice. However, in a study
of software engineering students and professional software
developers, McNamara et al. found that explicitly
instructing developers to consider this ethical code had no
discernible difference compared to a control group. Developers did not alter their established ways of working.
In another study, Vakkuri et al. carried out interviews
at five different companies which were involved in AI development. While all the participants acknowledged the importance of ethics, when asked whether their AI development
practices took ethics into account, all respondents answered
no . Building on this empirically based research, the
authors suggest that there is a significant gap between the
research and practice of AI ethics . In a later study, Vakkuri et al. [78, p 195] specifically examined the attitudes
of developers in software startup environments, concluding
that there is a “complete ignorance of ethical consideration
in AI endeavors.” Ethics, so lauded in the academy and the
research institute, are shrugged off when entering the engineering labs and developer studios where technologies are
actually constructed.
Recognizing the current gap between AI principles and
AI practice, researchers and companies have aimed to make
ethical values feasible and actionable in real-world settings.
There is a drive to bridge this ethics/practice gap , to
operationalize AI ethics principles and to translate
principles into practices . High-minded normative statements must be integrated in meaningful ways into datasets,
production pipelines, and product features. Taking a cue
from software-as-a-service, Morley et al. suggest ethics
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
could function as a service composed of an independent
multi-disciplinary ethics board, a collaboratively developed
ethical code, and AI practitioners themselves.
However, operationalizing AI ethics promises to be difficult or even impossible, a daunting challenge underestimated
by a technically focused industry and even by ethicists.
Hagendorff [28, p 103] for instance, makes a number of salient points but also suggests that privacy and fairness, which
occur frequently in ethical frameworks, are aspects for which
“technical fixes can be or have already been developed.”
He goes on to suggest that “accountability, explainability,
privacy, justice, but also other values such as robustness or
safety are most easily operationalized mathematically and
thus tend to be implemented in terms of technical solutions”
[28, p 103]. The ease with which issues like fairness and
privacy are waved off as being “resolved” is stunning. These
are highly contested issues, with high stakes. What is fair
and who gets to decide it? How might the notion of fairness
respond to historical inequalities suffered by a particular
people group? And how might fairness play out differently in
different contexts and conditions? These are complex questions which have shifted substantially over time and which
intersect with race, gender, and culture .
Of course, this is not to suggest that there has been no
work around these issues in computer science. When it
comes to privacy, for instance, cloud-based technologies
unlock new ways of grouping data entries or encrypting variables so that the ability to identify subjects or de-anonymize
them is minimized . But such work adopts one particular
understanding of privacy and responds to it in one particular
way. And even within this narrow scope, there are always
trade-offs and workarounds that need to be considered .
The same point applies to related concepts such as fairness, safety, and justice, which can in no way be considered
“resolved” by the limited technical responses to-date.
Operationalization is not simply a perfunctory matter
of “translating” an ethical value into a technological outcome. There are tensions and trade-offs that must be worked
through and worked out into the material form of a data
model or a digital product. Krijger suggests there are
two key tensions that apply when attempting to operationalize AI ethics: an inter-principle tension, where competing
ethical demands are placed on an AI design; and an intraprinciple tension, which highlights the difficulty of materializing a principle into a technological form. Based on the
insights above, then, we can suggest two hurdles to operationalization: (1) the challenge of wrestling with competing
principles to arrive at meaningful demands and (2) the challenge of implementing those demands as concrete features,
interfaces, and infrastructures. This is difficult work which
requires engaging with social and political questions and
prototyping, testing, and rejecting different designs: there
are no shortcuts.
6  Alternatives to ethical principles
The dominant turn to AI principles is simultaneously a
turn away from alternative approaches. In a zero-sum
world, the immense human and financial resources poured
into generating AI ethics frameworks funnels it away
from other programs of action. It is not enough, then, to
denounce AI ethics as fruitless or useless. Instead, a critical assessment of the impact of ethics work to-date must
conclude that it is dangerous, hoarding expertise and funding that should be devoted to more effective work. The
high stakes of AI—its ability to harm some of the most
vulnerable communities and ecologies in material ways—
only increases the urgency of recognizing this strategic
misstep and its misallocation of resources.
What would be more productive approaches than the
de-facto turn to ethical principles? One approach, in
essence, is to think more broadly about AI justice. Zalnieriute [84, p 139] argues that the current focus on AI
procedural issues like transparency is blinkered, acting
as an “obfuscation and redirection from more substantive and fundamental questions about the concentration
of power, substantial policies, and actions of technology
behemoths.” Similarly, Powles suggests that concentrating tightly on bias distracts us from more fundamental
and urgent questions about power and AI.
AI justice provides a useful term that productively
expands the ethical scope of inquiry and intervention. As
Gabriel [22, p 218] notes, AI justice “reframes much of the
discussion around ‘AI ethics’ by drawing attention to the
fact that the moral properties of algorithms are not internal
to the models themselves but rather a product of the social
systems within which they are deployed.” If ethical principles are situated within company cultures and broader
systems of power (as discussed in Sect. 2), then it makes
sense to expand the scope of ethical engagement. Or, put
differently, if machine learning reflects, reproduces, and
amplifies structural inequalities, then any ethical program
must operate intersectionally, considering a wide array of
social and political dynamics .
What might this broader analysis entail? As a brief
example, AI justice may allow us to reflect more critically
upon the universal notion of the “human” in AI rhetoric
and the often empty truism that we need to design AI to
benefit “humanity.” History has shown that some racial
and ethnic groups were deemed more “human” and deserving than others, while others were considered less-thanhuman or even subhuman . Similarly, AI justice may
provide useful ways to problematize a taken-for-granted
principle like “fairness” which appears across many ethical frameworks. Historically fairness has been defined by
hegemonic groups in ways that perpetuate their advantage:
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
far from being “common sense,” fairness is always historical and cultural with major racialized and gendered
dimensions .
What might a commitment to AI justice look like in practice? At a concrete level, it may mean organizations engaging with groups that bear the brunt of AI impacts but are
not typically consulted: children, people of color, LGBT-
QIA + communities, migrants, and other groups. Those who
develop AI need to better understand the particular needs of
these communities, and then work with them in meaningful
ways to ensure that AI contributes to their well-being and
does not exacerbate historical inequities. Large tech companies and “tech-forward” governments particularly have a role
to play here in leading by example and thus establishing a
blueprint for best-practice AI work moving forward.
How else might AI justice manifest? Considering justice
in AI more broadly might mean confronting the longstanding relationship between capitalism and computation ,
recognizing the extent to which technologies have marginalized women , or considering the knowledge-systems
that have been privileged and the indigenous epistemologies
that have been ignored . One specific strain of work has
begun to think more concretely about ways to decolonise
AI, unraveling histories of inequality and asymmetric systems of power . However, this work is nascent and it
remains unclear how AI technologies might be decolonised
or even what that might entail . This is difficult work
that may entail acknowledging privilege, confronting corporate assumptions, or developing community consensus.
In contrast to the prominent work on AI principles, Bender
 suggests that this work of reversing power centralization
and longstanding systems of oppression is harder and less
trendy—but work on ethical AI is useless without it.
If AI justice and its invitation to broaden our ethical horizon is one approach, the other, in essence, is to think more
narrowly. Such work does not invoke the grand scope of AI
ethics, but often uses more mundane but better-understood
terms: accuracy, alignment, mismatch, and impacts. The
work of Timnit Gebru and her colleagues is exemplary in
this regard. If facial analysis misclassifies subjects because
the datasets are dominated by light-skinned subjects, then
this problem might be partially diagnosed and addressed
by introducing a new dataset balanced by gender and skin
type . If the provenance and origins or datasets used in
AI productions are often obscured, then this problem could
be mitigated through “datasheets,” standard documents that
lay out a datasets creation, collection method, limitations,
recommended uses, and so on .
This is granular work or even gruntwork, the less spectacular labor that digs into the data infrastructures and digital substrates of machine learning and AI production. AI,
after all, is material not magical, cobbled together from
datasets, software libraries, engineering expertise and
hardware-accelerated computation. As Joanna Bryson 
reminds us, AI and machine learning occurs through design
and produces a material artifact; auditing, governance, and
legislation should be applied to correct sloppy or inadequate
manufacturing, just as we do with other products. The basic
idea across this strain of research is to make concrete progress in improving AI by breaking the often nebulous concept of “ethics” down into measurable metrics and discrete
Two aims emerge when surveying this work. First, there
is transparency. This is the ability to see how a system operates, to grasp what its assumptions are, and to understand
how it responds to different contexts and situations. Oversight and auditing are key terms within this theme. As one
example, Raji et al. have proposed an end-to-end framework for AI production. The system would allow developers
to audit their work at each stage and see how well it matches
organizational principles. Such tools aim to provide better
oversight about the kinds of decisions that are being made
and the kinds of (potentially harmful) consequences that
may result. In a similar vein, Mitchell et al. propose
model cards for model reporting. These short documents
would accompany trained machine learning models and
provide benchmarked evaluation. Such tools would allow
developers to see how the model responds across a variety of
different conditions, analyzing, for example, its performance
across different demographic or phenotypic groups.
Once we can understand what is wrong with a model
or system, we need an ability to act on this information.
Transparency must then be accompanied by accountability.
Recourse, responsibility, and governance are key terms here.
There needs to be clearly defined lines of accountability and
both producers and consumers of technology must have the
ability to meaningfully address harmful AI technologies.
Redressing these harms might entail redesigning a product,
consulting members of a community, or halting an AI service altogether. And accountability must be backed up by
enforcement: lawsuits, fines, or banning from a particular
jurisdiction. Such aims suggest a place for conventional governance structures using managerial hierarchies and humans
in the loop to identify responsibility within an organization
 . Equally, however, they suggest grassroot efforts that aim
to redress harms by reimagining data and models in ways
that better suit the needs of a particular community .
Taken together, these alternative approaches of thinking
more broadly and more narrowly suggest that many different
stakeholders have a part to play in reshaping AI. Designers
and developers are able to code up particular affordances and
integrate them into digital products and platforms. Managers
can take the lead in implementing testing and auditing libraries. Business and community leaders can establish cultures
which are reflective and open to forms of critical questioning and exploration. Governments can create new policy
AI and Ethics 3:869–877
mechanisms and enforce compliance by properly resourcing the relevant agencies. And even more minor actors like
professional societies and insurance companies can exert
force through codes of conduct and defining certain practices
as risky. Together, these twin approaches go beyond ethical
principles, making progress in this critical area by reflecting
deeply and radically about the potentials and pitfalls of AI.
Acknowledgements  Thanks to both reviewers from AI and Ethics for
their thoughtful and constructive feedback, which led me to extend
the alternatives section and more sharply articulate some of the key
points and claims.
Author contributions  Not applicable (solo-authored article).
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and
its Member Institutions. Not applicable.
Availability of data and materials  Not applicable.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  There are no competing interests in regards to this
article or the author.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit