Ioumal of Experimental Psychology: General
Copyright 1998 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
1998, Vol. 127, No. 4, 398-415
0096-3445/98/$3.00
Does Consistent Scene Context Facilitate Object Perception?
Andrew Hollingworth and John M. Henderson
Michigan State University
The conclusion that scene knowledge interacts with object perception depends on evidence
that object detection is facilitated by consistent scene context. Experiment 1 replicated the
I. Biederman, R. J. Mezzanotte, and J. C. Rabinowitz object-detection paradigm.
Detection performance was higher for semantically consistent versus inconsistent objects.
However, when the paradigm was modified to control for response bias (Experiments 2 and 3)
or when response bias was eliminated by means of a forced-choice procedure (Experiment 4),
no such advantage obtained. When an additional source of biasing information was eliminated
by presenting the object label after the scene (Experiments 3 and 4), there was either no effect
of consistency (Experiment 4) or an inconsistent object advantage (Experiment 3). These
results suggest that object perception is not facilitated by consistent scene context.
To what degree is perception affected by our knowledge
of the wodd? This question has historically been central in
theories of perception and cognition. For example, the
apparent role of semantic constraint in visual recognition led
to the emergence of so-called New Look psychology
 . In cognitive psychology, the effects of
contextual expectations on perception have been couched in
terms of debates between bottom-up versus top-down pat-
tern recognition and modular versus interac-
tive perception . More
recently, the effect of higher-level knowledge on perception
has become critical in discussions of the role of re-entrant
neural pathways in the early cortical processing of visual
stimulation . In the
present study, we explored the following version of the
context question: How is the identification of a visual object
affected by the meaning of the real-world scene in which that
object appears? This question is important because it
Andrew Hollingworth submitted this work as part of the
requirements for his master of arts degree in psychology at
Michigan State University. This research was supported by a
National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship to Andrew
Hollingworth, by U.S. Army Research Office Grant DAAH04-94-
G-0404, and by National Science Foundation Grant SBR 96-
17274. We are solely responsible for the contents of this article,
which should not be construed as an official U.S. Department of the
Army position, policy, or decision.
We would like to thank the master's committee of Tom Carr,
Fernanda Ferreira, and Rose Zacks for their helpful discussions of
the research and for their comments on a draft of this article. We
would also like to thank Peter De Graef for his discussions of the
research, Sandy Pollatsek and Johan Lanwereyns for their com-
ments on a draft of the article, and Gary Schrock for his technical
assistance.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Andrew HoUingworth or John M. Henderson, Department of
Psychology, 129 Psychology Research Building, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1117. Electronic mail
may be sent to or .
directly addresses the influence of our knowledge and
beliefs about meaningful relationships in the wodd on our
perception of the visual environment.
For the purposes of this study, we define object identifica-
tion from the perspective of current computational theories
 . At a general
level of description, these theories assume two processing
stages in object identification. First, the retinal image is
transformed into a perceptual description that is compatible
with a set of memory descriptions. This first stage can be
further broken down into two sub-stages, an early stage of
visual analysis that translates the current pattern of retinal
stimulation into perceptual primitives, and an additional
stage that uses these primitives to produce descriptions of
the object tokens in the scene. Second, object descriptions
are matched to stored long-term memory descriptions of
object types, leading to entry-level recognition. When a
match is found, identification has occurred, and information
stored in memory about that object type, such as its identity,
whether it is good to eat, and so on becomes available. In the
following experiments, we will consider the activation of an
entry-level label for an object stimulus as evidence of the
successful completion of the matching stage of object
identification.
The hypothesis we set out to test was that the identifica-
tion of a real-world object is facilitated when that object is
semantically consistent rather than inconsistent with the
scene in which it appears . The strongest evidence supporting the view that
consistent scene context facilitates object identification
comes from the object-detection paradigm introduced by
Biederman and colleagues . In this paradigm, participants were asked to
determine whether a pre-specified object appeared within a
briefly presented scene at a particular location. During each
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
trial, a label naming an object was presented until the
participant was ready to continue, followed by a line-
&awing of a natural scene presented for 150 ms, followed
by a pattern mask with an embedded location cue. The
pattern mask remained on the screen until the participant
pressed one of two buttons to indicate whether the object
named by the label had or had not appeared in the scene at
the cued location. 1 In target-present trials, the target label
named the cued object. In catch trials, the target label named
an object that did not appear in the scene. We will refer to
this paradigm as the original object-detection paradigm.
The primary contextual manipulation in the original
object-detection paradigm was the relationship between the
object presented at the cued location (the cued objec0 and
the scene in which that object appeared. Base scenes
contained a cued object that was consistent with the scene,
and the scene contained no other objects that violated scene
context. Violation scenes contained a cued object that was
inconsistent with the scene along one or more dimensions,
including episodic probability, position, size, support, and
interposition (whether the object occluded objects behind it
or was transparent). For the purposes of this article, we will
focus on cases of probability violation (i.e., the semantic
consistency between object and scene). The most conserva-
tive hypothesis regarding the information contained in a
scene concept is that it specifies the object types typically
found in the scene . Therefore, manipulations of object probabil-
ity provide the most direct means to investigate the influence
of scene meaning on object perception.
Biederman et al. found that detection performance
was best when the cued object did not violate any of the
constraints imposed by scene meaning. They reported poorer
performance across all violation dimensions, with com-
pound violations (e.g., probability and support) producing
even greater decrements. Importantly, violations of semantic
relationships were found to be as disruptive as violations of
structural relationships (e.g., support or interposition), sug-
gesting that semantic relationships can be accessed very
rapidly and can then interact with the initial perceptual
analysis of an object. The poorer performance in violation
conditions held across percentage correct performance,
sensitivity (d'), and reaction time. These measures, however,
are not equally valid for investigating the influence of scene
context on object perception. Reaction time in that study
cannot be taken as strong evidence for the facilitated
detection of consistent objects, as there were a significant
number of errors, causing more than 30% of the trials to be
excluded from the analysis. In general, it is not clear that
reaction time is a good measure of object perception
processes, as it may be influenced by post-identification
factors, such as response generation . 2 In
addition, percentage correct performance in target-present
trials does not provide a reliable measure of object-detection
performance, as participants demonstrated significant re-
sponse biases that varied with the consistency of the target
label with the scene. Thus, the conclusion that consistent
scene context facilitates object perception rests most firmly
on the finding that detection sensitivity (d') was higher in
base conditions than in violation conditions. This sensitivity
result has been replicated by Boyce et al. using a
similar object-detection paradigm.
The results of the Biederman et al. study have led
to two general conclusions about the perception of objects in
natural scenes. First, scene meaning, including information
about the semantic relationship between scene and object
types, can be accessed very quickly. Such early activation is
a necessary condition for context effects, as contextual
constraints must be active early enough to influence the
perception of object stimuli. This conclusion is supported by
a number of studies demonstrating that the information
necessary to identify natural scenes can be obtained in less
than 150 ms .
Second, stored knowledge about scenes and the objects
likely to appear in them can be used to facilitate the
construction of perceptual descriptions of consistent objects.
Taken together, these two hypotheses combine to form the
perceptual schema model of scene context effects . The perceptual
schema model proposes that the stored representation of a
scene type contains information about the objects that form
that type. The early activation of this information can be
used to facilitate the perceptual analysis (e.g., the encoding
of features or generation of a perceptual description) of
objects that are consistent with the semantic constraints
imposed by the scene.
In addition to the perceptual schema model, two other
models of scene and object processing can account for the
facilitated detection of consistent objects in scenes. First, a
priming model of scene context effects places the locus of contex-
tual influence at the matching stage of object identification,
when the perceptual description of an object token is
compared to long-term memory representations of object
types. According to the priming model, the recognition of a
scene serves to prime the stored representations of object
types consistent with that scene (i.e., the activation levels of
stored, consistent object representations are raised closer to
a threshold value). As a result, relatively less perceptual
information needs to be encoded to bring a stored, consistent
l The following terminology has been used. The object named by
the label appearing before the scene has been referred to as the
target object, the label itself as the target label, and the object
presented at the cued location as the cued object.
2 Boyce and Pollatsek used a paradigm in which, after a
scene had appeared on the screen, a single object wiggled, and
participants were required to make an eye movement to the object
and name it as quickly as possible. They found shorter naming
latencies for consistent versus inconsistent objects, which they
interpreted as support for the view that consistent scene context
facilitates object perception. As with the Biederman et al. 
experiment, however, it is not clear that naming latency is an
appropriate measure of ease of object identification.
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
object representation to the threshold value indicating that a
match has been found. 3
Second, facilitated detection of consistent objects in
scenes can be accounted for by an interactive activation
model similar to that proposed by McClelland and Rumel-
hart for word and letter recognition .
In this model, scenes correspond to the word level in the
network and objects to the letter level. These two levels
mutually constrain each other, facilitating the perception of
objects consistent with scene meaning and inhibiting the
perception of inconsistent objects. In addition, partial activa-
tion at the object level could act to constrain the encoding of
perceptual features consistent with that object type, though
no interactive activation model of scene context effects has,
as yet, specifically included that level of interaction.
Each of these models of the influence of scene knowledge
on object perception predicts that perception of an object
should be facilitated when that object is consistent with the
scene in which it appears. We will therefore refer to them as
contextual facilitation models of object perception in scenes.
Concerns With the Object-Detection Paradigm
Support for contextual facilitation models rests almost
entirely on results from object-detection experiments that
show detection benefits for consistent objects versus incon-
sistent objects under brief presentation conditions . However, a number of
general concerns have been raised regarding the original
object-detection paradigm . These concerns revolve around two central
issues. First, the original object-detection paradigm may not
have adequately controlled participant response bias. Sec-
ond, the presentation of the target label prior to the scene and
the location cue following the scene may have provided
additional sources of information that influenced detection
performance.
Catch Trial Design and the Calculation of Sensitivity
In the original object-detection paradigm , detection sensitivity (d') was calculated using the
percentage correct rate in target-present trials (the hit rate)
and the error rate in catch trials (the false-alarm rate). Table
1 summarizes the design of the target-present and catch trials
for Biederman et al. . One concern with
this design is that the method of calculating detection
sensitivity did not adequately control for participants' bias to
respond "yes" more often when the catch trial label was
semantically consistent versus semantically inconsistent
with the subsequent scene. If participants attempt to detect
an absent horse in a farmyard, for example, they should be
biased to respond "yes," as a horse is generally likely to
appear there. If participants attempt to detect an absent
television in the farmyard, however, they should show less
bias to respond "yes," as there is contextual information
arguing against a television's presence. This pattern of bias
Summary of the Target-Present and Catch Trial Design in
Biederman et al. and in Experiments
1-3for a Sample Trial Presenting a Farmyard Scene
Semantic consistency manipulation
Inconsistent
Consistent
(probability
violation)
Target-present
Cued object
Target label
Cued object
Target label
Biederman et al. 
"chicken .
70% consistent
70% consistent
("horse"), 30%
("horse"), 30%
inconsistent
inconsistent
("television")
("television")
Target-present
Cued object
Target label
Cued object
Target label
Experiment 1
"chicken .
50% consistent
50% consistent
("horse"), 50%
("horse"), 50%
inconsistent
inconsistent
("television")
("television")
Experiments 2 and 3
Target-present
Cued object
Target label
"chicken .
Cued object
Target label
"chicken .
should lead to higher false-alarm rates in consistent target
label catch trials and lower false-alarm rates in inconsistent
target label catch trials. Biederman et al. found precisely this
effect: False-alarm rates were higher when the target label
3 Friedman recorded eye movements while participants
viewed scenes in preparation for a difficult memory test. The
duration of the first fixation (i.e., the total duration the eyes were
fixated on the object the first time it was entered, now referred to as
firstpass gaze duration) was shorter for consistent versus inconsis-
tent objects, a result that Friedman interpreted as support for
a priming model of scene context effects. The difference in fixation
duration was more than 300 ms, however, which is unlikely to be
explained by perceptual factors alone . For example, participants may have looked
longer at a semantically inconsistent object to integrate the already
identified object into a conceptual representation in which it was
incongruous. In addition, the instructions to prepare for a difficult
memory test may have caused participants to consciously create an
association between the inconsistent object and the scene, leading
to longer fixation durations study, however, did not
calculate sensitivity in this manner: The false-alarm rates in
both base and violation conditions averaged across catch
trials on which the target label was consistent and inconsis-
tent with the subsequent scene (see Table 1). Thus, differ-
ences in response bias as a function of target label consis-
tency were not necessarily controlled in the d' measure.
It is important to note that this method of computing d'
may have overestimated the sensitivity rate in base condi-
tions and underestimated the sensitivity rate in violation
conditions. As discussed previously, the false-alarm rate was
higher when the catch trial label was consistent versus
inconsistent with the scene. By averaging across these two
catch trial conditions for the purpose of calculating d',
sensitivity in the base condition may have been artificially
raised because the averaged false-alarm rate was lower than
the false-alarm rate for consistent target label catch trials
alone. Similarly, sensitivity in the probability violation
condition may have been artificially lowered because the
averaged false-alarm rate was higher than the false-alarm
rate for inconsistent target label catch trials alone. Thus, the
Biederman et al. method of calculating d' very likely
produced an exaggerated sensitivity advantage for the
detection of consistent objects. 4
A second concern with the design of the original object-
detection paradigm is that participants did not attempt to
detect the same object in the catch trials as in the correspond-
ing target-present trials. Thus, detection sensitivity for a
particular object was based on the correct detection of that
object in the scene and the false detection of an entirely
different object that was not in the scene. Signal detection
theory, however, requires that sensitivity measures be calcu-
lated using the correct detection of a particular signal when it
is present and the false detection of the same signal when it
is not present . For example, suppose
that the consistent cued object appearing in a kitchen scene
were a stove, and the consistent target label in the catch trial
were "bread box." The hit rate would reflect the correct
detection of a stove. The false-alarm rate, however, would
reflect the false detection of a bread box. Because a bread
box is less likely to appear in a kitchen scene than a stove,
the false-alarm rate would be artificially low, and the
resulting sensitivity estimate would be artificially high. This
example demonstrates the importance of requiring partici-
pants to detect the same object on corresponding target-
present and catch trials. The object-detection experiments
conducted to date have not met this criterion , and thus the sensitivity measures in those experi-
ments must be interpreted with caution.
Target Label Preview
The second concern with the original object-detection
paradigm involves the presentation of the target label before
scene viewing. There are two potential problems with such a
design. First, participants may have used the identity of the
target object to guide their search in the subsequent scene
 . This strategy could have lead to a
consistent object-detection advantage if the spatial positions
of consistent objects were more predictable than the posi-
tions of inconsistent objects. For example, participants may
have known where to find a horse in a farmyard but would
not necessarily have known where to find a television in a
farmyard. Supporting this intuition, we have recently demon-
strated that viewers can more quickly locate semantically
consistent versus inconsistent objects in a free-viewing,
visual search task (Henderson, Weeks, & Hollingworth, in
press). The information provided by the target label preview
may have been particularly helpful in the Boyce et al. 
experiments. The scenes used in that study contained only
five discrete objects presented against a very simple back-
ground. Thus, participants had to search through only a
small number of objects during scene presentation. If the
positions of consistent objects were more predictable than
the positions of inconsistent objects, an advantage for the
detection of consistent objects would be expected.
Second, the preview of the target label (e.g., "mixer")
may have led participants to expect the subsequent presenta-
tion of a certain scene type (in this case, a kitchen). The
generation of such expectations would have been particu-
larly likely in the Biederman et al. study, because
70% of the target labels were consistent with the subsequent
scene. When the target label specified an object inconsistent
with the subsequent scene, however, the discontinuity
between the expected and presented scene may have inter-
fered with perceptual processing, to the detriment of incon-
sistent object detection.
Location Cue
The final concern regarding the original object-detection
paradigm is that the location cue may have provided
information useful to post-perceptual guessing. The position
of the cue relative to the scene could have provided evidence
concerning the types of objects likely to be found at that
position . A cue marking a position high
in a living room scene, for example, would constrain the
objects that could have appeared there to clocks, pictures,
curtains, etc. Such information would be useful when
attempting to detect a consistent object but not as useful
4 It is important to note that the Boyce et al. replication of
this paradigm is not subject to this criticism, as the consistency of
the catch trial labels was controlled. However, the Boyce et al.
study is subject to the remaining criticisms.
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
when attempting to detect an inconsistent object, be-
cause the spatial position of an inconsistent object is less
predictable.
The Present Study
Results from object-detection experiments are the pri-
mary support for the widely held view that consistent scene
context facilitates object identification. It is therefore impor-
tant to assess the previous concerns experimentally. To do
this, we conducted four experiments. Experiment 1 at-
tempted to replicate the original Biederman et al. 
paradigm. Experiment 2 tested whether the consistent object
advantage in the original object-detection paradigm was due
to the inadequate control of response bias. The original
paradigm was modified so that participants attempted to
detect the same object on corresponding target-present and
catch trials. Experiment 3 investigated the influence of
presenting the target label before the scene by manipulating
whether the label appeared before or after the scene. In
addition, the location cue was eliminated from the third
experiment to investigate whether its presence may have
affected performance. Experiment 4 employed a forced-
choice procedure to investigate the influence of scene
context on object perception independently of response bias.
In all four experiments, contextual facilitation models
predict better detection of objects that are consistent with a
scene versus objects that are inconsistent, because they
propose that stored scene knowledge of the types of objects
likely to be found in a scene facilitates the identification of
those objects.
Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to replicate the original
Biederman et al. paradigm. We felt that replication
was necessary as a baseline against which to compare the
results from subsequent experiments in which we modified
the original paradigm. Figure 1 illustrates the main aspects
of the paradigm. The basic design was the same as that of
Biederman et al. . 5 A target label was
presented for 1500 ms, followed by a line drawing of a real-
world scene for 200 ms, followed by a pattern mask with an
embedded location cue. The participant's task was to
determine whether the object named by the target label had
or had not appeared in the scene at the cued location.
The key manipulation in Experiment 1 was the semantic
consistency between the cued object and the scene in which
it appeared. Semantically consistent cued objects were likely
to appear in the scene (e.g., a chicken in a farmyard);
semantically inconsistent cued objects were unlikely to
appear in the scene (e.g., a mixer in a farmyard). In half of
the trials, the target label named a semantically consistent
object, and in the other half the target label named a
semantically inconsistent object. Half of the trials presented
a scene that contained the target object (target-present trials),
and half of the trials presented a scene that did not (catch
trials). In the target-present trials, the target label named the
Schematic illustration of a trial in Experiment 1.
cued object. In the catch trials, the target label named an
object that did not appear in the scene. As in the original
object-detection paradigm, there was no relationship be-
tween the semantic consistency of the target label on
5 We made a number of modifications to the original Biederman
et al. paradigm. First, we limited the cued
object consistency manipulations to base (semantically consistent)
and probability violation (semantically inconsistent). Second, we
did not include a bystander condition. Third, we used a paired-
scene design to control for scene-specific factors such as cued
object distance from fixation and lateral masking. Fourth, we
presented the target label for 1500 ms rather than for a participant-
determined duration. Fifth, we used a scene presentation duration
of 200 ms rather than 150 ms. The 200 ms presentation duration
prevents eye movements during scene presentation, limiting view-
ing to a single glance of the scene, but reduces the possibility of
floor effects. Sixth, in the Biederman et al. experiment, 30% of the
catch trial target labels were inconsistent with the subsequent
scene, because 30% of the labels in the target-present trials were
inconsistent. In Experiment 1, 50% of the catch trial target labels
were inconsistent with the subsequent scene, because 50% of the
labels in the target-present trials were inconsistent. Finally, the
probability violation catch trials in the Biederman et al. paradigm
did not have the same design as the catch trials in the base
condition. For each scene in the probability violation condition, the
same object was cued in the catch trials as in the target-present
trials. For each scene in the base condition, however, a different
object was cued in the catch trials than in the target-present trials
(see Table 1). Thus, we chose to make the two consistency
conditions in Experiment 1 equivalent by always cueing the same
object in target-present and catch trials for each scene in each
consistency condition. This cueing manipulation is the same as that
employed by Boyce et al. .
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
corresponding target-present and catch trials: For each cued
object consistency condition, half of the catch trials pre-
sented a consistent target label and half an inconsistent target
label. Note that, as in the original object-detection paradigm,
the catch trial semantic consistency manipulation is defined
by the cued object appearing in the scene and not by the
consistency of the object the participant is attempting to
detect. Table 1 summarizes the design of the target-present
and catch trials for Experiment 1.
Participants.
Twenty-four Michigan State University under-
graduate students participated in the experiment for course credit.
All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The
participants were naive with respect to the hypotheses under
investigation.
Twenty scenes and 20 cued objects were used as
stimuli. The stimuli were generated from photographs of natural
scenes. Fourteen scenes were generated from those used by van
Diepen and De Graef , and the other 6 scenes were generated
from photographs taken in the East Lansing, Michigan, area. In
both cases, the main contours of the scenes were traced using
commercial software to create gray-scale line drawings. The
images generated from the two sources were not distinguishable.
Semantically consistent cued objects for each scene were also
created by digitally tracing scanned images. These objects were
created separately from the scenes. The 20 scenes were paired, and
the semantically inconsistent conditions were created by swapping
objects across scenes. For example, a mixer was the semantically
consistent cued object in a kitchen scene, and a live chicken was the
consistent cued object in a farmyard scene. These objects were
swapped across scenes so that the mixer was the semantically
inconsistent object in the farmyard scene, and the chicken was the
inconsistent object in the kitchen scene. Figure 2 shows an example
of a stimulus scene and the semantic consistency manipulation.
Because each scene was to be presented a total of eight times
during the experiment, two cued object positions were chosen
within each scene to minimize participants' ability to predict the
object's location. Each position was chosen as a place within the
scene where the consistent cued object might reasonably appear.
Both the consistent and inconsistent cued objects appeared in the
same two positions. In a number of scenes, the two object positions
required using two different sizes of each object (e.g., a fire hydrant
placed in two positions on a receding sidewalk). In such a case, the
paired scene also employed two different sizes of each object. The
percentage change in the size of each object was equated and was
the same in both of the paired scenes. As a consequence of this
paired-scene design, each scene served as a control for its partner,
reducing the influence of such factors as object size, eccentricity,
and lateral masking.
All scene and object manipulations were conducted using
commercially available software. The scenes subtended a visual
angle of 23 degrees (width) by 15 degrees (height) at a viewing
distance of 64 cm. Cued objects subtended about 2.75 degrees on
average (range = 1.25 to 4.92 degrees). All images were displayed
as gray-scale contours on a white background at a resolution of
800 × 600 pixels × 16 levels of gray. Gray-scale was used for
anti-aliasing so that the contours appeared smooth and sharp.
Target labels were created using lower-case, 24-point, anti-
aliased Ariai font. Labels for target-present trials named the cued
object. For catch trials, one consistent and one inconsistent label
were chosen for each scene. Each of these labels named an object
that never appeared in the scene.
An example of the type of scene used and the cued
object semantic consistency manipulation. The top scene contains a
semantically consistent cued object (chicken), and the bottom
scene contains a semantically inconsistent cued object (mixer).
This farmyard scene was paired with a kitchen scene in which the
mixer was consistent and the chicken inconsistent.
The pattern mask presented after the scene consisted of overlap-
ping line segments, curves, and angles, and was slightly larger than
the scene stimuli. The scenes were completely obliterated when
presented simultaneously with the pattern mask. The location cue
appearing within the pattern mask was a thick circle containing a
dot, subtending 1.4 degrees.
Apparatus.
The stimuli were displayed on a fiat-screen SVGA
monitor with a 100-Hz refresh rate. Responses were collected with
a button box connected to a dedicated input--output (I-O) board.
Depression of a button stopped a millisecond clock on the 1-4)
board. The display and I--O systems were interfaced with a
486-based microcomputer that controlled the experiment.
Procedure.
Participants were tested individually. The experi-
menter first explained that the task would be to determine whether
the object named by a label was present at a marked location in a
briefly displayed scene. The participant was then seated in front of
a computer monitor, with one hand resting on a button labeled
"yes" and the other on a button labeled "no." Viewing distance
was maintained by a forehead rest.
During each experimental trial, participants saw a fixation cross
and a prompt instructing them to press a pacing button to begin the
trial. Once the participant pressed the button, the fixation cross
remained on the screen for an additional 500 ms, followed by a
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
blank screen containing a target label for 1500 ms, followed by the
presentation of the scene for 200 ms, followed by a pattern mask
containing an embedded location cue. There was no delay (i.e., the
inter-stimulus interval was zero) between each display. The pattern
mask remained in view until the participant pressed the left (yes)
button to indicate that the object named by the target label had
appeared in the scene at the cued location or the right (no) button to
indicate that the target object had not appeared at the cued location.
After the response, there was a 4-s delay while the stimuli for the
next trial were loaded into video memory, and then the prompt for
the next trial appeared.
Participants took part in a practice block of 16 trials (2 cued
object consistency conditions x 2 target object presence conditions
x 2 cued object positions × 2 scenes). The two scenes used in the
practice block were not used in the experimental trials. After the
practice trials, the experimenter answered any questions the
participant had about the procedure, and the participant proceeded
to the experimental trials.
Each participant saw 160 experimental trials that were produced
by a within-purtieipant factorial combination of 2 cued object
consistency conditions x 2 target object presence conditions × 2
cued object positions × 20 scenes. The position of the cued object
and the consistency of the catch trial label were counterbalanced
between a pair of scenes and completely counterbalanced as a
between-perticipants
factor. Because the cued object position
factor was not of theoretical interest, the two levels of that factor
were combined in the statistical analyses. Each participant saw all
160 trials in a different random order. The entire session lasted
approximately 45 min.
In the following analyses, two measures were used to
assess object-detection performance. First, we report percent-
age correet hits for the target-present trials and percentage
correct rejections for the catch trials. Second, because
reliable response biases were present, we report A', a
nonparametric measure of sensitivity . A' can
be interpreted as equivalent to percentage correct in a
forced-choice procedure. A' was computed using the rate of
correct responses in target-present trials (the hit rate) and the
rate of errors in catch trials (the false-alarm rate). For the
purpose of replicating the Biederman et al. paradigm,
we did not separate the catch trial data as a function of the
semantic consistency of the target label. Thus, the A' results
reported in this section are based on the mean false-alarm
rate in each cued object consistency condition, averaging
across catch trials in which the target label was consistent
and inconsistent with the subsequent scene.
Percentage correct analysis.
Mean percentage correct
as a function of cued object consistency and target object
presence is presented in Table 2. First, there was a reliable
main effect of target object presence, F(1, 23) = 12.79,
MSE = .0506, p < .005. Participants responded correctly
67.9% of the time when the target object was present and
79.5% of the time when the target object was absent. There
was also a main effect of cued object consistency, F(1, 23) =
31.57, MSE = .0141, p < .001, with better performance
when the cued object was consistent (78.5%) than when it
was inconsistent (68.9%) with the scene. Finally, there was a
reliable interaction between cued object consistency and
target object presence, F(1, 23) = 19.42, MSE = .0149,p <
.001. Simple effects tests indicated that the hit rate for scenes
containing a consistent cued object (76.6%) was higher than
that for scenes containing an inconsistent cued object
(59.2%), F(1, 23) = 31.71, MSE = .0229, p < .001. This
pattern was not present in the catch trials; the correct
rejection rate was the same when the cued object was
consistent (80.4%) versus inconsistent (78.5%), F(1, 23) =
1.38, MSE = .0061,p > .25. To summarize, although the hit
rate was higher for consistent versus inconsistent cued
objects, the false-alarm rates were not different, 19.6% and
21.5% respectively.
A' analysis.
Mean A' for each cued object consistency
condition is shown in Table 2. Detection sensitivity was
reliably higher in scenes containing a consistent cued object
(.861) than in scenes containing an inconsistent cued object
(.775), F(1, 23) = 20.50, MSE = .0043,p < .001.
Discussion
Experiment 1 replicated the principal result of the original
object-detection paradigm. We found that object-detection
performance was higher for scenes containing a consistent
cued object than for scenes containing an inconsistent cued
object. This experiment demonstrates that our scenes and
semantic consistency manipulation are sufficient to replicate
the basic consistent object contextual facilitation effect. The
results of this experiment provide a baseline that can be used
to assess the results of Experiments 2-4, in which the
original paradigm will be modified to address the concerns
specified in the Introduction.
In Biederman et al. , false-alarm rates were higher
when the catch trial label was consistent versus inconsistent
with the scene. To investigate whether such biases were
present in the current experiment, we conducted a full
analysis of the Experiment 1 catch trial data. The two
within-participants variables of cued object semantic consis-
tency and target label semantic consistency were entered
into an ANOVA. There was a reliable effect of target label
semantic consistency, F(1, 23) = 4.97, MSE = .0303, p <
.05, with a higher correct rejection rate for inconsistent
target labels (83.4%) than consistent target labels (75.5%).
As found in the Biederman et al. study, participants were
more likely to falsely respond that an absent consistent target
object was present than to respond that an absent inconsis-
tent target object was present. This response bias was likely
caused by participants adopting a higher standard of evi-
dence to accept that an inconsistent object was present in the
scene than that a consistent object was present.
Mean Percentage Hits, Percentage Correct Rejections
(Percentage False Alarms), and A ' for Experiment 1
Cued object
% correct rejections
consistency
(% false alarms)
Consistent
80.4 (19.6)
Inconsistent
78.5 (21.5)
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
As reported previously, the effect of cued object semantic
consistency on catch trial performance did not approach
reliability, F(1, 23) = 1.38, MSE = .0061, p > .25, nor was
the interaction between cued Object consistency and target
label consistency reliable, F < 1. The absence of a cued
object consistency effect on catch trial performance is
intriguing. According to contextual facilitation models,
consistent cued objects should be easier to identify than
inconsistent cued objects. Thus, contextual facilitation mod-
els predict lower false-alarm rates when the cued object is
consistent with the scene, because participants will be better
able to determine that the cued object does not match the
target label. No such effect of cued object consistency was
found. It is important to note that a similar lack of an effect
of cued object consistency on catch trial performance was
reported by Biederman et al. . In that
experiment, false-alarm rates were 16% in the base condi-
tion and 15% in the probability violation condition.
In summary, analysis of the catch trial data revealed that
the semantic consistency of the target label reliably influ-
enced performance, but the semantic consistency of the cued
object had little influence on performance. Because the
original object-detection paradigm (and our replication of
that paradigm in Experiment 1) averaged across consistent
and inconsistent target label catch trials when calculating
false-alarm rates, it is likely that these experiments underes-
timated the false-alarm rate for base conditions and overesti-
mated the false-alarm rate for violation conditions. This
would result in artificially high sensitivity estimates in base
conditions and artificially low sensitivity estimates in
violation conditions. Overall, these data suggest that
the consistent object facilitation effect observed in prior
object-detection experiments may have been due, at least in
part, to the fact that sensitivity measures did not control for
response biases induced by the consistency of the target
design controls for the potential bias for participants to
respond "yes" more often when the catch trial target label is
consistent versus inconsistent with the scene.
To control for the general complexity of the scene in
target-present and catch trials, the catch trial scenes con-
tained the cued object from the paired scene at the cued
location. For example, if a participant viewed the label
"chicken" in a catch trial, the subsequent scene would
contain the paired cued object (a mixer). Thus, in the catch
trials, the semantic consistency manipulation was based
on the relationship between the target label and the scene
rather than the relationship between the cued object and the
Participants. Twenty-four Michigan State University under-
graduate students participated in the experiment for course credit.
All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The
participants were naive with respect to the hypotheses under
investigation. None had participated in Experiment 1.
Stimuli. The stimuli were the same as in Experiment 1 with the
following modifications. First, for each scene, target labels in catch
trials named the same object as in corresponding target-present
trials. Second, the catch trial scenes contained the paired cued
object (e.g., a mixer when the target object was a chicken).
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus and procedure were
the same as in Experiment 1. Each participant saw 160 experimen-
tal trials that were produced by a within-participant factorial
combination of 2 target label semantic consistency conditions × 2
target object presence conditions × 2 cued object positions × 20
scenes. Because the cued object position factor was not of
theoretical interest, the two levels of that factor were combined in
the statistical analyses. Each participant saw all 160 trials in a
different random order. The entire session lasted approximately
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we modified the original object-detection
paradigm to address our concerns about catch trial design
and the method of calculating sensitivity. In this experiment,
the target label in a catch trial named the same object as in a
corresponding target-present trial (see Table 1). This design
has two advantages over the original paradigm. First,
measures of sensitivity in this experiment were based on the
correct detection of a particular signal when it was present
and the false detection of the same signal when it was not
present. Second, the semantic consistency of the target label
with the scene on corresponding target-present and catch
trials was equivalent, because both labels named the same
object. As a result, false-alarm rates in the semantically
consistent condition were based entirely on the false detec-
tion of consistent target objects, and false-alarm rates in the
semantically inconsistent condition were based entirely on
the false detection of inconsistent target objects. In contrast
to the original object-detection paradigm, this catch trial
Percentage correct analysis.
Mean percentage correct
performance as a function of target label semantic consis-
tency and target object presence is shown in Table 3. First,
there was a reliable main effect of target object presence,
F(1, 23) = 8.61, MSE = .0739, p < .01. Participants
responded correctly 65.6% of the time when the target object
was present and 77.1% of the time when the target object
was absent. There was no main effect of target label
semantic consistency, F < 1, with 71.9% correct perfor-
mance when the target label was consistent with the scene
and 70.9% when the target label was inconsistent. There
was, however, a reliable interaction between target label
semantic consistency and target object presence, F(1, 23) =
65.85, MSE = .0269, p < .001. The hit rate in the consistent
target label condition (75.7%) was higher than that in the
inconsistent target label condition (55.5%), but the reverse
pattern obtained in the catch trials, with a higher correct
rejection rate in the inconsistent target label condition
(86.3%) than in the consistent target label condition (68.0%).
In other words, both the hit and false-alarm rates were higher
for consistent versus inconsistent target object-detection,
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
suggesting that participants were more biased to respond
"yes" when attempting to detect a consistent target object.
Given this pattern, sensitivity measures provide a better
indication of detection accuracy than percentage correct
performance.
A' analysis. Mean A' for each target object consistency
condition is presented in Table 3. No effect of target label
semantic consistency was obtained, F < 1. Participants were
equally accurate at detecting semantically consistent target
objects (.803) as semantically inconsistent target objects
Discussion
In Experiment 2, the catch trial design of the original
object-detection paradigm was modified so that participants
attempted to detect the same target object on corresponding
target-present and catch trials. The main result was that no
advantage was found for the detection of semantically
consistent versus inconsistent target objects. In addition,
there were reliable response biases caused by target label
semantic consistency. As in Experiment 1, participants were
biased to respond "yes" more often when the catch trial
label was consistent versus inconsistent with the scene. This
bias suggests that information sufficient to access scene
meaning was available within the 200 ms scene presentation
Why might the consistent object contextual facilitation
effect, present in Experiment 1, be absent in Experiment 2?
One potential explanation is that, in the catch trials, the
presence of the paired cued object at the cued location may
have biased performance. For example, in an inconsistent
condition catch trial, the target label was "chicken"; this
label was followed by a kitchen scene containing the paired
cued object (a mixer). If consistent objects are easier to
detect than inconsistent objects, as suggested by contextual
facilitation models, false-alarm rates may have been artifi-
ciaily low when the target label was inconsistent with the
scene, because on those trials, the cued object was always
consistent with the scene. This lower false-alarm rate in the
inconsistent condition might have masked consistent object
facilitation in our sensitivity measure. We have no direct
way to determine whether cued object semantic consistency
influenced performance in this experiment, as that factor
was confounded with the semantic consistency of the target
label. The results from Experiment 1, as well as those
reported by Biederman et al. , however, provide no
support for this hypothesis. Both experiments strongly
Mean Percentage Hits, Percentage Correct Rejections
(Percentage False Alarms), and A ' for Experiment 2
Target label
% correct rejections
consistency
(% false alarms)
Consistent
68.0 (32.0)
Inconsistent
86.3 (13.7)
suggest that the semantic consistency of the cued object has
little if any effect on performance in catch trials, because
false-alarm rates did not differ as a function of cued object
consistency.
A second explanation for the difference in results between
Experiments 1 and 2 is that the facilitated detection of
consistent objects in Experiment 1 and in the original
object-detection paradigm was an artifact produced by the
method of calculating sensitivity. In these experiments,
measures of sensitivity did not control response biases
caused by the semantic consistency of the target label, as
those paradigms averaged across catch trials on which the
target object was consistent and inconsistent with the scene.
In Experiment 2, when the catch trials were modified so that
response biases were controlled in A', no such consistent
object advantage was obtained. This suggests that results
from the original object-detection paradigm reflected re-
sponse bias rather than the influence of scene context on
object perception, and thus cannot be taken as strong
evidence for contextual facilitation of consistent object
perception.
A final explanation for the absence of a consistent object
facilitation effect in Experiment 2 hinges on the use of a
target label preview. The priming model of scene context
effects proposes that the source of contextual facilitation
effects is the spread of activation from the activated represen-
tation of a scene to stored descriptions of object types likely
to be found in the scene . In Experiment 2, the presentation of the
target label prior to scene viewing may have served to prime
the stored description of the target object, regardless of its
semantic consistency. Such priming could mask potential
influences of scene context. In Experiment 3, the target label
was presented either before or after the scene. If the priming
model is correct, contextual facilitation of consistent object
detection should be observed when the target label is
presented after the scene, but not necessarily when the target
label is presented before the scene.
Experiment 3
Experiment 3 sought to provide further evidence concern-
ing the influence of scene context on object perception. In
this experiment, the target label was presented either before
or after scene presentation. In addition, the location cue was
eliminated. Otherwise, Experiment 3 was identical to Experi-
ment 2. The presentation of the target label after the scene
further refines the object-detection paradigm by eliminating
two potential problems. First, participants may have used the
target label preview to constrain the spatial extent of their
search in the subsequent scene. This strategy would benefit
the detection of consistent objects, because the position of a
consistent object in a scene is easier to predict than the
position of an inconsistent object. Second, the presentation
of a semantically inconsistent target label before the scene
may have interfered with perceptual processing when the
scene implied by the label was not presented. In addition,
elimination of the location cue improves the object-
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
Schematic illustration of a trial in Experiment 3.
detection paradigm by undermining the potential strategy of
using cue position to assist post-presentation guessing.
Figure 3 illustrates the main aspects of the paradigm. In
the target label preview condition, participants saw a target
label for 1500 ms, followed by presentation of the scene
for 200 ms, followed by a pattern mask containing a series
of lowercase Xs, which remained on the screen until
response. In the target label postview condition, participants
saw a series of Xs in a blank field for 1500 ms, followed by
presentation of the scene for 200 ms, followed by a pattern
mask containing the target label, which remained on the
screen until response. The series of Xs was employed to
roughly equate stimulus presentation in the two conditions.
In addition to the manipulation of target label (preview or
postview), we omitted the location cue. The absence of a
location cue changed the participants' task. In Experiments 1
and 2, the task was to determine whether the target object
appeared at the cued location. In Experiment 3, the task was
to determine whether the target object appeared anywhere in
the scene. As in Experiment 2, the semantic consistency
manipulation in the catch trials was based on the relationship
between the target label and the scene rather than the
relationship between the presented object and the scene. 6
Table 1 presents a summary of the target-present and catch
trial design in Experiment 3.
6 In Experiments 3 and 4, the object presented in the scene was
not cued by a location dot. Therefore, we will refer to this object as
the presented object rather than the cued object.
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
Participants. Twenty-four members of the Michigan State
University community were paid $5 each for their participation. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The partici-
pants were naive with respect to the hypotheses under investiga-
tion. None had participated in previous experiments.
Stimuli. The stimuli were the same as in Experiment 2, except
that a blank space, subtending 6.3 × 1.5 degrees, was created in the
center of the pattern mask to accommodate the object label or series
Apparatus. The apparatus was the same as that used for
Experiment 1, except that the stimuli were displayed on a
flat-screen monitor with a 72-Hz refresh rate.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as that in Experiment
1, except that the participant was informed that the target label
could appear either before or after the scene. In either case, the
participant was to press the button marked "yes" if the object
named by the label had appeared anywhere in the scene or the
button marked "no" if the object had not appeared in the scene.
Each participant saw 160 experimental trials that were produced
by a within-participant factorial combination of 2 target label
presentation conditions (preview, postview) × 2 target label
consistency conditions × 2 target object presence conditions × 20
scenes. Object position was manipulated between participants and
was tied to the preview-postview manipulation. In one group, if
position A was employed for the preview trials of a particular
scene, position B was used for all postview trials employing that
scene. These assignments were reversed in the second group.
Because the object position factor was not of theoretical interest,
the two levels of that factor were combined in the statistical
analyses. Each participant saw all 160 trials in a different random
order. The entire session lasted approximately 45 min.
Percentage correct analysis. Mean percentage correct
performance as a function of target label presentation, target
label semantic consistency, and target object presence is
shown in Table 4. First, there was a reliable main effect of
target label presentation (preview, postview), F(1, 23) =
36.00, MSE = .0082, p < .001. Participants responded
correctly 73.8% of the time in the preview condition and
65.9% of the time in the postview condition. There was also
a main effect of target object presence, F(1, 23) = 10.89,
MSE = .0765, p < .005, with better performance in the
catch trials (76.4%) than in the target-present trials (63.2%).
There was no main effect of target label semantic consis-
tency, F < 1, but there was a reliable interaction between
target label semantic consistency and target object presence,
F(1, 23) = 107.67, MSE = .0313,p < .001. The hit rate for
consistent target objects (76.4%) was higher than that for
inconsistent target objects (50.1%), but the reverse pattern
obtained in the catch trials, with a higher correct rejection
rate for inconsistent target objects (89.8%) than for consis-
tent target objects (63.0%). Finally, there was a reliable
3-way interaction between all factors considered, F(1, 23) --
10.63, MSE = .0080, p < .005. In the target-present trials,
performance for consistent target objects dropped slightly
between preview and postview conditions (6.1%), but
performance for inconsistent target objects dropped more
significantly (13.2%). In the catch trials, the reverse pattern
obtained: Correct rejections for consistent target objects
dropped significantly between preview and postview trials
(11.0%), but correct rejections for inconsistent target objects
showed almost no decline (1.2%). As in Experiments 1 and
2, both the hit rate and false-alarm rate were higher for
consistent versus inconsistent target objects, suggesting that
participants were biased to respond "yes" more often when
attempting to detect a consistent versus an inconsistent
object. Given this pattern, sensitivity measures again pro-
vide a better indication of detection accuracy than percent-
age correct performance.
A' analysis. Mean A' as a function of target label
presentation and target label semantic consistency is re-
ported in Table 4. There was a reliable main effect of target
label presentation, F(1, 23) = 23.52, MSE = .0067, p <
.001, with better detection in the preview conditions (.836)
than in the postview conditions (.755). In addition, there was
a reliable main effect of semantic consistency, F(1, 23) =
5.87, MSE = .0034, p < .05, with better detection of
semantically inconsistent target objects (.810) than consis-
tent target objects (.782). These effects were mediated by a
marginally reliable interaction between label presentation
and target object semantic consistency, F(1, 23) = 3.55,
MSE = .0036, p = .07. Planned simple effects tests showed
that there was no difference in performance for consistent
versus inconsistent target objects in the preview condition,
F < 1, but there was a reliable advantage for inconsistent
target object detection in the postview condition, F(1, 23) =
5.35, MSE = .0060, p < .05.
Discussion
The results from the preview condition of Experiment 3
replicated those of Experiment 2 and provided no support
for contextual facilitation models of object perception in
scenes. The pattern of performance as a function of target
label consistency was the same across the two experiments:
There was no advantage for the detection of semantically
consistent versus inconsistent objects, and participants dem-
onstrated a bias to respond that consistent target objects were
present in the scene compared to inconsistent objects. In
addition, overall performance in the preview condition of
Experiment 3 (A' = .836) was higher than that in Experi-
ment 2 (A' = .807). These experiments differed only in the
presence of the location cue, suggesting that the location cue
provided little if any information to aid detection perfor-
Mean Percentage Hits, Percentage Correct Rejections
(Percentage False Alarms), and A' for Experiment 3
Target label
% correct rejections
consistency
(% false alarms)
Consistent
68.5 (31.5)
Inconsistent
90.4 (9.6)
Consistent
57.5 (42.5)
Inconsistent
89.2 (10.8)
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
mance. The results of the postview condition of Experiment
3 also failed to support contextual facilitation models of
object perception in scenes. Contrary to the prediction 0f
those models, an advantage for the detection of inconsistent
target objects was obtained. This result is in particular
contrast to the prediction derived from the priming model
that consistent object facilitation may only be observed
when the target label is presented after the scene.
In addition, the results from Experiment 3 provide further
evidence that the semantic consistency between the cued
object and the scene has little or no influence on catch trial
performance. In Experiment 3, the location cue was elimi-
nated, and the task was to determine whether the target
object appeared anywhere in the scene. Participants were
therefore unaware, at least initially, that the identity of the
presented object had any bearing on whether the target
object was present or absent. If the lower false-alarm rate for
inconsistent versus consistent target objects in Experiment 2
was caused by the semantic consistency of the cued object,
that difference should have disappeared, or at least have
been attenuated, in Experiment 3. Contrary to this predic-
tion, the false-alarm rates for inconsistent target label catch
trials in both the preview and postview conditions of
Experiment 3 were lower than that in Experiment 2. In
addition, the difference in the false-alarm rate as a function
of target label semantic consistency was actually larger in
both the preview and postview conditions of Experiment 3
than in Experiment 2, suggesting that participants were more
biased to respond that consistent objects were present in
Experiment 3 than in Experiment 2. Thus, the absence of a
consistent object advantage in Experiment 2 and the preview
condition of Experiment 3, and the presence of the inconsis-
tent object advantage in the postview condition of Experi-
ment 3, do not appear to have been caused by the semantic
consistency of the object presented in the scene during catch
Experiment 4
The purpose of Experiment 4 was to provide converging
evidence bearing on the general hypothesis that consistent
scene context facilitates object perception. In Experiments
1-3, A' was employed to control for participant response
biases. In Experiment 4, we introduced a forced-choice
procedure, similar to that developed by Reicher in the word
recognition literature , to eliminate response
bias entirely. This paradigm eliminates response biases
caused by the semantic consistency of the object label
because participants must discriminate between two object
labels, both of which are either semantically consistent or
inconsistent with the scene. Figure 4 illustrates the main
aspects of the paradigm.
A scene was presented for 250 ms, followed by a pattern
mask for 30 ms, followed by a screen displaying two object
labels. One label named an object presented in the scene, and
the other label named an object that had not appeared in the
scene. The participants' task was to indicate which of the
two labels named an object that had been presented in the
scene. The main contextual manipulation was the semantic
consistency between the scene and the presented object. For
this experiment we chose one additional consistent and one
additional inconsistent object to be presented in each scene.
Thus, each scene could contain one of four presented
objects, two of which were consistent and two of which were
inconsistent. In the forced-choice response screen, one
object label named the object presented in the scene, and the
second label named the other object of the equivalent
semantic consistency. For example, when a consistent object
(a chicken or a pig) was presented in the farmyard scene, the
forced choice screen presented the labels "chicken" and
"pig." As in previous experiments, contextual facilitation
models predict that percentage correct discrimination perfor-
mance should be better when the presented object is
consistent versus inconsistent with the scene in which it
Participants. Twenty-four Michigan State University under-
graduate students participated in the experiment for course credit.
One of these original participants had to be replaced because he had
difficulty understanding the instructions. All participants had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The participants were naive
with respect to the hypotheses under investigation. None had
participated in previous experiments.
Stimuli. The stimuli were the same as in Experiments 1-3 with
the following modifications. For each scene, a second consistent
and a second inconsistent object were chosen. One scene from the
original set was replaced because of the difficulty of finding a
second object that would be consistent in the scene at the same
location as the original consistent object. Finally, only one object
location was used for each scene. The object labels appearing after
scene presentation were centered vertically and positioned to the
left and right of fixation. The labels were created using lower-case,
24-point, anti-aliased Arial font.
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus was the same as in
Experiments 1 and 2. Participants were presented a scene for 250
ms, followed by a pattern mask for 30 ms, followed by a
forced-choice screen containing two object labels. There was no
delay (i.e., the inter-stimulus interval was zero) between each
display. The forced-choice screen remained in view until the
participant pressed the left button to indicate that the object named
by the left-hand label had appeared or the right button to indicate
that the object named by the right-hand label had appeared in the
scene. Each participant saw 160 experimental trials that were
produced by a within-participant factorial combination of 2 pre-
sented object consistency conditions × 2 presented objects × 2
label positions in the forced-choice display × 20 scenes. Because
the presented object factor and the label position factor were not of
theoretical interest, the two levels of each factor were combined in
the statistical analyses. Each participant saw all 160 trials in a
different random order. The entire session lasted approximately 45
The influence of object consistency on percentage correct
discrimination performance was analyzed via a simple
effects test. There was no effect of the consistency of the
presented object, F < 1. Participants responded correctly
70.7% of the time when the presented object was consistent
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of a trial in Experiment 4.
with the scene and 71.6% of the time when the presented
object was inconsistent with the scene. The 95% confidence
interval around these means was - 1.69%. Thus, the experi-
ment had enough power to detect a 2.39% effect .
Discussion
In Experiment 4, we introduced a forced-choice proce-
dure to investigate the influence of scene context on object
perception independently of response bias. Contrary to the
prediction of contextual facilitation models, no advantage
for the detection of consistent objects was found. In fact, the
non-reliable trend was in the direction of better inconsistent
object detection. Thus, using the same general set of scene
stimuli, the original object-detection paradigm (Experiment
1) produced a consistent object advantage, but Experiment
4, in which response bias was eliminated, showed no such
advantage. This suggests, again, that the consistent object
advantage in the original object-detection paradigm resulted,
at least in part, from the inadequate control of response bias
rather than from the influence of scene context on object
perception.
In Experiment 4, only one object position was used for
each scene. It is possible that the absence of a consistent
object advantage was due to participants learning the
position at which the presented object appeared in each
scene. Such knowledge could allow participants to direct
their attention quickly to the object position regardless of
whether the presented object was semantically consistent or
inconsistent with the scene. To investigate this possibility,
we calculated percentage correct discrimination perfor-
mance as a function of object consistency and first half
versus second half of the trials. If the learning of object
positions masked a consistent object advantage, that advan-
tage would more likely be found in the first half of the
experiment than in the second. However, there was no
evidence of a consistent object advantage in the first half of
the experiment. Percentage correct discrimination was 67.3%
when the presented object was consistent and 68.8% when
the presented object was inconsistent. A second potential
concern with Experiment 4 is that the scene was presented
for 250 ms, 100 ms longer than studies finding contextual
facilitation of object detection . However, we have replicated Experi-
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
ment 4 with a scene presentation duration of 150 ms and
obtained no advantage for the discrimination of semantically
consistent objects (Hollingworth & Henderson, in press-a).
In fact, discrimination performance was reliably higher
when the target object was inconsistent versus consistent
with the scene.
General Discussion
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
object identification is influenced by the semantic relation-
ship between an object and the scene in which it appears.
One view of the influence of scene context on object
identification proposes that consistent scene context facili-
tates the perception of objects . This view has
been instantiated in contextual facilitation models of object
perception in scenes, which propose that knowledge about
the objects found in a given scene type facilitates the
perception of object stimuli consistent with that scene
 . The primary evidence supporting contextual facilita-
tion models comes from experiments demonstrating that the
detection of an object in a scene is facilitated when the
object is semantically consistent compared with when it is
inconsistent with the scene . However, as discussed in the Introduction,
there are several potential problems with the original
object-detection paradigm that make interpretation of these
data difficult . Specifically, the original paradigm
may not have adequately controlled for participant response
biases, and may have provided additional sources of informa-
tion that influenced detection performance. In this study, we
modified the original object-detection paradigm to address
these concerns.
In Experiment 1, we replicated the original object-
detection paradigm contextual facilitation effect . Participants saw a target
label naming an object, followed by a briefly presented
scene, followed by a pattern mask with an embedded
location cue. The object marked by the location cue could be
either semantically consistent or inconsistent with the scene
in which it appeared. Detection performance was based on
percentage correct for trials in which the target label named
the cued object and percentage of errors for trials in which
the target label named a different object that did not appear
in the scene. In these latter trials, the semantic consistency of
the target label with the subsequent scene was not related to
the consistency of the cued object with the scene. Using this
paradigm, we replicated the basic consistent object contex-
tual facilitation effect: Detection performance (A') was
better when the cued object was semantically consistent
versus inconsistent with the scene. However, a more detailed
analysis of the catch trial data indicated that reliable
response biases were caused by the semantic consistency of
the target label: Participants responded "yes" more often
when the catch trial target label was semantically consistent
versus inconsistent with the scene. Because of the design of
the catch trials in this paradigm, sensitivity measures were
unable to adequately control for this response bias.
In Experiment 2, we modified the original object-
detection paradigm so that participants attempted to detect
the same object on trials in which it was and was not present
in the scene. This modification assured that the detection
performance measure (A') was based on the correct detec-
tion of a particular signal when it was present in the scene
and the false detection of the same signal when it was not
present. In addition, response biases caused by the semantic
consistency of the target label were controlled in A',
providing a valid measure of object-detection performance.
Contrary to the prediction of contextual facilitation models,
no advantage was found for the detection of consistent
versus inconsistent objects.
In Experiment 3, we manipulated whether the target label
appeared before or after the scene, and we eliminated the
location cue. The purpose of the label manipulation was to
investigate whether presenting the label before the scene
may have interfered with scene processing when it was
inconsistent with the subsequent scene, and may have
allowed participants to constrain their subsequent search,
biasing detection performance. The location cue was elimi-
nated to see if it provided information useful to post-
presentation guessing strategies. The results from the target
label preview condition replicated those of Experiment 2
and indicated that the location cue provided little or no
information to aid performance. The main result from the
target label postview condition was superior detection of
inconsistent versus consistent objects.
In Experiment 4, we employed a forced-choice procedure
to assess object-detection performance. This procedure
improved the object-detection paradigm by eliminating the
possibility of response bias caused by the semantic consis-
tency of the target label. Participants were asked to discrimi-
nate between two consistent object labels (when the pre-
sented object was consistent with the scene) or between two
inconsistent object labels (when the presented object was
inconsistent with the scene). Contrary to the prediction of
contextual facilitation models, no advantage was found for
the detection of consistent objects.
In order to conclude from these data that consistent scene
context does not facilitate object identification, it is neces-
sary that these experiments meet two criteria. First, scene
meaning must have been available early enough to influence
object identification, if such influences exist. Second, the
contextual manipulation must have been strong enough to
interact with object identification, if such interaction is
possible. In this study, scene meaning was available early
enough and was strong enough to produce reliable response
biases based on the consistency of the target label. These
response biases suggest that scene meaning and its relation-
ship to the identity of the target object was available from
information obtained within the brief presentation duration
of the scene stimulus. In addition, the contextual manipula-
tion was strong enough to replicate the Biederman et al.
 results. Given that we found no evidence for
facilitated detection of semantically consistent objects in the
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
face of a robust contextual manipulation, the conclusion
follows that consistent scene context does not facilitate
object identification.
In summary, when the object-detection paradigm was
modified so that (a) response biases were either adequately
controlled or eliminated from the paradigm and (b) other
sources of potentially biasing information were removed, no
advantage was found for the detection of semantically
consistent objects. This suggests that the results from
previous object-detection paradigms may not have reflected the
influence of scene context on object identification. Instead,
the consistent object advantage in these experiments appears
to have been caused by the inadequate control of response
bias and by the presentation of the target label before the
scene. Most significantly, these data suggest that consistent
scene context does not facilitate the identification of real-
world objects.
lnteractivity Versus Functional Isolation
The data from this study do not support the hypothesis
that stored knowledge about a scene type facilitates the
identification of consistent object stimuli, as proposed by
contextual facilitation models of object perception in scenes.
In contrast, these data are consistent with a functional
architecture of the visual system in which object perception
is isolated from stored information about the objects likely
to appear in a scene. Such isolation may be necessary to
avoid what has been termed the frame problem . Given that experience with natural scenes comprises
most of waking life, the set of potentially relevant informa-
tion to any scene perception task would be so large as to
make the discrimination between relevant and irrelevant
information resource intensive and time consuming. There-
fore, perceptual systems may be fast and accurate precisely
because they do not consult sources of information such as
contextually derived expectations.
Alternatively, it might be argued that functional isolation
derives not from structural properties of the visual system
but from the relatively low degree of constraint that exists in
the real world between scenes and objects. By way of
illustration, consider the relationship between letters and
words versus objects and scenes. A particular word is present
if and only if a certain set of letters is present in a particular
spatial arrangement. In contrast, the constraints between a
given scene and the objects in that scene are far less strict.
For example, a kitchen scene remains a kitchen scene even if
a highly diagnostic object, such as a stove, is not present. In
addition, the spatial arrangement of the objects in a scene is
far less constrained; as long as basic physical constraints are
upheld, a stove can appear in many different locations
relative to other objects in the scene. Moreover, scene and
object representations are not necessarily organized hierar-
chically; whereas a word must be recognized through local
analysis of letter identities, a scene can be recognized when
most of the local object information is removed via low-pass
filter . Thus, it might be argued
that even if conceptual information can, in principle, interact
with perceptual systems, in the case of object perception,
functional isolation between object perception and scene
knowledge has been produced by the relatively weak
constraints that a given scene places on the objects and
spatial relationships likely to be found there. 7
This hypothesis, though logically possible, is not very
satisfying. First, although the correlations between specific
scenes and specific objects are not one, they are also not
zero. In the case of the stimuli used in the present experi-
ments, the target objects were relatively highly semantically
constrained. For example, given that one is looking at a farm
scene, a chicken is relatively likely to appear, whereas a
mixer is relatively unlikely. This type of relationship does
not seem to be unusual for real-world scenes. More gener-
ally, the view that less than perfect correlations in the world
can lead to functional isolation seems to mn counter to
current perspectives on constraint-based perception, which
assume that all available constraints are consulted when
interpreting an input pattern .
Although the results of this study are consistent with the
hypothesis that object perception is functionally isolated
from scene knowledge, they may appear to be contrary to
evidence that suggests facilitative interaction between other
visual subsystems (where a sub-system is optimized to
perform a specific task). For example, classic demonstra-
tions of the effects of perceptual learning on difficult
segmentation problems, such as that seen with the Dalma-
tian dog image , suggest that
the presence of a stored image interpretation can facilitate
initial segmentation and grouping processes for that image, s
However, these results are not incompatible with ours.
Facilitative interaction (or functional isolation) between two
visual subsystems cannot be taken as evidence that such
interaction (or functional isolation) exists between all sub-
systems. There may be functional isolation between some
forms of representation (e.g., scene conceptual knowledge
and object perception) but not between others (e.g., stored
object models and segmentation routines). More generally,
in order to investigate interactivity and isolation in the visual
system, it is important to specify explicitly the representa-
tional systems that are potentially functional in a given
7 The fact that the constraints are weak between scenes and
objects might lead to a functional isolation of object perception
either ontogenetically or phylogenetically. The former case would
be consistent with constraint-satisfaction theories of cognition, in
which the contingencies experienced by a specific individual
determines the functional architecture of that individual's visual-
cognitive system. Alternatively, those same constraints, experi-
enced over evolutionary time scales, may have produced a geneti-
cally programmed neural architecture in which functional isolation
between object perception and scene knowledge is produced.
s More recently, Peterson and Gibson have provided
evidence that figure-ground segmentation for an object is not
independent of possible object interpretations. Results from these
experiments might also be interpreted as indicating that there is
interaction between stored object models and the computation of a
perceptual description of an object, though it should be noted that
Peterson and Gibson do not interpret their results in this way.
OBJECT PERCEPTION IN SCENES
visual task, to determine what interactions are logically
possible among these systems, and then to examine empiri-
cally each potential interaction.
This point is also relevant to recent theorizing about the
functional role of feedback projections in the neural architec-
ture of the visual system. It is tempting to conclude that
because there are back-projecting pathways from later to
earlier cortical visual areas , there must be massive top-down influences at all
levels of visual analysis, including an influence of scene
meaning on the generation of a description of input patterns
for objects . However, it is premature to
make this inference given our current understanding of the
relationship between neural architecture and functional
architecture. The existence of re-entrant neural pathways
does not necessarily imply the type of massive interactivity
between sub-systems assumed by the hypothesis that vision
is a constraint-satisfaction problem in which all sub-systems
settle together . For example, re-
entrant pathways could be serving one or more alternative
functions, such as attentional regulation of information flow
between cortical areas or the binding of visual
representations to other visual representations, spatial repre-
sentations, and motor representations . Thus, the existence of
re-entrant neural pathways is not necessarily evidence for
massive constraint-satisfaction interactivity between func-
tional sub-systems.
The Inconsistent Object Advantage
There is some evidence in this study to indicate that
detection performance was not entirely insensitive to the
semantic relationship between an object and the scene in
which it appeared. In the postview condition of Experiment
3, detection performance was better for semantically incon-
sistent versus consistent objects. Although this result may
appear anomalous, it replicates an inconsistent object advan-
tage found in a similar paradigm based on change detection
 . In this paradigm, the participant was
presented with an initial picture of a natural scene for 250
ms, followed by a pattern mask, followed by presentation of
a test scene. The test scene either was identical to the initial
scene or was identical except for a change to a single target
object in the scene (either deletion or mirror reversal). The
participant's task was to determine whether any of the
objects in the scene had changed across the two presenta-
tions. The semantic consistency of the target object was
manipulated, so that it was either semantically consistent or
inconsistent with the scene in which it appeared. Detection
of changes, as reflected in A', was better when the object
undergoing the change was semantically inconsistent with
the scene.
It is possible that this inconsistent object advantage could
be explained by faciliatory interactions between stored scene
knowledge and the perceptual processing of objects inconsis-
tent with the scene. This idea seems unlikely, however,
because it assumes that a scene concept represents informa-
tion about each object in the extremely large set of objects
that would be inconsistent with that scene. Thus, we propose
two potential hypotheses to explain the inconsistent object
advantage, both of which are compatible with the view that
object perception is functionally isolated from stored
knowledge about the objects likely to be found in the scene.
These are the memory schema hypothesis and the attention
hypothesis.
The memory schema hypothesis.
According to this hy-
pothesis, perceptual encoding of semantically consistent and
inconsistent objects proceeds equivalently, but following
perceptual encoding, information about semantically incon-
sistent objects is preferentially remembered. Specifically,
information about objects consistent with the scene may be
lost during a normalization process within a memory
schema, whereas information about inconsistent objects may
be retained more veridically, perhaps as part of a list noting
deviations from the default values in the schema . This hypothesis is supported by scene memory
studies that have shown better long-term memory for
semantically inconsistent versus consistent objects . In Experiment 3, the object label was
presented immediately after the offset of the scene. Thus, if
the inconsistent object advantage in Experiment 3 is due to
memory schema effects, these processes must occur quite
The attention hypothesis.
According to the attention
hypothesis, perceptual encoding of semantically consistent
and inconsistent objects is not influenced directly by scene
context, but, after an object has been identified, attention is
preferentially allocated to objects that violate the constraints
imposed by scene meaning. Attention may be allocated to
inconsistent objects because they are difficult to integrate
into the conceptual representation established by the scene
and require the encoding of more detailed perceptual
information to resolve the contextual discrepancy. The
additional attentional resources devoted to an inconsistent
object would then produce a more complete perceptual
description of that object, leading to better detection perfor-
mance in Experiment 3.
Support for the attention hypothesis comes from eye
movement studies that have measured the allocation of overt
attention in scenes containing semantically consistent and
inconsistent objects. A number of studies have indicated that
once an inconsistent object in a scene is fixated, the eyes
tend to dwell longer on that object compared to consistent
objects . In addition,
Loftus and Mackworth have provided evidence that
the eyes may be drawn to inconsistent objects in the
periphery, though this result has not been replicated with
realistic scene stimuli such as those used in the present study
 . Thus, eye movement
studies suggest that although attention may not be initially
drawn to regions of semantic inconsistency, once such a
region has been attended, attention may be captured and may
dwell longer at that location. This longer attentional dwell
HOLLINGWORTH AND HENDERSON
time, then, could increase the quality of the information
encoded for a semantically inconsistent object.
Conclusion
In summary, we reported evidence from four experiments
showing that when the original object-detection paradigm
was modified to control for participant response biases, and
when other sources of potentially biasing information were
eliminated, no advantage was found for the detection of
semantically consistent versus inconsistent objects. These
results do not support contextual facilitation models of
object identification in scenes , nor do they support the
general hypothesis that object perception is influenced by
the constraints imposed by scene meaning . Instead, the results suggest that object identification
processes may be functionally isolated from scene contex-
tual information. Once an object representation has been
formed, however, the semantic status of the object with the
scene may influence memory for that object or may influ-
ence the allocation of visual/spatial attention, leading to an
enhanced representation of objects inconsistent with the