Copyright © 2017 Vilnius Gediminas Technical University (VGTU) Press
 
TECHNOLOGICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF ECONOMY
ISSN 2029-4913 / eISSN 2029-4921
2017  Volume 23(5): 709–725
doi:10.3846/20294913.2015.1070772
Corresponding author Oscar Claveria
E-mail: 
DATA PRE-PROCESSING FOR NEURAL NETWORK-BASED
FORECASTING: DOES IT REALLY MATTER?
Oscar CLAVERIAa, Enric MONTEb, Salvador TORRAc
aAQR-IREA, Department of Econometrics and Statistics,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
bDepartment of Signal Theory and Communications,
Polytechnic University of Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
cRiskcenter-IREA, Department of Econometrics and Statistics,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Received 10 February 2014; accepted 06 July 2014
Abstract. This study aims to analyze the effects of data pre-processing on the forecasting performance of neural network models. We use three different Artificial Neural Networks techniques
to predict tourist demand: multi-layer perceptron, radial basis function and the Elman neural
networks. The structure of the networks is based on a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
approach. We use official statistical data of inbound international tourism demand to Catalonia
(Spain) and compare the forecasting accuracy of four processing methods for the input vector of the
networks: levels, growth rates, seasonally adjusted levels and seasonally adjusted growth rates. When
comparing the forecasting accuracy of the different inputs for each visitor market and for different
forecasting horizons, we obtain significantly better forecasts with levels than with growth rates. We
also find that seasonally adjusted series significantly improve the forecasting performance of the networks, which hints at the significance of deseasonalizing the time series when using neural networks
with forecasting purposes. These results reveal that, when using seasonal data, neural networks
performance can be significantly improved by working directly with seasonally adjusted levels.
Keywords: artificial neural networks, forecasting, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), seasonality, detrending, tourism demand, multilayer perceptron, radial basis function, Elman.
JEL Classification: L83, C53, C45, R11.
Introduction
International tourism has become one of today’s fastest growing industries. Tourism accounts for almost 10% of total international trade and plays a fundamental role in the longrun economic development of many regions . To
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
achieve a sustainable tourism model, policy makers and professionals need more accurate
predictions of the number of tourist arrivals at the destination level. Many authors have
acknowledged the importance of applying new approaches to tourism demand forecasting
in order to improve the accuracy of the methods of analysis . The availability of more advanced forecasting techniques has led to a growing interest in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) models to the detriment of time series models
 and causal econometric models . Some
of the new AI based techniques are fuzzy time series models , genetic algorithms , expert systems and
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) . Recent research
has shown the suitability of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for dealing with tourism
demand forecasting .
In spite of the successful use of ANNs for time series forecasting, very few studies
compare the accuracy of different NN architectures for tourism demand forecasting at a
regional level. The present study deals with tourist arrivals to Catalonia. Barcelona is the
capital of Catalonia, and the most important destination in Spain. After France and the
United States, Spain is the third most important destination of the world with 60 million
tourist arrivals in 2013. Catalonia received more than 15 million tourists in 2013, an 8%
raise over the previous year. Tourism is one of the fastest growing industries in Catalonia,
accounting for 12% of GDP and providing employment for 15% of the working population.
These figures show the importance of accurate forecasts of tourism volume at the destination level for tourism planning.
The fact that tourism data are characterised by strong seasonal patterns and volatility,
make it a particularly interesting field in which to apply different types of ANN architectures. The raw time series of tourism data usually require significant pre-processing in order to be used for forecasting purposes. While the effects of data pre- processing on forecast
accuracy have been widely studied in the context of time series analysis, there are very few
studies of tourism demand with neural networks . Empirically, ANNs have
shown to be suited to forecast nonlinear time series. Nevertheless, studies reach different
conclusions on how to deal with seasonal time series . While Nelson
et al. and Zhang and Kline concluded that in order to obtain a better ANN
forecasting, the seasonal effect should be removed from the raw data, Franses and Draisma
 and Alon et al. found that ANNs are capable of modelling the seasonal and
trend effects in data structure without removing the seasonal effects.
The objective of this study is to investigate the effects of data pre-processing in the
forecast performance of ANNs when using seasonal time series, extending to tourist demand forecasting the results of previous research on economics. Given that univariate
specifications are limited and unable to capture dynamic interrelationships between variables, we analyze whether a multivariate setting provides useful for forecasting purposes.
With this aim, we implement a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) approach (i.e.
each output corresponds to a given country) to predict international tourism demand to
Catalonia (Spain) from all countries of origin. We compare the forecasting performance
of three different ANN architectures: multi-layer perceptron (MLP), radial basis function
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
(RBF) and the Elman networks. To analyze the effects of data pre-processing on forecast
accuracy for the different ANN architectures, we design the experiment using alternative
approaches for data pre-processing: levels, growth rates, seasonally adjusted levels and seasonally adjusted growth rates. To assess the value of the different models we compute the
Diebold-Mariano (DM) test for significant differences between each two competing series.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to analyze the forecasting performance of MIMO
ANNs for tourism data.
The structure of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 briefly reviews the literature
on tourism demand forecasting with ANNs. In section 2, we present the different NN
architectures used in the analysis. In the following section we explain how to design the
experiment and implement the models. Data is presented in the 4th section, where the
results of the out-of-sample forecasting competition are discussed. Finally, a summary and
a discussion of the implications are given in the last Section.
1. Artificial Neural Networks in tourism demand forecasting
ANNs are models capable of identifying temporal patterns from historical data, capturing
functional relationships among the data when the underlying process is unknown. The data
generating process of tourist arrivals is too rich to be specified by a single linear algorithm,
which might not be able to take into account saturation or exponential effects, interactions
between different time series, etc. This explains the great interest that ANNs have aroused
for tourism demand forecasting. Each type of network is suited to a combination of a learning paradigm, a learning rule and a learning algorithm (back-propagation, etc.). The main
learning paradigms are supervised learning and non-supervised learning. In supervised
learning, the weights are adjusted to approximate the network output to a target value for
each pattern of entry; while in non-supervised learning, the subjacent structure of data
patterns is explored so as to organize such patterns according to a distance criterion. MLP
networks are supervised learning models, while RBF networks, combine both learning
methods. The combination of both learning methods implies that part of the weights is determined by a supervised process while the rest are determined by non-supervised learning.
ANNs can also be classified into feed-forward and recurrent networks regarding the
connecting patterns of the different layers. The most widely used feed-forward topology in
tourism demand forecasting is the MLP network . RBF networks are a special class of multi-layer feed-forward
architecture with two layers of processing. In contrast to MLP networks, RBF networks are
based in local approximations of the functions by means of centroids. Unlike feed-forward
networks, recurrent neural networks are models that allow for a feedback of the past states
of the network. While a feed-forward network propagates data linearly from input to output, recurrent networks also propagate data from later processing stages to earlier stages. A
special class of recurrent network is the Elman network. Whilst MLP neural networks are
increasingly used with forecasting purposes, RBF and the Elman neural networks have been
scarcely used in tourism demand forecasting. Cang has recently combined MLP,
RBF and SVM forecasts to predict UK inbound tourist arrivals. Cho used the Elman
architecture to predict the number of arrivals from different countries to Hong Kong.
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
In recent years, several studies have been published on tourism in Spain at a regional
level , but very few concerning tourism
demand forecasting. Palmer et al. designed a MLP neural network to forecast tourism expenditure in the Balearic Islands. Medeiros et al. developed a NN-GARCH
model to estimate demand for international tourism also in the Balearic Islands. Bermúdez
et al. applied a multivariate exponential smoothing model, and by means of a Bayesian approach calculate prediction intervals for hotel occupancy in three provinces in Spain.
Claveria and Torra compared the forecasting accuracy of time series models to that
of MLP networks in Catalonia. In this study we analyze the effects of data pre-processing
on the forecasting accuracy of three alternative ANN architectures.
2. Artificial Neural Network models for the forecasting competition
We use three ANN models: MLP, RBF and Elman networks. Equations (1), (2) and (3)
respectively describe the input/output relationship of the three architectures:
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
Where yt is the output vector of the MLP at time t; g is the nonlinear function of the
neurons in the hidden layer; xt–i is the input vector at time t – i, where i stands for the
number of lags that are used to introduce the context of the actual observation (which is set
to one in this study); q is the number of neurons in the hidden layer; jij are the weights of
neuron j connecting the input with the hidden layer; and bj are the weights connecting the
output of the neuron j at the hidden layer with the output neuron. In the RBF specification
gj is the activation function, which usually has a Gaussian shape; mj is the centroid vector
for neuron j; and the spread sj is a scalar that measures the width over the input space
of the Gaussian function and it can be defined as the area of influence of neuron j in the
space of the inputs. In the Elman network, zj,t is the output of the hidden layer neuron j at
the moment t and dij are the weights that correspond to the output layer and connect the
activation at moment t. Further information about these three ANN architectures can be
found in Bishop and Haykin .
The models used for the forecasting comparison have two different kinds of parameters:
the weights and the hyperparameters related to each topology (in the case of the RBF, the
spread of each radial basis). The hyperparameters are determined by the performance of
the networks on cross validation. The estimation of the parameters can be done by means
of different algorithms, which are either based on gradient search, line search or quasi
Newton search. In this paper we use a variant of the quasi Newton search called Levenberg-Marquardt.
Another aspect to be taken into account is the fact that the training is done by iteratively estimating the value of the parameters by local improvements of the cost function.
To avoid the possibility that the search for the optimum value of the parameters finishes
in a local minimum, we use a multi-starting technique that initializes the neural network
several times for different initial random values and returns the best result on a validation
database. The values in for the number of neurons in the hidden layer range from 5 to
25, and the margin for the spread of the radial basis from 0.1 to 2 with increments of 0.2.
Note that the complexity of the search space is low, so we chose an enumeration strategy
which finds the best combination. The specific values of these parameters depend on the
forecasting horizon and the algorithm. As the forecasting horizon increases, the number of
neurons needed in the hidden layer raises and varies between 10 and 20.
In order to assure a correct performance of RBF networks, the number of centroids and
the spread of each centroid have to be selected before the training phase. In this study, the
training is done by adding the centroids iteratively with the spread parameter fixed. Then a
regularized linear regression is estimated to compute the connections between the hidden
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
and the output layers. Finally, the performance of the network is assessed on the validation
data set. This process is repeated until the performance on the validation database ceases to
decrease. The hyperparameter sigma is selected before determining the topology of the network and is tuned outside the training phase. The optimal value depends on the Euclidean
distance that is computed inside each neuron. Values of the sigma parameter vary from 0.8
to 1.3 depending on the experiment, and are also dependent on the horizon of the forecast,
possibly due to the uncertainty that arises when the forecast horizon increases to 6 months.
In the case of the Elman networks, the training is done by back-propagation through
time, which is a generalization of back-propagation for feed-forward networks. The parameters of the Elman neural network are estimated by minimizing an error cost function. In
order to minimize total error, gradient descent is used to change each weight in proportion
to its derivative with respect to the error, provided the nonlinear activation functions are
differentiable. A major problem with gradient descent for standard recurrent architectures
is that error gradients vanish exponentially quickly with the size of the time lag.
3. Design of the experiment
By means of the Johansen test (see Table 1), we find a correlated evolution between all
different visitor markets, which leads us to apply a MIMO approach to obtain forecasts
of tourism demand for different forecast horizons. Given that univariate specifications are
limited and unable to capture dynamic interrelationships between different countries of
origin, we use a multivariate approach, in which information about all visitor markets to
a destination is simultaneously used. This is the first study to analyze the forecasting performance of ANNs in a multivariate setting that allows incorporating cross-correlations
between the evolutions of tourist arrivals from different countries to a specific destination.
We carry out an out-of-sample forecasting comparison between three different ANN
architectures (MLP, RBF and Elman) using a MIMO setting. While a single-input single-output (SISO) approach requires implementing the experiment for each visitor country,
a MIMO approach allows to simultaneously obtaining forecasts for each visitor market.
A MIMO approach seems especially suited for this particular data set in which seasonal
Table 1. Number of cointegrating relations by model
Type of model
Assume no deterministic
trend in data
Allow for linear
deterministic trend in data
Allow for quadratic
deterministic trend in data
No intercept
Intercept and trend
No test VAR
No intercept
Linear trend
Eigenvalue
Notes: Estimation period 2001:01–2012:07. Critical values based on MacKinnon et al. .
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
adjusted levels of tourist arrivals from all the different countries of origin share a common
stochastic trend.
Multivariate approaches to tourist demand forecasting are few and have yielded mixed
results. Athanasopoulos and Silva compared the forecasting accuracy of exponential smoothing methods in a multivariate setting against univariate alternatives. They used
international tourist arrivals to Australia and New Zealand and found that multivariate
models improved on forecast accuracy over the univariate alternatives. Tsui et al. 
estimated multivariate ARIMA models (ARIMAX) with explanatory variables to forecast
airport passenger traffic for Hong Kong and found similar forecasting results to SARIMA
models. Contrary to what could be expected, Du Preez and Witt found that multivariate time series models did not generate more accurate forecasts than univariate time
series models.
Following Bishop and Ripley , we divide the collected data into three sets:
training, validation and test sets. This division is done in order to asses the performance of
the network on unseen data. The partition between train and test sets is done sequentially
in order to maximize the size of the training database. As the prediction advances, forecasts
are incorporated to the training database, successively increasing its size. The effect of this
strategy is to improve the training of the network as the prediction advances, thus refining
the performance at the end of the test phase.
Based on these considerations, the first sixty monthly observations are selected as the initial training set, the next thirty-six as the validation set and the last 20% as the test set. Due to the large
number of possible networks’ configurations, the validation set is used for determining the
following aspects of the neural networks:
a. The topology of the networks.
b. The number of epocs for the training of the MLP/Elman neural networks. The iterations in the gradient search are stopped when the error on the validation set
increases.
c. The number of neurons in the hidden layer for the RBF. The sequential increase in
the number of neurons at the hidden layer is stopped when the error on the validation increases.
d. The value of the spread sj in the RBF NN.
To make the system robust to local minima, we apply the multistarting technique, which
consists on repeating each training phase several times. The benefits of the multistarting
technique derive from the fact that it is a technique for solving the problem that arises from
using a gradient search for optimizing the parameters of the neural network. The use of
gradient search yields solutions that might be a local minimum of the cost function. These
local minima consist of flat zones of the cost function where the gradient is near zero, and
therefore the optimization algorithm stops the search. As the geometry of the cost functions is difficult to analyze, one strategy to overcome the problem is to try different initial
values, selecting the result with the best performance on the validation database. In our
case, we repeat the training three times so as to obtain a low value of the performance error.
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
The selection criterion for the topology and the parameters is the performance on the
validation set. The results that are presented correspond to the selection of the best topology, the best spread in the case of the RBF neural networks, and the best training strategy in the case of the Elman neural networks. Forecasts for 1, 3 and 6 months ahead are
computed in a recursive way. All neural networks are implemented using Matlab™ and its
Neural Networks toolbox.
4. Results of the out-of-sample forecasting competition
In this section we implement a MIMO approach to predict arrivals to Catalonia from
the different visitor countries. We use the number of tourists (first destinations) provided
by the Statistical Institute of Catalonia (IDESCAT). Data include the monthly number
of tourists arriving from each visitor market over the time period 2001:01 to 2012:07. In
Figure 1 we present the evolution of tourist arrivals to Catalonia. Tabulation of the data is
presented in Table 2. It can be seen that the first four visitor markets (France, Belgium and
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and Germany) account for more than half of the
total number of tourist arrivals to Catalonia.
We compare the forecasting performance of three different MIMO ANN architectures:
MLP, RBF and the Elman recursive neural network. We repeat the experiment using alternative approaches for data pre-processing: levels, growth rates, seasonally adjusted levels
and seasonally adjusted growth rates. Seasonally adjusted series are obtained using a Census X12 filter with a multiplicative decomposition. Forecasts for 1, 3 and 6 months ahead
are generated in a recursive way . To summarize this information we compute the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) statistic of forecast accuracy.
The results of our multiple-step-ahead forecasting experiment are shown in Tables 3, 4 and
5. We have also used the DM test (Table 6) to obtain significant differences between each
two competing series: levels vs. seasonally adjusted levels, rates vs. seasonally adjusted rates
and seasonally adjusted levels vs. seasonally adjusted rates.
Fig. 1. Level of tourists coming to Catalonia
Source: compiled by the author.
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
When analysing the forecast accuracy of the different ANN models, MLP and RBF
networks show lower MAPE values than the Elman networks. MLP and RBF networks
outperform the Elman networks in most countries and forecasting horizons. A possible
explanation for this result is the length of the time series used in the analysis. The fact that
the number of training epocs had to be low in order to maintain the stability of the network
suggests that this architecture requires longer time series. For long training phases, the
gradient sometimes diverged. The worse forecasting performance of the Elman neural networks compared to that of MLP and RBF architectures indicates that the feedback topology
of the Elman network could not capture the specificities of the time series. Conversely, RBF
networks display the lowest MAPE values in most countries, especially for growth rates.
When comparing the different pre-processing options, we obtain the best forecasting
performance with raw data, especially for seasonally adjusted levels. In this context all
three architectures show low MAPE values. The relative performance of MLP and Elman
networks compared to RBF worsens when using growth rates, although the lowest MAPE
is obtained with RBF networks in most cases. When using levels we also observe that the
forecasting accuracy for longer time horizons improves in some countries, showing that
working with levels is more indicated for longer term predictions.
When testing for significant differences between each two competing series (Table 6),
we obtain better forecasts with seasonally adjusted levels than with levels, although not
always significant. The only exception is Russia, the UK and Other countries for 6-month
ahead forecasts. We also obtain significantly better forecasts with seasonally adjusted rates
than with growth rates. The only exception being the predictions for longer forecast horizons in Russia and Other countries. Finally, when comparing seasonally adjusted levels
and seasonally adjusted growth rates, with the exception of Russia, we always obtain significantly better forecasts with seasonally adjusted levels. These results show the suitability
of deseasonalizing but not detrending for neural network forecasting with time series, especially for the longest forecasting horizons.
Table 2. Distribution of the frequency of tourist arrivals
Tourist arrivals
% cumulated
Belgium and the Netherlands
United Kingdom
US and Japan
Northern countries
Switzerland
Other countries
Source: Compiled by the author, using data from the Statistical Institute of Catalonia (IDESCAT).
Tourist arrivals expressed in thousands.
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
Table 3. MAPE Levels vs. SA Levels
Levels (original series)
Levels (seasonally adjusted)
United Kingdom
Belgium and the NL
US and Japan
Northern countries
Switzerland
Other countries
Note: Italics: best model for each country. * Best model.
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
Table 4. MAPE Rates vs. SA Rates
United Kingdom
Belgium and the NL
US and Japan
Northern countries
Switzerland
Other countries
Note: Italics: best model for each country. * Best model.
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
Table 5. MAPE SA Levels vs. SA Rates
Levels (seasonally adjusted)
Rates (seasonally adjusted)
United Kingdom
Belgium and the NL
US and Japan
Northern countries
Switzerland
Other countries
Note: Italics: best model for each country. * Best model.
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
Table 6. Diebold-Mariano loss-differential test statistic for predictive accuracy
Levels vs. Seasonally
adjusted levels
Growth rates vs. Seasonally
adjusted rates
Seasonally adjusted levels
vs. SA growth rates
Belgium and the NL
US and Japan
Northern countries
Switzerland
Other countries
Notes: Diebold-Mariano test statistic with NW estimator. Null hypothesis: the difference between the
two competing series is non-significant. A negative sign of the statistic implies that the second model
has bigger forecasting errors. * Significant at the 5% level.
O. Claveria et al. Data pre-processing for neural network-based forecasting ...
In contrast to previous studies , we find that ANNs produce significantly more accurate forecasts when built with
deseasonalized data. Our finding on the suitability of working with seasonally adjusted levels for neural network forecasting confirms previous research by Zhang and Kline ,
Zhang and Qi , Virili and Freisleben and Nelson et al. . The fact that
we do not find evidence in favour of detrending could partly be explained by the fact that
the data used for the analysis do not present a strong trend component.
Conclusions
Tourism demand forecasting has become essential in one of today’s fastest growing industries. Accurate forecasts of tourist arrivals are crucial to develop a sustainable tourist
model at the destination level. In this context, Artificial Neural Networks are a very useful
technique for forecasting purposes. This study analyzes the effects of data pre-processing
in the forecast performance of ANNs when using seasonal time series. This is an important
issue in order to improve the accuracy in neural network-based time series forecasting.
We implement a multiple-input multiple-output approach to predict international tourism
demand in order to compare the forecasting performance of three different neural network
architectures (multi-layer perceptron, radial basis function and the Elman neural network).
We repeat the experiment using alternative approaches for input pre-processing (levels,
growth rates, seasonally adjusted levels and seasonally adjusted growth rates) to analyze
the effects of data pre-processing on the forecast accuracy of the different ANN models. To
assess the differences between each two competing series we compute the Diebold-Mariano
loss-differential test statistic for predictive accuracy.
When comparing the forecasting accuracy of the different input pre-processing techniques for each visitor market and for different forecasting horizons, we obtain significantly
better forecasts with levels than with growth rates. We also find that seasonally adjusted
series significantly improve the forecasting performance of the networks, indicating the
importance of deseasonalizing when using neural networks for forecasting purposes. These
results reveal that, when using seasonal data, neural networks performance can be significantly improved by working directly with seasonally adjusted levels. When comparing
the forecasting accuracy of the different techniques, we find that multi-layer perceptron
and radial basis function ANNs outperform the Elman networks. These results suggest
that issues related with the divergence of the Elman neural network may arise when using
dynamic networks with forecasting purposes.
The forecasting out-of-sample comparison reveals the suitability of applying multi-layer
perceptron and radial basis function neural networks models for tourism demand forecasting. A question to be considered in further research is whether the implementation
of supervised learning models such as support vector regressions, or the combination of
the forecasts of different topologies, may improve the forecasting performance of practical
neural network-based tourism demand forecasting.
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 2017, 23(5): 709–725
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Editor and two anonymous referees for their useful comments
and suggestions.