Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning by Context Prediction
Carl Doersch1,2
Abhinav Gupta1
Alexei A. Efros2
1 School of Computer Science
2 Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
University of California, Berkeley
This work explores the use of spatial context as a source
of free and plentiful supervisory signal for training a rich
visual representation. Given only a large, unlabeled image
collection, we extract random pairs of patches from each
image and train a convolutional neural net to predict the position of the second patch relative to the ﬁrst. We argue that
doing well on this task requires the model to learn to recognize objects and their parts. We demonstrate that the feature representation learned using this within-image context
indeed captures visual similarity across images. For example, this representation allows us to perform unsupervised
visual discovery of objects like cats, people, and even birds
from the Pascal VOC 2011 detection dataset. Furthermore,
we show that the learned ConvNet can be used in the R-
CNN framework and provides a signiﬁcant boost over
a randomly-initialized ConvNet, resulting in state-of-theart performance among algorithms which use only Pascalprovided training set annotations.
1. Introduction
Recently, new computer vision methods have leveraged
large datasets of millions of labeled examples to learn rich,
high-performance visual representations . Yet efforts
to scale these methods to truly Internet-scale datasets (i.e.
hundreds of billions of images) are hampered by the sheer
expense of the human annotation required. A natural way
to address this difﬁculty would be to employ unsupervised
learning, which aims to use data without any annotation.
Unfortunately, despite several decades of sustained effort,
unsupervised methods have not yet been shown to extract
useful information from large collections of full-sized, real
images. After all, without labels, it is not even clear what
should be represented.
How can one write an objective
function to encourage a representation to capture, for example, objects, if none of the objects are labeled?
Interestingly, in the text domain, context has proven to
be a powerful source of automatic supervisory signal for
learning representations . Given a large text
corpus, the idea is to train a model that maps each word
to a feature vector, such that it is easy to predict the words
Question 1:
Question 2:
Figure 1. Our task for learning patch representations involves randomly sampling a patch (blue) and then one of eight possible
neighbors (red). Can you guess the spatial conﬁguration for the
two pairs of patches? Note that the task is much easier once you
have recognized the object!
Answer key: Q1: Bottom right Q2: Top center
in the context (i.e., a few words before and/or after) given
the vector. This converts an apparently unsupervised problem (ﬁnding a good similarity metric between words) into
a “self-supervised” one: learning a function from a given
word to the words surrounding it. Here the context prediction task is just a “pretext” to force the model to learn a
good word embedding, which, in turn, has been shown to
be useful in a number of real tasks, such as semantic word
similarity .
Our paper aims to provide a similar “self-supervised”
formulation for image data: a supervised task involving predicting the context for a patch. Our task is illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. We sample random pairs of patches in one of
eight spatial conﬁgurations, and present each pair to a machine learner, providing no information about the patches’
original position within the image. The algorithm must then
guess the position of one patch relative to the other. Our
underlying hypothesis is that doing well on this task requires understanding scenes and objects, i.e. a good visual
representation for this task will need to extract objects and
their parts in order to reason about their relative spatial location. “Objects,” after all, consist of multiple parts that
can be detected independently of one another, and which
 
occur in a speciﬁc spatial conﬁguration (if there is no speciﬁc conﬁguration of the parts, then it is “stuff” ). We
present a ConvNet-based approach to learn a visual representation from this task. We demonstrate that the resulting
visual representation is good for both object detection, providing a signiﬁcant boost on PASCAL VOC 2007 compared
to learning from scratch, as well as for unsupervised object
discovery / visual data mining. This means, surprisingly,
that our representation generalizes across images, despite
being trained using an objective function that operates on a
single image at a time. That is, instance-level supervision
appears to improve performance on category-level tasks.
2. Related Work
One way to think of a good image representation is as
the latent variables of an appropriate generative model. An
ideal generative model of natural images would both generate images according to their natural distribution, and be
concise in the sense that it would seek common causes
for different images and share information between them.
However, inferring the latent structure given an image is intractable for even relatively simple models. To deal with
these computational issues, a number of works, such as
the wake-sleep algorithm , contrastive divergence ,
deep Boltzmann machines , and variational Bayesian
methods use sampling to perform approximate inference.
Generative models have shown promising performance on smaller datasets such as handwritten digits , but none have proven effective for
high-resolution natural images.
Unsupervised representation learning can also be formulated as learning an embedding (i.e. a feature vector for
each image) where images that are semantically similar are
close, while semantically different ones are far apart. One
way to build such a representation is to create a supervised
“pretext” task such that an embedding which solves the task
will also be useful for other real-world tasks. For example, denoising autoencoders use reconstruction from
noisy data as a pretext task: the algorithm must connect
images to other images with similar objects to tell the difference between noise and signal. Sparse autoencoders also
use reconstruction as a pretext task, along with a sparsity
penalty , and such autoencoders may be stacked to form
a deep representation . (however, only was successfully applied to full-sized images, requiring a million
CPU hours to discover just three objects). We believe that
current reconstruction-based algorithms struggle with lowlevel phenomena, like stochastic textures, making it hard to
even measure whether a model is generating well.
Another pretext task is “context prediction.” A strong
tradition for this kind of task already exists in the text domain, where “skip-gram” models have been shown to
generate useful word representations. The idea is to train a
Figure 2. The algorithm receives two patches in one of these eight
possible spatial arrangements, without any context, and must then
classify which conﬁguration was sampled.
model (e.g. a deep network) to predict, from a single word,
the n preceding and n succeeding words. In principle, similar reasoning could be applied in the image domain, a kind
of visual “ﬁll in the blank” task, but, again, one runs into the
problem of determining whether the predictions themselves
are correct , unless one cares about predicting only very
low-level features . To address this, predicts
the appearance of an image region by consensus voting of
the transitive nearest neighbors of its surrounding regions.
Our previous work explicitly formulates a statistical
test to determine whether the data is better explained by a
prediction or by a low-level null hypothesis model.
The key problem that these approaches must address is
that predicting pixels is much harder than predicting words,
due to the huge variety of pixels that can arise from the same
semantic object. In the text domain, one interesting idea is
to switch from a pure prediction task to a discrimination
task . In this case, the pretext task is to discriminate
true snippets of text from the same snippets where a word
has been replaced at random. A direct extension of this to
2D might be to discriminate between real images vs. images where one patch has been replaced by a random patch
from elsewhere in the dataset. However, such a task would
be trivial, since discriminating low-level color statistics and
lighting would be enough. To make the task harder and
more high-level, in this paper, we instead classify between
multiple possible conﬁgurations of patches sampled from
the same image, which means they will share lighting and
color statistics, as shown on Figure 2.
Another line of work in unsupervised learning from images aims to discover object categories using hand-crafted
features and various forms of clustering (e.g. 
learned a generative model over bags of visual words). Such
representations lose shape information, and will readily dis-
cover clusters of, say, foliage. A few subsequent works have
attempted to use representations more closely tied to shape
 , but relied on contour extraction, which is difﬁcult
in complex images. Many other approaches 
focus on deﬁning similarity metrics which can be used in
more standard clustering algorithms;
 , for instance,
re-casts the problem as frequent itemset mining. Geometry may also be used to for verifying links between images , although this can fail for deformable objects.
Video can provide another cue for representation learning. For most scenes, the identity of objects remains unchanged even as appearance changes with time. This kind
of temporal coherence has a long history in visual learning
literature , and contemporaneous work shows strong
improvements on modern detection datasets .
Finally, our work is related to a line of research on discriminative patch mining , which has
emphasized weak supervision as a means of object discovery. Like the current work, they emphasize the utility of
learning representations of patches (i.e. object parts) before
learning full objects and scenes, and argue that scene-level
labels can serve as a pretext task. For example, trains
detectors to be sensitive to different geographic locales, but
the actual goal is to discover speciﬁc elements of architectural style.
3. Learning Visual Context Prediction
We aim to learn an image representation for our pretext task, i.e., predicting the relative position of patches
within an image. We employ Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets), which are well known to learn complex
image representations with minimal human feature design.
Building a ConvNet that can predict a relative offset for a
pair of patches is, in principle, straightforward: the network
must feed the two input patches through several convolution layers, and produce an output that assigns a probability
to each of the eight spatial conﬁgurations (Figure 2) that
might have been sampled (i.e. a softmax output). Note,
however, that we ultimately wish to learn a feature embedding for individual patches, such that patches which are visually similar (across different images) would be close in
the embedding space.
To achieve this, we use a late-fusion architecture shown
in Figure 3: a pair of AlexNet-style architectures that
process each patch separately, until a depth analogous to
fc6 in AlexNet, after which point the representations are
fused. For the layers that process only one of the patches,
weights are tied between both sides of the network, such
that the same fc6-level embedding function is computed for
both patches. Because there is limited capacity for joint
reasoning—i.e., only two layers receive input from both
patches—we expect the network to perform the bulk of the
pool1 (3x3,96,2)
pool1 (3x3,96,2)
pool2 (3x3,384,2)
pool2 (3x3,384,2)
fc6 (4096)
fc6 (4096)
conv5 (3x3,256,1)
conv5 (3x3,256,1)
conv4 (3x3,384,1)
conv4 (3x3,384,1)
conv3 (3x3,384,1)
conv3 (3x3,384,1)
conv2 (5x5,384,2)
conv2 (5x5,384,2)
conv1 (11x11,96,4)
conv1 (11x11,96,4)
fc7 (4096)
fc8 (4096)
pool5 (3x3,256,2)
pool5 (3x3,256,2)
Figure 3. Our architecture for pair classiﬁcation. Dotted lines indicate shared weights. ‘conv’ stands for a convolution layer, ‘fc’
stands for a fully-connected one, ‘pool’ is a max-pooling layer, and
‘LRN’ is a local response normalization layer. Numbers in parentheses are kernel size, number of outputs, and stride (fc layers have
only a number of outputs). The LRN parameters follow . All
conv and fc layers are followed by ReLU nonlinearities, except fc9
which feeds into a softmax classiﬁer.
semantic reasoning for each patch separately. When designing the network, we followed AlexNet where possible.
To obtain training examples given an image, we sample
the ﬁrst patch uniformly, without any reference to image
content. Given the position of the ﬁrst patch, we sample the
second patch randomly from the eight possible neighboring
locations as in Figure 2.
3.1. Avoiding “trivial” solutions
When designing a pretext task, care must be taken to ensure that the task forces the network to extract the desired
information (high-level semantics, in our case), without taking “trivial” shortcuts.
In our case, low-level cues like
boundary patterns or textures continuing between patches
could potentially serve as such a shortcut. Hence, for the
relative prediction task, it was important to include a gap
between patches (in our case, approximately half the patch
width). Even with the gap, it is possible that long lines spanning neighboring patches could could give away the correct
answer. Therefore, we also randomly jitter each patch location by up to 7 pixels (see Figure 2).
However, even these precautions are not enough: we
were surprised to ﬁnd that, for some images, another trivial solution exists. We traced the problem to an unexpected
culprit: chromatic aberration. Chromatic aberration arises
from differences in the way the lens focuses light at different wavelengths. In some cameras, one color channel (commonly green) is shrunk toward the image center relative to
the others [5, p. 76]. A ConvNet, it turns out, can learn to localize a patch relative to the lens itself (see Section 4.2) sim-
Random Initialization
ImageNet AlexNet
Figure 4. Examples of patch clusters obtained by nearest neighbors. The query patch is shown on the far left. Matches are for three different
features: fc6 features from a random initialization of our architecture, AlexNet fc7 after training on labeled ImageNet, and the fc6 features
learned from our method. Queries were chosen from 1000 randomly-sampled patches. The top group is examples where our algorithm
performs well; for the middle AlexNet outperforms our approach; and for the bottom all three features work well.
ply by detecting the separation between green and magenta
(red + blue). Once the network learns the absolute location
on the lens, solving the relative location task becomes trivial. To deal with this problem, we experimented with two
types of pre-processing. One is to shift green and magenta
toward gray (‘projection’). Speciﬁcally, let a = [−1, 2, −1]
(the ’green-magenta color axis’ in RGB space). We then
deﬁne B = I −aT a/(aaT ), which is a matrix that subtracts the projection of a color onto the green-magenta color
axis. We multiply every pixel value by B. An alternative approach is to randomly drop 2 of the 3 color channels from
each patch (‘color dropping’), replacing the dropped colors
with Gaussian noise (standard deviation ∼1/100 the standard deviation of the remaining channel). For qualitative
results, we show the ‘color-dropping’ approach, but found
both performed similarly; for the object detection results,
we show both results.
Implementation Details: We use Caffe , and train on
the ImageNet 2012 training set ( 1.3M images), using
only the images and discarding the labels. First, we resize
each image to between 150K and 450K total pixels, preserving the aspect-ratio. From these images, we sample patches
at resolution 96-by-96. For computational efﬁciency, we
only sample the patches from a grid like pattern, such that
each sampled patch can participate in as many as 8 separate
pairings. We allow a gap of 48 pixels between the sampled
patches in the grid, but also jitter the location of each patch
in the grid by −7 to 7 pixels in each direction. We preprocess patches by (1) mean subtraction (2) projecting or dropping colors (see above), and (3) randomly downsampling
some patches to as little as 100 total pixels, and then upsampling it, to build robustness to pixelation. When applying
Initial layout, with sampled patches in red
Image layout
is discarded We can recover image layout automatically Cannot recover layout with color removed
Figure 5. We trained a network to predict the absolute (x, y) coordinates of randomly sampled patches. Far left: input image. Center left:
extracted patches. Center right: the location the trained network predicts for each patch shown on the left. Far right: the same result after
our color projection scheme. Note that the far right patches are shown after color projection; the operation’s effect is almost unnoticeable.
simple SGD to train the network, we found that the network
predictions would degenerate to a uniform prediction over
the 8 categories, with all activations for fc6 and fc7 collapsing to 0. This meant that the optimization became permanently stuck in a saddle point where it ignored the input
from the lower layers (which helped minimize the variance
of the ﬁnal output), and therefore that the net could not tune
the lower-level features and escape the saddle point. Hence,
our ﬁnal implementation employs batch normalization ,
without the scale and shift (γ and β), which forces the network activations to vary across examples. We also ﬁnd that
high momentum values (e.g. .999) accelerated learning. For
experiments, we use a ConvNet trained on a K40 GPU for
approximately four weeks.
4. Experiments
We ﬁrst demonstrate the network has learned to associate
semantically similar patches, using simple nearest-neighbor
matching. We then apply the trained network in two domains. First, we use the model as “pre-training” for a standard vision task with only limited training data: speciﬁcally,
we use the VOC 2007 object detection. Second, we evaluate visual data mining, where the goal is to start with an
unlabeled image collection and discover object classes. Finally, we analyze the performance on the layout prediction
“pretext task” to see how much is left to learn from this supervisory signal.
4.1. Nearest Neighbors
Recall our intuition that training should assign similar
representations to semantically similar patches. In this section, our goal is to understand which patches our network
considers similar. We begin by sampling random 96x96
patches, which we represent using fc6 features (i.e. we remove fc7 and higher shown in Figure 3, and use only one
of the two stacks). We ﬁnd nearest neighbors using normalized correlation of these features. Results for some patches
(selected out of 1000 random queries) are shown in Figure 4. For comparison, we repeated the experiment using
fc7 features from AlexNet trained on ImageNet (obtained
by upsampling the patches), and using fc6 features from our
architecture but without any training (random weights inipool5
conv6 (3x3,4096,1)
conv6b (1x1,1024,1)
fc7 (4096)
Image (227x227)
pool6 (3x3,1024,2)
Figure 6. Our architecture for Pascal
VOC detection. Layers from conv1
through pool5 are copied from our
patch-based network (Figure 3). The
new ’conv6’ layer is created by converting the fc6 layer into a convolution layer. Kernel sizes, output units,
and stride are given in parentheses, as
in Figure 3.
tialization). As shown in Figure 4, the matches returned by
our feature often capture the semantic information that we
are after, matching AlexNet in terms of semantic content (in
some cases, e.g. the car wheel, our matches capture pose
better). Interestingly, in a few cases, random (untrained)
ConvNet also does reasonably well.
4.2. Aside: Learnability of Chromatic Aberration
We noticed in early nearest-neighbor experiments that
some patches retrieved match patches from the same absolute location in the image, regardless of content, because those patches displayed similar aberration. To further
demonstrate this phenomenon, we trained a network to predict the absolute (x, y) coordinates of patches sampled from
ImageNet. While the overall accuracy of this regressor is
not very high, it does surprisingly well for some images:
for the top 10% of images, the average (root-mean-square)
error is .255, while chance performance (always predicting the image center) yields a RMSE of .371. Figure 5
shows one such result. Applying the proposed “projection”
scheme increases the error on the top 10% of images to .321.
4.3. Object Detection
Previous work on the Pascal VOC challenge has
shown that pre-training on ImageNet (i.e., training a ConvNet to solve the ImageNet challenge) and then “ﬁnetuning” the network (i.e. re-training the ImageNet model
for PASCAL data) provides a substantial boost over training
on the Pascal training set alone . However, as far as
we are aware, no works have shown that unsupervised pretraining on images can provide such a performance boost,
no matter how much data is used.
Since we are already using a ConvNet, we adopt the cur-
VOC-2007 Test
DPM-v5 
 w/o context
Regionlets 
Scratch-R-CNN 
Scratch-Ours
Ours-projection
Ours-color-dropping
Ours-Yahoo100m
ImageNet-R-CNN 
K-means-rescale 
Ours-rescale 
ImageNet-rescale 
VGG-K-means-rescale
VGG-Ours-rescale
VGG-ImageNet-rescale
Table 1. Mean Average Precision on VOC-2007.
rent state-of-the-art R-CNN pipeline . R-CNN works
on object proposals that have been resized to 227x227. Our
algorithm, however, is aimed at 96x96 patches. We ﬁnd that
downsampling the proposals to 96x96 loses too much detail.
Instead, we adopt the architecture shown in Figure 6. As
above, we use only one stack from Figure 3. Second, we resize the convolution layers to operate on inputs of 227x227.
This results in a pool5 that is 7x7 spatially, so we must convert the previous fc6 layer into a convolution layer (which
we call conv6) following . Note our conv6 layer has
4096 channels, where each unit connects to a 3x3 region
of pool5. A conv layer with 4096 channels would be quite
expensive to connect directly to a 4096-dimensional fullyconnected layer. Hence, we add another layer after conv6
(called conv6b), using a 1x1 kernel, which reduces the dimensionality to 1024 channels (and adds a nonlinearity).
Finally, we feed the outputs through a pooling layer to a
fully connected layer (fc7) which in turn connects to a ﬁnal fc8 layer which feeds into the softmax. We ﬁne-tune
this network according to the procedure described in 
(conv6b, fc7, and fc8 start with random weights), and use
fc7 as the ﬁnal representation. We do not use boundingbox regression, and take the appropriate results from 
Table 1 shows our results. Our architecture trained from
scratch (random initialization) performs slightly worse than
AlexNet trained from scratch. However, our pre-training
makes up for this, boosting the from-scratch number by
6% MAP, and outperforms an AlexNet-style model trained
from scratch on Pascal by over 5%. This puts us about 8%
behind the performance of R-CNN pre-trained with ImageNet labels . This is the best result we are aware of
on VOC 2007 without using labels outside the dataset. We
ran additional baselines initialized with batch normalization, but found they performed worse than the ones shown.
To understand the effect of various dataset biases ,
we also performed a preliminary experiment pre-training
on a randomly-selected 2M subset of the Yahoo/Flickr 100million Dataset , which was collected entirely automatically. The performance after ﬁne-tuning is slightly worse
than Imagenet, but there is still a considerable boost over
the from-scratch model.
In the above ﬁne-tuning experiments, we removed the
batch normalization layers by estimating the mean and variance of the conv- and fc- layers, and then rescaling the
weights and biases such that the outputs of the conv and fc
layers have mean 0 and variance 1 for each channel. Recent
work , however, has shown empirically that the scaling of the weights prior to ﬁnetuning can have a strong impact on test-time performance, and argues that our previous
method of removing batch normalization leads too poorly
scaled weights. They propose a simple way to rescale the
network’s weights without changing the function that the
network computes, such that the network behaves better
during ﬁnetuning. Results using this technique are shown
in Table 1. Their approach gives a boost to all methods, but
gives less of a boost to the already-well-scaled ImageNetcategory model. Note that for this comparison, we used
fast-rcnn to save compute time, and we discarded all
pre-trained fc-layers from our model, re-initializing them
with the K-means procedure of (which was used to initialize all layers in the “K-means-rescale” row). Hence, the
structure of the network during ﬁne-tuning and testing was
the same for all models.
Considering that we have essentially inﬁnite data to train
our model, we might expect that our algorithm should also
provide a large boost to higher-capacity models such as
VGG . To test this, we trained a model following the 16layer structure of for the convolutional layers on each
side of the network (the ﬁnal fc6-fc9 layers were the same
as in Figure 3). We again ﬁne-tuned the representation on
Pascal VOC using fast-rcnn, by transferring only the conv
layers, again following Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. to re-scale
the transferred weights and initialize the rest. As a baseline, we performed a similar experiment with the ImageNetpretrained 16-layer model of (though we kept pretrained fc layers rather than re-initializing them), and also
by initializing the entire network with K-means . Train-
Lower Better
Higher Better
Mean Median 11.25◦22.5◦30◦
Unsup. Tracking 
ImageNet Labels
Table 2. Accuracy on NYUv2.
ing time was considerably longer—about 8 weeks on a Titan
X GPU—but the the network outperformed the AlexNetstyle model by a considerable margin. Note the model initialized with K-means performed roughly on par with the
analogous AlexNet model, suggesting that most of the boost
came from the unsupervised pre-training.
4.4. Geometry Estimation
The results of Section 4.3 suggest that our representation is sensitive to objects, even though it was not originally
trained to ﬁnd them. This raises the question: Does our
representation extract information that is useful for other,
non-object-based tasks? To ﬁnd out, we ﬁne-tuned our network to perform the surface normal estimation on NYUv2
proposed in Fouhey et al. , following the ﬁnetuning procedure of Wang et al. (hence, we compare directly to
the unsupervised pretraining results reported there).
used the color-dropping network, restructuring the fullyconnected layers as in Section 4.3. Surprisingly, our results are almost equivalent to those obtained using a fullylabeled ImageNet model. One possible explanation for this
is that the ImageNet categorization task does relatively little
to encourage a network to pay attention to geometry, since
the geometry is largely irrelevant once an object is identi-
ﬁed. Further evidence of this can be seen in seventh row of
Figure 4: the nearest neighbors for ImageNet AlexNet are
all car wheels, but they are not aligned well with the query
4.5. Visual Data Mining
Visual data mining , or unsupervised object discovery , aims to use a large image collection to discover image fragments which happen to depict
the same semantic objects. Applications include dataset visualization, content-based retrieval, and tasks that require
relating visual data to other unstructured information (e.g.
GPS coordinates ).
For automatic data mining, our
approach from section 4.1 is inadequate: although object
patches match to similar objects, textures match just as
readily to similar textures. Suppose, however, that we sampled two non-overlapping patches from the same object.
Not only would the nearest neighbor lists for both patches
share many images, but within those images, the nearest
neighbors would be in roughly the same spatial conﬁguration. For texture regions, on the other hand, the spatial con-
ﬁgurations of the neighbors would be random, because the
texture has no global layout.
To implement this, we ﬁrst sample a constellation of
four adjacent patches from an image (we use four to reduce
the likelihood of a matching spatial arrangement happening by chance). We ﬁnd the top 100 images which have
the strongest matches for all four patches, ignoring spatial
layout. We then use a type of geometric veriﬁcation 
to ﬁlter away the images where the four matches are not
geometrically consistent. Because our features are more
semantically-tuned, we can use a much weaker type of geometric veriﬁcation than . Finally, we rank the different
constellations by counting the number of times the top 100
matches geometrically verify.
Implementation Details: To compute whether a set of four
matched patches geometrically veriﬁes, we ﬁrst compute
the best-ﬁtting square S to the patch centers (via leastsquares), while constraining that side of S be between 2/3
and 4/3 of the average side of the patches. We then compute
the squared error of the patch centers relative to S (normalized by dividing the sum-of-squared-errors by the square of
the side of S). The patch is geometrically veriﬁed if this
normalized squared error is less than 1. When sampling
patches do not use any of the data augmentation preprocessing steps (e.g. downsampling). We use the color-dropping
version of our network.
We applied the described mining algorithm to Pascal
VOC 2011, with no pre-ﬁltering of images and no additional labels. We show some of the resulting patch clusters
in Figure 7. The results are visually comparable to our previous work , although we discover a few objects that
were not found in , such as monitors, birds, torsos, and
plates of food. The discovery of birds and torsos—which
are notoriously deformable—provides further evidence for
the invariances our algorithm has learned. We believe we
have covered all objects discovered in , with the exception of (1) trusses and (2) railroad tracks without trains
(though we do discover them with trains). For some objects
like dogs, we discover more variety and rank the best ones
higher. Furthermore, many of the clusters shown in depict gratings (14 out of the top 100), whereas none of ours
do (though two of our top hundred depict diffuse gradients).
As in , we often re-discover the same object multiple
times with different viewpoints, which accounts for most of
the gaps between ranks in Figure 7. The main disadvantages of our algorithm relative to are 1) some loss of
purity, and 2) that we cannot currently determine an object
mask automatically (although one could imagine dynamically adding more sub-patches to each proposed object).
To ensure that our algorithm has not simply learned an
object-centric representation due to the various biases 
in ImageNet, we also applied our algorithm to 15,000 Street
View images from Paris (following ). The results in
Figure 8 show that our representation captures scene lay-
Figure 7. Object clusters discovered by our algorithm. The number beside each cluster indicates its ranking, determined by the fraction of
the top matches that geometrically veriﬁed. For all clusters, we show the raw top 7 matches that veriﬁed geometrically. The full ranking is
available on our project webpage.
out and architectural elements. For this experiment, to rank
clusters, we use the de-duplication procedure originally proposed in .
Quantitative Results
As part of the qualitative evaluation, we applied our algorithm to the subset of Pascal VOC 2007 selected in :
speciﬁcally, those containing at least one instance of bus,
dining table, motorbike, horse, sofa, or train, and evaluate
via a purity coverage curve following . We select 1000
sets of 10 images each for evaluation. The evaluation then
sorts the sets by purity: the fraction of images in the cluster containing the same category. We generate the curve by
walking down the ranking. For each point on the curve, we
plot average purity of all sets up to a given point in the ranking against coverage: the fraction of images in the dataset
that are contained in at least one of the sets up to that point.
As shown in Figure 9, we have gained substantially in terms
of coverage, suggesting increased invariance for our learned
feature. However, we have also lost some highly-pure clusters compared to —which is not very surprising considering that our validation procedure is considerably simpler.
Implementation Details: We initialize 16,384 clusters by
sampling patches, mining nearest neighbors, and geometric veriﬁcation ranking as described above. The resulting
clusters are highly redundant. The cluster selection procedure of relies on a likelihood ratio score that is calibrated across clusters, which is not available to us. To select clusters, we ﬁrst select the top 10 geometrically-veriﬁed
neighbors for each cluster. Then we iteratively select the
highest-ranked cluster that contributes at least one image to
our coverage score. When we run out of images that aren’t
included in the coverage score, we choose clusters to cover
each image at least twice, and then three times, and so on.
4.6. Accuracy on the Relative Prediction Task Task
Can we improve the representation by further training
on our relative prediction pretext task?
To ﬁnd out, we
brieﬂy analyze classiﬁcation performance on pretext task
Figure 8. Clusters discovered and automatically ranked via our algorithm (§ 4.5) from the Paris Street View dataset.
Purity-Coverage for Proposed Objects
Visual Words .63 (.37)
Russel et al. .66 (.38)
HOG Kmeans .70 (.40)
Singh et al. .83 (.47)
Doersch et al. .83 (.48)
Our Approach .87 (.48)
Figure 9. Purity vs coverage for objects discovered on a subset of
Pascal VOC 2007. The numbers in the legend indicate area under
the curve (AUC). In parentheses is the AUC up to a coverage of .5.
itself. We sampled 500 random images from Pascal VOC
2007, sampled 256 pairs of patches from each, and classiﬁed them into the eight relative-position categories from
Figure 2. This gave an accuracy of 38.4%, where chance
performance is 12.5%, suggesting that the pretext task is
quite hard (indeed, human performance on the task is similar). To measure possible overﬁtting, we also ran the same
experiment on ImageNet, which is the dataset we used for
training. The network was 39.5% accurate on the training
set, and 40.3% accurate on the validation set (which the network never saw during training), suggesting that little over-
ﬁtting has occurred.
One possible reason why the pretext task is so difﬁcult
is because, for a large fraction of patches within each image, the task is almost impossible. Might the task be easiest
for image regions corresponding to objects? To test this
hypothesis, we repeated our experiment using only patches
sampled from within Pascal object ground-truth bounding
boxes. We select only those boxes that are at least 240 pixels on each side, and which are not labeled as truncated,
occluded, or difﬁcult. Surprisingly, this gave essentially the
same accuracy of 39.2%, and a similar experiment only on
cars yielded 45.6% accuracy. So, while our algorithm is
sensitive to objects, it is almost as sensitive to the layout of
the rest of the image.
Acknowledgements We thank Xiaolong Wang and Pulkit Agrawal for
help with baselines, Berkeley and CMU vision group members for many
fruitful discussions, and Jitendra Malik for putting gelato on the line. This
work was partially supported by Google Graduate Fellowship to CD, ONR
MURI N000141010934, Intel research grant, an NVidia hardware grant,
and an Amazon Web Services grant.