A Measure for Objective Evaluation of Image Segmentation Algorithms
R. Unnikrishnan
C. Pantofaru
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
Despite signiﬁcant advances in image segmentation techniques, evaluation of these techniques thus far has been
largely subjective. Typically, the effectiveness of a new algorithm is demonstrated only by the presentation of a few
segmented images and is otherwise left to subjective evaluation by the reader. Little effort has been spent on the design
of perceptually correct measures to compare an automatic
segmentation of an image to a set of hand-segmented examples of the same image. This paper demonstrates how
a modiﬁcation of the Rand index, the Normalized Probabilistic Rand (NPR) index, meets the requirements of largescale performance evaluation of image segmentation. We
show that the measure has a clear probabilistic interpretation as the maximum likelihood estimator of an underlying
Gibbs model, can be correctly normalized to account for
the inherent similarity in a set of ground truth images, and
can be computed efﬁciently for large datasets. Results are
presented on images from the publicly available Berkeley
Segmentation dataset.
1. Introduction
Segmentation is a frequent pre-processing step in many image understanding algorithms and practical vision systems.
In an effort to compare the performance of current segmentation algorithms to human perceptual grouping as well as
understand the cognitive processes that govern grouping of
visual elements in images, much work has gone into amassing hand-labeled segmentations of natural images .
Quantifying the performance of a segmentation algorithm, however, remains a challenging task. This is largely
due to image segmentation being an ill-deﬁned problem –
there is no single ground truth segmentation against which
the output of an algorithm may be compared. Rather the
comparison is to be made against the set of all possible perceptually consistent interpretations of the image, of which
only a minuscule fraction is usually available. This paper
proposes a measure that makes this comparison by quantifying the agreement of an output segmentation with the inherent variation in a set of available manual segmentations.
It is certainly unreasonable to expect a single measure
to be valid for every problem instance. For example, ﬁgureground segmentation for target tracking may value the proximity of the estimated segment to the true target location
more than the accuracy of the actual shape of the detected
boundary. Measures of similarity that quantify the extent
to which two segmentations agree may also depend on the
type and cardinality of the labels. For example, supervised
segmentations into semantic categories (eg. ‘sky’, ‘road’,
‘grass’, etc.) must be treated differently from unsupervised
clustering of pixels into groups with unordered and permutable labels . This work assumes the labels to be nonsemantic and permutable, and makes no assumptions about
the underlying assignment procedure.
Consider the task where one must choose from among a
set of segmentation algorithms based on their performance
on a database of natural images. The algorithms are to be
evaluated by objective comparison of their segmentation results with manual segmentations, several of which are available for each image. In the context of this task, a reasonable
set of requirements for a measure of segmentation correctness are:
I Non-degeneracy: It does not have degenerate cases
where unrealistic input instances give abnormally high
values of similarity.
II No assumptions about data generation: It does not
assume equal cardinality of the labels or region sizes
in the segmentations.
III Adaptive accommodation of reﬁnement: We use the
term label reﬁnement to denote differences in the pixellevel granularity of label assignments in the segmentation of a given image. Of particular interest are the
differences in granularity that are correlated with differences in the level of detail at which the image is perceived. While human segmentations of an image differ with interpretation, perceptual grouping is arguably
consistent over several large regions. Intuitively, this
demands that a perceptually meaningful measure of
similarity accommodate label reﬁnement only in regions that humans ﬁnd ambiguous and penalize differences in reﬁnement elsewhere.
IV Comparable scores: The measure gives scores that
permit meaningful comparison between segmentations
0-7695-2372-2/05/$20.00 (c) 2005 IEEE
of different images and between different segmentations of the same image.
In this paper we introduce a new measure for evaluating
segmentations, the Normalized Probabilistic Rand (NPR)
index, which is an extension to the Probabilistic Rand (PR)
index introduced in . We ﬁrst show how the PR index meets the ﬁrst, second, and third requirements listed
above. However, the PR index as given in cannot be
directly applied to the task of evaluating segmentation algorithms. In order to permit meaningful comparison of scores
between images and segmentations (the fourth requirement
above), the index must be adjusted with respect to a baseline common to all of the images in the test set. Also, it is
necessary to scale the index to reﬂect the amount of variance inherent in the test set. Hence we extend the PR index
 to the Normalized Probabilistic Rand (NPR) index and
show how it meets all four of the stated requirements for a
useful measure.
2. Related work
In this section, we review measures that have been proposed
in the literature to address variants of the segmentation evaluation task, while paying attention to the requirements described in the introduction.
We can broadly categorize previously proposed measures as follows:
1. Region differencing : Several measures operate by
computing the degree of overlap between clusters or the
cluster associated with each pixel in one segmentation
and its “closest” approximation in the other segmentation.
Some of them are deliberately intolerant of label reﬁnement
 . It is widely agreed, however, that humans differ in
the level of detail at which they perceive images. To compensate for the difference in granularity while comparing
segmentations, many measures allow label reﬁnement uniformly through the image. D. Martin’s thesis proposed
two measures – Global Consistency Error (GCE) and Local
Consistency Error (LCE) that allowed labeling reﬁnement
in either or both directions, respectively.
Measures based on region differencing suffer from one or
both of the following drawbacks:
(a) Degeneracy: As observed by the authors of ,
there are two segmentations that give zero error for
GCE and LCE – one pixel per segment, and one segment for the whole image. This adversely limits the
use of the error functions to comparing segmentations
that have similar cardinality of labels.
(b) Uniform penalty: Region-based measures that the authors are aware of in the literature compare one test
segmentation to only one manually labeled image and
penalize reﬁnement uniformly over the image.
2. Boundary matching:
Several measures work by
matching boundaries between the segmentations, and computing some summary statistic of match quality . Work
in proposed solving an approximation to a bipartite
graph matching problem for matching segmentation boundaries, computing the percentage of matched edge elements
and using the harmonic mean of precision and recall as the
statistic. However, since these measures are not tolerant of
reﬁnement, it is possible for two segmentations that are perfect mutual reﬁnements of each other to have very low precision and recall scores.
3. Information theory: Work in computes a measure of information content in each of the segmentations
and how much information one segmentation gives about
the other. The proposed metric measure is termed the variation of information (VI) and is related to the conditional entropies between the class label distribution of the segmentations. The measure has several promising properties but its
potential for extension to evaluation on real images where
there is more than one ground truth clustering is unclear.
Several measures work by counting the number of falsepositives and false-negatives and similarly assume existence of only one ground truth segmentation. Due to the
lack of spatial knowledge in the measure, the label assignments to pixels may be permuted in a combinatorial number
of ways to maintain the same proportion of labels and keep
the score unchanged.
4. Non-parametric tests: Popular non-parametric measures in statistics literature include Cohen’s Kappa , Jaccard’s index, Fowlkes and Mallow’s index among others.
The latter two are variants of the Rand index and work
by counting pairs of pixels that have compatible label relationships between the two segmentations to be compared.
More formally, consider two valid label assignments S and
S′ of N points X = {x1, x2, . . . xi, . . . , xN} that assign labels {li} and {l′
i} respectively to point xi . The Rand index
R can be computed as the ratio of the number of pairs of
points having a compatible label relationship in S and S′.
R(S, S′) =
li = lj ∧l′
li ̸= lj ∧l′
where Iis the identity function, and the denominator is the
number of possible unique pairs among N data points. Note
that the number of unique labels in S and S′ are not restricted to be equal.
Nearly all the relevant measures known to the authors deal
with the case of comparing two segmentations, one of
which is treated as the singular ground truth. Hence they
are not directly applicable for evaluating image segmentations in our framework. Section 3 outlines a modiﬁcation
Figure 1: Example of oversegmentation: (a) Image from the Berkeley segmentation database ,(b) its mean shift segmentation
(using hs=15 (spatial bandwidth), hr=10 (color bandwidth)), and (c-h) its ground truth hand segmentations. Average LCE = 0.0630,
PR = 0.3731, NPR = -0.7349
Figure 2: Example of undersegmentation: (a) Image from the Berkeley segmentation database ,(b) its mean shift segmentation
(using hs=15, hr=10), and (c-i) its ground truth hand segmentations. Average LCE = 0.0503, PR = 0.4420, NPR = -0.5932
to the basic Rand index that addresses this concern by soft
non-uniform weighting of pixel pairs as a function of the
variability in the ground truth set.
Normalized Probabilistic Rand
(NPR) Index
In this section, we outline the Normalized Probabilistic
Rand (NPR) index, an extension to the Probabilistic Rand
(PR) index proposed in . Section 3.1 describes the PR
index and further discusses its desirable properties. Section 3.2 explains a simpliﬁcation required for further analysis. Finally, Section 3.3 presents the NPR, describing its
crucial improvements over the PR and other segmentation
3.1. Probabilistic Rand Index
Consider a set of manually segmented (ground truth) images {S1, S2, . . . , SK} corresponding to an image X =
{x1, x2, . . . xi, . . . , xN}, where a subscript indexes one of
N pixels. Let Stest be the segmentation that is to be compared with the manually labeled set. We denote the label of
point xi by lStest
in segmentation Stest and by lSk
in the manually segmented image Sk. It is assumed that each label lSk
can take values in a discrete set of size Lk, and correspondingly lStest
takes one of Ltest values.
We chose to model label relationships for each pixel pair
by an unknown underlying distribution. One may visualize
this as a scenario where each human segmenter provides
information about the segmentation Sk of the image in the
form of binary numbers I(lSk
j ) for each pair of pixels
(xi, xj). The set of all perceptually correct segmentations
deﬁnes a Bernoulli distribution over this number, giving a
random variable with expected value denoted pij. Hence
the set {pij} for all unordered pairs (i, j) deﬁnes a generative model of correct segmentations for the image X.
Consider the Probabilistic Rand (PR) index :
PR(Stest, {Sk}) =
Let cij denote the event of a pair of pixels i and j having
the same label in the test image Stest:
Then the PR index can be written as:
PR(Stest, {Sk}) =
[cijpij + (1 −cij)(1 −pij)]
This measure takes values in , where 0 means
Stest and {S1, S2, . . . , SK} have no similarities (i.e. when
S consists of a single cluster and each segmentation in
{S1, S2, . . . , SK} consists only of clusters containing single points, or vice versa) to 1 when all segmentations are
identical.
Since cij ∈{0, 1}, Eqn (3) can be equivalently written
PR(Stest, {Sk}) =
ij (1 −pij)1−cij
Note that the quantity in square brackets in Eqn. (4) is
the likelihood that labels of pixels xi and xj take values lStest
and lStest
respectively under the pairwise distribution deﬁned
Recall that in our segmentation algorithm evaluation environment, a necessary feature of a good measure is a
lack of degenerate cases. Figures 1 and 2 show (from left
to right) images from the Berkeley segmentation database
 , segmentations of those images, and the ground truth
hand segmentations of those images.
The segmentation
method we use is mean shift segmentation , which is a
non-parametric kernel density-based segmentation method.
Mean shift segmentation has two parameters that provide
granularity control: hs, the bandwidth of the kernel for the
spatial features, and hr, the bandwidth of the kernel for the
other features (in our case, color). Now, notice that Fig. 1
is an oversegmentation and Fig. 2 is an undersegmentation.
We compare the PR scores to the LCE scores . Note
that the LCE is an error, with a score of 0 meaning no error
and a score of 1 meaning maximum error. The LCE measure is tolerant to reﬁnement regardless of the ground
truth, and hence gives low error (high similarity) scores of
0.0630 and 0.0503, respectively. On the other hand, the PR
is a measure of similarity, with a score of 0 meaning no similarity (maximum error) and a score of 1 meaning maximum
similarity (no error). The PR does not allow reﬁnement or
coarsening that is not inspired by one of the human segmentations, hence the PR index gives low (low similarity, high
error) scores of 0.3731 and 0.4420, respectively.
Tolerance to reﬁnement is desired, however, as long as
the reﬁnement is inspired by one of the human segmentations.
Consider the example in Fig. 3.
The image in
Fig. 3(a) is the original image, the two stacked images
in Fig. 3(b) are two possible segmentations generated by
an automatic segmentation algorithm, and the two images
in Fig. 3(c) are the ground truths hand-labeled by people.
Clearly, one of the hand-segmenters has chosen to segment
according to texture, and the other according to color. The
topmost automatic segmentation is ﬁner than either of the
two hand segmentations, however each of the edges can be
found in one of the hand segmentations. Intuitively, it is
still a useful segmentation because it only disagrees with the
human segmentations in the same places that they are themselves ambiguous. The Probabilistic Rand index would
give the same score to either the top image in Fig. 3(b), or
either of the hand segmentations. Hence this a permissible
reﬁnement. Now, look at the bottom automatic segmentation in Fig. 3(b). It is a further reﬁnement, however the
extra boundaries can not be found in either of the hand seg-
Figure 3: Synthetic example of permissible reﬁnements: (a) Input
image, (b) Segmentations for testing, and (c) ground truth set
mentations. Since it has divided clusters which the hand
segmentations unambiguously stated should not be divided,
its PR index is lower.
At this point we have successfully addressed requirements I (non-degeneracy), II (no assumptions about data
generation) and III (adaptive accommodation of reﬁnement)
for a useful measure, as stated in the introduction. Section 3.3 will expand on requirement II and address requirement IV (permitting score comparison between images and
segmentations). Before we can extend the measure, however, we will need to show how to reduce the PR index to
be computationally tractable.
3.2. Reduction using sample mean estimator
A straightforward choice of estimator for pij, the probability of the pixels i and j having the same label, is the sample
mean of the corresponding Bernoulli distribution as given
For this choice, it can be shown that the resulting PR index
assumes a trivial reduction and can be estimated efﬁciently
in time linear in N.
The PR index can be written as:
PR(Stest, {Sk}) =
[cij ¯pij + (1 −cij)(1 −¯pij)]
Substituting Eqn. (5) in Eqn. (6) and moving the summation over k outwards yields
PR(Stest, {Sk}) = 1
+ (1 −cij)I
which is simply the mean of the Rand index computed
between each pair (Stest, Sk). We can compute the terms
within the square parentheses in O(N + LtestLk) in the following manner.
Construct a Ltest × Lk contingency table with entries
nSk(l, l′) containing the number of pixels that have label
l in Stest and label l′ in Sk. This can be done in O(N) steps
for each Sk.
The ﬁrst term in Eqn. (7) is the number of pairs having
the same label in Stest and Sk, and is given by
nSk(l, l′)
which is simply the number of possible pairs of points chosen from sets of points belonging to the same class, and is
computable in O(LtestLk) operations.
The second term in Eqn. (7) is the number of pairs having
different labels in Stest and in Sk. To derive this, let us deﬁne
two more terms for notational convenience. We denote the
number of points having label l in the test segmentation Stest
nSk(l, l′)
and similarly, the number of points having label l′ in the
second partition Sk as:
n(·, l′) =
nSk(l, l′)
The number of pairs of points in the same class in Stest but
different classes in Sk can be written as
nSk(l, l′)
Similarly, the number of pairs of points in the same class in
Sk but different classes in Stest can be written as
nSk(l, l′)
Since all the possible pixel pairs must sum to
, the number of pairs having different labels in Stest and Sk is given
nSk(l, l′)
l′ n(·, l′)
which is computable in O(N + LtestLk) time. Hence the
overall computation for all K images is O(KN + 
Figure 4: Illustration of the notation used in the Normalized Probabilistic Rand index. Each row φ has (a) an associated input Image
φ, (b) a candidate segmentation Sφ
test and (c) a set of Kφ available
manual segmentations {Sφ
3.3. Normalization
The signiﬁcance of a measure of similarity has much to do
with the baseline with respect to which it is expressed. One
may draw an analogy between the baseline and a null hypothesis in signiﬁcance testing. For image segmentation,
the baseline may be interpreted as the expected value of the
index under some appropriate model of randomness in the
input images. A popular strategy is to use the index normalized with respect to its baseline as
Normalized index =
Index −Expected index
Maximum index −Expected index
so that the expected value of the normalized index is zero
and it has a larger range and hence is more sensitive.
Hubert and Arabie normalize the Rand index using a
baseline that assumes the segmentations are generated from
a hypergeometric distribution. This implies that a) the segmentations are independent, and b) the number of pixels
having a particular label (the class label probabilities) is
kept constant. The same model is adopted for the measure
proposed in with an unnecessary additional assumption
of equal cardinality of labels. However, as also observed
in , the equivalent null model does not represent
anything plausible in terms of realistic images, and both of
the above assumptions are usually violated in practice. We
would like to normalize the PR index in a way that avoids
these pitfalls.
We will normalize the PR Index in Eqn. (2) using
Eqn. (10), so we need to compute the expected value:
Color bandwidths (hr)
Figure 5: Example of changing scores for different segmentation
granularities: (a) Original image, (b)-(h) mean shift segmentations
 using scale bandwidth (hs) 7 and color bandwidths (hr) 3, 7,
11, 15, 19, 23 and 27 respectively. The plot shows the LCE error, the PR index score and the NPR score for each segmentation.
Note that only the NPR index reﬂects the intuitive accuracy of each
segmentation of the image. The NPR index correctly shows that
segmentation (f) is the best one, segmentations (d), (e), and (f) are
reasonable, and segmentations (g) and (h) are horrible.
PR(Stest, {Sk})
ijpij + (1−p′
ij)(1−pij)
The question is: what is a meaningful way to compute
? We propose that for a baseline
in image segmentation to be useful, it must be representative
of perceptually consistent grouping of random but realistic
images. Pair-wise probabilities provide a convenient way
to model such segmentations of natural images. This translates to estimating p′
ij from segmentations of all images for
all unordered pairs (i, j). Let Φ be the number of images in
a dataset, and Kφ the number of ground truth hand segmentations of image φ. Then p′
ij can be expressed as:
Segmentation #
Figure 6: Example of comparing segmentations of different images: (a)-(e) Original images, (f)-(j) segmentations.
shows the LCE error, the PR index score and the NPR score for
each segmentation. Note that only the NPR index reﬂects the intuitive accuracy of each segmentation across images
Note that using this formulation for p′
that E[PR(Stest, {Sk})] is just a (weighted) sum of
k , {Sk}). Although PR(Sφ
k , {Sk}) can be computed
efﬁciently, performing this computation for every hand segmentation Sφ
k is expensive, so in practice we uniformly
sample 5 × 106 pixel pairs for an image size of 321 × 481
(N = 1.5 × 105) instead of computing it exhaustively over
all pixel pairs.
The philosophy that the baseline should depend on the
empirical evidence from all of the images in a ground truth
training set differs from the philosophy used to normalize
the Rand Index . In the Adjusted Rand Index , the
expected value is computed over all theoretically possible
segmentations with constant cluster proportions, regardless
of how probable those segmentations are in reality. In comparison, the approach taken by the Normalized Probabilistic
Rand index (NPR) has two important beneﬁts:
First, since p′
ij and pij are modeled from the ground truth
data, the number and size of the clusters in the images do
not need to be held constant. Thus, the error produced by
two segmentations with differing cluster sizes can be compared. In terms of evaluating a segmentation algorithm, this
allows the comparison of the algorithm’s performance with
different parameters. Figure 5 demonstrates this behavior.
The top two rows show an image from the segmentation
Figure 7: Examples of “good” segmentations: (a) Images from the Berkeley segmentation database , (b) mean shift segmentations 
(using hs=15, hr=10), and (c-h) their ground truth hand segmentations. Top image: NPR = 0.8938, Bottom image: NPR = 0.8495
Figure 8: Examples of “bad” segmentations: (a) Images from the Berkeley segmentation database , (b) mean shift segmentations 
(using hs=15, hr=10), and (c-g) their ground truth hand segmentations. Top image: NPR = -0.7333, Bottom image: NPR = -0.6207
database and segmentations of different granularity.
Note that the LCE error is low for all of the images since
it is not sensitive to reﬁnement, hence it cannot determine
which segmentation is the most desirable. The PR index
reﬂects the correct relationship among the segmentations,
however its range is small and the expected value is unknown, hence it is difﬁcult to judge what a “good” segmentation is. The NPR index ﬁxes these problems. It reﬂects
the desired relationships among the segmentations with no
degenerate cases, and any segmentation which gives a score
signiﬁcantly above 0 is known to be useful.
Second, since p′
ij is modeled using all of the ground truth
data, not just the data for the particular image in question,
it is possible to compare the segmentation errors for different images to their respective ground truths. This facilitates
the comparison of an algorithm’s performance on different
images. Figure 6 shows the scores of segmentations of different images. The ﬁrst row contains the original images
and the second row contains the segmentations. Once again,
note that the NPR is the only index which both shows the
desired relationship among the segmentations and whose
output is easily interpreted.
The images in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 demonstrate the consistency of the NPR. In Fig. 7(b), both mean shift segmentations are perceptually equally “good” (given the ground
truth segmentations), and correspondingly their NPR indices are high and similar. The segmentations in Fig. 8(b)
are both perceptually “bad” (oversegmented), and correspondingly both of their NPR indices are very low. Note
that the NPR indices of the segmentations in Fig. 2(b) and
Fig. 8(b) are comparable, although the former is an undersegmentation and the latter are oversegmentations.
The normalization step has addressed requirement IV,
facilitating meaningful comparison of scores between different images and segmentations. Note also that the NPR
still does not make assumptions about data generation (requirement II). Hence we have met all of the requirements
set out at the beginning of the paper.
3.4. Interpretation as a random ﬁeld
Consider the labels of image X modeled as a Gibbs distribution with the equivalent random ﬁeld deﬁned on a complete graph with a node for each pixel xi. The joint likelihood of a segmentation assigning label li to each pixel xi
may then be expressed as:
P({li}) = 1
where C is the set of cliques in the graph, −Ic({lc}) is the
interaction potential as a function of labels at pixels xi ∈c
only, and Z is the (constant) partition function.
We assume only pairwise potentials to be non-zero, employing a common restriction placed on model complexity
for tractability on k-connected meshes. Taking the logarithm of Eqn. (12) then gives
log P({li}) ∝
Iij(li, lj)
where −Iij(li, lj) is now a pairwise potential on pair (i, j).
Comparing the RHS of Eqn. (13) to that of the PR index
PR(Stest, {Sk}) =
ij (1 −pij)1−cij
reveals the interaction potential Iij(li, lj) to be proportional
to the likelihood of pixels i and j having labels li and lj
given the parameters pij from the manual segmentations.
4. Extensions
There are several natural extensions that can be made to the
NPR index to take advantage of side-information or priors:
1. Weighted data points: If there are speciﬁc regions of
interest in the image being tested, it is straightforward to
weight the contribution of points non-uniformly and maintain exact computation, assuming the use of a sample mean
estimator for pij.
For example, let the points X = {x1, x2, . . . , xN} be assigned weights W ={w1, w2, . . . , wN} such that 0<wi <1
for all i and 
i wi = N. Then the contingency table in
Sec. 3.2 may be modiﬁed by replacing unit counts of pixels
in the table by their weights. The remainder of the computation proceeds as before in O(KN + 
k Lk) complexity.
2. Soft segmentation: In a situation where one cannot
commit to a hard segmentation, each pixel xi may be associated with a probability pSk
i (l) of having label l in the k-th
segmentation, such that 
i (l) = 1. The contingency
table can be modiﬁed in a similar manner as for weighted
data points by spreading the contribution of a point across a
row and column of the table. For example, the contribution
of point xi to the entry n(l, l′) for segmentation pairs Stest
and Sk is pStest
3. Priors from ecological statistics: Experiments in 
showed that the probability of two pixels belonging to the
same perceptual group in natural imagery seems to follow
an exponential distribution as a function of distance between the pixels. In presenting the use of the sample mean
estimator for pij, this work assumed the existence of large
enough number of hand-segmented images to sufﬁciently
represent the set of valid segmentations of the image. If
this is not feasible, a MAP estimator of the probability
parametrized in terms of distance between pixels would be
a sensible choice. What inﬂuence the choice of prior would
have on the measure, particularly with regard to accommodation of label reﬁnement, is the subject of future work.
5. Summary and Conclusions
This paper presented the Normalized Probabilistic Rand
(NPR) index, a new measure for performance evaluation
of image segmentation algorithms. It exhibits several desirable properties not exhibited together in previous measures. Numbers generated by the NPR index for a variety of
natural images correspond to human intuition of perceptual
grouping. Also, its ﬂexibility gives it potential applications
in related problems where extra domain knowledge is available. Future work includes application to large-scale performance evaluation as well as investigation of its utility as
an objective function for training segmentation algorithms.