Department of Economics
Manor Road Building, Manor Road
Oxford, OX1 3UQ
ISSN 1471-0498
Department of Economics
Discussion Paper Series
The Cost of Staying Open: Voluntary Social Distancing
and Lockdowns in the US
Adam Brzezinski, Valentin Kecht, David Van Dijcke
Number 910
September, 2020
The Cost of Staying Open: Voluntary Social Distancing
and Lockdowns in the US∗
Adam Brzezinski1, Valentin Kecht2, David Van Dijcke*1,3
1 Department of Economics, University of Michigan
2 Department of Economics, Bocconi University
3 Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford
2020-09-30
In combating the spread of COVID-19, some governments have been reluctant to adopt
lockdown policies due to their perceived economic costs. Such costs can, however, arise
even in the absence of restrictive policies, if individuals’ independent reaction to the virus
slows down the economy. This paper ﬁnds that imposing lockdowns leads to lower overall
costs to the economy than staying open. We combine detailed location trace data from
40 million mobile devices with diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimations and a modiﬁcation
of the epidemiological SIR model that allows for societal and political response to the
virus. In that way, we show that voluntary reaction incurs substantial economic costs,
while the additional economic costs arising from lockdown policies are small compared to
their large beneﬁts in terms of reduced medical costs. Our results hold for practically all
realistic estimates of lockdown eﬃciency and voluntary response strength. We quantify the
counterfactual costs of voluntary social distancing for various US states that implemented
lockdowns. For the US average, we estimate that lockdowns reduce the costs of the
pandemic by 0.8% of annual GDP per capita, compared to purely voluntary responses.
Keywords: COVID-19, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences, SIR model, social distancing, lockdown,
JEL-Classiﬁcation: I12, I18, H12, D04, C33, H51.
∗We thank SafeGraph for providing their data and support. We also thank Austin L. Wright, Rick Van
der Ploeg, Nicola Gennaioli, R. Maria del Rio-Chanona, Carlo Altomonte, Sebastian Hager, Gustavo Mellior,
Xiaowen Lei, Pietro Buri, Doyne Farmer and the INET Complexity Economics Group for support and helpful
discussions. Correspondence to: David Van Dijcke, 611 Tappan Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Email:
 . Declarations of interest: Van Dijcke acknowledges support from the Belgian American
Educational Foundation.
Introduction
There is an emerging consensus that social distancing is eﬀective at diminishing the spread
of COVID-19 by reducing interpersonal transmission . Yet, the way in which political leaders aim to ﬂatten
the infection curve diﬀers vastly across countries. Many governments successfully decreased
contagion by mandating lockdown policies , while others relied on the
voluntary response of their population, under the argument that lockdown policies may be
associated with signiﬁcant economic costs. It is therefore a major policy concern to understand
how high levels of social distancing can be reached at minimal economic
In this paper, we leverage high-resolution location trace data across US counties and combine
them with microeconometric methods to disentangle the voluntary and mandatory social
distancing response during the pandemic. For the purpose of calculating the voluntary and
lockdown responses, we concentrate on the time period from the start of the pandemic until the last day before the ﬁrst easing of a lockdown takes place .
Using a controlled SIR model , we translate these social distancing response
estimates into assessments of medical and economic costs associated with COVID. We thus
arrive at two sets of cost estimates: ﬁrst, those that would arise in the absence of a lockdown;
and second, those that would arise under a state-wide lockdown that is not eased before the
end of the pandemic.
We ﬁnd that the percentage of people who stay at home voluntarily increases on average by
5.1% in response to the occurrence of the ﬁrst local cases of COVID. The eﬀect following the
implementation of a state-wide shelter-in-place mandate is of a similar size. Combining these
estimates with the SIR model based on Gros et al. , we estimate the pandemic to cost
the US around 16.1% of annual GDP per capita under a non-lockdown scenario compared to
15.2% if a lockdown is imposed. When taking into account the statistical value of life, these
values increase to 20.9% and 18.1%, respectively.
The main implications of our paper are threefold. First, independent of government policies,
movement decreases markedly in response to a local outbreak of the virus. Thus, economic
costs are inevitable even in the absence of lockdown policies. Second, voluntary and lockdown
responses are of similar magnitude. Governments that rely on their citizens to respond voluntarily
need to take into account that the associated change in social distancing behavior will be
signiﬁcantly smaller without a lockdown policy in place. Third, our augmented version of the
SIR model indicates that not imposing a lockdown barely improves economic performance, while
it drastically increases medical costs—both in terms of lives lost and in terms of hospitalization
Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, we support the ﬁnding that
the additional economic costs of lockdown measures compared to non-lockdown scenarios are
relatively small, while their medical beneﬁts are large. Low economic costs have also been
estimated by Baek et al. , who ﬁnd that only one fourth of the unemployment claims in
the early phases of the crisis can be attributed to shelter-in-place policies. Hence, our results
stand in opposition to the view that voluntary responses are a better strategy than lockdown
policies as proposed in Krueger et al. , among others. An often cited example for the
eﬃcacy of relying on voluntary social distancing is Sweden. Current data on GDP growth and
forecasts suggest, however, that the Swedish economy may contract in a similar magnitude as
in other European countries or in the US .1 Our results also contrast with those of
Chudik et al. , who ﬁnd that voluntary responses have a small impact on the spread of the
pandemic compared to lockdowns, but lead to large costs in terms of employment losses. Second,
this paper speaks to a growing literature that jointly models the dynamics of the economic
and health threats arising from COVID . Third, a number of papers has used cellphone data to study movement
patterns during the COVID pandemic. They show that patterns in social distancing depend on
partisanship , political polarization , poverty and economic
dislocation , belief in science , risk perception
 and civic capital . Our central contribution is to combine data from mobile
devices with a controlled SIR model to estimate the medical and economic costs under diﬀerent
policy scenarios.
We construct a dataset at the county-day level spanning the period between January 1, 2020
and April 23, 2020. The data contains measures of social distancing and the lockdown policies
enacted by counties.We only consider data up to April 23 because Georgia was the ﬁrst state to
partially ease its lockdown on April 24, but we are interested in the eﬀect of imposing lockdowns,
not easing them.
Social distancing. Our outcome variables are based on location trace data from SafeGraph,
obtained by tracking GPS pings from up to 40 million devices across the United States. Our
analysis is based on a new data product SafeGraph developed to allow the tracking of social
distancing in response to the virus, Social Distancing Metrics.
The data comes from an
underlying panel of up to 40 million mobile devices with home addresses in all 200,000+ census
1Sweden only saw an estimated 4 p.p. smaller decrease in aggregate consumer spending than neighboring
Denmark, which did impose a lockdown and experienced a drop in spending of around 29 percent (Andersen,
block groups (CBG) across the United States. It has been aggregated in an exhaustive 6-step
process designed to guarantee reliability, granularity and anonymity.2 As our main outcome
variable we calculate the percentage of devices that stayed home all day by summing, at the
county level, the number of the devices that exclusively emitted GPS pings from their home
location over the course of a day, and dividing it by the total number of devices observed in each
county on that same day. Variations of this variable have previously been exploited in Brzezinski
et al. , Cotti et al. , Holtz et al. , Lasry et al. , and Simonov et al.
 . A device’s home is determined as its common nighttime location over the course of 6
weeks, down to a Geohash-7 (153m x 153m) granularity. Note that, due to the limited frequency
of GPS pings, our outcome variable is likely to be downward biased for more densely populated
areas, where short trips outside of the home might not be registered. We take this into account
by controlling for county-speciﬁc factors in our main regression speciﬁcations.
The panel exhibits limited bias along several dimensions. When it comes to geographic bias,
the absolute diﬀerence between the panel’s density and the true population density as measured
by the US census never exceeds 1% at the county level. The correlation between both variables
is 0.97. In addition, the panel also has a low degree of demographic sampling bias. Although
device-level demographics are not collected for privacy reasons, average demographic patterns
can be studied using panel-weighted, CBG-level Census data. Here again, the frequency of
salient demographic and income groups in the panel closely tracks the same frequency in the
Census. This supports the representativity of the sample with respect to the whole population,
because cellphone use in the US is common across a wide range of demographic groups.3
Lockdown Policies. Data on the lockdown measures implemented to combat the spread
of COVID have been retrieved from several sources: the National Association of Counties
(NACO)4; the National Governors’ Association (NGA)5; Education Week6 ; and The New York
Times.7 The data incorporates information on shelter-in-place policies as well as school and
business closures. Business closure orders require all non-essential businesses to shut down,
while shelter-in-place policies call for all citizens to stay at home. Essential needs, such as
grocery shopping, exercise and medical emergencies, are the only exceptions to shelter-in-place
orders. Nonetheless, such orders were generally not strictly enforced in the US, allowing for
varying degrees of compliance. People working in essential businesses were still allowed to go
to work. Additionally, all states implemented school closures. We codify the date of a policy’s
2CBGs with less than 5 devices are excluded from the sample. To further enhance privacy preservation,
SafeGraph collects data not directly from cellphones, but only from secondary sources. Thus, the data products
and maps derived from the mobility patterns are aggregate results that do not allow the re-identiﬁcation of
individuals.
3See, for example, 
4For details , see 
5 
6 
override=web
7 
implementation as the oﬃcial date it went into eﬀect if it did so before 12pm, or one day later
if it did so after 12pm.
COVID Statistics. County-level statistics on COVID cases and deaths in the United States
are retrieved from the COVID-19 data portal provided by the New York Times.8 We also
collected data on the state-day eﬀective reproduction number Rt, which is calculated according
to a modiﬁed version of the model described in Bettencourt and Ribeiro .9
Unemployment. Data on weekly unemployment claims and rates by state was retrieved from
the United States Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration.10
Quantifying Voluntary and Lockdown Responses
In order to quantify and compare voluntary and lockdown-induced social distancing responses,
we pursue a set of diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) strategies. First, we estimate the state-speciﬁc
voluntary social distancing response by analyzing how movement patterns vary around the
appearance date of the ﬁrst local COVID cases controlling for whether a lockdown policy is in
place. Second, we isolate the social distancing response to state-wide shelter-in-place policies,
where we control for the trajectory of voluntary behavior caused by the spread of the virus. We
also explicitly control for spillovers caused by policies of connected states and counties using the
approach of Holtz et al. . Following Goodman-Bacon and Marcus , we complement
our baseline DiD estimates with an event-study approach to check the robustness of our results.
The inherent diﬀerences in our two types of events of interest, i.e. the appearance of
county-level local cases and the implementation of state-wide lockdown policies, as well as
their staggered nature, implies that we need to pursue two separate DiD strategies to obtain
estimates of the voluntary and lockdown responses. To estimate the voluntary response, we
can leverage the fact that COVID cases appear at diﬀerent periods across counties in a given
US state, allowing us to estimate the voluntary response separately for each state. We cannot
pursue the same strategy for estimating the eﬀect of state-level lockdowns, since these are, by
deﬁnition, implemented simultaneously in all counties of a state. Thus, we implement separate
DiD strategies for the estimation of voluntary and lockdown responses, for which we employ
diﬀerent sets of control variables, as will be described in more detail further below.11
Figure 1 shows the evolution in the growth rate in the percentage of people who stay at home,
alongside the share of states that have experienced their ﬁrst COVID cases and deaths as well
8 
9 
10 
11For instance, to capture increases in social distancing that are really voluntary, we need to account for
whether county- or state-level policies have been implemented. On the other hand, when estimating the lockdown
response, we require additional controls that account for the voluntary increase in social distancing, since
lockdowns are enacted for the most part after the appearance of ﬁrst cases.
as the share that implemented state-wide shelter-in-place policies. In most states, the ﬁrst case
occurred during the ﬁrst half of March, while ﬁrst deaths and lockdown policies were lagging
behind. Social distancing gained ground from March 8 onward, the date of the ﬁrst death in
the US, until the end of the month and remained stable afterwards. To disentangle voluntary
and lockdown-induced social distancing, we adopt a DiD approach where the counterfactual
comprises counties that have not (yet) been exposed to a ﬁrst COVID case or a shelter-in-place
order, respectively. Hence, our identiﬁcation strategy hinges on a parallel trend assumption in
the outcome variable relative to the day of the treatment. In this case, the approach yields
estimates that can be interpreted as causal average treatment eﬀects.
— [ insert Figure 1 here ] —
Voluntary response. To estimate the voluntary response, we pursue the following DiD
pcti,t = αi +δt +ζLockj,t +β Firsti,t +γ (Lockj,t ×Firsti,t)+Ωyi,t +ϵi,t,
where pcti,t denotes the percent of devices that stay home all day in county i and on day t. αi
and δt refer to county and day ﬁxed eﬀects. Lockj,t takes value 1 if the shelter-in-place policy
has been implemented at or before time t in state j. Similarly, Firsti,t is a dummy variable
that is equal to 1 if the ﬁrst case has already occurred, and 0 otherwise. Lastly, the vector
yi,t includes controls for state-wide cases and deaths, state-wide school closures, county-wide
business closures and state- and county-wide emergency declarations.12
Since we control for the interaction of Firsti,t and the policy variables, the coeﬃcient β
captures the social distancing response when no policy is enacted, in other words, the voluntary
response. For each state, we use a balanced sample of its counties that goes up to two weeks
after the state’s lockdown. For the US-wide stacked DiD, we use the full balanced sample.
Further robustness checks suggest that our estimates are not strongly aﬀected by bias due to
either time or unit heterogeneity (see section D).
Figure 2 shows the results from regression Equation 1, estimated separately for each state.
Blue (red) lines correspond to Democratic (Republican) states as per the 2016 presidential
election, dashed lines indicate parameters that are insigniﬁcant, and the horizontal line plots the
point estimate for the US as a whole. The main US-wide regression results for the estimation are
reported in Table 1, Column 1.13 Our state-speciﬁc estimates range from showing no signiﬁcant
eﬀect to an eﬀect of 6.2 percentage points, with a US-wide estimate of 1.28 percentage points.
— [ insert Figure 2 here ] —
12We do not control for state-wide business closures as these generally coincide with shelter-in-place orders.
Note also that our speciﬁcation assumes that the eﬀect of a county-level policy is constant over time, and that
the eﬀect of a state-level lockdown only depends on whether an outbreak has already taken place. This seems a
reasonable approximation: the estimates from our event-study approach for the state-level lockdown show that
the coeﬃcients are relatively stable across the ﬁrst days after a lockdown (see Figure D.1).
13Full results in Appendix Table A.3.
Lockdown response. We pursue a similar stacked DiD approach to estimate the lockdown
pcti,t = αi +δt +dayssincei,t +θLockj,t +ζDGEO
+Ψyi,t +ui,t,
where all variables are deﬁned as above, with the exception that we include the additional
days-since-ﬁrst-case ﬁxed eﬀects dayssincei,t. Additionally, we include DGEO
k wi,k ×Dk,t,
which is a vector containing a geographic-adjacency-weighted average of all other counties’
policies.14 The weights wi,k measure the normalized posterior probability of travel to county k
for someone who lives in county i, and Dit is a vector of dummies for county- and state-level
shelter-in-place orders, business closures and school closures.15 This term allows us to control
for spillovers of policies implemented in geographic alter counties. We incorporate this variable
to control for the trajectory of voluntary responses coming from the progression of the disease,
before any lockdown has occurred. As previously shown, individuals in aﬀected areas exhibit
voluntary social distancing over and above any country-wide behavioral trends. Thus, omitting
dayssincei,t would result in an upward bias in the estimate for θ. The event-study approach in
section D conﬁrms that there is no signiﬁcant pre-trend in our analysis.
As before, we balance the US-wide sample by county and date. We exclude counties from
the analysis that have implemented county-level policies before the introduction of state-level
policies to reduce the threat of anticipation eﬀects. In contrast to the voluntary response, we
are unable to obtain state-speciﬁc lockdown results, since, by deﬁnition, state-level lockdowns
are enacted in all counties of a state simultaneously.
Column 2 in Table 1 shows the estimate for θ from Equation 2 for the US. We ﬁnd that the
lockdown increases the percentage of people who stay at home by 1.32 percentage points after
the policy is implemented. The full regression results presented in Appendix Table A.3 conﬁrm
that the control variables have the expected signs or are insigniﬁcant.
— [ insert Figure 1 here ] —
The Costs of Voluntary and Imposed Social Distancing
In this section, we provide calculations of the medical and economic costs incurred by voluntary
and policy-induced social distancing. We do so by combining the estimates for the two forms
of social distancing with the ‘controlled SIR model’, a modiﬁed version of the workhorse SIR
14Note that for the estimation of the voluntary response, we cannot include similar geographic-adjacencyweighted average measures of all other counties’ ﬁrst-case appearance. The reason is that the appearance of
COVID cases in one county is highly collinear with the appearance of such cases in neighbouring counties. We
also do not include geographic-adjacency-weighted average measures of other counties’ policies for the estimation
of voluntary responses, since the ﬁrst cases appear generally much earlier than the implementation of policy
15See Holtz et al. for further information on the geographic adjacency matrix.
model, that allows the disease reproduction number to endogenously depend on the political
and societal response intensity to the virus .
As the model admits an analytical solution, the total response intensity can be estimated
from the data. We interpret this response intensity as the combination of voluntary and
lockdown-induced social distancing, which we can then decompose based on our counterfactual
econometric estimates from the preceding section. Armed with this decomposition, we resimulate the model for several US states so as to quantify the costs associated with the observed
total and estimated voluntary reductions in movements. We thus combine econometric estimates
based on detailed micro-data with a modeling approach ﬁrmly embedded in epidemiology to
conduct a counterfactual policy simulation of the costs of staying open. The theoretical model
we use is parsimonious and transparent, a feature we believe makes it preferable to heavily
parametrized economic models, as it reduces the uncertainty associated with estimating a large
number of parameters, and facilitates discussion of the underlying model assumptions. Moreover,
while agent heterogeneity is likely to be an important factor in the spread of the virus, our
model assumes that governments are either not capable of or not willing to target lockdowns
towards speciﬁc population groups.
Identiﬁcation of the model parameters requires that a peak of the pandemic is clearly
identiﬁable and has already passed. As a result, we only include states in the analysis where
a clear peak is identiﬁable before the easing of a state-level lockdown. The calculation of
the estimates of the costs of lockdowns requires the further assumption that the government
lockdowns would have been kept in place until case levels are low enough to be contained by
more targeted measures. This allows us to calculate two types of counterfactual medical cost
estimates for each state: those that would arise under no lockdown, and those that would arise
under a lockdown that was kept in place until the end of the pandemic. Since we only look at
states that saw a clear initial peak during lockdown, the parameters estimated on the basis
of our speciﬁcation are well-identiﬁed even if these states see resurgences in cases after the
lockdown is lifted.
Controlled SIR model. At any time t > 0, a population is composed of three types of
individuals: susceptible, infected and recovered; with associated quantities S = S(t), I = I(t)
and R = R(t).16 Population size is constant and normalized such that S + I + R = 1. The
following set of ordinary diﬀerential equations describes an isolated epidemic outbreak:
dt = −gSI,
dt = gSI −I,
where g is the reproduction number and τ > 0 is the time scale. According to the ﬁrst equation,
the growth rate of S decreases in g and in the number of contacts between susceptible and
infected individuals SI. The change in infections in the second equation equals this reduction
16This paragraph closely follows the exposition in Gros et al. .
in susceptible individuals gSI. Finally, the third equation posits that all infected individuals
recover or die. Note that, in the case of COVID, this invites an interpretation of the model’s
time scale as the duration of the disease’s infectiousness, which is estimated to be 2 weeks
 .
In contrast to the standard SIR model, societal and political response to the spread of the
virus is assumed to push g below its intrinsic number g0 > 0, which depends on the virological
characteristics of the disease. This notion can be operationalized by
The parameter α ≥0 describes the overall reaction strength of the population to the spread of the
virus, captured by the cumulative number of cases X. Equation 4 implies that social distancing
has decreasing returns in reducing the reproduction number. This is in line with epidemiological
evidence that the distribution of individual infectiousness is highly right-skewed, with a small
number of ‘superspreaders’ infecting many individuals at large social events .17 Given g0, the parameter α determines the level to which the reproduction number
converges as the disease progresses, allowing us to interpret α as the degree of social distancing.
As such, a business-as-usual scenario amounts to α = 0 and g = g0. Using our estimates from
section 3, we can decompose α = αv +αl, where αv ≥0 captures the degree of voluntary social
distancing and αl ≥0 the additional response induced by lockdown policies. Note that our
DiD design allows for such an additive interpretation of both responses, as the estimated
lockdown response quantiﬁes the additional social distancing compared to the counterfactual of
no lockdown—i.e. of only voluntary social distancing.18
Under the assumption that individuals and policymakers react to X rather than I—what
Gros et al. call long-term and short-term control, respectively—, the controlled SIR model
described by Equations 3 and 4 admits an analytical solution. Since X = 1−S by deﬁnition,
this implies that the reaction depends directly on the size of the susceptible population. From a
theoretical point of view, this is more intuitive than to assume that the government only reacts
to the current rate of infections, regardless of the progression of the virus and the amount of
people at risk of being infected. Moreover, the assumption that the government reacts to X,
and the implied relationship between X and the reproduction rate, holds true empirically or even lower than it was for SARS and MERS,
two other corona viruses that exhibited strong clustering.
18For both the voluntary and the lockdown response estimations, the absence of signiﬁcant pre-trends in the
event study estimates presented in D.1 provides evidence in favor of this interpretation. With the use of suitable
control variables, we ensure that our estimate of αv only captures the voluntary response and of αl only the
lockdown response (see section 3). For this purpose, in the case of the voluntary response we include controls for
county- and state-level policies. For the estimation of lockdown responses, in turn, we use a rich set of controls
for the progression of the disease, and thus account for the voluntary response pre-lockdown. Therefore, the
estimated lockdown response quantiﬁes the additional social distancing compared to a no-lockdown scenario.
the discussion of Figure C.1 in the Appendix). The model then permits the estimation of α and
g0 from the data using the derived ‘XI representation’
which is independent of τ. This relation holds remarkably well in the data across highly
dissimilar regions, validating the model and supporting its robustness .
Figure B.1 in Appendix shows a similarly close model ﬁt for 23 diﬀerent US states. What is
more, the model is robust to diﬀerences in testing as long as I and X are mismeasured by the
same ratio.
Parametrization. To estimate the model parameters, we take It and Xt from our daily data
as the number of newly conﬁrmed COVID cases and the cumulative number of conﬁrmed cases.19
We smooth the number of cases with a symmetric moving average of length 5, as in Gros et al.
 , and normalize by dividing It and Xt by the total population size of the geographical
unit under consideration. To parametrize Equation 5, we use weighted least squares to estimate,
for state j at time t,
Ijt = β1Xjt +β2 log(1−Xjt)+ϵjt,
where the weights equal Ijt to account for the fact that the case data is crowded at low levels
 . For each state, we use a sample that goes until the lockdown is lifted.
One can then obtain ˆg0 and ˆα using β1 = (α + g0)/g0 and β2 = (1 + α)/g0. The estimated
parameters are reported for selected US states in Table A.1. Based on ˆα, we obtain estimates for
the voluntary response ˆαv by using the estimates from Section 3 and the relationship α = αv +αl.
In particular, we use the state-speciﬁc voluntary response estimates (V) shown in Figure 2 and
the US-wide lockdown response (L) from Table 1 to estimate the relative size of ˆαv by scaling α
by the ratio
for each state.20
19Note that this is a valid measure of I as long as the infectiousness period does not change in the sample.
This seems reasonable since no probably eﬀective drug treatment had yet been put to wide use during our sample
20Note that our decomposition of α constitutes a conservative way of estimating the fraction of the total
measured response made up by the voluntary response. The reason for this is that there are likely other ‘weaker’
forms of voluntary social distancing that our estimate does not take into account, which are, for example,
captured in the country-wide time trend . Our deﬁnition of voluntary social distancing is
‘strict’ in that we only consider people’s response to the local spread of the virus, which is a feature we should
always expect to be associated with a pandemic outbreak. The country-wide time trend, on the other hand, likely
captures the response to more contingent features of the outbreak, such as national emergency declarations. Our
‘strict’ deﬁnition is thus conservative in the sense that it underestimates what percentage of the total response
is due to voluntary social distancing, and hence underestimates the economic costs associated with voluntary
distancing.
Because we are interested in decomposing the eﬀect of lockdown, we only consider states
that implemented such a policy in our sample. Additionally, we drop all states where daily case
counts did not clearly reach a ﬁrst peak before the lockdown was eased.
With these parameter estimates in hand, one can simulate the discrete-time version of the
model. Denoting the discrete-time equivalents of g and g0 by ρ and ρ0, respectively, it holds
that ˆρ0 = exp(ˆg0), and the discretized model can be written as
It+1 = ˆρt It (1−Xt),
where ρt is described by the discrete version of Equation 4.21 Note that the estimated baseline
reproduction numbers ρ0 in Table A.1 are closely in line with those from the epidemiological
literature .
Cost estimates. As shown in Equations 3 and 4, the framework explicitly models the positive
feedback loop between infections and the reproduction number. Political and societal factors
can lead to variation in g and therefore inﬂuence the costs associated with the outbreak. We use
the ﬁndings from section 3 to estimate the costs related to voluntary and policy measures. We
distinguish four types of costs, expressed in terms of GDP per capita: (1) the production loss
due to infected workers going on sick leave, (2) the medical expenses associated with infections,
(3) the loss of human lives, and (4) the costs of social distancing .
Since the ﬁrst three types are related to health and medical costs, they are directly proportional to Xtot, the cumulative number of cases at the end of the pandemic.22 Hence, these costs
can be approximated as Cmedical = kXtot, where Gros et al. suggest a value of k ≈0.305,
or ˜k ≈0.14 if the value of human life is not considered. These estimates, based on data from the
Diamond Princess cruise ship, include appraisals of the costs induced by the lost work time of
sick people, as well as conservative estimates of hospitalization costs in Europe, which are based
on early estimates of the hospitalization rate of COVID .23 Under a laissez-faire
scenario, Xtot = 0.9424 and the upper bound for the medical cost estimate is roughly 29% (or
13% if not accounting for the value of life) of annual GDP per capita.
The fourth cost factor is a function of voluntary and mandatory social distancing. Denote
the function that maps social distancing into economic costs by f(αv,αl,S), which depends
positively on voluntary social distancing αv and lockdown-induced social distancing αv, and
21We initialize I0 = 2×10−5 and end the simulation at It = 10−5, after which it is assumed that new cases
are fully reduced to zero by test and trace strategies .
22We assume that Xtot ≈X at time t = T, with T the ﬁnal time period.
23Note that these are truly conservative estimates insofar as hospitalization costs in the US are generally
higher than in Europe.
24We stress that this value is not to be confused with herd immunity, the point where transmission of the
disease starts to decline. In fact, consistent with the literature , plugging our estimates in
the standard formula 1−1/ρ0 yields an estimated herd immunity point of around 70% for the
US as a whole.
negatively on the size of the susceptible population S. By Equation 4, this cost can be captured
by the decrease in ρ/ρ0:
Cecon = f(αv,αl,S) =
where Equation 9 sums over all points in time when the pandemic is in a large-scale containment
stage, that is, when individual testing and tracing is not possible. The parameter m maps
the social distancing eﬀorts into their economic costs. We estimate m based on the observed
relation between the weekly average of the state-level reproduction rate and the weekly insured
unemployment rate across US states, as described in section C.25 Our estimate of 0.28 is very
close to the value of 0.25 calculated by Gros et al. relying on data from China.
Overall, the model reﬂects the trade-oﬀfaced by governments between medical and economic
costs. Less restrictive policies lower the direct economic burden of the pandemic due to an
increase in g at the expense of an increase in medical costs, which enters the estimated costs
through a higher level of Xtot. Clearly, our estimates of the economic and medical costs of the
pandemic are based on a highly stylized model. For instance, it does not take into account the
possibility of a collapse of the health care system, which would lead to a discontinuous surge
in the death toll (“The beneﬁts and costs of ﬂattening the curve for COVID-19”). Moreover,
the model also abstracts from externalities arising from social distancing, such as increases in
domestic violence or mental health issues. We address some of these issues by checking the
robustness of our results for a wide range of diﬀerent parameter estimates further below.
Another potential limitation is that increases in voluntary responses and in lockdown
responses aﬀect our cost estimates in the same way. In other words, we do not allow for
the possibility that, on the margin, an increase in the voluntary response yields diﬀerent
medical and economic implications than an equivalent increase in the lockdown response of the
population. However, this line of reasoning would require that the heterogeneity in responses
diﬀers systematically across demographic and income groups. The available evidence, in turn,
suggests otherwise: For instance, people from lower income groups exhibit both a weaker
voluntary and a weaker lockdown response . As
a result, similar heterogeneities for the voluntary and mandatory social distancing map into
similar marginal costs, implying that the additive decomposition is justiﬁed at the aggregate
Results. Figure 3 plots our results. It shows the total costs, in terms of GDP per capita, of
the total containment response (T) and the counterfactual voluntary response (V) by US state.
As explained above, the total response cost is estimated using the α measured from the data,
25We exclude 5 outlier states, though the estimated m is very similar (13.74) when we retain them.
26Moreover, this issue would only pose a problem for our main results if, on the margin, an increase in the
lockdown response would yield systematically lower health beneﬁts and higher economic costs than an equivalent
increase in the voluntary response.
while the voluntary response is a counterfactual based on our estimates from section 3. Also
shown are the total and voluntary costs for the GDP-weighted average of all included states
(2019Q4, annualized). Both costs are broken down into economic (red) and medical (blue) costs.
Note that the state-level costs should be interpreted as relative to the GDP per capita of the
state in question, not of the US as a whole.
Panel a) in the ﬁgure depicts a stark result. For the overall average, we estimate COVID
to generate costs of around 16.1% of annualized GDP per capita under a laissez-faire scenario
compared to 15.2% if a lockdown is imposed. Taking into account the statistical value of a life,
these estimates increase to 20.9% and 18.1% (see Figure B.3). For all states considered, reducing
the measured containment response to levels consistent with voluntary social distancing would
only marginally decrease the economic costs, while at the same time drastically increasing the
medical costs. This ﬁnding is more or less pronounced depending on both the estimated total
containment response α and the estimated voluntary response for each state from Figure 2.
States with a combination of a high estimated containment eﬃciency and a high estimated
voluntary response, such as Montana and Idaho, barely see a change in either medical or economic
costs when changing to voluntary containment, as they remain close to the respective asymptotic
minimum and maximum of both cost cost categories.27 On the other hand, states with a
combination of low estimated containment eﬃciency and low estimated voluntary response, such
as New York and Massachusetts, see a stronger change in both cost categories when moving to
voluntary response, with the increase in medical costs outweighing the decrease in economic
The reason why the model predicts that voluntary social distancing will lead to higher overall
costs becomes evident by considering Figure B.2 in the Appendix, which shows how total costs
change with an increase in control strength α. The model implies a trade-oﬀbetween medical
and economic costs as α gets higher. While the former fall with a stronger reaction strength,
the latter increase. Initially, for low values of α, an increase in its value rapidly generates higher
economic costs, causing larger estimates of total costs. However, once α is suﬃciently high,
further increases in the control strength will generate smaller marginal increases in economic
costs, which are easily oﬀset by the medical beneﬁts. This means that the economic costs are
approximately concave in α. Following this logic, for a range of values for the control strength
there are two strategies that yield the same costs: either a weak response that implies small
economic and large medical costs, or a strong response that generates small medical and larger
economic costs. For all the states in our sample, we estimate that the strong responses result in
lower overall costs.
Robustness. The previous section has concluded that lockdown strategies yield lower economic
costs than strategies that rely on voluntary responses. We corroborate this ﬁnding by performing
27Note that the Figure actually shows a slight decrease in total costs for ID, MT and NV, which is due to
numerical inaccuracies and discontinuities in the cost function.
a series of robustness checks, showing that our conclusion holds for a large set of diﬀerent model
parametrizations and estimation approaches. These robustness checks are described in detail in
section D. First, we consider the robustness of our baseline DiD results by pursuing a staggered
event-study approach. As pointed out in Abraham and Sun and Goodman-Bacon ,
heterogeneous treatment eﬀects over time may induce bias in the ‘stacked’ DiD approach in
section 3. Yet, the results presented in section D in the Appendix indicate that such heterogeneity
is rather limited and there is no signiﬁcant pre-trend prior to the treatments of interest. In
addition, the estimated coeﬃcients are very close to our baseline results.
Second, we show that our main conclusion would still hold for estimates that diﬀer considerably from our baseline, by considering the suﬃcient conditions under which lockdowns are
the most cost-eﬀective strategy. For this purpose, we take the model calibration of our SIR
model and show the range of alternative estimates of the combined response strength and of the
relative magnitude of the voluntary response for which our conclusions would still hold.
Third, we assess the robustness of our results to diﬀerent estimates of the cost parameter m.
Importantly, higher estimates for m increase the economic costs for any given level of social
distancing. As higher economic costs render no-lockdown strategies more favorable, diﬀerences
in m may modify our main conclusion. However, Figure D.2 supports the robustness of our
results with respect to variations in m: starting from a baseline value of 0.28, a small increase in
the parameter would lead the ﬁrst two states to prefer a no-lockdown strategy, while even under
unreasonably high elasticities, it would still be eﬃcient for most states to impose a lockdown.
Lastly, we emphasize that our results are not merely artifacts of the model. As we show in
Figure D.3, diﬀerent combinations of α and m can indeed generate lower overall costs under
the voluntary scenario. However, our estimates paired with any realistic parametrization of
the C-SIR model support the view that lockdowns have been the eﬃcient strategy during the
COVID pandemic.
— [ insert Figure 3 here ] —
Conclusion
Lockdown policies are an important tool for policymakers to combat the spread of COVID-19.
Nonetheless, several governments across the world have been reluctant to adopt such policies,
fearing that their economic costs outweigh their medical beneﬁts. In contrast to this view, this
paper argues that the costs of staying open outweigh the beneﬁts. This is because individuals
engage in substantial voluntary social distancing even in the absence of lockdowns, once the
virus takes hold in their area. Hence, substantial economic costs are unavoidable, even when not
locking down. At the same time, we show that lockdowns lead to a signiﬁcant uptake in social
distancing over and above any voluntary response. While large economic costs materialize in any
event, such additional social distancing still plays an important role in further reducing medical
costs by ﬂattening the curve. Indeed, for our estimates of the voluntary and mandated social
distancing responses, all US states that imposed a lockdown would have incurred larger overall
costs had they stayed open. This suggests that the observed reluctance of some governments to
lock down was unwarranted insofar as it was guided by a concern over the economic costs of
such a policy.
Our study is subject to several caveats. First, the cost estimates presented are simulated
for the trajectory of a large-scale pandemic for which test and trace strategies are not feasible.
This implies that our results may not apply to other diseases and should not be interpreted as a
justiﬁcation for lockdowns in all contexts. Second, note that we only allow for variations in the
strength of the response—and not, for example, in its speed—while assuming that containment
remains operative until the number of infectious people drops below a certain threshold. Third,
we do not speciﬁcally take into account possible externalities on outcomes such as mental health
 or inequality . Fourth, while we hope our
results can guide the response to possible future waves of COVID-19, such extrapolation should
be done with caution and with consideration of the fraction of the population infected in the
ﬁrst wave.28 Finally, our model does not preclude the possibility that well-targeted partial
lockdowns that take into account regional and demographic heterogeneity can achieve similar
reductions in medical costs, at lower economic costs.29 Our central contribution is to show that,
even in the extreme case of an across-the-board lockdown, such a measure in all likelihood fares
better than a laissez-fare approach.
28Indeed, non-linear dynamic systems such as the C-SIR model are highly sensitive to initial conditions.
29Due to the skewed distribution of virus transmission and the importance of ‘superspreader’ events, local and quick measures may indeed be best
suited for mitigating the spread of COVID line shows the percentage of states with at least one conﬁrmed case (death).
The spikes indicate the percentage of states that have shelter-in-place orders. The green dashed line depicts
the growth rate of the median percentage of devices that stayed home over all counties, smoothed with a
moving-average of length 7 to eliminate weekly patterns. Baseline period is February 2020.
Figure 2: Voluntary Response, by State
Voluntary Response
Note: The ﬁgure plots the cumulative change in the percentage of devices that stay completely at home following
the ﬁrst case in a county (parameter β from Equation 1). Parameter estimates and conﬁdence intervals come
from separate regressions for each state, while the overall eﬀect (horizontal line) comes from a country-wide
regression. Blue (red) lines correspond to Democratic (Republican) states as per the 2016 presidential election;
dashed lines indicate parameters that are insigniﬁcant at p < 0.05. The sample is balanced on county and date,
where we cut the sample for each state two weeks after the state-wide shelter-in-place. 95% conﬁdence intervals
are based on standard errors double-clustered by county and date, as recommended in Brzezinski et al. .
Table 1: US-Wide Voluntary and Lockdown Responses
Dependent Variable: Percent at Home
Voluntary Response
Lockdown Response
County-Level Controls
Observations
Note: The table shows US-wide regression results for β and θ from Equations 1 and 2 in
Columns 1 and 2, respectively. Standard errors are double-clustered by county and date,
as recommended in Brzezinski et al. . Full results shown in Appendix Table A.3.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Figure 3: Results From Controlled SIR Model
(a) Costs of Voluntary and Total Social Distancing by State, Without Value of Life
Cost / GDP
Economic, Total
Economic, Voluntary
Medical, Total
Medical, Voluntary
(b) Intensities of Voluntary Social Distancing That Incur Same Cost as Lockdown,
Plus Costs for Each, for Various Lockdown Strengths
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Total Control Strength α
Cost / GDP
Breakeven Voluntary α
Economic, Total
Economic, Voluntary (Breakeven)
Medical, Total
Medical, Voluntary (Breakeven)
1 Panel a): estimated costs under voluntary social distancing (V) compared to total social distancing (T)—which includes
voluntary (V) and lockdown-induced reductions (L) in movement. Estimated costs for (T) are based on simulations of the discretized
C-SIR model using the α and ρ0 estimates reported in Table A.2. Costs for (V) are re-estimated with α scaled by the estimated
ratio V/(V +L) = V/T. Estimates of responses V and L are those reported in Figure 2 and Table 1. Costs are in terms of GDP per
capita. Costs are broken down into economic (red) and medical (blue, without value of life), see Equation 9. Avg. serves as a proxy
for the US overall and refers to the weighted average of the states in the sample, weighted by state-level GDP in Q4:2019 measured
in current prices. NB the small decrease in total costs for ID, MT, NV is due to numerical inaccuracies and discontinuities in the
cost function.
2 Panel b): Black line: gives, for each control strength α on the x-axis, the corresponding lower α on the y-axis that would incur
the same costs, i.e. the maximal corresponding level of voluntary social distancing that could obtain without incurring higher costs
than full lockdown. Estimates are from C-SIR model simulations with ρ0=3. Bars: give the total (saturated color) and voluntary
(transparent color) costs as % of GDP p.c. incurred by the total control strength α given on the x-axis and the corresponding
(given by black line) voluntary response strength α on the right y-axis. Costs are broken down into economic (red) and medical