UNet++: A Nested U-Net Architecture for Medical Image
Segmentation
Zongwei Zhou, Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee, Nima Tajbakhsh, Jianming Liang
Arizona State University
In this paper, we present UNet++, a new, more powerful architecture for medical image
segmentation. Our architecture is essentially a deeply-supervised encoder-decoder network where
the encoder and decoder sub-networks are connected through a series of nested, dense skip
pathways. The re-designed skip pathways aim at reducing the semantic gap between the feature
maps of the encoder and decoder sub-networks. We argue that the optimizer would deal with an
easier learning task when the feature maps from the decoder and encoder networks are
semantically similar. We have evaluated UNet++ in comparison with U-Net and wide U-Net
architectures across multiple medical image segmentation tasks: nodule segmentation in the lowdose CT scans of chest, nuclei segmentation in the microscopy images, liver segmentation in
abdominal CT scans, and polyp segmentation in colonoscopy videos. Our experiments
demonstrate that UNet++ with deep supervision achieves an average IoU gain of 3.9 and 3.4
points over U-Net and wide U-Net, respectively.
1 Introduction
The state-of-the-art models for image segmentation are variants of the encoder-decoder
architecture like U-Net and fully convolutional network (FCN) . These encoderdecoder networks used for segmentation share a key similarity: skip connections, which
combine deep, semantic, coarse-grained feature maps from the decoder sub-network with
shallow, low-level, fine-grained feature maps from the encoder sub-network. The skip
connections have proved effective in recovering fine-grained details of the target objects;
generating segmentation masks with fine details even on complex background. Skip
connections is also fundamental to the success of instance-level segmentation models such
as Mask-RCNN, which enables the segmentation of occluded objects. Arguably, image
segmentation in natural images has reached a satisfactory level of performance, but do these
models meet the strict segmentation requirements of medical images?
Segmenting lesions or abnormalities in medical images demands a higher level of accuracy
than what is desired in natural images. While a precise segmentation mask may not be
critical in natural images, even marginal segmentation errors in medical images can lead to
poor user experience in clinical settings. For instance, the subtle spiculation patterns around
 .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . Author
manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 01.
 
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . 2018 September ; 11045: 3–
11. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-00889-5_1.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
a nodule may indicate nodule malignancy; and therefore, their exclusion from the
segmentation masks would lower the credibility of the model from the clinical perspective.
Furthermore, inaccurate segmentation may also lead to a major change in the subsequent
computer-generated diagnosis. For example, an erroneous measurement of nodule growth in
longitudinal studies can result in the assignment of an incorrect Lung-RADS category to a
screening patient. It is therefore desired to devise more effective image segmentation
architectures that can effectively recover the fine details of the target objects in medical
To address the need for more accurate segmentation in medical images, we present UNet++,
a new segmentation architecture based on nested and dense skip connections. The
underlying hypothesis behind our architecture is that the model can more effectively capture
fine-grained details of the foreground objects when high-resolution feature maps from the
encoder network are gradually enriched prior to fusion with the corresponding semantically
rich feature maps from the decoder network. We argue that the network would deal with an
easier learning task when the feature maps from the decoder and encoder networks are
semantically similar. This is in contrast to the plain skip connections commonly used in U-
Net, which directly fast-forward high-resolution feature maps from the encoder to the
decoder network, resulting in the fusion of semantically dissimilar feature maps. According
to our experiments, the suggested architecture is effective, yielding significant performance
gain over U-Net and wide U-Net.
2 Related Work
Long et al. first introduced fully convolutional networks (FCN), while U-Net was
introduced by Ronneberger et al. . They both share a key idea: skip connections. In FCN,
up-sampled feature maps are summed with feature maps skipped from the encoder, while U-
Net concatenates them and add convolutions and non-linearities between each up-sampling
step. The skip connections have shown to help recover the full spatial resolution at the
network output, making fully convolutional methods suitable for semantic segmentation.
Inspired by DenseNet architecture , Li et al. proposed H-denseunet for liver and liver
tumor segmentation. In the same spirit, Drozdzalet al. systematically investigated the
importance of skip connections, and introduced short skip connections within the encoder.
Despite the minor differences between the above architectures, they all tend to fuse
semantically dissimilar feature maps from the encoder and decoder sub-networks, which,
according to our experiments, can degrade segmentation performance.
The other two recent related works are GridNet and Mask-RCNN . GridNet is an
encoder-decoder architecture wherein the feature maps are wired in a grid fashion,
generalizing several classical segmentation architectures. GridNet, however, lacks upsampling layers between skip connections; and thus, it does not represent UNet++. Mask-
RCNN is perhaps the most important meta framework for object detection, classification and
segmentation. We would like to note that UNet++ can be readily deployed as the backbone
architecture in Mask-RCNN by simply replacing the plain skip connections with the
suggested nested dense skip pathways. Due to limited space, we were not able to include
Zhou et al.
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
results of Mask RCNN with UNet++ as the backbone architecture; however, the interested
readers can refer to the supplementary material for further details.
3 Proposed Network Architecture: UNet++
Fig. 1a shows a high-level overview of the suggested architecture. As seen, UNet++ starts
with an encoder sub-network or backbone followed by a decoder sub-network. What
distinguishes UNet++ from U-Net (the black components in Fig. 1a) is the re-designed skip
pathways (shown in green and blue) that connect the two sub-networks and the use of deep
supervision (shown red).
3.1 Re-designed skip pathways
Re-designed skip pathways transform the connectivity of the encoder and decoder subnetworks. In U-Net, the feature maps of the encoder are directly received in the decoder;
however, in UNet++, they undergo a dense convolution block whose number of convolution
layers depends on the pyramid level. For example, the skip pathway between nodes X0,0 and
X1,3 consists of a dense convolution block with three convolution layers where each
convolution layer is preceded by a concatenation layer that fuses the output from the
previous convolution layer of the same dense block with the corresponding up-sampled
output of the lower dense block. Essentially, the dense convolution block brings the semantic
level of the encoder feature maps closer to that of the feature maps awaiting in the decoder.
The hypothesis is that the optimizer would face an easier optimization problem when the
received encoder feature maps and the corresponding decoder feature maps are semantically
Formally, we formulate the skip pathway as follows: let xi,j denote the output of node Xi,j
where i indexes the down-sampling layer along the encoder and j indexes the convolution
layer of the dense block along the skip pathway. The stack of feature maps represented by
xi,j is computed as
ℋ( xi −1, j) ,
ℋ([ xi, k]
j −1 , U( xi + 1, j −1)) , j > 0
where function ℋ( ⋅) is a convolution operation followed by an activation function, U( ⋅)
denotes an up-sampling layer, and [ ] denotes the concatenation layer. Basically, nodes at
level j = 0 receive only one input from the previous layer of the encoder; nodes at level j = 1
receive two inputs, both from the encoder sub-network but at two consecutive levels; and
nodes at level j > 1 receive j + 1 inputs, of which j inputs are the outputs of the previous j
nodes in the same skip pathway and the last input is the up-sampled output from the lower
skip pathway. The reason that all prior feature maps accumulate and arrive at the current
node is because we make use of a dense convolution block along each skip pathway. Fig. 1b
further clarifies Eq. 1 by showing how the feature maps travel through the top skip pathway
of UNet++.
Zhou et al.
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
3.2 Deep supervision
We propose to use deep supervision in UNet++, enabling the model to operate in two
modes: 1) accurate mode wherein the outputs from all segmentation branches are averaged;
2) fast mode wherein the final segmentation map is selected from only one of the
segmentation branches, the choice of which determines the extent of model pruning and
speed gain. Fig. 1c shows how the choice of segmentation branch in fast mode results in
architectures of varying complexity.
Owing to the nested skip pathways, UNet++ generates full resolution feature maps at
multiple semantic levels, {x0,j, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}}, which are amenable to deep supervision. We
have added a combination of binary cross-entropy and dice coefficient as the loss function to
each of the above four semantic levels, which is described as:
ℒ( Y , Y^) = −1
2 ⋅Y b ⋅logY^ b + 2 ⋅Y b ⋅Y^ b
Y b + Y^ b)
where Y^ b and Yb denote the flatten predicted probabilities and the flatten ground truths of
bth image respectively, and N indicates the batch size.
In summary, as depicted in Fig. 1a, UNet++ differs from the original U-Net in three ways: 1)
having convolution layers on skip pathways (shown in green), which bridges the semantic
gap between encoder and decoder feature maps; 2) having dense skip connections on skip
pathways (shown in blue), which improves gradient flow; and 3) having deep supervision
(shown in red), which as will be shown in Section 4 enables model pruning and improves or
in the worst case achieves comparable performance to using only one loss layer.
4 Experiments
As shown in Table 1, we use four medical imaging datasets for model evaluation, covering
lesions/organs from different medical imaging modalities. For further details about datasets
and the corresponding data pre-processing, we refer the readers to the supplementary
Baseline models:
For comparison, we used the original U-Net and a customized wide U-Net architecture. We
chose U-Net because it is a common performance baseline for image segmentation. We also
designed a wide U-Net with similar number of parameters as our suggested architecture.
This was to ensure that the performance gain yielded by our architecture is not simply due to
increased number of parameters. Table 2 details the U-Net and wide U-Net architecture.
Implementation details:
We monitored the Dice coefficient and Intersection over Union (IoU), and used early-stop
mechanism on the validation set. We also used Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3e-4.
Zhou et al.
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Architecture details for U-Net and wide U-Net are shown in Table 2. UNet++ is constructed
from the original U-Net architecture. All convolutional layers along a skip pathway (Xi,j) use
k kernels of size 3×3 (or 3×3×3 for 3D lung nodule segmentation) where k = 32 × 2i. To
enable deep supervision, a 1×1 convolutional layer followed by a sigmoid activation
function was appended to each of the target nodes: {x0,j| j ∈ {1,2,3,4}}. As a result, UNet++
generates four segmentation maps given an input image, which will be further averaged to
generate the final segmentation map. More details can be founded at github.com/Nested-
Table 3 compares U-Net, wide U-Net, and UNet++ in terms of the number parameters and
segmentation accuracy for the tasks of lung nodule segmentation, colon polyp segmentation,
liver segmentation, and cell nuclei segmentation. As seen, wide U-Net consistently
outperforms U-Net except for liver segmentation where the two architectures perform
comparably. This improvement is attributed to the larger number of parameters in wide U-
Net. UNet++ without deep supervision achieves a significant performance gain over both U-
Net and wide U-Net, yielding average improvement of 2.8 and 3.3 points in IoU. UNet++
with deep supervision exhibits average improvement of 0.6 points over UNet++ without
deep supervision. Specifically, the use of deep supervision leads to marked improvement for
liver and lung nodule segmentation, but such improvement vanishes for cell nuclei and colon
polyp segmentation. This is because polyps and liver appear at varying scales in video
frames and CT slices; and thus, a multi-scale approach using all segmentation branches
(deep supervision) is essential for accurate segmentation. Fig. 2 shows a qualitative
comparison between the results of U-Net, wide U-Net, and UNet++.
Model pruning:
Fig. 3 shows segmentation performance of UNet++ after applying different levels of
pruning. We use UNet++ Li to denote UNet++ pruned at level i (see Fig. 1c for further
details). As seen, UNet++ L3 achieves on average 32.2% reduction in inference time while
degrading IoU by only 0.6 points. More aggressive pruning further reduces the inference
time but at the cost of significant accuracy degradation.
5 Conclusion
To address the need for more accurate medical image segmentation, we proposed UNet++.
The suggested architecture takes advantage of re-designed skip pathways and deep
supervision. The re-designed skip pathways aim at reducing the semantic gap between the
feature maps of the encoder and decoder sub-networks, resulting in a possibly simpler
optimization problem for the optimizer to solve. Deep supervision also enables more
accurate segmentation particularly for lesions that appear at multiple scales such as polyps in
colonoscopy videos. We evaluated UNet++ using four medical imaging datasets covering
lung nodule segmentation, colon polyp segmentation, cell nuclei segmentation, and liver
segmentation. Our experiments demonstrated that UNet++ with deep supervision achieved
an average IoU gain of 3.9 and 3.4 points over U-Net and wide U-Net, respectively.
Zhou et al.
Deep Learn Med Image Anal Multimodal Learn Clin Decis Support . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Acknowledgments
This research has been supported partially by NIH under Award Number R01HL128785, by ASU and Mayo Clinic
through a Seed Grant and an Innovation Grant. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of NIH.