In the 7th IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, September 20–27, 1999, Kerkyra, Greece.
Globally Optimal Regions and Boundaries
Ian H. Jermyn and Hiroshi Ishikawa
Courant Institute of Mathematical Science
New York University, New York, NY, U.S.A.
 , 
We propose a new form of energy functional for the segmentation of regions in images, and an efﬁcient method for
ﬁnding its global optima. The energy can have contributions from both the region and its boundary, thus combining the best features of region- and boundary-based approaches to segmentation. By transforming the region energy into a boundary energy, we can treat both contributions on an equal footing, and solve the global optimization problem as a minimum mean weight cycle problem on
a directed graph. The simple, polynomial-time algorithm
requires no initialization and is highly parallelizable.
1. Introduction
Image segmentation methods generally fall into two
classes, being either region-based or boundary-based. The
former class uses properties of areas of the image to choose
among possible segmentations, while the latter looks at the
properties of the image only on the boundary of the proposed segmented regions.
Both methods have their advantages and drawbacks.
Region-based methods tend to be global, optimizing a functional of the image segmentation.
On the other hand,
they often ignore important boundary properties such as
smoothness.
Boundary-based approaches can treat such
properties very naturally, but suffer from their own difﬁculties. First, most algorithms ﬁnd only local minima, and
thus have no measure of the signiﬁcance of the extracted
boundary for the image as a whole. Second, although there
do exist algorithms guaranteed to ﬁnd global minima, using graph techniques such as dynamic programming and
Dijkstra’s algorithm, these do not adapt easily to closed
contours. Unfortunately, open contours do not segment regions in the image, so that further processing is needed to
group the contours into proto-surfaces. Third, boundarybased methods cannot incorporate region information such
as texture easily. In addition, many of the extant algorithms
require initialization by the user in some way, by specifying the end-points of the contour, or by deﬁning an initial
contour that then evolves to a solution.
In this paper we propose a new form of energy functional for the segmentation of regions in images, and an
efﬁcient method for ﬁnding its global optima in energy order. The energy is of a very general form (equation (1)),
being the modulus of the integral over the region of any
integrable function, divided by a measure of the length of
the boundary of the region. The solution to the optimization problem is the global maximum of this energy over all
regions. The region integral can be transformed to a boundary integral, and then combined with boundary-dependent
terms. In this way the energy can have contributions from
both the region and its boundary, allowing region information such as texture and homogeneity to be combined with
boundary information such as intensity gradients. Once
expressed as a boundary integral, we can cast the global
optimization problem into the form of a minimum mean
weight cycle problem in a digraph. This problem has a
simple, polynomial-time algorithm that requires no initialization, and is highly parallelizable, with each pixel able to
perform its computations independently, reading from, but
never writing to, its neighbours.
The paper is laid out as follows. In the next section, we
discuss related work. In section 3, we describe the general
form of the energy functional and its properties, and give
some examples of possible uses. We discuss the algorithm
that globally optimizes such energies and its relation to our
problem in section 4. In section 5 we describe some speciﬁc models of regions, and show the results of experiments
with these models.
2. Related work
Image segmentation has a huge literature, and here we
only touch on some of the work more closely related to
Contour-based grouping methods include Parent and
Zucker’s work using relaxation methods, Sha’ashua
and Ullman’s work on saliency networks, and Guy
Ian H. Jermyn and Hiroshi Ishikawa
and Medioni’s work using voting schemes. There is
also the work of Cox et al. on a Bayesian sequential tracking scheme . Elder and Zucker have developed a
method for ﬁnding closed contours using chains of tangent vectors. Williams and Thornber and Williams
and Jacobs discuss contour closure using stochastic
completion ﬁelds. Closest to our work however, because it
starts from an energy optimization criterion, is the work on
active contours. The seminal works in this area are Kass et
al. and Blake and Zisserman , and much subsequent
work follows this both in the form of the energy functionals
used, and in algorithmic techniques. Another body of work
applies dynamic programming techniques to minimize the
contour energy. Amini et al. use dynamic programming
as part of a gradient descent procedure. Montanari 
uses dynamic programming to ﬁnd the minimum energy
path between given end-points. Geiger et al. use initialization with a series of points, and a choice of window
around those points, to delineate the space of contours considered. Much of this work uses initialization and restricted
regions of the image to limit the space of contours over
which the optimization proceeds, and most algorithms ﬁnd
local minima, or approximations to global minima over a
limited set of contours. Globally minimum closed contours
are not found.
The paper by Cox, Rao, and Zhong is particularly
related to our work. They use a graph algorithm known as
the pinned ratio algorithm to ﬁnd closed contours in an image. The method can be made initialization-free, and ﬁnds
a global minimum under some weak constraints.
method is not as general as ours however, as they cannot
combine region and boundary information, and the region
information they use must be positive everywhere in the
Related work in the area of region-based segmentation
is that of Shi and Malik . They use a generalized eigenvalue method to ﬁnd normalized cuts. The denominator in
our equation (1) plays a similar role to the cut normalization. Leung and Malik extend their work by incorporating weak contour continuity information into the regionbased model.
Psychological work has emphasized the importance of
closure in perception since the Gestalt movement. Work
in illusory contours has also shown the importance of the
Gestalt concept of closure to the perceptual organization
involved in these phenomena . More recent work
by Kov´acs and Julesz, and Elder and Zucker has demonstrated that closure is a very important determinant of contour saliency .
3. Theoretical framework
An image is a real-valued function
I on a domain in
A simple region is denoted
R and its boundary
Gaussian is denoted
G, and convolution
3.1. Combining regions and boundaries
The form of energy functional with which we deal is
s is the arc length parameter,
f is any real-valued
function on
g is any positive real-valued function
R. We deﬁne the solution to the optimization problem as the global maximum of
E over all regions
reasons that will become clear, we note that by assigning
two energies to each region,
R), and then minimizing over all such energies, we achieve the same solution.
This can be viewed as an assignment of two orientations to
each region, and then a minimization over all oriented regions. The denominator is a (possibly weighted) measure
of the length of the boundary, and has the effect of damping
the scaling behaviour of the energy, which would otherwise
have a strong preference for large regions. It also functions
as a boundary smoothing term, as follows. If
unity we would be maximizing the area over the length,
and ﬁxing the length of the boundary would produce a disc
as the solution to the optimization problem. This is also
the solution to an active contour model with a ﬁxed length
and a smoothing term that is the square of the curvature.
In general, the effect of the dependence on area divided by
that on length will be to produce smoother boundaries.
The numerator of equation (1) can always be rewritten
as an integral over the boundary
R of the region
n is the normal vector to the boundary, and
deﬁned by the equation
f. Such an
A always exists.
It can for instance be given by the following integrals:
There is a choice of constant functions that can be added
to this vector ﬁeld, but the choice does not affect the value
of the boundary integral in equation (2). Indeed, we can
add any divergence-free vector ﬁeld and still have the same
boundary integral.
Similarly to equation (1), we can view the boundary
as having two possible orientations corresponding to the
bounding curve running in the two possible directions. Removing the modulus signs and minimizing over all oriented
boundaries is then equivalent to the original maximization
problem over un-oriented regions.
Globally Optimal Regions and Boundaries
 As advertized, the form of equation (2) allows us elegantly to include boundary as well as region information in our model. Indeed the present work shows that
they are essentially the same, although one description may be more appropriate than the other. We can
A any other vector ﬁeld
B and still compute the
global optimum.
 Averaging the weight of the boundary over a measure
of its length has at least two important advantages
over unaveraged contour models.
First, it removes
the uncontrollable dependence on contour length that
such models inevitably exhibit. This is most noticeable if the energy has a gradient term and a length
term for example. The length term is normally positive, while the gradient term is negative. Depending
on the parameters, the global solution could be trivial in one of two ways: inﬁnitely long or inﬁnitely
short.These are extreme examples, but the implicit dependence on length is always present. Second, a simple polynomial-timealgorithm exists for the minimum
mean weight cycle problem, whereas the minimum
weight cycle problem is NP-hard.
3.2. Forms of region function
The function
f in equation (1) can be any integrable
function. In particular, it can be the convolution of the
image with any ﬁlter
(p). In this case,
equation (2) also takes the form of a convolution:
The function
f need not be a linear ﬁlter however. Some
choices of
f and their meaning in our model are given below. Throughout we include the possibility of a Gaussian
smoothing of the image, or in other words the possibility of
examining the image at various scales. The examples are
intended to include the case of zero variance, when G is a
delta function.
G. In this case the model is looking for globally maximum intensity regions. It will ﬁnd bright spots such
as specular reﬂections, as well as large regions of high
intensity.
G. Viewed as a region integral, this function ﬁnds
the region with the largest absolute value of the integrated Laplacian of the smoothed intensity. Such
regions correspond to “lumps” or “dips” in the intensity function, since regions with undulations in the intensity will make both positive and negative contributions to the region integral, reducing its absolute value.
Converted to the form of equation (2),
is thus the vector ﬁeld of wavelet coefﬁcients. Viewed
in this way, the model ﬁnds regions whose boundaries
pass through points with high smoothed intensity gradient, in a direction perpendicular to the gradient. The
model averages over length, thus removing the dependence on scale, and our algorithm ﬁnds the globally
optimal region and boundary. We investigate such a
model in section 5.
Gj. The previous function does not deal well with
the case of contrast-reversing boundaries, which introduce both positive and negative contributions to the
region integral. We can deal with the case of general boundaries (including contrast-reversing) using
the absolute value of the Laplacian, at the expense of
losing a simple boundary interpretation. This region
function is a better way to deal with contrast-reversing
boundaries than the normal method of taking the magnitude of the gradient, since it preserves the notion that
intensity change should be normal to the boundary.
f is a positive, monotonically decreasing
function of the magnitude of the wavelet coefﬁcients
Gj, such as
rGj ( M is
an upper bound on the magnitude of the wavelet coef-
ﬁcients in the image). The integral of such a term over
a region will be large if the gradient has small magnitude everywhere. It will thus seek out the region with
globally most homogeneous intensity.
T. A ﬁlter
T (or linear combination of ﬁlters) that responds strongly to a particular class of textures can be
used to segment globally optimal regions of that texture.
Most interestingly, the function can be a combination of
these examples, so that we could search for the region with
the best response to a given texture and that had a high intensity gradient boundary for example, or that had a homogeneous intensity surrounded by a high intensity gradient
Before passing to a description of the algorithm that we
use to solve the global optimization problem, we make two
observations about the form of energy functional.
As mentioned, equation (2) has an interesting invariance. If we add to
A any vector ﬁeld with zero divergence,
we can see by transforming to the form of equation (1) that
the energy will not change. When
G, this corresponds to adding a harmonic function to the intensity.
Equation (1) is the most general form of energy that we
can optimize globally at present (although see section 6). In
Ian H. Jermyn and Hiroshi Ishikawa
the experiments we use a slightly restricted form, in which
the function
g is unity and the length is approximated by
an edge count. The algorithms to ﬁnd the global maximum
of the more general case are more complex than
the one we describe in section 4. For the sake of clarity, we
restrict ourselves to this case.
4. Algorithmic solution
To ﬁnd the global maximum of the energy in equation (2) (or equivalently equation (1)) we use a graph algorithm due to Richard Karp . This algorithm ﬁnds the
minimum mean weight cycle in a directed graph.
The algorithm requires no initialization by the user. It is
also highly parallelizable, with each pixel able to perform
its computations independently, reading from, but never
writing to, its neighbours. In the experiment, we iteratively
apply the algorithm. After each iteration, we remove from
the graph those vertices through which the previous solution passed. We thus ﬁnd a series of regions of increasing
energy, which can be viewed as a series of hypotheses about
regions in the image of gradually decreasing probability.
We ﬁrst describe the algorithm and then clarify its relation to our problem.
4.1. Algorithm
We begin with a weighted directed graph
G, with weight
w. We wish to ﬁnd the minimum mean weight
simple cycle, where the mean weight of an edge progression composed of edges
g is deﬁned as
First, deﬁne the function
) taking each vertex
V ( V is the vertex set) to the weight of the minimum weight
path of length
v from an arbitrary start vertex
and deﬁne it to be
 if no path exists of length
k. Then it
can be shown (proof is given in ) that the weight
the minimum mean weight cycle is given by
[0::(n )]
) can be computed using the recurrence
E is the edge set of
G. With in
The computation of
 )] can be
performed using dynamic programming in time
The minimum weight paths can be computed simultaneously. Using a further
) time we can compute
), leading to an overall computation time of
The cycle itself can be extracted by selecting the minimizing
k in equation (3), and ﬁnding a cycle of length
 k in the minimum weight path from
4.2. Application
We recall that, as discussed in section 3, if we remove
the modulus signs from equations (1) and (2) and view
the region and boundary as having two possible orientations, minimizing over all oriented regions or boundaries
is equivalent to maximizing equations (1) and (2) over all
un-oriented regions or boundaries.
To cast our problem in the form of a minimum mean
weight cycle problem, we embed a directed graph in the
image, with the property that for every two vertices,
) is an edge then
u) is also. Thus each cycle
can have two possible orientations. The embedding
each vertex
v to a point
), and each edge
tangent vector
(e) located at the median point of
(t), and directed from
(t). The unit normal vectors
n(e) required by equation (2) can then be deﬁned from
the tangent vectors by a ﬁxed rotation. A region boundary
is then by deﬁnition a simple cycle in this graph.
The weight of an edge
) is deﬁned as
Ag, where the vector ﬁeld
A is evaluated at the midpoint of
the edge, and so lies in the same tangent space as
s is the Euclidean distance between
plays the role of the measure
ds in equation (2). Note that
n(e) is deﬁned using a ﬁxed orientation from the
tangent vectors, the weights of edges between the same
two points but in opposite directions will have the same
absolute value but opposite sign.
This ensures that the
weights of cycles that differ only in orientation will have
the same absolute value but opposite sign, as required when
we remove the modulus signs and minimize over oriented
boundaries in equation (2). Summing the edge weights so
deﬁned over a cycle in the graph then gives a discrete version of the numerator in equation (2).
We can now apply the minimum mean weight cycle algorithm to ﬁnd the solution to our problem on this discrete
domain. If the graph is dense enough in the image plane,
we will have a good solution to the continuous problem.
5. Experiments
For the bulk of the experiments, we chose
in equation (1). Thus we are ﬁnding regions over which the
absolute value of the integral of the Laplacian is as large
as possible. These correspond to “lumps” or “dips” in the
intensity function, since regions with undulations in the intensity will make both positive and negative contributions
Globally Optimal Regions and Boundaries
Gradient vector
Figure 1. (a) For each pixel we compute the
gradient vector.
(b) The graph has a node
for each pixel and eight outgoing edges for
each node (except at the boundary.) (c) The
edge weight is calculated by taking a cross
product of the gradient vector and the edge
Figure 2. (a) A synthetic contrast-reversing
boundary. (b) The result of applying the region energy
G. (c) The result of applying
the region energy
Gj. The region found
is shown in grey.
to the region integral, reducing its absolute value. With
this choice of
f, the vector ﬁeld
A in equation (2) becomes
G, the wavelet coefﬁcients of the image at a scale dictated by the width of
G. (We took the width to be small, of
the order of a few pixels, so that we are dealing with a very
slightly blurred estimate of the gradient at pixel scale.) As
a boundary integral, the energy becomes
The integrand in equation (4) is minimal when the boundary tangent vector is perpendicular to the intensity gradient.
To apply the algorithm of section 4, we used a directed
graph with an eight-valent node for each pixel (Figure 1).
For each node, we computed the gradient vector at the pixel
by taking a wavelet coefﬁcient:
where “ ” denotes a convolution and
is the derivative of a
Gaussian. For an edge going from node
v corresponding to pixels
v, the edge weight is computed
This is the cross product of the tangent vector with length
equal to the Euclidean distance between the nodes with the
wavelet coefﬁcients. This is the same as taking the dot
product of the coefﬁcients with the appropriately oriented
normal vector, and weighting by the Euclidean distance between the nodes.
We iteratively applied the algorithm explained in section 4. After each iteration, we removed from the graph
those vertices through which the previous solution passed.
In this way a series of regions of increasing energy was
extracted. This can be viewed as a series of hypotheses
about regions in the image of gradually decreasing probability. Results are shown in Figure 3. The numbers indicate
the order in which the regions were found. The ﬁnding of
specularities (and their reverse - dark spots) by the method
is to be expected as these are isolated peaks or troughs in
the image. Although potentially interesting, these tiny regions can be eliminated by the addition of a term that favors
larger areas (for example homogeneity).
In order to illustrate that the method can also deal with
the case of contrast-reversing boundaries, we took a synthetic image and used the region function
results are shown in Figure 2. They illustrate that replacing
the Laplacian by its absolute value ﬁnds contrast-reversing
boundaries. The expansion of the region found beyond the
contrast-reversing boundary is a consequence of using an
edge count instead of the geometrical length. It results in
multiple degenerate solutions, one of which is illustrated.
Use of the more sophisticated algorithm mentioned at the
end of section 3.2 would break the degeneracy and pick out
the (correct) solution of minimum length.
We note that the region functions used in the experiments have no parameters. The scale at which we compute the gradient is variable, but we chose a small pixel-size
scale beforehand, and stayed with it throughout the experiments.
6. Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a new form of energy functional for the segmentation of regions in images, and an ef-
ﬁcient method for ﬁnding its global optima in energy order.
Ian H. Jermyn and Hiroshi Ishikawa
Figure 3. (a) A 256
 256 pixel image. Ten regions are shown. (b) A 200
 134 pixel image. Shown
are three least energy regions (the left ear, under the right arm, and the gorilla.) (c) A 124
 166 pixel
image. Three regions are shown. The numbers indicate the order in which the regions were found.
Globally Optimal Regions and Boundaries
The energy can have contributions from both the region and
its boundary, thus allowing typical region information such
as texture and homogeneity to be combined with typical
boundary information such as intensity gradients. The two
types of energy are transformable into each other however,
and by transforming the region energy into a boundary energy we can cast the global optimization problem into the
form of a minimum mean weight cycle problem in a digraph. This problem has a simple, polynomial-time algorithm that requires no initialization, and is highly parallelizable. We described experiments using combinations of region and boundary information that illustrate the strength
of the method. The energy is of a very general form, although always globally optimizable by the same algorithm,
and offers many other possibilities for further modeling.
Acknowledgments. The authors wish to thank the Instituto
de Matem´atica Pura e Aplicada in Rio de Janeiro for their
generous hospitality, and Professor Davi Geiger for his advice and encouragement.
This work was partially supported by grant number MURI-AFOSR 25-74100-F1837.