Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1746–1751,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c⃝2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classiﬁcation
New York University
 
We report on a series of experiments with
convolutional
trained on top of pre-trained word vectors for sentence-level classiﬁcation tasks.
We show that a simple CNN with little hyperparameter tuning and static vectors achieves excellent results on multiple benchmarks.
Learning task-speciﬁc
vectors through ﬁne-tuning offers further
gains in performance.
We additionally
propose a simple modiﬁcation to the architecture to allow for the use of both
task-speciﬁc and static vectors. The CNN
models discussed herein improve upon the
state of the art on 4 out of 7 tasks, which
include sentiment analysis and question
classiﬁcation.
Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable
results in computer vision and speech recognition 
in recent years. Within natural language processing, much of the work with deep learning methods has involved learning word vector representations through neural language models 
and performing composition over the learned word
vectors for classiﬁcation .
Word vectors, wherein words are projected from a
sparse, 1-of-V encoding (here V is the vocabulary
size) onto a lower dimensional vector space via a
hidden layer, are essentially feature extractors that
encode semantic features of words in their dimensions. In such dense representations, semantically
close words are likewise close—in euclidean or
cosine distance—in the lower dimensional vector
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) utilize
layers with convolving ﬁlters that are applied to
local features .
Originally
invented for computer vision, CNN models have
subsequently been shown to be effective for NLP
and have achieved excellent results in semantic
parsing , search query retrieval
 , sentence modeling , and other traditional NLP
tasks .
In the present work, we train a simple CNN with
one layer of convolution on top of word vectors
obtained from an unsupervised neural language
model. These vectors were trained by Mikolov et
al. on 100 billion words of Google News,
and are publicly available.1 We initially keep the
word vectors static and learn only the other parameters of the model. Despite little tuning of hyperparameters, this simple model achieves excellent
results on multiple benchmarks, suggesting that
the pre-trained vectors are ‘universal’ feature extractors that can be utilized for various classiﬁcation tasks. Learning task-speciﬁc vectors through
ﬁne-tuning results in further improvements. We
ﬁnally describe a simple modiﬁcation to the architecture to allow for the use of both pre-trained and
task-speciﬁc vectors by having multiple channels.
Our work is philosophically similar to Razavian
et al. which showed that for image classiﬁcation, feature extractors obtained from a pretrained deep learning model perform well on a variety of tasks—including tasks that are very different from the original task for which the feature
extractors were trained.
The model architecture, shown in ﬁgure 1, is a
slight variant of the CNN architecture of Collobert
et al. . Let xi ∈Rk be the k-dimensional
word vector corresponding to the i-th word in the
sentence. A sentence of length n (padded where
1 
n x k representation of
sentence with static and
non-static channels
Convolutional layer with
multiple filter widths and
feature maps
Max-over-time
Fully connected layer
with dropout and
softmax output
Figure 1: Model architecture with two channels for an example sentence.
necessary) is represented as
x1:n = x1 ⊕x2 ⊕. . . ⊕xn,
where ⊕is the concatenation operator. In general, let xi:i+j refer to the concatenation of words
xi, xi+1, . . . , xi+j.
A convolution operation involves a ﬁlter w ∈Rhk, which is applied to a
window of h words to produce a new feature. For
example, a feature ci is generated from a window
of words xi:i+h−1 by
ci = f(w · xi:i+h−1 + b).
Here b ∈R is a bias term and f is a non-linear
function such as the hyperbolic tangent. This ﬁlter
is applied to each possible window of words in the
sentence {x1:h, x2:h+1, . . . , xn−h+1:n} to produce
a feature map
c = [c1, c2, . . . , cn−h+1],
with c ∈Rn−h+1. We then apply a max-overtime pooling operation 
over the feature map and take the maximum value
ˆc = max{c} as the feature corresponding to this
particular ﬁlter. The idea is to capture the most important feature—one with the highest value—for
each feature map. This pooling scheme naturally
deals with variable sentence lengths.
We have described the process by which one
feature is extracted from one ﬁlter.
uses multiple ﬁlters (with varying window sizes)
to obtain multiple features. These features form
the penultimate layer and are passed to a fully connected softmax layer whose output is the probability distribution over labels.
In one of the model variants, we experiment
with having two ‘channels’ of word vectors—one
that is kept static throughout training and one that
is ﬁne-tuned via backpropagation (section 3.2).2
In the multichannel architecture, illustrated in ﬁgure 1, each ﬁlter is applied to both channels and
the results are added to calculate ci in equation
(2). The model is otherwise equivalent to the single channel architecture.
Regularization
For regularization we employ dropout on the
penultimate layer with a constraint on l2-norms of
the weight vectors . Dropout
prevents co-adaptation of hidden units by randomly dropping out—i.e., setting to zero—a proportion p of the hidden units during fowardbackpropagation. That is, given the penultimate
layer z = [ˆc1, . . . , ˆcm] (note that here we have m
ﬁlters), instead of using
y = w · z + b
for output unit y in forward propagation, dropout
y = w · (z ◦r) + b,
where ◦is the element-wise multiplication operator and r ∈Rm is a ‘masking’ vector of Bernoulli
random variables with probability p of being 1.
Gradients are backpropagated only through the
unmasked units. At test time, the learned weight
vectors are scaled by p such that ˆw = pw, and
ˆw is used (without dropout) to score unseen sentences. We additionally constrain l2-norms of the
weight vectors by rescaling w to have ||w||2 = s
whenever ||w||2 > s after a gradient descent step.
2We employ language from computer vision where a color
image has red, green, and blue channels.
20 10662 18765 16448
18 11855 17836 16262
16185 14838
23 10000 21323 17913
Table 1: Summary statistics for the datasets after tokenization. c: Number of target classes. l: Average sentence length.
N: Dataset size. |V |: Vocabulary size. |Vpre|: Number of
words present in the set of pre-trained word vectors. Test:
Test set size (CV means there was no standard train/test split
and thus 10-fold CV was used).
Datasets and Experimental Setup
We test our model on various benchmarks. Summary statistics of the datasets are in table 1.
• MR: Movie reviews with one sentence per review. Classiﬁcation involves detecting positive/negative reviews .3
Stanford Sentiment Treebank—an
extension of MR but with train/dev/test splits
provided and ﬁne-grained labels (very positive, positive, neutral, negative, very negative), re-labeled by Socher et al. .4
• SST-2: Same as SST-1 but with neutral reviews removed and binary labels.
• Subj: Subjectivity dataset where the task is
to classify a sentence as being subjective or
objective .
• TREC: TREC question dataset—task involves classifying a question into 6 question
types (whether the question is about person,
location, numeric information, etc.) .5
• CR: Customer reviews of various products
(cameras, MP3s etc.). Task is to predict positive/negative reviews .6
3 
4 Data is actually provided
at the phrase-level and hence we train the model on both
phrases and sentences but only score on sentences at test
time, as in Socher et al. , Kalchbrenner et al. ,
and Le and Mikolov . Thus the training set is an order
of magnitude larger than listed in table 1.
5 
6 
• MPQA: Opinion polarity detection subtask
of the MPQA dataset .7
Hyperparameters and Training
For all datasets we use: rectiﬁed linear units, ﬁlter
windows (h) of 3, 4, 5 with 100 feature maps each,
dropout rate (p) of 0.5, l2 constraint (s) of 3, and
mini-batch size of 50. These values were chosen
via a grid search on the SST-2 dev set.
We do not otherwise perform any datasetspeciﬁc tuning other than early stopping on dev
sets. For datasets without a standard dev set we
randomly select 10% of the training data as the
dev set. Training is done through stochastic gradient descent over shufﬂed mini-batches with the
Adadelta update rule .
Pre-trained Word Vectors
Initializing word vectors with those obtained from
an unsupervised neural language model is a popular method to improve performance in the absence
of a large supervised training set . We
use the publicly available word2vec vectors that
were trained on 100 billion words from Google
News. The vectors have dimensionality of 300 and
were trained using the continuous bag-of-words
architecture .
present in the set of pre-trained words are initialized randomly.
Model Variations
We experiment with several variants of the model.
• CNN-rand: Our baseline model where all
words are randomly initialized and then modiﬁed during training.
• CNN-static:
A model with pre-trained
vectors from word2vec.
All words—
including the unknown ones that are randomly initialized—are kept static and only
the other parameters of the model are learned.
• CNN-non-static: Same as above but the pretrained vectors are ﬁne-tuned for each task.
• CNN-multichannel: A model with two sets
of word vectors. Each set of vectors is treated
as a ‘channel’ and each ﬁlter is applied
7 
CNN-static
CNN-non-static
CNN-multichannel
RAE 
MV-RNN 
RNTN 
DCNN 
Paragraph-Vec 
CCAE 
Sent-Parser 
NBSVM 
MNB 
G-Dropout 
F-Dropout 
Tree-CRF 
CRF-PR 
SVMS 
Table 2: Results of our CNN models against other methods. RAE: Recursive Autoencoders with pre-trained word vectors from
Wikipedia . MV-RNN: Matrix-Vector Recursive Neural Network with parse trees .
RNTN: Recursive Neural Tensor Network with tensor-based feature function and parse trees . DCNN:
Dynamic Convolutional Neural Network with k-max pooling . Paragraph-Vec: Logistic regression on top of paragraph vectors . CCAE: Combinatorial Category Autoencoders with combinatorial
category grammar operators . Sent-Parser: Sentiment analysis-speciﬁc parser . NBSVM, MNB: Naive Bayes SVM and Multinomial Naive Bayes with uni-bigrams from Wang and Manning .
G-Dropout, F-Dropout: Gaussian Dropout and Fast Dropout from Wang and Manning . Tree-CRF: Dependency tree
with Conditional Random Fields . CRF-PR: Conditional Random Fields with Posterior Regularization
 . SVMS: SVM with uni-bi-trigrams, wh word, head word, POS, parser, hypernyms, and 60 hand-coded
rules as features from Silva et al. .
to both channels, but gradients are backpropagated only through one of the channels. Hence the model is able to ﬁne-tune
one set of vectors while keeping the other
Both channels are initialized with
In order to disentangle the effect of the above
variations versus other random factors, we eliminate other sources of randomness—CV-fold assignment, initialization of unknown word vectors, initialization of CNN parameters—by keeping them uniform within each dataset.
Results and Discussion
Results of our models against other methods are
listed in table 2. Our baseline model with all randomly initialized words (CNN-rand) does not perform well on its own. While we had expected performance gains through the use of pre-trained vectors, we were surprised at the magnitude of the
gains. Even a simple model with static vectors
(CNN-static) performs remarkably well, giving
competitive results against the more sophisticated
deep learning models that utilize complex pooling schemes or require
parse trees to be computed beforehand . These results suggest that the pretrained vectors are good, ‘universal’ feature extractors and can be utilized across datasets. Finetuning the pre-trained vectors for each task gives
still further improvements (CNN-non-static).
Multichannel vs. Single Channel Models
We had initially hoped that the multichannel architecture would prevent overﬁtting (by ensuring
that the learned vectors do not deviate too far
from the original values) and thus work better than
the single channel model, especially on smaller
datasets. The results, however, are mixed, and further work on regularizing the ﬁne-tuning process
is warranted.
For instance, instead of using an
additional channel for the non-static portion, one
could maintain a single channel but employ extra
dimensions that are allowed to be modiﬁed during
Most Similar Words for
Static Channel
Non-static Channel
Top 4 neighboring words—based on cosine
similarity—for vectors in the static channel (left) and ﬁnetuned vectors in the non-static channel (right) from the multichannel model on the SST-2 dataset after training.
Static vs. Non-static Representations
As is the case with the single channel non-static
model, the multichannel model is able to ﬁne-tune
the non-static channel to make it more speciﬁc to
the task-at-hand. For example, good is most similar to bad in word2vec, presumably because
they are (almost) syntactically equivalent. But for
vectors in the non-static channel that were ﬁnetuned on the SST-2 dataset, this is no longer the
case (table 3). Similarly, good is arguably closer
to nice than it is to great for expressing sentiment,
and this is indeed reﬂected in the learned vectors.
For (randomly initialized) tokens not in the set
of pre-trained vectors, ﬁne-tuning allows them to
learn more meaningful representations: the network learns that exclamation marks are associated with effusive expressions and that commas
are conjunctive (table 3).
Further Observations
We report on some further experiments and observations:
• Kalchbrenner et al.
 report much
worse results with a CNN that has essentially
the same architecture as our single channel
model. For example, their Max-TDNN (Time
Delay Neural Network) with randomly initialized words obtains 37.4% on the SST-1
dataset, compared to 45.0% for our model.
We attribute such discrepancy to our CNN
having much more capacity (multiple ﬁlter
widths and feature maps).
• Dropout proved to be such a good regularizer
that it was ﬁne to use a larger than necessary
network and simply let dropout regularize it.
Dropout consistently added 2%–4% relative
performance.
• When randomly initializing words not in
word2vec, we obtained slight improvements by sampling each dimension from
U[−a, a] where a was chosen such that the
randomly initialized vectors have the same
variance as the pre-trained ones. It would be
interesting to see if employing more sophisticated methods to mirror the distribution of
pre-trained vectors in the initialization process gives further improvements.
• We brieﬂy experimented with another set of
publicly available word vectors trained by
Collobert et al. on Wikipedia,8 and
found that word2vec gave far superior performance. It is not clear whether this is due
to Mikolov et al. ’s architecture or the
100 billion word Google News dataset.
• Adadelta gave similar results
to Adagrad but required
fewer epochs.
Conclusion
In the present work we have described a series of
experiments with convolutional neural networks
built on top of word2vec. Despite little tuning
of hyperparameters, a simple CNN with one layer
of convolution performs remarkably well. Our results add to the well-established evidence that unsupervised pre-training of word vectors is an important ingredient in deep learning for NLP.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Yann LeCun and the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback
and suggestions.
8