Mitosis detection in breast cancer
pathology images by combining
handcrafted and convolutional neural
network features
Haibo Wang
Angel Cruz-Roa
Ajay Basavanhally
Hannah Gilmore
Natalie Shih
Mike Feldman
John Tomaszewski
Fabio Gonzalez
Anant Madabhushi
Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology
images by combining handcrafted and
convolutional neural network features
Haibo Wang,a,* Angel Cruz-Roa,b Ajay Basavanhally,a Hannah Gilmore,a Natalie Shih,c Mike Feldman,c
John Tomaszewski,d Fabio Gonzalez,b and Anant Madabhushia
aCase Western Reserve University, Center for Computational Imaging and Personalized Diagnostics,
2071 Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, United States
bUniversidad Nacional de Colombia, Aulas de Ingenieria, MINDLab, 114 Edif. 453, Bogota, Colombia
cHospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States
dUniversity at Buffalo, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York 14214, United States
Abstract. Breast cancer (BCa) grading plays an important role in predicting disease aggressiveness and patient
outcome. A key component of BCa grade is the mitotic count, which involves quantifying the number of cells in
the process of dividing (i.e., undergoing mitosis) at a specific point in time. Currently, mitosis counting is done
manually by a pathologist looking at multiple high power fields (HPFs) on a glass slide under a microscope, an
extremely laborious and time consuming process. The development of computerized systems for automated
detection of mitotic nuclei, while highly desirable, is confounded by the highly variable shape and appearance
of mitoses. Existing methods use either handcrafted features that capture certain morphological, statistical, or
textural attributes of mitoses or features learned with convolutional neural networks (CNN). Although handcrafted features are inspired by the domain and the particular application, the data-driven CNN models tend
to be domain agnostic and attempt to learn additional feature bases that cannot be represented through
any of the handcrafted features. On the other hand, CNN is computationally more complex and needs
a large number of labeled training instances. Since handcrafted features attempt to model domain pertinent
attributes and CNN approaches are largely supervised feature generation methods, there is an appeal in
attempting to combine these two distinct classes of feature generation strategies to create an integrated set
of attributes that can potentially outperform either class of feature extraction strategies individually. We present
a cascaded approach for mitosis detection that intelligently combines a CNN model and handcrafted features
(morphology, color, and texture features). By employing a light CNN model, the proposed approach is far less
demanding computationally, and the cascaded strategy of combining handcrafted features and CNN-derived
features enables the possibility of maximizing the performance by leveraging the disconnected feature sets.
Evaluation on the public ICPR12 mitosis dataset that has 226 mitoses annotated on 35 HPFs (400× magnification) by several pathologists and 15 testing HPFs yielded an F-measure of 0.7345. Our approach is accurate,
fast, and requires fewer computing resources compared to existent methods, making this feasible for clinical use.
© 2014 Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) [DOI: 10.1117/1.JMI.1.3.034003]
Keywords: mitosis; breast cancer; convolutional neural networks; cascaded ensemble; handcrafted feature; digital pathology.
Paper 14061PRR received May 16, 2014; revised manuscript received Sep. 14, 2014; accepted for publication Sep. 16, 2014; published online Oct. 10, 2014.
Introduction
Bloom Richardson grading,1 the most commonly used system
for histopathologic diagnosis of invasive breast cancers (BCa),2
comprises three main components: tubule formation, nuclear
pleomorphism, and mitotic count. Mitotic count, which refers
to the number of dividing cells (i.e., mitoses) visible in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained histopathology, is widely
acknowledged as a good predictor of tumor aggressiveness.3
In clinical practice, pathologists define mitotic count as the number of mitotic nuclei identified visually in a fixed number of
high power fields (HPFs, 400× magnification). However, the
manual identification of mitotic nuclei often suffers from poor
inter-interpreter agreement due to the highly variable texture
and morphology between mitoses. Additionally, this is a very
laborious and time consuming process involving the pathologist
manually looking at and counting mitoses from multiple high
power view fields on a glass slide under a microscope.
Computerized detection of mitotic nuclei will lead to increased
accuracy and consistency while simultaneously reducing the
time and cost needed for BCa diagnosis.4
The detection of mitotic nuclei in H&E stained histopathology is a difficult task (see Fig. 1). First, mitosis is a complex
biological process during which the cell nucleus undergoes
various morphological transformations. This leads to highly
variable sizes and shapes across mitotic nuclei within the same
image. Another issue is rare event detection, which complicates
classification tasks where one class (i.e., mitotic nuclei) is considerably less prevalent than the other class (i.e., nonmitotic
nuclei). In this paper, we present a new automatic mitosis detection approach to address the aforementioned challenges and
*Address all correspondence to: Haibo Wang, E-mail: hbwang1427@gmail
0091-3286/2014/$25.00 © 2014 SPIE
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Journal of Medical Imaging 1(3), 034003 
outperform the majority of state-of-the-art approaches in mitosis
detection.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows.
In Sec. 2, we describe motivations of the proposal. In Sec. 3,
we describe details of the new methodology. In Sec. 4, we
present experimental results. Finally, in Sec. 5, we present our
concluding remarks.
Motivation and Previous Work
Recently, the development of computerized systems for automated mitosis detection has become an active area of research
with the goal of developing decision support systems to be able
to relieve the workload of the pathologist. In a contest held in
conjunction with the ICPR 2012 conference5,6 to identify the best
automated mitosis detection algorithm, a variety of approaches
competed against each other. These approaches can be categorized as handcrafted feature based or feature learning based. The
commonly used handcrafted features include various morphological, shape, statistical, and textural features that attempt to
model the appearance of the domain and, in particular, the
appearance of the mitoses within the digitized images.7–10
Although domain inspired approaches (hand crafted) are useful in that they allow for explicit modeling of the kinds of features that pathologists look for when identifying mitoses, there
is another category of feature generation inspired by convolutional neural networks (CNN),11,12 CNN are multilayer neural
networks that learns a bank of convolutional filters at each
layer.13,14 In contrast to handcrafted features, CNN is fully datadriven, therefore, it is more accurate in representing training
samples and is able to find feature patterns that handcrafted
features fail to describe. However, CNN is computationally
demanding and sensitive to the scalability of the training data.
The winner14 of the ICPR contest used two 11 layers to achieve
an F-measure of 0.78. However, this approach is not feasible for
clinical use since each layer of the CNN model comprised hundreds of neurons and required a large amount of time (several
weeks) for both training and testing.
Other methods achieved an F-measure of up to 0.71, based
primarily on combining various handcrafted features. Although
handcrafted feature approaches are faster, drawbacks include
(1) the fact that the identification of salient features is highly
dependent on the evaluation dataset used and (2) the lack of
a principled approach for combining disparate features. Hence,
it stands to reason that a combination of CNN and handcrafted
features will allow us to exploit the high accuracy of CNN while
also reducing the computational burden (in terms of time) of
training deep CNN models. By employing a light CNN model,
the proposed approach is far less demanding computationally,
and the cascaded strategy of combining handcrafted features
and CNN-derived features enables the possibility of maximizing
performance by leveraging the disconnected feature sets.
Previous work in this approach includes the Nippon Electric
Company (NEC) team,13 where an attempt was made to stack
the CNN-learned features and handcrafted features yielded an
F-measure of 0.659, suggesting that more intelligent combinations of CNN and handcraft features are required.
In this paper, we present a cascaded approach to combining
CNN and handcrafted features for mitosis detection. The workflow of the new approach is depicted in Fig. 2. The first step is to
Fig. 1 An illustration of the visual similarity between true mitotic processes and confounding false positives. (a)–(c) True mitoses. (d)–(f) Confounding nonmitotic figures.
Fig. 2 Workflow of our methodology. Blue-ratio thresholding15 is first applied to segment mitosis candidates. On each segmented blob, handcrafted features are extracted and classified via a random forests
classifier. Meanwhile, on each segmented 80 × 80 patch, convolutional neural networks (CNN)11 are
trained with a fully connected regression model as part of the classification layer. For those candidates
that are difficult to classify (ambiguous result from the CNN), we train a second-stage random forests
classifier on the basis of combining CNN-derived and handcrafted features. Final decision is obtained via
a consensus of the predictions of the three classifiers.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Wang et al.: Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combining handcrafted and convolutional neural network features
segment likely mitosis regions. This initial phase serves as a
triage to remove obviously nonmitotic regions. For each candidate region, both CNN-learned and handcrafted features were
extracted independently. Independently trained classifiers were
constructed using the handcrafted and CNN-learned features
alone. For the regions on which the two individual classifiers
highly disagree, they are further classified by a third classifier
that was trained based on the stacking of handcrafted and CNNlearned features. The final prediction score is a weighted average
of the outputs of all the classifiers.
Our approach differs from the NEC system in two key
aspects. First, we perform classification via CNN and handcrafted features separately, only using their combination to deal
with confounders. Simply stacking handcrafted and CNN features will bias the classifier toward the feature set with the larger
number of attributes. Our approach is less prone to this issue.
Second, CNN works on a 80 × 80 pixels patch size while handcrafted features are extracted from clusters of segmented nuclei
(normally ≤30 × 30 pixels). This way we capture attributes of
not only mitotic nuclei, but also of the local context. Local context around candidate mitoses is an important factor for pathologists in correctly identifying mitoses. In summary, key
contributions of this work include:
• A cascaded approach for combination of CNN and handcrafted features.
• Learning multiple attributes that characterize mitosis via
the combination of CNN and handcrafted features.
• Achieving a high level of mitosis detection while minimizing the computing resources required.
Methodology
Candidate Segmentation
We segment likely mitosis candidates by first converting RGB
images into blue-ratio images.15 By assigning a higher value to a
pixel with a high blue intensity relative to its red and green components, blue-ratio is proven capable of highlighting nuclei
regions.15 Laplacian of Gaussian16 responses are then computed
to discriminate the nuclei region from the background, followed
by integrating globally fixed thresholding and local dynamic
thresholding to identify candidate nuclei. One segmentation
example is shown in Fig. 3. We can see that most dark-blue
spots are retained as potential mitotic figures.
Detection with Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN architecture
First, each HPF is converted from the RGB space to the YUV
space and normalized to a mean of 0 and variance of 1. The
CNN architecture employs three layers (Fig. 4): two consecutive
convolutional and pooling layers and a final fully connected
layer. The convolution layer applies a two-dimensional convolution of the input feature maps and a convolution kernel.
The pooling layer applies an L2 pooling function over a spatial
window without overlapping (pooling kernel) per each output
feature map. Learning invariant features will be allowed through
the L2 pooling. The output of the pooling layer is subsequently
fed to a fully connected layer, which produces a feature vector.
The outputs of the fully connected layer are two neurons (mitosis and nonmitosis) activated by a logistic regression model.
The three-layer CNN architecture comprises 64, 128, and
256 neurons, respectively. For each layer, a fixed 8 × 8 convolutional kernel and 2 × 2 pooling kernel were used.
Training stage
To deal with class-imbalance and achieve rotational invariance,
candidate image patches containing mitotic nuclei were duplicated with artificial rotations and mirroring. The whole CNN
model was trained using stochastic gradient descent17 to minimize the loss function:
LðxÞ ¼ −log
where xi corresponds to outputs of a fully connected layer multiplied by logistic model parameters. Thus, the outputs of CNN
are the log likelihoods of class membership.
Testing stage
An exponential function is applied to the log likelihoods of
each candidate nucleus belonging to the positive (mitosis)
class in order to calculate the probability that it is mitotic. In
our experiments, a candidate nucleus is classified as mitosis
if the probability is larger than an empirically determined threshold of 0.58.
Fig. 3 Example of blue-ratio segmentation. (a) is the original high
power field (HPF) slice while (b) is the segmentation mask. Note
that a majority of the objects identified via this approach in (b) are
indeed mitotic figures.
Fig. 4 Architecture of the CNN model. The CNN architecture comprises three layers: two consecutive convolutional-pooling layers
and a fully connected classification layer. The two convolutionalpooling layers use the same fixed 8 × 8 convolutional kernel and
2 × 2 pooling kernel, but have 64 and 128 neurons, respectively.
The last layer has 256 neurons, which are all connected to the final
two neurons for mitosis/nonmitosis classification.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Wang et al.: Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combining handcrafted and convolutional neural network features
Detection with Handcrafted Features
Features and their selection
The handcrafted features can be categorized into three groups:
morphology, intensity, and texture (Table 1). The morphological
features are extracted from the binary mask of the mitosis
candidate, which is generated by blue-ratio thresholding15 and
local nonmaximum suppression. The morphological features represent various attributes of mitosis shape. Intensity and textural
features are extracted from seven distinctive channels of squared
candidate patches (blue-ratio, red, blue, green, L in LAB, and V,
L in LUV) according to Ref. 7. The intensity features capture
statistical attributes of mitosis intensity and the texture features
capture textural attributes of the mitosis region. The total length
of handcrafted features is 15 þ 8 × 7 þ 26 × 7 ¼ 253. We then
perform dimensionality reduction with principal component
analysis (PCA).18 The best features are retained in PCA by keeping 98% of the total component variations.
Class balancing and classifier
We correct for the classification bias that occurs due to the relatively small number of mitotic nuclei compared to nonmitotic
nuclei. To train a balanced classifier, we (1) reduce nonmitotic
nuclei by replacing overlapping nonmitotic nuclei with their
clustered center; (2) oversample mitotic cells by applying the
synthetic minority oversampling technique,21 and (3) use an
empirically selected threshold 0.58. For classification, a random
forest classifier with 50 trees is used. Using more trees tends to
cause overfitting while using less trees leads to low classification accuracy.
Cascaded Ensemble
The cascaded ensemble consists of two stages (shown in Fig. 5).
First, we perform classification with CNN and handcrafted features individually. During training, we denote via Ld and Lh the
classification labels associated with using CNN and handcrafted
features, respectively. For instances with Ld ≠L or Lh ≠L,
where L is the ground truth label, we combine their CNN
and handcrafted features to train a second-stage classifier ℏ.
During testing, given the output probabilities Pd and Ph of
CNN and handcrafted feature classifiers, respectively, we calculate their combined probabilities P ¼ wdPd þ whPh, where wd
and wh are weighting factors. In the second stage, for instances
with P ∈½λl; λu (λl and λu are certain lower and upper bounds,
respectively), we let ℏclassify them again. The instance having
a final probability p larger than a certain threshold is categorized
as mitosis, otherwise, as nonmitosis.
Experimental Results
ICPR Dataset
The dataset includes 50 images corresponding to 50 HPF in five
different biopsy slides stained with H&E (illustrated in Fig. 6).
Each field represents a 512 × 512 μm2 area, and is acquired
using three different setups: two slide scanners and a multispectral microscope. Here, we consider images acquired by the
widely used Aperio XT scanner. The Aperio scanner has a resolution of 0.2456 μm∕pixel, resulting in a 2084 × 2084 pixels
RGB image for each field. A total of 326 mitotic nuclei are manually annotated by an expert pathologist. The centroids of these
mitoses are used as ground truth. According to the test, the first
35 HPF images (226 mitosis) are used for training, while the
remaining 15 HPF images (100 mitosis) are used for evaluation.
Performance Measures
Evaluation is performed according to the ICPR 2012 contest criteria, where true positives (TP) are defined as detected mitoses
whose coordinates are closer than 5 μm (20.4 pixel) to the
ground truth centroid. Nuclei that do not meet this criteria
are defined as false positive (FP) and false negative (FN) errors.
We compute the following performance measures:
Precision ¼
F-measure ¼ 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision þ Recall
We compare the proposed approach (HC + CNN) with
approaches using handcrafted features only (HC), using CNN
only (CNN), as well as the reported approaches in Ref. 5.
The mitosis detection results on the ICPR12 dataset are shown
in Table 2. The HC + CNN approach yields a higher F-measure
(0.7345) than all other methods except that of Istituto Dalle
Molle di Studi sull'Intelligenza Artificiale (IDSIA) (0.7821).
Brief description of handcrafted features used for mitosis
detection.
Morphology
Area, eccentricity, equiv diameter, Euler
number, extent, perimeter, solidity, major
axis length, minor axis length, area overlap
ratio, average radial ratio, compactness,
Hausdorff dimension, smoothness, and
standard distance ratio
Mean, median, variance, maximum/minimum
ratio, range, interquartile range, kurtosis and
skewness of patch intensities at seven color
Concurrence features: mean and standard
deviation of 13 Haralick19 gray-level
concurrence features grabbed at four
orientations. Run-length features:20 mean
and standard deviation of gray-level
run-length matrices at four orientations
Fig. 5 Workflow of the cascaded ensemble, which comprises two
stages. First, we perform classification with CNN-learned and
handcrafted features individually, and if the two classification scores
are consistent, a binary decision (mitosis/nonmitosis) will be made
directly. Second, for those instances whose individual classification
scores are highly inconsistent, we classify them again by combining
their CNN and handcrafted features.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Wang et al.: Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combining handcrafted and convolutional neural network features
The FN rate associated with HC + CNN is relatively high compared to other methods. As Table 3 illustrates, this is partially
due to the fact that the blue-ratio segmentation has an
FN error of seven mitoses. In addition, HC + CNN outperforms
NEC (F-measure ¼ 0.6592), the only other approach to combine CNN and handcrafted features. Note that CNN-based
approaches (HC + CNN, IDSIA, and NEC) tend to produce
fewer FP errors, reflecting the capacity of CNN to accurately
recognize nonmitotic nuclei.
The most critical parameter of the HC + CNN classifier is the
classification threshold that is used to decide mitosis/nonmitosis. Based off our empirical results, the optimal threshold was
identified to be ≈0.6. In general, a larger threshold will lead to
fewer TPs, FPs and more FNs, and vice versa. In order to evaluate the influence of this threshold parameter, we generate the
precision-recall curves by varying the threshold from 0.45 to
0.7. Figure 7 shows that the performances of the other methods
(except IDSIA) lie in the interior of the areas spanned by the
curve. This fact suggests that the performance of HC + CNN
Fig. 6 Hematoxylin and eosin-stained HPF examples from the ICPR dataset. The HPFs are acquired
by a Aperio XT scanner with a resolution of 0.2456 μm per pixel. Each HPF has a size of
2084 × 2084 pixels, representing a 512 × 512 μm2 area annotated by pathologists.
Table 2 Evaluation results for mitosis detection using HC + CNN and
comparative methods on the ICPR12 dataset.
Precision Recall F-measure
Note: The bold value highlights the result of the proposed HC + CNN
Performances of the blue-ratio segmentation module and
the detection module. The blue-ratio segmentation finds 2484 mitosis
candidates, among which 93 are true mitoses while the other 2391 are
nonmitoses. Seven true mitoses are lost in this step. The detection
module identifies 65 true mitoses and 12 false mitoses from these
2484 candidates. Twenty-eight mitoses are misclassified as nonmitotic figures in this module.
Segmentation
Detection module
Fig. 7 Precision–recall curve of the proposed HC + CNN method. The
performance of the other methods is also plotted for comparison. The
curve is generated by varying the classification threshold between
0.45 and 0.7. (The threshold for each point is marked along the curve.)
The fact that the performance of the other methods (except IDSIA)
lie in the interior of the areas spanned by the curve suggests that
the performance of HC + CNN is resilient to the precise choice of
the classification threshold.
The influence of the number of RF trees.
Number of trees
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Wang et al.: Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combining handcrafted and convolutional neural network features
is resilient to the precise choice of the classification threshold.
Table 4 shows the influence of the number of random forests
trees on mitosis detection. We can clearly see that fewer trees
will most likely lead to worse classification, while more trees
may cause overfitting.
Figure 8 shows some detected mitosis examples. As one can
see, the FNs tend to be poorly colored and textured while the
FPs have similar color and shape attributes compared to the TPs.
Although the textural patterns between FPs and TPs are different, this difference is not well appreciated at this prespecified
HPF resolution. Figure 9 shows a mitosis detection example
using CNN and HC + CNN, respectively, revealing the
improvement obtained by integrating handcrafted features and
CNN in HC + CNN. Figure 10 shows two mitotic detection
results of HC + CNN, while also revealing some FN examples.
Both the segmentation and detection steps contribute to the loss
of these mitotic figures.
The two 11-layers neural networks used by IDSIA14 requires
roughly 30 epochs, which takes 2 days for training with GPU
optimization. Our three-layer CNN needs <10 epochs, and
requires only 11.4 h using nine epochs without GPU optimization. Including the time needed to extract handcrafted features
(6.5 h in pure MATLAB implementation), the training stage for
HC + CNN was completed in <18 h. At the detection stage, the
Fig. 8 Mitoses identified by HC + CNN as TP (green rectangles), FN (yellow rectangles), and FP (red
rectangles) on the ICPR12 dataset. The TP examples have distinctive intensity, shape, and texture while
the FN examples are less distinctive in intensity and shape. The FP examples are visually more alike to
mitotic figures than the FNs.
Fig. 9 Mitoses identified by CNN and HC + CNN as TP (green circles), FN (yellow circles), and FP (red
circles) on a HPF of ICPR12 dataset. (a) Only using CNN leads to 7 TPs, 5 FNs and 3 FPs. (b) Using HC
and CNN leads to 9 TPs, 3 FNs and 1 FP, which clearly outperforms the use of CNN alone.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Oct–Dec 2014 • Vol. 1(3)
Wang et al.: Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combining handcrafted and convolutional neural network features
MATLAB implementation of HC + CNN takes about 1.5 min to
process each H&E image, which is roughly 5× faster than the
winner of the ICPR challenge.14
Concluding Remarks
Mitosis detection is one of the three key factors in BCa grading.
Existing approaches attempt to detect mitosis using either stacked
handcrafted features or CNN-learned features. However, the
problem of low detection accuracy arises when only handcrafted
features are used while CNN-based approaches suffer from the
issue of high computational complexity. To tackle these problems,
we presented a new approach that combines handcrafted features
and a light CNN in a cascaded way. Our approach yields an
F-measure of 0.7345, which would have secured the second
rank in the ICPR contest, and is higher than the NEC approach
that combines CNN and handcrafted features at the feature level.
Compared to the leading methodology (two 11-layer CNN models) at the ICPR contest (F-measure ¼ 0.78), our approach is
faster, requiring far less computing resources.
Experimental results shows that it is still necessary to
improve the accuracy of the presented approach. Future work
will use a GPU to implement a multilayer (>3) CNN model.
Acknowledgments
Research reported in this publication was supported by the
National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health
under Award Nos. R01CA136535-01, R01CA140772-01, NIH
1R21CA179327-01A1, and R21CA167811-01; the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases under
Award No. R01DK098503-02, the DOD Prostate Cancer Synergistic Idea Development Award (PC120857), the DOD CDMRP
Lung Cancer Research Idea Development Award New Investigator (LC130463); the QED award from the University City Science
Center and Rutgers University, the Ohio Third Frontier Technology development grant, and the CTSC Coulter Annual Pilot grant.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of
Health. Angel Cruz-Roa is supported by the doctoral Grant from
Administrative Department of Science, Technology and Innovation of Colombia (Colciencias) .