On human motion prediction using recurrent neural networks
Julieta Martinez∗1, Michael J. Black2, and Javier Romero3
1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
2MPI for Intelligent Systems, T¨ubingen, Germany
3Body Labs Inc., New York, NY
 , , 
Human motion modelling is a classical problem at the
intersection of graphics and computer vision, with applications spanning human-computer interaction, motion synthesis, and motion prediction for virtual and augmented reality. Following the success of deep learning methods in
several computer vision tasks, recent work has focused on
using deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model human motion, with the goal of learning time-dependent representations that perform tasks such as short-term motion
prediction and long-term human motion synthesis. We examine recent work, with a focus on the evaluation methodologies commonly used in the literature, and show that, surprisingly, state-of-the-art performance can be achieved by a
simple baseline that does not attempt to model motion at all.
We investigate this result, and analyze recent RNN methods
by looking at the architectures, loss functions, and training
procedures used in state-of-the-art approaches. We propose
three changes to the standard RNN models typically used
for human motion, which result in a simple and scalable
RNN architecture that obtains state-of-the-art performance
on human motion prediction.
1. Introduction
An important component of our capacity to interact with
the world resides in the ability to predict its evolution over
time. Handing over an object to another person, playing
sports, or simply walking in a crowded street would be extremely challenging tasks without our understanding of how
people move, and our ability to predict what they are likely
to do in the following instants. Similarly, machines that
are able to perceive and interact with moving people, either
in physical or virtual environments, must have a notion of
how people move. Since human motion is the result of both
physical limitations (e.g. torque exerted by muscles, gravity,
moment preservation) and the intentions of subjects (how to
∗Research carried out while Julieta was an intern at MPI.
Ground truth
Conditioning ground truth
Prediction
milliseconds
Figure 1. Top: Mean average prediction error for different motion
prediction methods. Bottom: Ground truth passed to the network
is shown in grey, and short-term motion predictions are shown in
colour. Previous work, based on deep RNNs, produces strong discontinuities at the start of the prediction (middle column). Our
method produces smooth, low-error predictions.
perform an intentional motion), motion modeling is a complex task that should be ideally learned from observations.
Our focus in this paper is to learn models of human motion from motion capture (mocap) data. More speciﬁcally,
we are interested in human motion prediction, where we
forecast the most likely future 3D poses of a person given
their past motion. This problem has received interest in a
 
wide variety of ﬁelds, such as action prediction for sociallyaware robotics , 3D people tracking within computer vision , motion generation for computer graphics 
or modeling biological motion in psychology .
Traditional approaches have typically imposed expert
knowledge about motion in their systems in the form of
Markovian assumptions , smoothness, or low dimensional embeddings . Recently, a family of methods based on deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have
shown good performance on this task while trying to be
more agnostic in their assumptions. For example, uses
curriculum learning and incorporates representation learning in the architecture, and manually encodes the semantic similarity between different body parts. These approaches beneﬁt from large, publicly available collections
of motion capture data , as well as recent advances in
the optimization of time-series modelling .
Recent work has validated its performance via two complementary methods: (1) quantitative prediction error in the
short-term, typically measured as a mean-squared loss in
angle-space, and (2) qualitative motion synthesis for longer
time horizons, where the goal is to generate feasible motion. The ﬁrst evaluation metric is particularly interesting
for computer vision applications such as people tracking,
where predictions are continually matched and corrected
with new visual evidence. The second criterion, most relevant for open-loop motion generation in graphics, is hard to
evaluate quantitatively, because human motion is a highly
non-deterministic process over long time horizons.
problem is similar to the one found in recent research on
deep generative networks , where the numerical evaluation based on the negative log-likelihood and Parzen window estimates are known to be far from perfect.
We have empirically observed that current deep RNNbased methods have difﬁculty obtaining good performance
on both tasks. Current algorithms are often trained to minimize a quantitative loss for short-term prediction, while
striving to achieve long-term plausible motion by tweaking
the architectures or learning procedures. As a result, their
long-term results suffer from occasional unrealistic artifacts
such as foot sliding, while their short-term results are not
practical for tracking due to clear discontinuities in the ﬁrst
prediction. In fact, the discontinuity problem is so severe,
that we have found that state-of-the-art methods are quantitatively outperformed by a range of simple baselines, including a constant pose predictor. While this baseline does
not produce interesting motion in the long-run, it highlights
both a poor short-term performance, as well as a severe discontinuity problem in current deep RNN approaches. In this
work, we argue that (a) the results achieved by recent work
are not fully satisfactory for either of these problems, and
(b) trying to address both problems at once is very challenging, especially in the absence of a proper quantitative
evaluation for long-term plausibility.
We focus on short-term prediction, which is the most relevant task for a visual tracking scenario. We investigate the
reasons for the poor performance of recent methods on this
task by analyzing several factors such as the network architectures and the training procedures used in state-of-theart RNN methods. First, we consider the training schedule
used in . It is a known problem in RNNs and
reinforcement learning that networks cannot learn to
recover from their own mistakes if they are fed only groundtruth during training. The authors of introduced increasing amounts of random noise during training to compensate for this effect. However, this noise is difﬁcult to
tune, makes it harder to choose the best model based on validation error, and has the effect of degrading the quality of
the prediction in the ﬁrst frame. Instead, we propose a simple approach that introduces realistic error in training time
without any scheduling; we simply feed the predictions of
the net, as it is done in test time. This increases the robustness of the predictions compared to a network trained only
on ground truth, while avoiding the need of a difﬁcult-totune schedule.
Unfortunately, this new architecture is still unable to accurately represent the conditioning poses in its hidden representation, which still results in a discontinuity in the ﬁrst
frame of the prediction. We borrow ideas from research on
the statistics of hand motion , and model velocities instead of absolute joint angles, while keeping the loss in the
original angle representation to avoid drift. Therefore, we
propose a residual architecture that models ﬁrst-order motion derivatives, which results in smooth and much more
accurate short-term predictions.
Both of our contributions can be implemented using an
architecture that is signiﬁcantly simpler than those in previous work. In particular, we move from the usual multi-layer
LSTM architectures (long short-term memory) to a single
GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit), and do not require a spatial
encoding layer. This allows us to train a single model on
the entire Human 3.6M dataset in a few hours. This
differs from previous approaches , which trained
only action-speciﬁc models from that dataset. Our approach
sets the new state of the art on short-term motion prediction, and overall gives insights into the challenges of motion modelling using RNNs. Our code is publicly available at 
human-motion-prediction.
2. Related work
Our main task of interest is human motion prediction,
with a focus on recent deep RNN architectures . One
of our ﬁndings is that, similar to , a family of simple
baselines outperform recent deep learning approaches. We
brieﬂy review the literature on these topics below.
Modelling of human motion.
Learning statistical models of human motion is a difﬁcult task due to the highdimensionality, non-linear dynamics and stochastic nature
of human movement. Over the last decade, and exploiting the latent low-dimensionality of action-speciﬁc human
motion, most work has focused on extensions to latentvariable models that follow state-space equations such as
hidden Markov models (HMMs) , exploring the tradeoffs between model capacity and inference complexity. For
example, Wang et al. use Gaussian-Processes to perform non-linear motion prediction, and learn temporal dynamics using expectation maximization and Markov-chain
Monte Carlo. Taylor et al. assume a binary latent space
and model motion using a conditional restricted Boltzman
machine (CRBM), which requires sampling for inference.
Finally, Lehrmann et al. use a random forest to nonlinearly choose a linear system that predicts the next frame
based on the last few observations.
Applications of human motion models.
Motion is a key
part of actions; therefore, the ﬁeld of action recognition
has paid special attention to models and representations
of human motion.
In their seminal work, Yacoob and
Black model motion with time-scale and time-shifted
activity bases from a linear manifold of visual features computed with Principal Component Analysis (PCA). More
complex models like mixtures of HMMs , latent
topic models of visual words or LSTMs are used
in recent methods. Although their purpose (action classi-
ﬁcation from a sequence of poses) is different from ours,
this ﬁeld contains interesting insights for motion prediction,
such as the importance of a mathematically sound orientation representation or how learned, compact motion
representations improve action recognition accuracy .
Another popular use of motion models, specially shortterm ones, is pose tracking. The use of simple linear Markovian models or PCA models has evolved to locally linear ones like factor analizers , non-linear embeddings like Laplacian Eigenmaps , Isomap , dynamic variants of Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models
(GPLVM) , or physics-based models .
In animation, similar methods have been used for the
generation of human pose sequences. Spaces of HMMs parameterised by style were used by Brand et al. to generate complex motions. Arikan and Forsyth collapse full
sequences into nodes in a directed graph, connected with
possible transitions between them, and in cluster trees
improve the path availability. More recently, motion models based on GPLVM have been used for controlling virtual
characters in a physical simulator . An overview of motion generation for virtual characters can be found in .
Deep RNNs for human motion.
Our work focuses on recent approaches to motion modelling that are based on deep
RNNs. Fragkiadaki et al. propose two architectures:
LSTM-3LR (3 layers of Long Short-Term Memory cells)
and ERD (Encoder-Recurrent-Decoder).
Both are based
on concatenated LSTM units, but the latter adds non-linear
space encoders for data pre-processing. The authors also
note that, during inference, the network is prone to accumulate errors, and quickly produces unrealistic human motion.
Therefore, they propose to gradually add noise to the input
during training (as is common in curriculum learning ),
which forces the network to be more robust to prediction errors. This noise scheduling makes the network able to generate plausible motion for longer time horizons, specially
on cyclic walking sequences. However, tuning the noise
schedule is hard in practice.
More recently, Jain et al. introduced structural
RNNs (SRNNs), an approach that takes a manually designed graph that encodes semantic knowledge about the
RNN as input, and creates a bi-layer architecture that assigns individual RNN units to semantically similar parts
of the data. The authors also employ the noise scheduling
technique introduced by Fragkiadaki et al., and demonstrate
that their network outperforms previous work both quantitatively in short-term prediction, as well as qualitatively.
Interestingly, SRNNs produce plausible long-term motion
for more challenging, locally-periodic actions such as eating and smoking, and does not collapse to unrealistic poses
in aperiodic “discussion” sequences.
Revisiting baselines amid deep learning.
The rise and
impressive performance of deep learning methods in classical problems such as object recognition has encouraged researchers to attack both new and historically challenging problems using variations of deep neural networks.
For example, there is a now a large body of work on visual question answering (VQA), i.e. the task of answering
natural-language questions by looking at images, based almost exclusively on end-to-end trainable systems with deep
CNNs for visual processing and deep RNNs for language
modelling . Recently, however, Zhou et al. 
have shown that a simple baseline that concatenates features
from questions’ words and CNN image features performs
comparably to approaches based on deep RNNs. Moreover,
Jabri et al. have shown competitive performance on
VQA with a simple baseline that does not take images into
account, and state-of-the-art performance with a baseline
that is trained to exploit the correlations between questions,
images and answers.
Our work is somewhat similar to that of Jabri et al. ,
in that we have found a very simple baseline that outperforms sophisticated state-of-the-art methods based on deep
RNNs for short-term motion prediction. In particular, our
baseline outperforms the ERD and LSTM-3LR models by
Fragkiadi et al. , as well as the structural RNN (SRNN)
method of Jain et al. . Another example of baselines
outperforming recent work in the ﬁeld of pose models can
be found in , where a Gaussian pose prior outperforms
the more complicated GPLVM.
Recent deep learning methods for human pose prediction offer an agnostic learning framework that could
potentially be integrated with video data or used for
other forecasting applications . However, for the speciﬁc task of motion forecasting, we note that they have a
few common pitfalls that we would like to improve.
3.1. Problems
First frame discontinuity.
While both methods generate
continuous motion, a noticeable jump between the conditioning ground truth and the ﬁrst predicted frame is present
in their results (see Figure 1). This jump is particularly
harmful for tracking applications, where short-term predictions are continuously updated with new visual evidence.
Hyper-parameter tuning.
These methods add to the typical set of network hyper-parameters an additional one, particularly hard to tune: the noise schedule.
In time series modelling, it is often necessary to model
noise as part of the input, in order to improve robustness
against noisy observations. For example, in Kalman ﬁltering, a small amount of Gaussian noise is modelled explicitly as part of the standard state-space equations. In applications such as motion synthesis, exposing the method to
the errors that the network will make at test time is crucial
to prevent the predicted poses from leaving the manifold of
plausible human motion. Algorithms like DAGGER ,
used in reinforcement learning, use queries to an “expert”
during training so that the predictor learns how to correct
its own errors. It is, however, not straightforward how one
would use this approach for pose prediction.
The basic architectures that we use, RNNs, typically
do not consider this mismatch between train and test input, which makes them prone to accumulate errors at inference time. To alleviate this problem, Fragkiadaki et al.
propose to use noise scheduling; that is, to inject noise of
gradually increasing magnitude to the input in training time
(see Fig. 2, left), which corresponds to a type of curriculum learning.
Jain et al. similarly adopt this idea,
and have found that it helps stabilizing long-term motion
synthesis. The downsides are, (1) that both noise distribution and magnitude scheduling are hard to tune, (2) that
while this noise improves long-term predictions, it tends to
hurt performance in short-term predictions, as they become
discontinuous from previous observations, and (3) that the
common rule for choosing the best model, based on lowest validation error, is not valid anymore, since lowest validation error typically corresponds to the validation epoch
without injected noise.
Depth and complexity of the models.
LSTM-3LR, ERD
and SRNN use more than one RNN in their architectures,
stacking two or three layers for increased model capacity. While deeper models have empirically shown the best
performance on a series of tasks such as machine translation , deep networks are known to be hard to train when
data is scarce (which is the data regime for action-speciﬁc
motion models).
Moreover, recent work has shown that
shallow RNNs with minimal representation processing can
achieve very competitive results in tasks such as the learning of sentence-level embeddings , as long as a large
corpus of data is available. Finally, deeper models are computationally expensive, which is an important factor to consider in the context of large-scale training datasets.
Action-speciﬁc networks.
Although the vision community has recently beneﬁted from large-scale, publicly available datasets of motion capture data , motion modelling
systems have been typically trained on small action-speciﬁc
subsets. While restricting the training data to coherent subsets makes modelling easier, it is also well-known that deep
networks work best when exposed to large and diverse training datasets . This should specially apply to datasets
like Human3.6M, where different actions contain large portions of very similar data (e.g. sitting or walking).
3.2. Solutions
Sequence-to-sequence architecture.
We address
short-term motion prediction as the search for a function
that maps an input sequence (conditioning ground truth)
to an output (predicted) sequence. In this sense, the problem is analogous to machine translation, were sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) architectures are popular. In seq2seq,
two networks are trained; (a) an encoder that receives the
inputs and generates an internal representation, and (b), a
decoder network, that takes the internal state and produces
a maximum likelihood estimate for prediction. Unlike the
common practice in machine translation, we enforce the encoder and the decoder to share weights, which we found to
accelerate convergence. A beneﬁt of this architecture is that
the encoding-decoding procedure during training is more
similar to the protocol used at test-time. Moreover, there
are multiple variations of seq2seq architectures (e.g., with
attention mechanisms , or bi-directional encoders ),
that could potentially improve motion prediction.
Sampling-based loss.
While it is often common in RNNs
to feed the ground truth at each training time-step to the
network, this approach has the downside of the network not
being able to recover from its own mistakes. Previous work
has addressed this problem by scheduling the rate at which
the network sees either the ground truth or its own predictions , or by co-training and adversarial network to force
Figure 2. Training procedure as done in previous work, and our proposed sequence-to-sequence residual architecture. Green stick ﬁgures
represent ground truth, and blue stick ﬁgures represent predictions. Left: LSTM-3LR architecture, introduced by Fragkiadaki et al. .
During training, ground truth is fed to the network at each time-step, and noise is added to the input. Right: Our sequence-to-sequence
architecture; During training, the ground truth is fed to an encoder network, and the error is computed on a decoder network that feeds its
own predictions. The decoder also has a residual connection, which effectively forces the RNN to internally model angle velocities.
the internal states of the RNN to be similar during train and
test time . These approaches, however, rely heavily on
hyper-parameter tuning, which we want to avoid. Striving
for simplicity, during training we let the decoder produce a
sequence by always taking as input its own samples. This
approach requires absolutely no parameter tuning. Another
beneﬁt of this approach is that we can directly control the
length of the sequences that we train on. As we will see,
training to minimize the error on long-term motions results
in networks that produce plausible motion in the long run,
while training to minimize error the short-term reduces the
error rate in the ﬁrst few predicted frames.
Residual architecture.
While using a seq2seq architecture trained with a sampling-based loss can produce plausible long-term motion, we have observed that there is still
a strong discontinuity between the conditioning sequence
and prediction. Our main insight is that motion continuity,
a known property of human motion, is easier to express in
terms of velocities than in poses. While it takes considerable modelling effort to represent all possible conditioning
poses so that the ﬁrst frame prediction is continuous, it only
requires modeling one particular velocity (zero, or close to
zero velocity) to achieve the same effect. This idea is simple
to implement in current deep learning architectures since it
translates into adding a residual connection between the input and the output of each RNN cell (see Fig. 2, right). We
note that, although residual connections have been shown
to improve performance on very deep convolutional networks , in our case they help us model prior knowledge
about the statistics of human motion.
Multi-action models.
We also explore training a single
model to predict motion for multiple actions, in contrast
to previous work , which has focused on building
action-speciﬁc models. While modelling multiple actions
is a more difﬁcult task than modelling single-action sets,
it is now a common practice to train a single, conditional
model, on multiple data modalities, as this allows the network to exploit regularities in large datasets . Semantic
knowledge about each activity can be easily incorporated
using one-hot vectors; i.e., concatenating, in the input, a 15dimensional vector that has zeros everywhere, but a value of
one in the index of the indicated action.
4. Experimental setup
We consider three main sets of experiments to quantify
the impact of our contributions:
Seq2seq architecture and sampling-based loss.
First, we train action-speciﬁc models using our proposed sequence-to-sequence architecture with samplingbased loss, and compare it to previous work, which uses
noise scheduling, and to a baseline that feeds the ground
truth at each time-step. The goal of these experiments is to
verify that using a sampling-based loss, which does not require parameter tuning, performs on par with previous work
on short-term motion prediction, while still producing plausible long-term motion. In these experiments, the network
is trained to minimize the loss over 1 second of motion.
2. Residual architecture.
The second set of experiments
explore the effects of using a residual architecture that models ﬁrst-order motion derivatives, while keeping the loss in
the original angle space. Here, we are interested in learning
whether a residual architecture improves short term prediction; therefore, in these experiments, the network is trained
Milliseconds
Mean angle error
Milliseconds
Mean angle error
Residual sup. (MA)
Milliseconds
Mean angle error
Milliseconds
Mean angle error
Discussion
Figure 3. Error curves comparing ERD , LSTM-3LR ,
SRNN and our method (Residual sup. (MA) in Table 1) with
residual connections, sampling-based loss and trained on multiple
actions, as well as a zero-velocity baseline.
to minimize the prediction error over 400 milliseconds.
3. Multi-action models.
Our last round of experiments
quantiﬁes the beneﬁts of training our architecture on the entire Human 3.6M dataset, as opposed to building actionspeciﬁc models. We consider both a supervised and an unsupervised variant.
The supervised variant enhances the
input to the model by concatenating one-hot vectors with
the 15 action classes. In contrast, the unsupervised variant
does not use one-hot input during training nor prediction.
In these experiments we also train the network to minimize
the prediction error over the next 400 milliseconds.
Dataset and data pre-processing.
Following previous
work, we use the Human 3.6M (H3.6M) dataset by
Ionescu et al. , which is currently the largest publicly
available dataset of motion capture data. H3.6M includes
seven actors performing 15 varied activities such as walking, smoking, engaging in a discussion, taking pictures, and
talking on the phone, each in two different trials. For a fair
comparison, we adopt the pose representation and evaluation loss from . Pose is represented as an exponential map representation of each joint, with a special preprocessing of global translation and rotation (see for
more details). For evaluation, similar to , we measure the Euclidean distance between our prediction and the
ground truth in angle-space for increasing time horizons.
We report the average error on eight randomly sampled test
sequences, and use the sequences of subject ﬁve for testing,
while the rest of the sequences are used for training.
A scalable seq2seq architecture.
In all our experiments,
we use a single gated recurrent unit (GRU) with 1024
units, as a computationally less-expensive alternative to
LSTMs, and we do not use any time-independent layers
for representation learning. Experimentally, we found that
stacking recurrent layers makes the architecture harder to
train, while it also makes it slower; we also found that the
best performance is obtained without a spatial encoder. We
do, however, use a spatial decoder to back-project the 1024dimensional output of the GRU to 54 dimensions, the number of independent joint angles provided in H3.6M.
We use a learning rate of 0.005 in our multi-action experiments, and a rate of 0.05 in our action-speciﬁc experiments; in both cases, the batch size is 16, and we clip the
gradients to a maximum L2-norm of 5. During training as
well as testing, we feed 2 seconds of motion to the encoder,
and predict either 1 second (for long-term experiments) or
400 milliseconds (for short-term prediction) of motion from
the decoder. We implemented our architecture using TensorFlow , which takes 75ms for forward processing and
back-propagation per iteration on an NVIDIA Titan GPU.
Baselines.
We compare against two recent approaches to
human motion prediction based on deep RNNs: LSTM-
3LR and ERD by Fragkiadaki et al. , and SRNN by
Jain et al. . To reproduce previous work, we rely on the
pre-trained models and implementations of ERD, LSTM-
3LR and SRNN publicly available 1. These implementations represent the best efforts of the SRNN authors to reproduce the results of the ERD and LSTM-3LR models reported by Fragkiadaki et al. , as there is no ofﬁcial public implementation for that work. We found that, out of the
box, these baselines produce results slightly different (most
often better) from those reported by Jain et al. .
We also consider an agnostic zero-velocity baseline
which constantly predicts the last observed frame. For completeness, we also consider running averages of the last two
and four observed frames. While these baselines are very
simple to implement, they have not been considered in recent work that uses RNNs to model human motion.
5. Results
Figure 3 shows a summary of the results obtained by
ERD, LSTM-3LR and SRNN, as well as a zero-velocity
baseline and our method, on four actions of the Human 3.6
dataset. Tables 1 and 2 describe these results in more detail, and include results on the rest of the actions. In the
remainder of the section we analyze these results.
Zero-velocity baseline.
The ﬁrst striking result is the
comparatively good performance of the baselines, specially
1 
Discussion
milliseconds
LSTM-3LR 
Running avg. 4
Running avg. 2
Zero-velocity
Zero noise (SA)
Sampling-based loss (SA)
Residual (SA)
Residual unsup. (MA)
Residual sup. (MA)
Untied (MA)
Table 1. Detailed results for motion prediction, measured in mean angle error for walking, eating, smoking and discussion activities of the
Human 3.6M dataset. The top section corresponds to previous work based on deep recurrent neural networks. “Zero noise” is a model
trained by feeding ground truth at each time step. “Sampling-based loss” is trained by letting the decoder feed its own output. SA stands
for “Single action”, and MA stands for “Multi-action”. Finally “Untied” is the same model as Residual sup (MA), but with untied weights
between encoder and decoder.
Directions
milliseconds
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
Zero-velocity
0.25 0.44 0.61 0.68 0.80 1.23 1.81 1.87 0.80 1.23 1.81 1.87 0.32 0.63 1.16 1.45 0.72 1.03 1.46 1.49 0.43 1.12 1.41 1.58
0.44 0.95 1.27 1.55 0.87 1.40 2.19 2.26 0.31 0.57 0.88 1.04 0.50 0.96 1.64 1.96 0.74 1.60 1.57 1.72 0.44 1.05 1.51 1.69
Res. unsup. (MA) 0.27 0.47 0.73 0.87 0.77 1.18 1.74 1.84 0.24 0.43 0.68 0.83 0.40 0.77 1.32 1.62 0.62 1.10 1.07 1.14 0.68 1.04 1.43 1.65
Res. sup. (MA)
0.26 0.47 0.72 0.84 0.75 1.17 1.74 1.83 0.23 0.43 0.69 0.82 0.36 0.71 1.22 1.48 0.51 0.97 1.07 1.16 0.41 1.05 1.49 1.63
Untied (MA)
0.31 0.52 0.77 0.89 0.79 1.19 1.72 1.83 0.27 0.46 0.68 0.85 0.42 0.77 1.29 1.58 0.52 1.01 1.07 1.16 0.51 1.13 1.56 1.74
Sitting down
Taking photo
Walking Dog
Walking together
milliseconds
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
80 160 320 400
Zero-velocity
0.27 0.54 0.93 1.05 0.22 0.47 0.78 0.89 0.27 0.49 0.96 1.12 0.60 0.96 1.27 1.33 0.33 0.60 0.96 1.03 0.42 0.74 1.12 1.20
0.38 0.77 1.36 1.59 0.37 0.66 1.30 1.70 0.36 0.73 1.31 1.51 0.62 1.02 1.55 1.65 0.44 0.81 1.25 1.36 0.46 0.88 1.35 1.54
Res. unsup. (MA) 0.41 0.80 1.43 1.63 0.27 0.56 0.98 1.16 0.32 0.62 1.13 1.30 0.58 0.95 1.37 1.45 0.35 0.62 0.87 0.87 0.39 0.72 1.08 1.22
Res. sup. (MA)
0.39 0.81 1.40 1.62 0.24 0.51 0.90 1.05 0.28 0.53 1.02 1.14 0.56 0.91 1.26 1.40 0.31 0.58 0.87 0.91 0.36 0.67 1.02 1.15
Untied (MA)
0.47 0.89 1.57 1.72 0.30 0.56 0.95 1.12 0.38 0.64 1.18 1.41 0.61 0.98 1.42 1.54 0.40 0.69 0.98 1.03 0.42 0.74 1.11 1.26
Table 2. Prediction results for our zero-velocity baseline and our main prediction methods on the remainder 11 actions of the H3.6m dataset.
the zero-velocity one. They clearly outperform state-of-theart results, highlighting the severity of the discontinuities
between conditioning and prediction in previous work. The
good performance of the baseline also means that deterministic losses are not suitable to evaluate motion forecasting
with a long time horizon.
Sampling-based loss.
In Table 1, using our samplingbased loss consistently achieves motion prediction error
competitive with or better than the state of the art. Moreover, since we have trained our model to minimize the error
over a 1-second time horizon, the network retains the ability to generate plausible motion in the long run. Figure 4
shows a few qualitative examples of long-term motion using
this approach. Given that our proposed sampling-based loss
does not require any hyper-parameter tuning, we would argue that this is a fast-to-train, interesting alternative to previous work for long-term motion generation using RNNs.
Residual architecture and multi-action models.
Finally, we report the performance obtained by our architecture with sampling-based loss, residual connections and
trained on single (SA) or multiple actions (MA) in the bottom subgroup of Table 1. We can see that using a residual connection greatly improves performance and pushes
our method beyond the state of the art, which highlights
the fact that velocity representations are easier to model
by our network. Importantly, our method obtains its best
performance when trained on multiple actions; this result,
together with the simplicity of our approach, uncovers the
Discussion
Figure 4. Qualitative long-term motion generation, showing two seconds of motion prediction on different activities. The gray top sequence
corresponds to ground truth and the red one to SRNN. The ﬁrst dark blue sequence corresponds to our method, trained on speciﬁc actions,
and without residual connection, but using sampling-based loss (Sampling-based loss (SA) on Table 1). This model produces plausible
motion in the long term, but does suffer from discontinuities in short-term predictions. The last blue sequence corresponds to our full
model, including residual connections, and trained on multiple actions (Residual sup. (MA) on Table 1); this model produces smooth,
continuous predictions in the short term, but converges to a mean pose.
importance of large amounts of training data when learning short-term motion dynamics. We also note that highly
aperiodic classes such as discussion, directions and sitting
down remain very hard to model.
Moreover, we observe that adding semantic information
to the network in the form of action labels helps in most
cases, albeit by a small margin. Likely, this is due to the fact
that, for short-term motion prediction, modelling physical
constraints (e.g. momentum preservation) is more important
than modelling high-level semantic intentions.
When analysing Fig. 4, it becomes obvious that the best
numerical results do not correspond to the best qualitative
long-term motion – a result that persists even when trained
to minimize loss over long horizons (e.g. 1 second). One
can hardly blame the method though, since our network is
achieving the lowest loss in an independent validation set.
In other words, the network is excelling in the task that
has been assigned to it. In order to produce better qualitative results, we argue that a different loss that encourages
other similarity measures (e.g. adversarial, entropy-based
etc.) should be used instead. Our results suggest that it is
inherently hard to produce both accurate short-term predictions – which are relatively deterministic and seem to be
properly optimized with the current loss – and long-term
forecasting using RNNs.
6. Conclusions and future work
We have demonstrated that previous work on human motion modelling using deep RNNs has harshly neglected the
important task of short-term motion prediction, as we have
shown that a zero-velocity prediction is a simple but hardto-beat baseline that largely outperforms the state of the art.
Based on this observation, we have developed a sequenceto-sequence architecture with residual connections which,
when trained on a sample-based loss, outperforms previous
work. Our proposed architecture, being simple and scalable, can be trained on large-scale datasets of human motion, which we have found to be crucial to learn the shortterm dynamics of human motion. Finally, we have shown
that providing high-level supervision to the network in the
form of action labels improves performance, but an unsupervised baseline is very competitive nonetheless. We ﬁnd
this last result particularly encouraging, as it departs from
previous work in human motion modelling which has typically worked on small, action-speciﬁc datasets. Future work
may focus on exploring ways to use even larger datasets of
motion capture in an unsupervised manner.
Acknowledgements.
The authors thank Laura Sevilla-
Lara for proofreading our work. We also thank Nvidia for
the donation of some of the GPUs used in this research.
This research was supported in part by NSERC.