Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
Myle Ott 1 Michael Auli 1 David Grangier 1 Marc’Aurelio Ranzato 1
Machine translation is a popular test bed for research in neural sequence-to-sequence models
but despite much recent research, there is still a
lack of understanding of these models. Practitioners report performance degradation with large
beams, the under-estimation of rare words and
a lack of diversity in the ﬁnal translations. Our
study relates some of these issues to the inherent
uncertainty of the task, due to the existence of
multiple valid translations for a single source sentence, and to the extrinsic uncertainty caused by
noisy training data. We propose tools and metrics
to assess how uncertainty in the data is captured
by the model distribution and how it affects search
strategies that generate translations. Our results
show that search works remarkably well but that
models tend to spread too much probability mass
over the hypothesis space. Next, we propose tools
to assess model calibration and show how to easily ﬁx some shortcomings of current models. As
part of this study, we release multiple human reference translations for two popular benchmarks.
1. Introduction
Machine translation (MT) is an interesting task not only
for its practical applications but also for the formidable
learning challenges it poses, from how to transduce variable
length sequences, to searching for likely sequences in an
intractably large hypothesis space, to dealing with the multimodal nature of the prediction task, since typically there are
several correct ways to translate a given sentence.
The research community has made great advances on this
task, recently focusing the effort on the exploration of several variants of neural models that
have greatly improved the state of the art performance on
1Facebook AI Research, USA. Correspondence to: Myle Ott
< >.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
public benchmarks. However, several open questions remain . In this work, we analyze
top-performing trained models in order to answer some of
these open questions. We target better understanding to help
prioritize future exploration towards important aspects of
the problem and therefore speed up progress.
For instance, according to conventional wisdom neural
machine translation (NMT) systems under-estimate rare
words , why is that? Is the model
poorly calibrated? Is this due to exposure bias , i.e., the mismatch between the distribution of
words observed at training and test time? Or is this due
to the combination of uncertainty in the prediction of the
next word and inference being an arg max selection process, which always picks the most likely/frequent word?
Similarly, it has been observed 
that performance degrades with large beams. Is this due
to poor ﬁtting of the model which assigns large probability
mass to bad sequences? Or is this due to the heuristic nature
of this search procedure which fails to work for large beam
values? In this paper we will provide answers and solutions
to these and other related questions.
The underlying theme of all these questions is uncertainty,
i.e. the one-to-many nature of the learning task. In other
words, for a given source sentence there are several target
sequences that have non negligible probability mass. Since
the model only observes one or very few realizations from
the data distribution, it is natural to ask the extent to which
an NMT model trained with token-level cross-entropy is
able to capture such a rich distribution, and whether the
model is calibrated. Also, it is equally important to understand the effect that uncertainty has on search and whether
there are better and more efﬁcient search strategies.
Unfortunately, NMT models have hundreds of millions of
parameters, the search space is exponentially large and we
typically observe only one reference for a given source sentence. Therefore, measuring ﬁtness of a NMT model to
the data distribution is a challenging scientiﬁc endeavor,
which we tackle by borrowing and combining tools from
the machine learning and statistics literature . With these tools, we show
that search works surprisingly well, yielding highly likely
sequences even with relatively narrow beams. Even if we
 
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
consider samples from the model that have similar likelihood, beam hypotheses yield higher BLEU on average. Our
analysis also demonstrates that although NMT is well calibrated at the token and set level, it generally spreads too
much probability mass over the space of sequences. This
often results in individual hypotheses being under-estimated,
and overall, poor quality of samples drawn from the model.
Interestingly, systematic mistakes in the data collection process also contribute to uncertainty, and a particular such kind
of noise, the target sentence being replaced by a copy of the
corresponding source sentence, is responsible for much of
the degradation observed when using wide beams.
This analysis – the ﬁrst one of its kind – introduces tools and
metrics to assess ﬁtting of the model to the data distribution,
and shows areas of improvement for NMT. It also suggests
easy ﬁxes for some of the issues reported by practitioners.
We also release the data we collected for our evaluation,
which consists of ten human translations for 500 sentences
taken from the WMT’14 En-Fr and En-De test sets.1
2. Related Work
In their seminal work, Zoph et al. frame translation as
a compression game and measure the amount of information
added by translators. While this work precisely quantiﬁes
the amount of uncertainty, it does not investigate its effect
on modeling and search. In another context, uncertainty
has been considered for the design of better evaluation metrics , in order
not to penalize a model for producing a valid translation
which is different from the provided reference.
Most work in NMT has focused on improving accuracy
without much consideration for the intrinsic uncertainty of
the translation task itself (§3).
Notable exceptions are latent variable models which explicitly attempt
to model multiple modes in the data distribution, or decoding strategies which attempt to predict diverse outputs
while leaving the model unchanged .
However, none of these works check for improvements in
the match between the model and the data distribution.
Recent work on analyzing machine translation has focused
on topics such as comparing neural translation to phrasebased models . Koehn & Knowles presented
several challenges for NMT, including the deterioration of
accuracy for large beam widths and the under-estimation of
1Additional reference translations are available from:
 
analyzing-uncertainty-nmt.
rare words, which we address in this paper. Isabelle et al.
 propose a new evaluation benchmark to test whether
models can capture important linguistic properties. Finally,
Niehues et al. focus on search and argue in favor of
better translation modeling instead of improving search.
3. Data Uncertainty
Uncertainty is a core challenge in translation, as there are
several ways to correctly translate a sentence; but what are
typical sources of uncertainty found in modern benchmark
datasets? Are they all due to different ways to paraphrase
a sentence? In the following sections, we answer these
questions, distinguishing uncertainty inherent to the task
itself (§3.1), and uncertainty due to spurious artifacts caused
by the data collection process (§3.2).
3.1. Intrinsic Uncertainty
One source of uncertainty is the existence of several semantically equivalent translations of the same source sentence.
This has been extensively studied in the literature . Translations can be more
or less literal, and even if literal there are many ways to
express the same meaning. Sentences can be in the active
or passive form and for some languages determiners and
prepositions such as ‘the’, ‘of’, or ‘their’ can be optional.
Besides uncertainty due to the existence of distinct, yet semantically equivalent translations, there are also sources of
uncertainty due to under-speciﬁcation when translating into
a target language more inﬂected than the source language.
Without additional context, it is often impossible to predict
the missing gender, tense, or number, and therefore, there
are multiple plausible translations of the same source sentence. Simpliﬁcation or addition of cultural context are also
common sources of uncertainty .
3.2. Extrinsic Uncertainty
Statistical machine translation systems, and in particular
NMT models, require lots of training data to perform well.
To save time and effort, it is common to augment high
quality human translated corpora with lower quality web
crawled data . This process is error
prone and responsible for introducing additional uncertainty
in the data distribution. Target sentences may only be partial
translations of the source, or the target may contain information not present in the source. A lesser-known example are
target sentences which are entirely in the source language,
or which are primarily copies of the corresponding source.
For instance, we found that between 1.1% to 2.0% of training examples in the WMT’14 En-De and WMT’14 En-Fr
datasets (§4.2) are “copies” of the source sentences, where
a target sentence is labeled as “copy” if the intersection over
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
the union of unigrams (excluding punctuation and numbers)
is at least 50%. Source copying is particularly interesting
since we show that, even in small quantities, it can signiﬁcantly affect the model output (§5.3). Note that test sets are
manually curated and never contain copies.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Sequence to Sequence Model
Our experiments rely on the pre-trained models of the
fairseq-py toolkit , which achieve competitive performance on the datasets we consider. Formally,
let x be an input sentence with m words {x1, . . . , xm},
and t be the ground truth target sentence with n words
{t1, . . . , tn}. The model is composed of an encoder and
a decoder. The encoder takes x through several convolutional layers to produce a sequence of hidden states,
z = {z1, . . . , zm}, one per input word. At time step k,
the decoder takes a window of words produced so far (or
the ground truth words at training time), {tk−1, . . . , tk−i},
the set of encoder hidden states z and produces a distribution over the current word: p(tk|tk−1, . . . , tk−i, z). More
precisely, at each time step, an attention module summarizes the sequence z with a single vector
through a weighted sum of {z1, . . . , zm}. The weights depend on the source sequence x and the decoder hidden state,
hk, which is the output of several convolutional layers taking
as input {tk−1, . . . , tk−i}. From the source attention vector,
the hidden state of the decoder is computed and the model
emits a distribution over the current word as in: p(tk|hk) =
softmax(Whk + b). Gehring et al. provides further
details. To train the translation model, we minimize the
cross-entropy loss: L = −Pn
i=1 log p(ti|ti−1, . . . , t1, x),
using Nesterov’s momentum .2
At test time, we aim to output the most likely translation
given the source sentence, according to the model estimate.
We approximate such an output via beam search. Unless otherwise stated, we use beam width k = 5, where hypotheses
are selected based on their length-normalized log-likelihood.
Some experiments consider sampling from the model conditional distribution p(ti|ti−1, hi−1, x), one token at a time,
until the special end of sentence symbol is sampled.
4.2. Datasets and Evaluation
We consider the following datasets:
WMT’14 English-German (En-De): We use the same
setup as Luong et al. which comprises 4.5M sentence pairs for training and we test on newstest2014. We
build a validation set by removing 44k random sentence-
2We also obtain similar results with models trained with
sequence-level losses .
Automatic evaluation
Human evaluation (pairwise)
Table 1. Automatic and human evaluation on a 500 sentence subset
of the WMT’14 En-Fr and En-De test sets. Models generalize well
in terms of perplexity and BLEU. Our human evaluation compares
(reference, system) pairs for beam 5.
pairs from the training data. As vocabulary we use 40k
sub-word types based on a joint source and target byte pair
encoding .
WMT’17 English-German (En-De):
The above preprocessed version of WMT’14 En-De did not provide a split
into sub-corpora which we required for some experiments.
We therefore also experiment on the 2017 data where we
test on newstest2017. The full version of the dataset (original) comprises 5.9M sentence pairs after length ﬁltering
to 175 tokens. We then consider the news-commentary
portion with 270K sentences (clean), and a ﬁltered version comprising 4M examples after removing low scoring
sentence-pairs according to a model trained on the cleaner
news-commentary portion.
WMT’14 English-French (En-Fr): We remove sentences
longer than 175 words and pairs with a source/target length
ratio exceeding 1.5 resulting in 35.5M sentence pairs for
training. The source and target vocabulary is based on 40k
BPE types. Results are reported on both newstest2014 and
a validation set held-out from the training data comprising
26k sentence pairs.
We evaluate with tokenized BLEU 
on the corpus-level and the sentence-level, after removing
BPE splitting. Sentence-level BLEU is computed similarly
to corpus BLEU, but with smoothed n-gram counts (+1) for
n > 1 .
5. Uncertainty and Search
In this section we start by showing that the models under
consideration are well trained (§5.1). Next, we quantify the
amount of uncertainty in the model’s output and compare
two search strategies: beam search and sampling (§5.2).
Finally we investigate the inﬂuence of a particular kind of
extrinsic uncertainty in the data on beam search, and provide
an explanation for the performance degradation observed
with wide beams (§5.3).
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
Number of hypotheses considered
Cumulative prob.
Number of hypotheses considered
Avg. token prob.
(max by model prob.)
(max by BLEU)
Number of hypotheses considered
Sentence BLEU
Figure 1. Left: Cumulative sequence probability of hypotheses obtained by beam search and sampling on the WMT’14 En-Fr valid
set; Center: same, but showing the average per-token probability as we increase the number of considered hypotheses, for each source
sentence we select the hypothesis with the maximum probability (orange) or sentence-level BLEU (green); Right: same, but showing
averaged sentence-level BLEU as we increase the number of hypotheses.
5.1. Preliminary: Models Are Well Trained
We start our analysis by conﬁrming that the models under
consideration are well trained. Table 1 shows that the models, and particularly the En-Fr model, achieve low perplexity
and high BLEU scores.
To further assess the quality of these models, we conducted
a human evaluation with three professional translators. Annotators were shown the source sentence, reference translation, and a translation produced by our model through
beam search—a breadth-ﬁrst search that retains only the
k most likely candidates at each step. Here, we consider
a relatively narrow beam of size k = 5. The reference
and model translations were shown in random order and
annotators were blind to their identity. We ﬁnd that model
translations roughly match human translations for the En-Fr
dataset, while for the En-De dataset humans prefer the reference over the model output 80% of the time. Overall, the
models are well trained—particularly the En-Fr model—
and beam search can ﬁnd outputs that are highly rated by
human translators.
5.2. Model Output Distribution Is Highly Uncertain
How much uncertainty is there in the model’s output distribution? What search strategies are most effective (i.e.,
produce the highest scoring outputs) and efﬁcient (i.e., require generating the fewest candidates)? To answer these
questions we sample 10k translations and compare them to
those produced by beam search with k = 5 and k = 200.
Figure 1 (Left) shows that the model’s output distribution
is highly uncertain: even after drawing 10k samples we
cover only 24.9% of the sequence-level probability mass.
And while beam search is much more efﬁcient at searching
this space, covering 14.6% of the output probability mass
with k = 5 and 22.4% of the probability mass with k = 200,
these ﬁnding suggest that most of the probability mass is
spread elsewhere in the space (see also §6.2).
Figure 1 also compares the average sentence-level BLEU
and model scores of hypotheses produced by sampling and
beam search. Sampling results for varying sample size
n = 1, . . . , 10k are on two curves: orange reports probability (Center) and sentence BLEU (Right) for the sentence
with the highest probability within n samples, while green
does the same for the sentence with the highest sentence
BLEU in the same set . We ﬁnd that
sampling produces hypotheses with similar probabilities
as beam search (Center), however, for the same likelihood
beam hypotheses have higher BLEU scores (Right). We
also note that BLEU and model probability are imperfectly correlated: while we ﬁnd more likely translations
as we sample more candidates, BLEU over those samples
eventually decreases (Right, orange curve).3 Vice versa,
hypotheses selected by BLEU have lower likelihood score
beyond 80 samples (Center, green curve). We revisit this
surprising ﬁnding in §5.3.
Finally, we observe that the model on average assigns much
lower scores to the reference translation compared to beam
hypotheses (Figure 1, Center). To better understand this,
in Figure 2 we compare the token-level model probabilities of the reference translation, to those of outputs from
beam search and sampling. We observe once again that
beam search is a very effective search strategy, ﬁnding
hypotheses with very high average token probabilities and
rarely leaving high likelihood regions; indeed only 20% of
beam tokens have probabilities below 0.7. In contrast, the
probabilities for sampling and the human references are
much lower. The high conﬁdence of beam is somewhat surprising if we take into account the exposure bias of these models, which have only seen gold
3Hypothesis length only decreases slightly with more samples,
i.e., the BLEU brevity penalty moves from 0.975 after drawing
300 samples to 0.966 after 10k samples.
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
Percentile
Token probability
Figure 2. Probability quantiles for tokens in the reference, beam
search hypotheses (k = 5), and sampled hypotheses for the
WMT’14 En-Fr validation set.
translations at training time. We refer the reader to §6.2 for
discussion about how well the model actually ﬁts the data
distribution.
5.3. Uncertainty Causes Large Beam Degradation
In the previous section we observed that repeated sampling
from the model can have a negative impact on BLEU, even
as we ﬁnd increasingly likely hypotheses. Similarly, we observe lower BLEU scores for beam 200 compared to beam 5,
consistent with past observations about performance degradation with large beams .
Why does the BLEU accuracy of translations found by
larger beams deteriorate rather than improve despite these
sequences having higher likelihood? To answer this question we return to the issue of extrinsic uncertainty in the
training data (§3.2) and its impact on the model and search.
One particularly interesting case of noise is when target
sentences in the training set are simply a copy of the source.
In the WMT’14 En-De and En-Fr dataset between 1.1% and
2.0% of the training sentence pairs are “copies” (§3.2). How
does the model represent these training examples and does
beam search ﬁnd them? It turns out that copies are overrepresented in the output of beam search. On WMT’14
En-Fr, beam search outputs copies at the following rates:
2.6% (beam=1), 2.9% (beam=5), 3.2% (beam=10) and 3.5%
(beam=20).
To better understand this issue, we trained models on the
news-commentary portion of WMT’17 English-German
which does not contain copies. We added synthetic copy
noise by randomly replacing the true target by a copy of the
source with probability pnoise. Figure 3 shows that larger
beams are much more affected by copy noise. Even just 1%
of copy noise can lead to a drop of 3.3 BLEU for a beam
of k = 20 compared to a model with no added noise. For a
10% noise level, all but greedy search have their accuracy
more than halved.
Next, we examine model probabilities at the token-level.
BLEU on valid set
Figure 3. Translation quality of models trained on WMT’17
English-German news-commentary data with added synthetic copy
noise in the training data (x-axis) tested with various beam sizes
on the validation set.
Position in sentence
Avg. token prob.
copying source
Figure 4. Average probability at each position of the output sequence on the WMT’14 En-Fr validation set, comparing the reference translation, beam search hypothesis (k = 5), and copying the
source sentence.
Speciﬁcally, we plot the average per position log-probability
assigned by the En-Fr model to each token of: (i) the reference translation, (ii) the beam search output with k = 5,
and (iii) a synthetic output which is a copy of the source
sentence. Figure 4 shows that the probability of copying the
ﬁrst source token is very unlikely according to the model
(and actually matches the ground truth rate of copy noise).
However, after three tokens the model switches to almost
deterministic transitions. Because beam search proceeds
in strict left-to-right manner, the copy mode is only reachable if the beam is wide enough to consider the ﬁrst source
word which has low probability. However, once in the
beam, the copy mode quickly takes over. This explains
why large beam settings in Figure 3 are more susceptible
to copy noise compared to smaller settings. Thus, while
larger beam widths are effective in ﬁnding higher likelihood
outputs, such sequences may correspond to copies of the
source sentence, which explains the drop in BLEU score
for larger beams. Deteriorating accuracy of larger beams
has been previously observed ,
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
original (no copy)
filtered (no copy)
clean (no copy)
Figure 5. BLEU on newstest2017 as a function of beam width
for models trained on all of the WMT’17 En-De training data
(original), a ﬁltered version of the training data (ﬁltered) and a
small but clean subset of the training data (clean). We also show
results when excluding copies as a post-processing step (no copy).
however, it has not until now been linked to the presence of
copies in the training data or model outputs.
Note that this ﬁnding does not necessarily imply a failure of
beam nor a failure of the model to match the data distribution. Larger beams do ﬁnd more likely hypotheses. It could
very well be that the true data distribution is such that no
good translation individually get a probability higher than
the rate of copy. In that case, even a model perfectly matching the data distribution will return a copy of the source. We
refer the reader to §6.2 for further analysis on this subject.
The only conclusion thus far is that extrinsic uncertainty
is (at least partially) responsible for the degradation of
performance of large beams.
Finally, we present two simple methods to mitigate this issue. First, we pre-process the training data by removing low
scoring sentence-pairs according to a model trained on the
news-commentary portion of the WMT’17 English-German
data (ﬁltered; §4.2). Second, we apply an inference constraint that prunes completed beam search hypotheses which
overlap by 50% or more with the source (no copy). Figure 5
shows that BLEU improves as beam gets wider on the clean
portion of the dataset. Also, the performance degradation is
greatly mitigated by both ﬁltering the data and by constraining inference, with the best result obtained by combining
both techniques, yielding an overall improvement of 0.5
BLEU over the original model. Appendix A describes how
we ﬁrst discovered the copy noise issue.
6. Model Fitting and Uncertainty
The previous section analyzed the most likely hypotheses
according to the model distribution. This section takes a
more holistic view and compares the estimated distribution
to the true data distribution. Since exact comparison is intractable and we can only have access to few samples from
Frequency percentile in train
Observed frequency
rare words
common words
Figure 6. Unigram word frequency over the human references, the
output of beam search (k = 5) and sampling on a random subset
of 300K sentences from the WMT’14 En-Fr training set.
the data distribution, we propose several necessary conditions for the two distributions to match. First, we inspect the
match for unigram statistics. Second, we move to analyze
calibration at the set level and design control experiments to
assess probability estimates of sentences. Finally, we compare in various ways samples from the model with human
references. We ﬁnd uncontroversial evidence that the model
spreads too much probability mass in the hypothesis space
compared to the data distribution, often under-estimating
the actual probability of individual hypothesis. Appendix B
outlines another condition.
6.1. Matching Conditions at the Token Level
If the model and the data distribution match, then unigram
statistics of samples drawn from the two distributions should
also match (not necessarily vice versa). This is a particularly
interesting condition to check since NMT models are well
known to under-estimate rare words ; is the actual model poorly estimating word frequencies or is this just an artifact of beam search? Figure 6 shows
that samples from the model have roughly a similar word
frequency distribution as references in the training data, except for extremely rare words (see Appendix C for more
analysis of this issue). On the other hand, beam search overrepresents frequent words and under-represents more rare
words, which is expected since high probability sequences
should contain more frequent words.
Digging deeper, we perform a synthetic experiment where
we select 10 target word types w ∈W and replace each w in
the training set with either w1 or w2 at a given replacement
rate p(w1|w).4 We train a new model on this modiﬁed
data and verify whether the model can estimate the original
replacement rate that determines the frequency of w1 and w2.
Figure 7 compares the replacement rate in the data (prior)
4Each replaced type has a token count between 3k-7k, corresponding to bin 20 in Fig. 6. |W| = 50k.
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
prior in data distribution
Figure 7. Comparison of how often a word type is output by the
model with beam search or sampling compared to the data distribution; prior is the data distribution. Values below prior underestimate the data distribution and vice versa.
to the rate measured over the output of either beam search
or sampling. Sampling closely matches the data distribution
for all replacement rates but beam greatly overestimates
the majority class: it either falls below the prior for rates
of 0.5 or less, or exceeds the prior for rates larger than
0.5. These observations conﬁrm that the model closely
matches unigram statistics except for very rare words,
while beam prefers common alternatives to rarer ones.
6.2. Matching Conditions at the Sequence Level
In this section, we further analyze how well the model captures uncertainty in the data distribution via a sequence of
necessary conditions operating at the sequence level.
Set-Level Calibration.
Calibration veriﬁes whether the model probability estimates pm match the true data probabilities pd. If
pd and pm match, then for any set S, we observe:
[I{x ∈S}] = pm(S).
The left hand side gives the expected rate at which samples
from the data distribution appear in S; the right hand side
sums the model probability estimates over S.
In Figure 8, we plot the left hand side against the right hand
side where S is a set of 200 beam search hypotheses on
the WMT’14 En-Fr validation set, covering an average of
22.4% of the model’s probability mass. Points are binned so
that each point represents 10% of sentences in the validation
or test set . For instance, the
rightmost point in the ﬁgure corresponds to sentences for
which beam collects nearly the entire probability mass, typically very short sentences. This experiment shows that the
model matches the data distribution remarkably well at
the set level on both the validation and test set.
Control Experiment. To assess the ﬁt to the data distribu-
Rate of reference ∈S
Perfect match
Beam 200 (valid)
Beam 200 (test)
Figure 8. Matching distributions at the set level using 200 beam
search hypotheses on the WMT’14 En-Fr valid and test set. Points
are binned so that each represents 10% of sentences. The lowest
probability bin (not shown) has value 0 (reference never in S).
perfect match
exact copy
partial (incl. exact) copy
Figure 9. Rate of copy of the source sentence (exact and partial) as
a function of the amount of copy noise present in the model’s train
data (§5.3). Results on WMT’17 En-De validation set.
tion further, we re-consider the models trained with varying
levels of copy noise (pnoise, cf. §5.3) and check if we reproduce the correct amount of copying (evaluated at the
sequence level) when sampling from the model. Figure 9
shows a large discrepancy: at low pnoise the model underestimates the probability of copying (i.e., too few of the
produced samples are exact copies of the source), while at
high noise levels it overestimates it. Moreover, since our
model is smooth, it can assign non-negligible probability
mass to partial copies5 which are not present in the training data. When we consider both partial and exact copies,
the model correctly reproduces the amount of copy noise
present in the training data. Therefore, although the model
appears to under-estimate some hypotheses at low copy
rates, it actually smears probability mass in the hypothesis space. Overall, this is the ﬁrst concrete evidence of the
model distribution not perfectly ﬁtting the data distribution.
5Partial copies are identiﬁed via the IoU at 50% criterion (§3.2).
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
Expected Inter-Sentence BLEU is deﬁned as
x∼p,x′∼p[BLEU(x, x′)]
which corresponds to the expected BLEU between two translations sampled from a distribution p where x is the hypothesis and x′ is the reference. If the model matches the data distribution, then the expected BLEU computed with sentences
sampled from the model distribution pm should match the
expected BLEU computed using two independent reference
translations (see §6.3 for more details on data collection).
We ﬁnd that the expected BLEU is 44.5 and 32.1 for human
translations on the WMT’14 En-Fr and WMT’14 En-De
datasets, respectively.6 However, the expected BLEU of the
model is only 28.6 and 24.2, respectively. This large discrepancy provides further evidence that the model spreads
too much probability mass across sequences, compared
to what we observe in the actual data distribution.
6.3. Comparing Multiple Model Outputs to Multiple
References
Next we assess if model outputs are similar to those produced by multiple human translators. We collect 10 additional reference translations from 10 distinct humans translators for each of 500 sentences randomly selected from
the WMT’14 En-Fr and En-De test sets. We also collect
a large set of translations from the model via beam search
(k = 200) or sampling. We then compute two versions
of oracle BLEU at the sentence-level: (i) oracle reference
reports BLEU for the most likely hypothesis with respect to
its best matching reference (according to BLEU); and (ii)
average oracle computes BLEU for every hypothesis with
respect to its best matching reference and averages this number over all hypotheses. Oracle reference measures if one of
the human translations is similar to the top model prediction,
while average oracle indicates whether most sentences in
the set have a good match among the human references. The
average oracle will be low if there are hypotheses that are
dissimilar from all human references, suggesting a possible
mismatch between the model and the data distributions.
Table 2 shows that beam search (besides degradation due
to copy noise) produces not only top scoring hypotheses
that are very good (single reference scoring at 41 and oracle
reference at 70) but most hypotheses in the beam are close
to a reference translation (as the difference between oracle
reference and average oracle is only 5 BLEU points). Unfortunately, beam hypotheses lack diversity and are all close to
a few references as indicated by the coverage number, which
measures how many distinct human references are matched
6We also report inter-human pairwise corpus BLEU: 44.8 for
En-Fr and 34.0 for En-De; and concatenated corpus BLEU over
all human references: 45.4 for En-Fr and 34.4 for En-De.
Prob. covered
Sentence BLEU
single reference
oracle reference
average oracle
- # refs covered
Corpus BLEU (multi-bleu.pl)
single reference
10 references
Table 2. Sentence and corpus BLEU for beam search hypotheses
and 200 samples on a 500 sentence subset of the WMT’14 En-Fr
test set. “Single reference” uses the provided reference and the
most likely hypothesis, while oracle reference and average oracle
are computed with 10 human references.
to at least one of the hypotheses. In contrast, hypotheses
generated by sampling exhibit opposite behavior: the quality of the top scoring hypothesis is lower, several hypotheses poorly match references (as indicated by the 25 BLEU
points gap between oracle reference and average oracle) but
coverage is much higher. This ﬁnding is again consistent
with the previous observation that the model distribution
is too spread in hypothesis space. We conjecture that the
excessive spread may also be partly responsible for the lack
of diversity of beam search, as probability mass is spread
across similar variants of the same sequence even in the
region of high likelihood. This over-smoothing might be
due to the function class of NMT; for instance, it is hard
for a smooth class of functions to ﬁt a delta distribution
(e.g., a source copy), without spreading probability mass to
nearby hypotheses (e.g., partial copies), or to assign exact 0
probability in space, resulting in an overall under-estimation
of hypotheses present in the data distribution.
7. Conclusions and Final Remarks
In this study we investigate the effects of uncertainty in
NMT model ﬁtting and search. We found that search works
remarkably well. While the model is generally well calibrated both at the token and sentence level, it tends to diffuse
probability mass too much. We have not investigated the
causes of this, although we surmise that it is largely due
to the class of smooth functions that NMT models can represent. We instead investigated some of the effects of this
mismatch. In particular, excessive probability spread causes
poor quality samples from the model. It may also cause the
“copy mode” to become more prominent once the probability of genuine hypotheses gets lowered. We show that this
latter issue is linked to a form of extrinsic uncertainty which
causes deteriorating accuracy with larger beams. Future
work will investigate even better tools to analyze distributions and leverage this analysis to design better models.
Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation
Acknowledgements
We thank the reviewers, colleagues at FAIR and Mitchell
Stern for their helpful comments and feedback.