Vol.:(0123456789)
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
 
OPEN FORUM
The ethics of algorithms: key problems and solutions
Andreas Tsamados1 · Nikita Aggarwal1,3 · Josh Cowls1,2 · Jessica Morley1 · Huw Roberts1 · Mariarosaria Taddeo1,2 ·
Luciano Floridi1,2
Received: 27 July 2020 / Accepted: 22 January 2021 / Published online: 20 February 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Research on the ethics of algorithms has grown substantially over the past decade. Alongside the exponential development
and application of machine learning algorithms, new ethical problems and solutions relating to their ubiquitous use in society have been proposed. This article builds on a review of the ethics of algorithms published in 2016 (Mittelstadt et al. Big
Data Soc 3(2), 2016). The goals are to contribute to the debate on the identification and analysis of the ethical implications
of algorithms, to provide an updated analysis of epistemic and normative concerns, and to offer actionable guidance for the
governance of the design, development and deployment of algorithms.
Keywords  Algorithm · Artificial intelligence · Autonomy · Digital ethics · Explainability · Fairness · Machine learning ·
Privacy · Responsibility · Transparency · Trust
* Luciano Floridi
 
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles’,
Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Rd,
London NW1 2DB, UK
Faculty of Law, University of Oxford, St. Cross Building,
St. Cross Road, Oxford OX1 3UL, UK
1  Introduction
Algorithms have become a key element underpinning crucial services and infrastructures of information societies.
Individuals interact with recommender systems—algorithmic systems that make suggestions about what a user may
like—on a daily basis, be it to choose a song, a movie, a
product or even a friend . At the same time, schools and
hospitals , financial institutions courts , local governmental bodies , and national governments , all increasingly rely on algorithms to
make significant decisions.
The potential for algorithms to improve individual and
social welfare comes with significant ethical risks . Algorithms are not ethically neutral.
Consider, for example, how the outputs of translation and
search engine algorithms are largely perceived as objective,
yet frequently encode language in gendered ways . Bias has also been reported in
algorithmic advertisement, with opportunities for higherpaying jobs and jobs within the field of science and technology advertised to men more often than to women . Likewise, prediction algorithms used to manage the health data of millions of patients in the United States exacerbate existing
problems, with white patients given measurably better care
than comparably similar, black patients . While solutions to these issues are being discussed
and designed, the number of algorithmic systems exhibiting
ethical problems continues to grow.
Since 2012, artificial intelligence (AI) has been experiencing a new ‘summer’, both in terms of the technical advances
being made and the attention that the field has received
from academics, policy makers, technologists, and investors
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
 . Within this, there has been a growing
body of research on the ethical implications of algorithms,
particularly in relation to fairness, accountability, and transparency . In
2016, our research group at the Digital Ethics Lab published a
comprehensive study that sought to map these ethical concerns
 . However, this is a fast-changing field
and both novel ethical problems and ways to address them
have emerged, making it necessary to improve and update that
In particular, work on the ethics of algorithms has increased
significantly since 2016, when national governments, nongovernmental organisations, and private companies started
to take a prominent role in the conversation on “fair” and
“ethical” AI and algorithms . Both the
quantity and the quality of the research available on the topic
have expanded enormously. Given these changes, this article
updates our previous work in light of new insights into the
ethics of algorithms, updates the initial analysis, includes references to the literature that were missed by the original review,
and extends the analysed topics, including for example work
on AI for social good (see the Sect. 9). At the same time, the
conceptual map proposed in 2016 (see Fig. 1) remains a fruitful framework for reviewing the current debate on the ethics
of algorithms, identifying the ethical problems that algorithms
give rise to, and the solutions that have been proposed in recent
relevant literature. Specifically, in Sect. 2, we summarise the
conceptual map and detail our methodology for the literature
review. In Sects. 3–8, we offer systematic search and review 
on the ethics of algorithms and draw links with the types of
ethical concerns previously identified. Section 9 concludes the
article with an overview.
2  Map of the ethics of algorithms
There is little agreement in the relevant literature on the
definition of an algorithm. The term is often used to indicate both the formal definition of an algorithm as a mathematical construct, with ‘‘a finite, abstract, effective, compound control structure, imperatively given, accomplishing
a given purpose under given provisions” ,
as well as domain-specific understandings which focus on
the implementation of these mathematical constructs into
a technology configured for a specific task. In this article,
we decided to maintain the same approach adopted in the
2016 article and to focus on the ethical issues posed by algorithms as mathematical constructs, their implementations as
programs and configurations (applications), and the ways in
which these can be addressed. We consider algorithms that
are used to (1) turn data into evidence for a given outcome,
which is used to, (2) trigger and motivate an action that may
have ethical consequences. Actions (1) and (2) may be performed by (semi-)autonomous algorithms—such as machine
learning (ML) algorithms—and this complicates, (3) the
attribution of responsibility for the effects of actions that
an algorithm may trigger. Here, ML is of particular interest,
as a field which includes deep learning architectures. Computer systems deploying ML algorithms may be described as
“autonomous” or “semi-autonomous”, to the extent that their
outputs are induced from data and thus, non-deterministic.
Based on this approach, we used the conceptual map
shown in Fig. 1 to identify the ethical issues that algorithms
pose. The map identifies six ethical concerns, which define
the conceptual space of the ethics of algorithms as a field of
research. Three of the ethical concerns refer to epistemic factors, specifically: inconclusive, inscrutable, and misguided
evidence. Two are explicitly normative: unfair outcomes and
transformative effects; while one—traceability—is relevant
both for epistemic and normative purposes.
The epistemic factors in the map highlight the relevance
of the quality and accuracy of the data for the justifiability
of the conclusions that algorithms reach and which, in
turn, may shape morally-loaded decisions affecting individuals, societies, and the environment. The normative
concerns identified in the map refer explicitly to the ethical impact of algorithmically-driven actions and decisions,
including lack of transparency (opacity) of algorithmic
processes, unfair outcomes, and unintended consequences.
Epistemic and normative concerns, together with the distribution of the design, development, and deployment
of algorithms make it hard to trace the chain of events
and factors leading to a given outcome, thus, hindering
the possibility of identifying its cause, and of attributing
moral responsibility for it. This is what the sixth ethical
concern, traceability, refers to.
Fig. 1   Six types of ethical concerns raised by algorithms 
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
It is important to stress that this conceptual map can be
interpreted at both a micro- and macro-ethical level. At the
micro-ethical level, it sheds light on the ethical problems
that particular algorithms may pose. By highlighting how
these issues are inseparable from those related to data and
responsibilities, it shows the need to take a macro-ethical
approach to addressing the ethics of algorithms as part of a
wider conceptual space, namely, digital ethics . As Floridi and Taddeo argue:
“While they are distinct lines of research, the ethics
of data, algorithms and practices are obviously intertwined … [Digital] ethics must address the whole
conceptual space and hence all three axes of research
together, even if with different priorities and focus”
 .
In the remainder of this article, we address each of these
six ethical concerns in turn, offering an updated analysis of
the ethics of algorithms literature (at a micro level), with
the goal of contributing to the debate on digital ethics (at a
macro level).
A systematic literature search was performed via keyword
queries on four widely used reference repositories to identify
and analyse the literature on the ethics of algorithms (seeTable 1). Four keywords were used to describe an algorithm:
‘algorithm’, ‘machine learning’, ‘software’ and ‘computer
program’.1 The search was limited to publications made
available between November 2016 and March 2020.
The search identified 4891 unique papers for review.2
After initial review of title/abstract, 180 papers were selected
for a full review. Of these, 62 were rejected as off-topic,
leaving 118 articles for a full review. There are all listed
in the reference list of the paper. Another 37 articles and
books were reviewed and referenced in this paper to provide
additional information regarding specific ethical issues and
solutions (eg. technical details, examples and tools). These
were sourced from the bibliographies of the 118 articles
we reviewed as well as provided on an ad-hoc basis when
agreed upon by the authors as being helpful for clarification.
3  Inconclusive evidence leading
to unjustified actions
Research focusing on inconclusive evidence refers to the
way in which non-deterministic, ML algorithms produce
outputs that are expressed in probabilistic terms . These types of algorithms generally identify association and correlation between variables
in the underlying data, but not causal connections. As such,
they encourage the practice of apophenia: “seeing patterns
where none actually exist, simply because massive quantities
of data can offer connections that radiate in all directions”
 . This is highly problematic, as patterns identified by algorithms may be the result
of inherent properties of the system modelled by the data,
Table 1   Systematic literature
search results
a About 93 000 returned, first 100 reviewed
Algorithm* AND ethics
AND traceability
AND fairness
AND autonomy
AND (accountability OR responsibility)
AND (transparency OR scrutability OR opacity)
AND discrimination
Web of Science
Algorithm* AND ethics
AND traceability
AND fairness
AND autonomy
AND (accountability OR responsibility)
AND (transparency OR scrutability OR opacity)
AND discrimination
Philpapers
Algorithm* AND ethics
Google Scholar
Algorithm* AND ethics
1  The literature search was limited to English language articles in
peer-reviewed journals and conference proceedings.
2  Many of which were purely technical in nature, especially for “discrimination” and “(transparency OR scrutability OR opacity)”.
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
of the datasets (that is, of the model itself, rather than the
underlying system), or of skillful manipulation of datasets
(properties neither of the model nor of the system). This is
the case, for example, of Simpson’s paradox, when trends
that are observed in different groups of data reverse when the
data is aggregated . In the last two cases, poor
quality of the data leads to inconclusive evidence to support
human decisions.
Recent research has underlined the concern that inconclusive evidence can give rise to serious ethical risks. For example, focusing on non-causal indicators may distract attention
from the underlying causes of a given problem . Even with the use of causal methods, the available
data may not always contain enough information to justify
an action or make a decision fair .
Data quality—the timeliness, completeness and correctness of
a dataset—constrains the questions that can be answered using
a given dataset . Additionally, the insights
that can be extracted from datasets are fundamentally dependent on the assumptions that guided the data collection process
itself . For example, algorithms designed to predict patient outcomes in clinical settings
rely entirely on data inputs that can be quantified (e.g. vital
signs and previous success rates of comparative treatments),
whilst ignoring other emotional facts (e.g. the willingness to
live) which can have a significant impact on patient outcomes,
and thus, undermine the accuracy of the algorithmic prediction
 . This example highlights how insights stemming from algorithmic data processing
can be uncertain, incomplete, and time-sensitive .
One may embrace a naïve, inductivist approach and assume
that inconclusive evidence can be avoided if algorithms are
fed enough data, even if a causal explanation for these results
cannot be established. Yet, recent research rejects this view.
In particular, literature focusing on the ethical risks of racial
profiling using algorithmic systems has demonstrated the
limits of this approach highlighting, among other things, that
long-standing structural inequalities are often deeply embedded in the algorithms’ datasets and are rarely, if ever, corrected
for . More data by themselves do not lead to greater accuracy or greater representation.
On the contrary, they may exacerbate issues of inconclusive
data by enabling correlations to be found where there really are
none. As Ruha Benjamin put it “computational depth
without historical or sociological depth is just superficial learning [not deep learning]”. These limitations pose serious constraints on the justifiability of algorithmic outputs, which could
have a negative impact on individuals or an entire population
due to suboptimal inferences or, in the case of the physical
sciences, even tip the evidence for or against “a specific scientific theory” . This is why it is crucial to
ensure that data fed to algorithms are validated independently,
and data retention and reproducibility measures are in place to
mitigate inconclusive evidence leading to unjustified actions,
along with auditing processes to identify unfair outcomes and
unintended consequences .
The danger arising from inconclusive evidence and erroneous actionable insights also stems from the perceived
mechanistic objectivity associated with computer-generated
analytics .
This can lead to human decision-makers ignoring their
own experienced assessments—so-called ‘automation bias’
 —or even shirking part of their responsibility for decisions (see Traceability below) . As we shall see in Sects. 4 and 8, a lack of
understanding of how algorithms generate outputs exacerbates this problem.
4  Inscrutable evidence leading to opacity
Inscrutable evidence focuses on problems related to the lack
of transparency that often characterise algorithms (particularly
ML algorithms and models); the socio-technical infrastructure
in which they exist; and the decisions they support. Lack of
transparency—whether inherent due to the limits of technology
or acquired by design decisions and obfuscation of the underlying data —often translates into a lack of scrutiny and/
or accountability 
and leads to a lack of “trustworthiness” .
According to the recent literature, factors contributing
to the overall lack of algorithmic transparency include the
cognitive impossibility for humans to interpret massive algorithmic models and datasets; a lack of appropriate tools to
visualise and track large volumes of code and data; code and
data that are so poorly structured that they are impossible
to read; and ongoing updates and human influence over a
model . Lack of transparency is
also an inherent characteristic of self-learning algorithms,
which alter their decision logic (produce new sets of rules)
during the learning process, making it difficult for developers to maintain a detailed understanding of why certain
changes were made .
However, this does not necessarily translate into opaque
outcomes, as even without understanding each logical step,
developers can adjust hyperparameters, the parameters that
govern the training process, to test for various outputs. In
this respect, Martin stresses that, while the difficulty
of explaining ML algorithms’ outputs is certainly real, it is
important not to let this difficulty incentivise organisations
to develop complex systems to shirk responsibility.
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
Lack of transparency can also result from the malleability
of algorithms, whereby algorithms can be reprogrammed in
a continuous, distributed, and dynamic way . Algorithmic malleability allows developers to monitor and improve an already-deployed algorithm, but it may
also be abused to blur the history of its evolution and leave
end-users in a state of confusion about the affordances of a
given algorithm . Consider for
example Google’s main search algorithm. Its malleability
enables the company to make continuous revisions, suggesting a permanent state of destabilisation . This requires those affected by the algorithm to monitor it constantly and update their understanding accordingly
–an impossible task for most .
As Floridi and Turilli note, transparency is
not an “ethical principle in itself but a pro-ethical condition
for enabling or impairing other ethical practices or principles”. And indeed, complete transparency can itself cause
distinct ethical problems :
transparency can provide users with some critical information about the features and limitations of an algorithm,
but it can also overwhelm users with information and thus,
render the algorithm more opaque . Other research stress that excessive
focus on transparency can be detrimental to innovation and
unnecessarily divert resources that could instead be used
to improving safety, performance and accuracy . For example, the debate over prioritising
transparency (and explainability) is especially contentious
in the context of medical algorithms .
Transparency can enable individuals to game the system
 . Knowledge about the source of a dataset, the assumptions under
which sampling was done, or the metrics that an algorithm
uses to sort new inputs, may be used to figure out ways to
take advantage of an algorithm . Yet, the ability to game algorithms is only
within reach for some groups of the population—those with
higher digital literacy for example—thus, creating another
form of social inequality . Therefore, confusing transparency for an end in
itself, instead of a pro-ethical factor enabling
crucial ethical practices, may not solve existing ethical problems related to the use of algorithms and, indeed, pose new
ones. This is why it is important to distinguish between the
different factors that may hinder transparency of algorithms,
identify their cause, and nuance the call for transparency by
specifying which factors are required and at which layers of
algorithmic systems they should be addressed .
There are different ways of addressing the problems
related to lack of transparency. For example, Gebru et al.
propose that the constraints on transparency posed by the
malleability of algorithms can be addressed, in part, by using
standard documentary procedures similar to those deployed
in the electronics industry, where.
“every component, no matter how simple or complex,
is accompanied with a datasheet describing its operating characteristics, test results, recommended usage,
and other information” .
Unfortunately, publicly available documentation is currently uncommon in the development of algorithmic systems and there is no agreed-upon format for what should be
included when documenting the origin of a dataset .
Although relatively nascent, another potentially promising approach to enforcing algorithmic transparency is the
use of technical tools to test and audit algorithmic systems
and decision-making. Testing whether algorithms exhibit
negative tendencies, like unfair discrimination, and auditing a prediction or decision trail in detail, can help maintain
a high level of transparency . To this end, discursive frameworks have been developed to help businesses and public
sector organisations understand the potential impacts of
opaque algorithms, thus encouraging good practices . For instance, the AI Now Institute at New York University has produced algorithmic impact assessment guidance, which seeks to raise awareness and improve dialogue
over potential harms of ML algorithms . This includes the two aims of enabling developers
to design more transparent, and therefore more trustworthy
ML algorithms, and of improving the public understanding
and control of algorithms. In the same vein, Diakopoulos
and Koliska have provided a comprehensive list of “transparency factors” across four layers of algorithmic systems: data,
model, inference, and interface. Factors include, inter alia.
“uncertainty (e.g. error margins), timeliness (e.g. when
was the data collected), completeness or missing elements, sampling method, provenance (e.g. sources),
and volume (e.g. of training data used in machine
learning)” .
Effective transparency procedures are likely, and indeed
ought to, involve an interpretable explanation of the internal
processes of these systems. Buhmann et al. argue that
while a lack of transparency is an inherent feature of many
ML algorithms, this does not mean that improvements cannot
be made  . For example, companies like
Google and IBM have increased their efforts to make ML
algorithms more interpretable and inclusive by making tools
such as Explainable AI, AI Explainability 360, and the What-
If Tool publicly available. These tools provide developers and
also the general public with interactive visual interfaces that
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
improve human readability, explore various model results,
provide case-based reasoning, directly interpretable rules,
and even identify and mitigate unwanted biases in datasets
and algorithmic models .
However, explanations for ML algorithms are constrained
by the type of explanation sought, the fact that decisions
are often multi-dimensional in their nature, and that different users may require different explanations . Identifying appropriate methods for providing
explanations has been a problem since the late 1990s , but contemporary efforts can be categorised
into two main approaches: subject-centric explanations and
model-centric explanations . In the former, the accuracy and length of the explanation is tailored to
users and their specific interactions with a given algorithm
 ; in the
latter, explanations concern the model as a whole and do not
depend on their audience.
Explainability is particularly important when considering
the rapidly growing number of open source and easy-to-use
models and datasets. Increasingly, non-experts are experimenting with state-of-the-art algorithmic models widely
available via online libraries or platforms, like GitHub, without always fully grasping their limits and properties . This has prompted scholars to suggest that, to tackle
the issue of technical complexity, it is necessary to invest
more heavily in public education to enhance computational
and data literacy . Doing so would seem
to be an appropriate long-term solution to the multi-layered
issues introduced by ubiquitous algorithms, and open-source
software is often cited as critical to the solution .
While this approach is useful for abstracting and defining
analytical processes, it tends to ignore the social complexity
of the real world . Indeed, this approach
leads to algorithmic interventions that strive to be ‘neutral’
but in doing so, it risks entrenching existing social conditions , while creating the
illusion of precision . For
these reasons, the use of algorithms in some settings is questioned altogether . For example, a growing
number of scholars criticise the use of algorithm-based risk
assessment tools in court settings .
Some scholars affirm the limits of abstractions with
regard to unwanted bias in algorithms and argue for the need
to develop a sociotechnical frame to address and improve the
fairness of algorithms . In
this respect, Selbst et al. point to five abstraction “traps”, or failures to account for the social context in
which algorithms operate, which persist in algorithmic
design due to the absence of a sociotechnical frame, namely:
1. A failure to model the entire system over which a social
criterion, such as fairness, will be enforced;
2. A failure to understand how repurposing algorithmic
solutions designed for one social context may be misleading, inaccurate, or otherwise do harm when applied
to a different context;
3. A failure to account for the full meaning of social concepts such as fairness, which can be procedural, contextual, and contestable, and cannot be resolved through
mathematical formalisms;
4. A failure to understand how the insertion of technology
into an existing social system changes the behaviours
and embedded values of the pre-existing system; and
5. A failure to recognize the possibility that the best solution to a problem may not involve technology.
The term ‘bias’ often comes with a negative connotation,
but it is used here to denote a “deviation from a standard”
 , which can occur at any
stage of the design, development, and deployment process. The data used to train an algorithm is one of the main
sources from which bias emerges , through preferentially sampled data or from data reflecting existing societal bias . For example,
morally problematic structural inequalities that disadvantage
certain ethnicities may not be apparent in data and thus not
corrected for . Additionally,
data used to train algorithms are seldom obtained “according to any specific experimental design” and are used even though they may be inaccurate,
skewed, or systemically biased, offering a poor representation of a population under study .
One possible approach to mitigating this problem is to
exclude intentionally some specific data variables from
informing algorithmic decision-making. Indeed, the
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
processing of statistically relevant sensitive or “protected
variables”—such as gender or race—is typically limited or
prohibited under anti-discrimination and data protection law,
to limit the risks of unfair discrimination. Unfortunately,
even if protections for specific classes can be encoded in
an algorithm, there could always be biases that were not
considered ex ante, as in the case, for example, of language
models reproducing heavily male-focused texts . Even while bias may
be anticipated and protected variables excluded from the
data, unanticipated proxies for these variables could still be
used to reconstruct biases, leading to “bias by proxy” that
is difficult to detect and avoid .
At the same time, there may be good reasons to rely on
statistically biased estimators in algorithmic processing,
as they can be used to mitigate training data bias. In this
way, one type of problematic algorithmic bias is counterbalanced by another type of algorithmic bias or by introducing
compensatory bias when interpreting algorithmic outputs
 . Simpler approaches to mitigating
bias in data involve piloting algorithms in different contexts
and with various datasets . Having a model, its
datasets, and metadata (on provenance) published to enable
external scrutiny can also help correct unseen or unwanted
bias . It is also worth noting that so-called ‘synthetic data’, or algorithmically generated data, produced via
reinforcement learning or generative adversarial networks
(GANs) offer an opportunity to address certain issues of data
bias . Fair data generation
with GANs may help diversify datasets used in computer
vision algorithms . For example, StyleGAN2
 is able to produce high-quality images
of non-existing human faces and has proven to be especially
useful in creating diverse datasets of human faces, something that many algorithmic systems for facial recognition
currently lack .
Unwanted bias also occurs due to improper deployment of
an algorithm. Consider transfer context bias: the problematic
bias that emerges when a functioning algorithm is used in
a new environment. For example, if a research hospital’s
healthcare algorithm is used in a rural clinic and assumes
that the same level of resources are available to the rural
clinic as the research hospital, the healthcare resource allocation decisions generated by the algorithm will be inaccurate and flawed .
In the same vein, Grgić-Hlača et al. warn of
vicious cycles when algorithms make misguided chain
assessments. For example, in the context of the COMPAS
risk-assessment algorithm, one of the assessment criteria for
predicting recidivism is the criminal history of a defendant’s
friends. It follows that having friends with a criminal history
would create a vicious cycle in which a defendant with convicted friends will be deemed more likely to offend, and
therefore sentenced to prison, hence increasing the number
of people with criminal records in a given group on the basis
of mere correlation .
High-profile examples of algorithmic bias in recent
years—not least investigative reporting around the COMPAS
system —have led to a growing focus
on issues of algorithmic fairness. The definition and operationalisation of algorithmic fairness have become “urgent
tasks in academia and industry” , as the
significant uptick in the number of papers, workshops and
conferences dedicated to ‘fairness, accountability and transparency’ (FAT) highlights . We analyse key topics
and contributions in this area in the next section.
6  Unfair outcomes leading to discrimination
There is widespread agreement on the need for algorithmic fairness, particularly to mitigate the risks of direct and
indirect discrimination (under US law, ‘disparate treatment’
and ‘disparate impact’, respectively) due to algorithmic decisions . Yet there remains a lack of agreement among researchers on the definition, measurements and
standards of algorithmic fairness .
Wong identifies up to 21 definitions of fairness across
the literature and such definitions are often mutually inconsistent .
There are many nuances in the definition, measurement,
and application of different standards of algorithmic fairness. For instance, algorithmic fairness can be defined both
in relation to groups as well as individuals . Four main definitions of algorithmic fairness have gained prominence in the recent literature 37:215–230
4. Statistical parity, which defines fairness as an equal average probability estimate over all members of protected
However, each of these commonly used definitions of
fairness has drawbacks and are generally mutually incompatible . Taking anti-classification as
an example, protected characteristics, such as race, gender
and religion, cannot simply be removed from training data
to prevent discrimination, as noted above . Structural inequalities mean that formally non-discriminatory data points such as postcodes can act as proxies
for, and be used, either intentionally or unintentionally, to
infer protected characteristics, like race . Because of this, Binns
 stresses the importance of considering the historical
and sociological context that cannot be captured in the data
presented to algorithms but that can inform contextually
appropriate approaches to fairness in algorithms. It is also
critical to note that algorithmic models can often produce
unexpected outcomes, contrary to human intuitions and
perturb their understanding. For example, as Grgić-Hlača
et al. highlight, using features that people believe to
be fair can in some cases increase the racism exhibited by
algorithms and decrease accuracy.
Regarding methods for improving algorithmic fairness,
Veale and Binns and Katell et al. offer two
approaches. The first envisages a third-party intervention,
whereby an entity external to the provider of algorithms
would hold data on sensitive or protected characteristics
and attempt to identify and reduce discrimination caused
by the data and models. The second approach proposes a
collaborative knowledge-based method which would focus
on community-driven data resources containing practical
experiences of ML and modelling . The two approaches are not mutually
exclusive, they may bring different benefits depending on
contexts of application, and their combination may also
be beneficial.
Given the significant impact that algorithmic decisions
have on people’s lives and the importance of context for
choosing appropriate measures of fairness, it is surprising
that there has been little effort to capture public views on
algorithmic fairness . Examining public perceptions of different
definitions of algorithmic fairness, Saxena et al. 
note that in the context of loan decisions people exhibit a
preference for a “calibrated fairness definition”, or meritbased selection, as compared to “treating similar people
similarly” and argue in favour of the principle of affirmative
action. In a similar study, Lee offers evidence suggesting that, when considering tasks that require uniquely
human skills, people consider algorithmic decisions to be
less fair and algorithms to be less trustworthy.
Reporting on empirical work conducted on algorithmic
interpretability and transparency, Webb et al. reveal
that moral references, particularly on fairness, are consistent across participants discussing their preferences on
algorithms. The study notes that people tend to go beyond
personal preferences to focus instead on “right and wrong
behaviour”, as a way to indicate the need to understand
the context of deployment of the algorithm and the difficulty of understanding the algorithm and its consequences
 . In the context of recommender systems,
Burke proposes a multi-stakeholder and multisided approach to defining fairness, moving beyond usercentric definitions to include the interests of other system
stakeholders.
It has become clear that understanding the public view on
algorithmic fairness would help technologists in developing
algorithms with fairness principles that align with the sentiments of the general public on prevailing notions of fairness
 . Grounding the design decisions of
the providers of an algorithm “with reasons that are acceptable by the most adversely affected” as well as being “open
to adjustments in light of new reasons” is
crucial to improving the social impact of algorithms. It is
important to appreciate, however, that measures of fairness
are often completely inadequate when they seek to validate
models that are deployed on groups of people that are already
disadvantaged in society because of their origin, income
level, or sexual orientation. We simply cannot “optimise
around”  existing economic, social, and
political power dynamics .
7  Transformative effects leading
to challenges for autonomy
and informational privacy
The collective impact of algorithms has spurred discussions
on the autonomy afforded to end users. . Algorithm-based services
are increasingly featured “within an ecosystem of complex,
socio-technical issues” , which can hinder the autonomy of users. Limits to users’ autonomy stem
from three sources:
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
1. pervasive distribution and proactivity of (learning) algorithms to inform users’ choice ;
2. users’ limited understanding of algorithms;
3. lack of second-order power (or appeals) over algorithmic
outcomes .
In considering the ethical challenges of AI, Yang et al.
 focus on the impact of autonomous, self-learning
algorithms on human self-determination and stress that “AI’s
predictive power and relentless nudging, even if unintentional, should foster and not undermine human dignity and
self-determination”.
The risks that algorithmic systems may hinder human
autonomy by shaping users’ choices has been widely
reported in the literature and has taken centre stage in
most of the high-level ethical principles for AI, including,
inter alia, those of the European Commission’s European
Group on Ethics in Science and Technologies, and the UK’s
House of Lords Artificial Intelligence Committee . In their analysis of these high-level principles, Floridi and Cowls note that it does not suffice that algorithms promote people’s autonomy: rather, the
autonomy of algorithms should be constrained and reversible. Looking beyond the West, the Beijing AI Principles—
developed by a consortium of China’s leading companies
and universities for guiding AI research and development—
also emphasise that human autonomy should be respected
 .
Human autonomy can also be limited by the inability of
an individual to understand some information or make the
appropriate decisions. As Shin and Park suggest, algorithms
“do not have the affordance that would allow users to understand them or how best to utilize them to achieve their goals”
 . As such, a key issue identified in
debates over users’ autonomy is the difficulty of striking an
appropriate balance between people’s own decision-making
and that which they delegate to algorithms . This is further complicated by a lack of transparency over the decision-making process by which particular
decisions are delegated to algorithms. Ananny and Crawford
 note that often this process does not account for all
stakeholders and is not void of structural inequalities.
As a method of Responsible Research and Innovation
(RRI), ‘participatory design’ is often mentioned for its
focus on the design of algorithms to promote the values
of end users and protect their autonomy . Participatory design aims at
“bringing participants’ tacit knowledge and embodied
experience into the design process” . For example, Rahwan’s ‘Society-in-the-Loop’ 
conceptual framework seeks to enable different stakeholders in society to design algorithmic systems before
deployment and to amend and reverse the decisions of
algorithmic systems that already underlie social activities. This framework aims to maintain a well-functioning
“algorithmic social contract”, defined as “a pact between
various human stakeholders, mediated by machines”
 . It accomplishes this by identifying and
negotiating the values of different stakeholders affected by
algorithmic systems as the basis for monitoring adherence
to the social contract.
Informational privacy is intimately linked with user
autonomy . Informational privacy guarantees peoples’ freedom to think, communicate,
and form relationships, among other essential human activities . However, people’s increasing interaction with algorithmic systems has effectively
reduced their ability to control who has access to information that concerns them and what is being done with it. The
vast amounts of sensitive data required in algorithmic profiling and predictions, central to recommender systems, pose
multiple issues regarding individuals’ informational privacy.
Algorithmic profiling takes place over an indefinite
period of time, in which individuals are categorised according to a system’s internal logic, and their profiles are updated
as new information is obtained about them. This information
is typically obtained directly, from when a person interacts
with a given system, or indirectly, inferred from algorithmically assembled groups of individuals .
Indeed, algorithmic profiling will also rely on information
gathered about other individuals and groups of people that
have been categorised in a similar manner to a targeted person. This includes information ranging from characteristics
like geographical location and age to information on specific behaviour and preferences, including what type of content a person is likely to seek the most on a given platform
 . While this poses a problem of
inconclusive evidence, it also indicates that if group privacy
 is not ensured, it may be impossible for
individuals to ever remove themselves from the process of
algorithmic profiling and predictions .
In other words, individuals’ informational privacy cannot be
secured without securing group privacy.
Users may not always be aware of, or may not have the
ability to gain awareness about, the type of information that
is being held about them and what that information is used
for. Considering that recommender systems contribute to the
dynamic construction of individuals’ identities by intervening in their choices, a lack of control over one’s information
translates in a loss of autonomy.
Giving individuals the ability to contribute to the design
of a recommender system can help create more accurate
profiles that account for attributes and social categories that
would have otherwise not been included in the labelling
used by the system to categorise users .
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
While the desirability of improving algorithmic profiling
will vary with the context, improving the algorithmic design
by including feedback from the various stakeholders of the
algorithm falls in line with the aforementioned scholarship
on RRI and improves users’ ability for self-determination
 .
Knowledge about who owns one’s data and what is done
with them can also help inform trade-offs between informational privacy and information-processing benefits . For example, in medical contexts,
individuals are more likely to be willing to share information that can help inform their, or others’ diagnostics, less
so in the context of job recruitment. Information coordination norms, as Sloan and Warner argue, can serve
to ensure that these trade-offs adapt correctly to different
contexts and do not place an excessive amount of responsibility and effort on single individuals. For example, personal
information ought to flow differently in the context of law
enforcement procedures as compared to a job recruitment
process. The European Union’s General Data Protection
Regulation has played an important role in instituting the
basis of such norms .
Finally, a growing scholarship on differential privacy is
providing new privacy protection methods for organisations
looking to protect their users’ privacy while also keeping
good model quality, as well as manageable software costs
and complexity, striking a balance between utility and privacy .
Technical advancements of this kind, which allow organisations to share publicly a dataset while keeping information
about individuals secret (preventing re-identification), and
can ensure provable privacy protection on sensitive data,
such as genomic data . Indeed, differential privacy was recently used by Social Science One and
Facebook to release safely one of the largest datasets (38
million URLs shared publicly on Facebook) for academic
research on the societal impacts of social media .
8  Traceability leading to moral
responsibility
The technical limitations of various ML algorithms, such as
lack of transparency and lack of explainability, undermine
their scrutability and highlight the need for novel approaches
to tracing moral responsibility and accountability for the
actions performed by ML algorithms. Regarding moral
responsibility, Reddy et al. note a common blurring
between technical limitations of algorithms and the broader
legal, ethical, and institutional boundaries in which they
operate. Even for non-learning algorithms, traditional, linear
conceptions of responsibility prove to offer limited guidance
in contemporary sociotechnical contexts. Wider sociotechnical structures make it difficult to trace back responsibility for
actions performed by distributed, hybrid systems of human
and artificial agents .
Additionally, due to the structure and operation of the
data brokerage market, it is in many cases impossible to
“trace any given datum to its original source” once it has
been introduced to the marketplace . Reasons for this include trade secret protection; complex markets that “divorce” the data collection process from the
selling and buying process; and the mix of large volumes
of computationally generated information with “no ‘real’
empirical source” combined with genuine data . This is practiced by organisations as
well as by individuals. Rubel et al. provide a straightforward
and chilling example of agency laundering by Facebook:
“Using Facebook’s automated system, the ProPublica team found a user-generated category called “Jew
hater” with over 2200 members. […] To help ProPublica find a larger audience (and hence have a better
ad purchase), Facebook suggested a number of additional categories. […] ProPublica used the platform to
select other profiles displaying anti-Semitic categories,
and Facebook approved ProPublica’s ad with minor
changes. When ProPublica revealed the anti-Semitic
categories and other news outlets reported similarly
odious categories, Facebook responded by explaining
that algorithms had created the categories based on
user responses to target fields [and that] “[w]e never
intended or anticipated this functionality being used
this way” .
Today, the failure to grasp the unintended effects of mass
personal data processing and commercialisation, a familiar
problem in the history of technology , is coupled with the limited explanations that most ML algorithms provide  . This approach risks to favour avoidance of responsibility through “the computer said so” type of denial . This can lead field experts, such as clinicians, to
avoid questioning the suggestion of an algorithm even when
it may seem odd to them. The interplay between field experts
and ML algorithms can prompt “epistemic vices” , such as dogmatism or gullibility , and hinder the attribution of responsibility in distributed systems . To address this issue, Shah’s
analysis stresses that the risk that some stakeholders
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
may breach their responsibilities can be addressed, for example, by establishing separate bodies for the ethical oversight
of algorithms . However,
expecting a single oversight body, like a research ethics committee or institutional review board, to “be solely responsible for ensuring the rigour, utility, and probity of big data”
is unrealistic . Indeed, some have
argued that these initiatives lack any sort of consistency and
can rather lead to “ethics bluewashing”, understood as.
“implementing superficial measures in favour of, the
ethical values and benefits of digital processes, products, services, or other solutions to appear more digitally ethical than one is.” .
Faced with strict legal regimes, resourceful actors may
also resort to so-called “ethics dumping” whereby unethical
“processes, products or services” are exported to countries
with weaker frameworks and enforcement mechanisms,
after which the outcomes of such unethical activities are
“imported back” .
There are a number of detailed approaches to establishing
algorithmic accountability in the reviewed literature. While
ML algorithms do require a level of technical intervention
to improve their explainability, most approaches focus on
normative interventions  . For example, Ananny
and Crawford argue that, at least, providers of algorithms
ought to facilitate public discourse about their technology
 . Similarly, to address the issue
of ad hoc ethical actions, some have claimed that accountability should first and foremost be addressed as a matter of
convention .
Looking to fill the convention “gap”, Buhmann et al.
 borrow from the seven principles for algorithms set
out by the Association for Computing Machinery, claiming
that through, inter alia, awareness of their algorithms, validation, and testing, an organisation should take responsibility for their algorithms regardless of how opaque they are
 . Decisions regarding the deployment
of algorithms should incorporate factors such as desirability and the wider context in which they will operate, which
should then lead to a more accountable “algorithmic culture”
 . To capture such considerations, “interactive and discursive fora and processes” with
relevant stakeholders, as suggested by Buhmann et al., may
prove a useful means .
In the same vein, Binns focuses on the politicalphilosophical concept of “public reason”. Considering that
the processes for ascribing responsibility for the actions of
an algorithm differ, both in nature and scope, in the public
versus private sector, Binns calls for the establishment of a
publicly shared framework , according to which algorithmic decisions
should be able to withstand the same level of public scrutiny
that human decision-making would receive. This approach
has been echoed by many others in the reviewed literature
 .
Problems relating to ‘agency laundering’ and ‘ethics
shirking’ arise from the inadequacy of existing conceptual
frameworks to trace and ascribe moral responsibility. As
Floridi points out, when considering algorithmic systems
and the impact of their actions.
“we are dealing with DMAs [distributed moral actions]
arising from morally neutral interactions of (potentially hybrid) networks of agents? In other words, who
is responsible (distributed moral responsibility, DMR)
for DMAs?”, .
Floridi’s analysis suggests ascribing full moral responsibility “by default and overridably” to all the agents in the
network which are causally relevant to the given action of
the network. The proposed approach builds on the concepts
of back-propagation from network theory, strict liability
from jurisprudence, and common knowledge from epistemic
logic. Notably, this approach decouples moral responsibility
from the intentionality of the actors and from the very idea
of punishment and reward for performing a given action, to
focus instead on the need to rectify mistakes (back-propagation) and improve the ethical working of all the agents in
the network.
9  Conclusion
This article builds on, and updates, previous research conducted by our group to review relevant literature published since 2016 on the ethics of algorithms. Although that article is now inevitably outdated in
terms of specific references and detailed information about
the literature reviewed, the map, and the six categories that it
provides, have withstood the test of time and remain a valuable tool to scope ethics of algorithms as an area of research,
with a growing body of literature focusing on each of the six
categories contributing either to refine our understanding of
existing problems or to provide solutions to address them.
Since 2016, the ethics of algorithms has become a central topic of discussion among scholars, technology providers, and policymakers. The debate has gained traction also
because of the so-called “summer of AI”, and with it the
pervasive use of ML algorithms. Many of the ethical questions analysed in this article and the literature it reviews
have been addressed in national and international ethical
guidelines and principles, like the aforementioned European
AI & SOCIETY 37:215–230
Commission’s European Group on Ethics in Science and
Technologies, the UK’s House of Lords Artificial Intelligence Committee , and the OECD
principles on AI .
One aspect that was not explicitly captured by the original
map, and which is becoming a central point of discussion
in the relevant literature, is the increasing focus on the use
of algorithms, AI and digital technologies more broadly, to
deliver socially good outcomes . While it is true, at least in
principle, that any initiative aimed at using algorithms for
social good should address satisfactorily the risks that each
of the six categories in the map identifies, there is also a
growing debate on the principles and criteria that should
inform the design and governance of algorithms, and digital
technologies more broadly, for the explicit purpose of social
Ethical analyses are necessary to mitigate the risks while
harnessing the potential for good of these technologies,
insofar as they serve the twin goals of clarifying the nature
of the ethical risks and of the potential for good of algorithms and digital technologies, and translating this understanding
into sound, actionable guidance for the governance of the
design and use of digital artefacts.
Methodology
Four databases of academic literature were systematically
queried (see: Table 1) to identify literature discussing ethics and algorithms. Four keywords were used to describe an
algorithm: ‘algorithm’, ‘machine learning’, ‘software’ and
‘computer program’.3 The search was limited to publications
from November 2016 to March 2020.
The search identified 4891 unique papers for review.4
After an initial review of title/abstract, 180 papers were
selected for a full review. Of these, 62 were rejected as offtopic, leaving 118 articles for full review.
Another 37 articles and books were reviewed and referenced in this paper to provide additional information
regarding specific ethical issues and solutions (e.g., technical details, examples and tools). These were sourced from
the bibliographies of the 118 articles we reviewed as well
as provided on an ad-hoc basis when agreed upon by the
authors as being helpful for clarification.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit