OBITUARY Vladimir Voevodsky,
pioneer in algebraic geometry
and computer proofs p.169
FUNDING African grant-giving
bodies need more data to
guide investments p.168
EXPLORATION On the trail of
an ill-fated expedition to
map the Arctic p.166
HISTORY Two centuries of
distorting publication
metrics p.163
illustrates some of the challenges that society
might be heading towards.
Current BCI technology is mainly focused
on therapeutic outcomes, such as helping
people with spinal-cord injuries. It already
enables users to perform relatively simple
motor tasks — moving a computer cursor or
controlling a motorized wheelchair, for
feels frustrated with the experimental team.
Later, his robotic hand crushes a cup after
taking it from one of the research assistants,
and hurts the assistant. Apologizing for what
he says must have been a malfunction of the
device, he wonders whether his frustration
with the team played a part.
This scenario is hypothetical. But it
onsider the following scenario.
A paralysed man participates in a clin­
ical trial of a brain–computer interface
(BCI). A computer connected to a chip in his
brain is trained to interpret the neural activ­
ity resulting from his mental rehearsals of an
action. The computer generates commands
that move a robotic arm. One day, the man
Four ethical priorities for
neurotechnologies and AI
Artificial intelligence and brain–computer interfaces must respect and preserve people’s
privacy, identity, agency and equality, say Rafael Yuste, Sara Goering and colleagues.
A man with a spinal-cord injury (right) prepares for a virtual cycle race in which competitors steer avatars using brain signals.
BSIP/UIG/GETTY
9 N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 5 1 | N A T U R E | 1 5 9
example. Moreover, researchers can already
interpret a person’s neural activity from func­
tional magnetic resonance imaging scans at
a rudimentary level1 — that the individual is
thinking of a person, say, rather than a car.
It might take years or even decades until
BCI and other neurotechnologies are part
of our daily lives. But technological devel­
opments mean that we are on a path to a
world in which it will be possible to decode
people’s mental processes and directly manip­
ulate the brain mechanisms underlying their
intentions, emotions and decisions; where
individuals could communicate with others
simply by thinking; and where powerful
computational systems linked directly to
people’s brains aid their interactions with the
world such that their mental and physical
abilities are greatly enhanced.
Such advances could revolutionize the
treatment of many conditions, from brain
injury and paralysis to epilepsy and schizo­
phrenia, and transform human experience
for the better. But the technology could also
exacerbate social inequalities and offer cor­
porations, hackers, governments or anyone
else new ways to exploit and manipulate
people. And it could profoundly alter some
core human characteristics: private mental life,
individual agency and an understanding of
individuals as entities bound by their bodies.
It is crucial to consider the possible
ramifications now.
The Morningside Group comprises neuro­
scientists, neurotechnologists, clinicians,
ethicists and machine-intelligence engineers.
It includes representatives from Google
and Kernel (a neurotechnology start-up
in Los Angeles, California); from inter­
national brain projects; and from academic
and research institutions in the United States,
Canada, Europe, Israel, China, Japan and
Australia. We gathered at a workshop spon­
sored by the US National Science Foundation
at Columbia University, New York, in May
2017 to discuss the ethics of neurotechnolo­
gies and machine intelligence.
We believe that existing ethics guidelines
are insufficient for this realm2. These include
the Declaration of Helsinki, a statement of
ethical principles first established in 1964
for medical research involving human sub­
jects (go.nature.com/2z262ag); the Belmont
Report, a 1979 statement crafted by the US
National Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behav­
ioural Research (go.nature.com/2hrezmb);
and the Asilomar artificial intelligence (AI)
statement of cautionary principles, pub­
lished early this year and signed by business
leaders and AI researchers, among others
(go.nature.com/2ihnqac).
To begin to address this deficit, here we lay
out recommendations relating to four areas
of concern: privacy and consent; agency and
identity; augmentation; and bias. Different
nations and people of varying religions,
ethnicities and socio-economic backgrounds
will have differing needs and outlooks. As
such, governments must create their own
deliberative bodies to mediate open debate
involving representatives from all sectors
of society, and to determine how to trans­
late these guidelines into policy, including
specific laws and regulations.
INTELLIGENT INVESTMENTS
Some of the world’s wealthiest investors are
betting on the interplay between neuro­
science and AI. More than a dozen companies
worldwide, including Kernel and Elon Musk’s
start-up firm Neuralink, which launched this
year, are investing in the creation of devices
that can both ‘read’ human brain activity and
‘write’ neural information into the brain. We
estimate that current spending on neuro­
technology by for-profit industry is already
US$100 million per year, and growing fast.
Investment from other sectors is also
considerable. Since 2013, more than
$500 million in federal funds has gone
towards the development of neurotechnol­
ogy under the US BRAIN initiative alone.
Current capabilities are already impressive.
A neuroscientist paralysed by amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS; also known as Lou
Gehrig’s or motor neuron disease) has used
a BCI to run his laboratory, write grant
applications and send e-mails3. Meanwhile,
researchers at Duke University in Durham,
North Carolina, have shown that three
monkeys with electrode implants can oper­
ate as a ‘brain net’ to move an avatar arm
collaboratively4. These devices can work
across thousands of kilometres if the signal
is transmitted wirelessly by the Internet.
Soon such coarse devices, which can
stimulate and read the activity of a few
dozen neurons at most, will be surpassed.
Earlier this year, the US Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
launched a project called Neural Engineer­
ing System Design. It aims to win approval
from the US Food and Drug Administration
within 4 years for a wireless human brain
device that can monitor brain activity using
1 million electrodes simultaneously and
selectively stimulate up to 100,000 neurons.
Meanwhile, Google, IBM, Microsoft,
Facebook, Apple and numerous start-ups are
building ever-more-sophisticated artificial
neural networks that can already outperform
humans on tasks with well-defined inputs
and outputs.
Last year, for example, researchers at the
University of Washington in Seattle demon­
strated that Google’s FaceNet system could
recognize one face from a million others.
Another Google system with similar neuralnetwork architecture far outperforms welltravelled humans at guessing where in the
world a street scene has been photographed,
demonstrating the generality of the tech­
nique. In August, Microsoft announced that,
in certain metrics, its neural network for rec­
ognizing conversational speech has matched
the abilities of even trained professionals,
who have the option of repeatedly rewind­
ing and listening to words used in context.
And using electroencephalogram (EEG)
data, researchers at the University of Freiburg
in Germany showed in July how neural
networks can be used to decode planningrelated brain activity and so control robots5.
Future neural networks derived from a
better understanding of how real ones work
will almost certainly be much more powerful
even than these examples. The artificial net­
works in current use have been inspired by
models of brain circuits that are more than
50 years old, which are based on recording the
activity of individual neurons in anaesthetized
animals6. In today’s neuroscience labs,
researchers can monitor and manipulate the
activity of thousands of neurons in awake,
behaving animals, owing to advances in
optical methods, computing, molecular
engineering and microelectronics.
We are already intimately connected to
our machines. Researchers at Google calcu­
lated this year that the average user touches
their phone nearly one million times annu­
ally (unpublished data). The human brain
controls auditory and visual systems to
When technology companies use
machine learning to improve their
software, they typically gather user
information on their servers to analyse
how a particular service is being used
and then train new algorithms on
the aggregated data. Researchers
at Google are experimenting with
an alternative method of artificialintelligence training called federated
learning. Here, the teaching process
happens locally on each user’s device
without the data being centralized:
the lessons aggregated from the
data (for instance, the knowledge
that the word ‘weekly’ can be used
as an adjective and an adverb) are
sent back to Google’s servers, but
the actual e-mails, texts and so on
remain on the user’s own phone.
Other groups are exploring similar
ideas. Thus, information systems with
improved designs could be used to
enhance users’ ownership and privacy
over their personal data, while still
enabling valuable computations to be
performed on those data.
PROTECTING PRIVACY
Federated learning
1 6 0 | N A T U R E | V O L 5 5 1 | 9 N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7
decipher sounds and images, and com­
mands limbs to hold and manipulate our
gadgets. Yet the convergence of develop­
ments in neurotechnologies and AI would
offer something qualitatively different — the
direct linking of people’s brains to machine
intelligence, and the bypassing of the normal
sensorimotor functions of brains and bodies.
FOUR CONCERNS
For neurotechnologies to take off in general
consumer markets, the devices would have to
be non-invasive, of minimal risk, and require
much less expense to deploy than current
neuro­surgical procedures. Nonetheless, even
now, companies that are developing devices
must be held accountable for their products,
and be guided by certain standards, best
practices and ethical norms.
We highlight four areas of concern that
call for immediate action. Although we raise
these issues in the context of neurotechnol­
ogy, they also apply to AI.
Privacy and consent. An extraordinary
level of personal information can already be
obtained from people’s data trails. Research­
ers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol­
ogy in Cambridge, for example, discovered
in 2015 that fine-grained analysis of people’s
motor behaviour, revealed through their key­
board typing patterns on personal devices,
could enable earlier diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease7. A 2017 study suggests that measures
of mobility patterns, such as those obtained
from people carrying smartphones during
their normal daily activities, can be used to
diagnose early signs of cognitive impairment
resulting from Alzheimer’s disease8.
Algorithms that are used to target advertis­
ing, calculate insur­
ance premiums or
match potential
partners will be
considerably more
powerful if they
draw on neural
information — for
instance, activ­
ity patterns from
neurons associated
with certain states of attention. And neural
devices connected to the Internet open up
the possibility of individuals or organiza­
tions (hackers, corporations or government
agencies) tracking or even manipulating an
individual’s mental experience.
We believe that citizens should have the
ability — and right — to keep their neural
data private (see also ‘Agency and identity’).
We propose the following steps to ensure this.
For all neural data, the ability to opt out
of sharing should be the default choice, and
assiduously protected. People readily give up
their privacy rights to commercial providers
of services, such as Internet browsing, social
media or entertainment, without fully under­
standing what they are surrendering. A
default of opting out would mean that neural
data are treated in the same way that organs
or tissues are in most countries. Individuals
would need to explicitly opt in to share neural
data from any device. This would involve a
safe and secure process, including a consent
procedure that clearly specifies who will use
the data, for what purposes and for how long.
Even with this approach, neural data from
many willing sharers, combined with massive
amounts of non-neural data — from Internet
searches, fitness monitors and so on — could
be used to draw ‘good enough’ conclusions
about individuals who choose not to share.
To limit this problem, we propose that the
sale, commercial transfer and use of neural
data be strictly regulated. Such regulations
— which would also limit the possibility of
people giving up their neural data or hav­
ing neural activity written directly into their
brains for financial reward — may be analo­
gous to legislation that prohibits the sale of
human organs, such as the 1984 US National
Organ Transplant Act.
Another safeguard is to restrict the
centralized processing of neural data. We
advocate that computational techniques,
such as differential privacy or ‘federated
After having electrodes implanted in the brain to stimulate neural activity, some people have reported feeling an altered sense of identity.
the world’s
wealthiest
investors are
betting on
the interplay
neuroscience
BSIP/UIG/GETTY
9 N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 5 1 | N A T U R E | 1 6 1
learning’, be deployed to protect user privacy
(see ‘Protecting privacy’). The use of other
technologies specifically designed to protect
people’s data would help, too. Blockchainbased techniques, for instance, allow data to
be tracked and audited, and ‘smart contracts’
can give transparent control over how data
are used, without the need for a centralized
authority. Lastly, open-data formats and
open-source code would allow for greater
transparency about what stays private and
what is transmitted.
Agency and identity. Some people receiving
deep-brain stimulation through electrodes
implanted in their brains have reported feel­
ing an altered sense of agency and identity.
In a 2016 study, a man who had used a brain
stimulator to treat his depression for seven
years reported in a focus group9 that he began
to wonder whether the way he was interacting
with others — for example, saying something
that, in retrospect, he thought was inappro­
priate — was due to the device, his depres­
sion or whether it reflected something deeper
about himself. He said: “It blurs to the point
where I’m not sure … frankly, who I am.”
Neurotechnologies could clearly disrupt
people’s sense of identity and agency, and
shake core assumptions about the nature of
the self and personal responsibility — legal
People could end up behaving in ways
that they struggle to claim as their own, if
machine learning and brain-interfacing
devices enable faster translation between an
intention and an action, perhaps by using an
‘auto-complete’ or ‘auto-correct’ function. If
people can control devices through their
thoughts across great distances, or if several
brains are wired to work collaboratively, our
understanding of who we are and where we
are acting will be disrupted.
As neurotechnologies develop and
corporations, governments and others start
striving to endow people with new capa­
bilities, individual identity (our bodily and
mental integrity) and agency (our ability to
choose our actions) must be protected as
basic human rights.
We recommend adding clauses protecting
such rights (‘neurorights’) to international
treaties, such as the 1948 Universal Declara­
tion of Human Rights. However, this might
not be enough — international declarations
and laws are just agreements between states,
and even the Universal Declaration is not
legally binding. Thus, we advocate the crea­
tion of an international convention to define
prohibited actions related to neurotechnol­
ogy and machine intelligence, similar to the
prohibitions listed in the 2010 International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance. An associ­
ated United Nations working group could
review the compliance of signatory states,
and recommend sanctions when needed.
Such declarations must also protect
people’s rights to be educated about the
possible cognitive and emotional effects of
neuro­technologies. Currently, consent forms
typically focus only on the physical risks of
surgery, rather than the possible effects of a
device on mood, personality or sense of self.
Augmentation. People frequently experi­
ence prejudice if their bodies or brains func­
tion differently from most10. The pressure to
adopt enhancing neurotechnologies, such as
those that allow people to radically expand
their endurance or sensory or mental capaci­
ties, is likely to change societal norms, raise
issues of equitable access and generate new
forms of discrimination.
Moreover, it’s easy to imagine an aug­
mentation arms race. In recent years, we
have heard staff at DARPA and the US
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity discuss plans to provide soldiers
and analysts with enhanced mental abilities
(‘super-intelligent agents’). These would
be used for combat settings and to better
decipher data streams.
Any lines drawn will inevitably be blurry,
given how hard it is to predict which tech­
nologies will have negative impacts on
human life. But we
urge that guidelines
are established at
both international
and national lev­
els to set limits on
the augmenting
neurotechnologies
that can be imple­
mented, and to define the contexts in which
they can be used — as is happening for gene
editing in humans.
Privacy and individuality are valued
more highly in some cultures than in others.
Therefore, regulatory decisions must be
made within a culture-specific context,
while respecting universal rights and global
guidelines. Moreover, outright bans of cer­
tain technologies could simply push them
underground, so efforts to establish specific
laws and regulations must include organized
forums that enable in-depth and open debate.
Such efforts should draw on the many
precedents for building international con­
sensus and incorporating public opinion into
scientific decision-making at the national
level11. For instance, after the First World
War, a 1925 conference led to the develop­
ment and ratification of the Geneva Protocol,
a treaty banning the use of chemical and bio­
logical weapons. Similarly, after the Second
World War, the UN Atomic Energy Commis­
sion was established to deal with the use of
atomic energy for peaceful purposes and to
control the spread of nuclear weapons.
In particular, we recommend that the use
of neural technology for military purposes
be stringently regulated. For obvious rea­
sons, any moratorium should be global and
sponsored by a UN-led commission.
Although such commissions and similar
efforts might not resolve all enhancement
issues, they offer the best-available model
for publicly acknowledging the need for
restraint, and for wide input into the devel­
opment and implementation of a technology.
Bias. When scientific or technological deci­
sions are based on a narrow set of systemic,
structural or social concepts and norms, the
resulting technology can privilege certain
groups and harm others. A 2015 study12 found
that postings for jobs displayed to female
users by Google’s advertising algorithm pay
less well than those displayed to men. Simi­
larly, a ProPublica investigation revealed
last year that algorithms used by US lawenforcement agencies wrongly predict that
black defendants are more likely to reoffend
than white defendants with a similar criminal
record (go.nature.com/29aznyw). Such biases
could become embedded in neural devices.
Indeed, researchers who have examined these
kinds of cases have shown that defining fair­
ness in a mathematically rigorous manner is
very difficult (go.nature.com/2ztfjt9).
Practical steps to counter bias within
technologies are already being discussed in
industry and academia. Such ongoing pub­
lic discussions and debate are necessary to
shape definitions of problematic biases and,
more generally, of normality.
We advocate that countermeasures to
combat bias become the norm for machine
learning. We also recommend that prob­
able user groups (especially those who are
already marginalized) have input into the
design of algorithms and devices as another
way to ensure that biases are addressed from
the first stages of technology development.
RESPONSIBLE NEUROENGINEERING
Underlying many of these recommendations
is a call for industry and academic research­
ers to take on the responsibilities that come
with devising devices and systems capable
of bringing such change. In doing so, they
could draw on frameworks that have already
been developed for responsible innovation.
In addition to the guidelines mentioned
above, the UK Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council, for instance,
provides a framework to encourage innova­
tors to “anticipate, reflect, engage and act”
in ways that “promote … opportunities for
science and innovation that are socially desir­
able and undertaken in the public interest”.
Among the various efforts to address this in
AI, the IEEE Standards Association created a
global ethics initiative in April 2016, with the
aim of embedding ethics into the design of
processes for all AI and autonomous systems.
bans of certain
technologies
could simply
underground.”
1 6 2 | N A T U R E | V O L 5 5 1 | 9 N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7
History indicates that profit hunting
will often trump social responsibility in
the corporate world. And even if, at an
individual level, most technologists set
out to benefit humanity, they can come
up against complex ethical dilemmas
for which they aren’t prepared. We think
that mindsets could be altered and the
producers of devices better equipped by
embedding an ethical code of conduct
into industry and academia.
A first step towards this would be to
expose engineers, other tech developers
and academic-research trainees to ethics
as part of their standard training on joining
a company or laboratory. Employees could
be taught to think more deeply about how
to pursue advances and deploy strategies
that are likely to contribute constructively
to society, rather than to fracture it.
This type of approach would essentially
follow that used in medicine. Medical
students are taught about patient confi­
dentiality, non-harm and their duties of
beneficence and justice, and are required
to take the Hippocratic Oath to adhere to
the highest standards of the profession.
The possible clinical and societal
benefits of neurotechnologies are vast. To
reap them, we must guide their develop­
ment in a way that respects, protects and
enables what is best in humanity. ■
Rafael Yuste is professor of biological
sciences at Columbia University, New
York City, New York, USA. Sara Goering
is associate professor of philosophy at the
University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
(A list of 25 co-authors in The Morningside
Group appears in the online version.)
e-mails: ;
 
1. Kay, K. N., Naselaris, T., Prenger, R. J. &
Gallant, J. L. Nature 452, 352–355 .
2. Goering, S. & Yuste, R. Cell 167, 882–885
3. Sellers, E. W., Vaughan, T. M. & Wolpaw, J. R.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 11, 449–455
4. Ramakrishnan, A. et al. Sci. Rep. 5, 10767
5. Burget, F. et al. Preprint at 
abs/1707.06633 .
6. Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. J. Physiol. (Lond.)
160, 106–154 .
7. Giancardo, L., Sánchez-Ferro, A.,
Butterworth, I., Mendoza, C. S. & Hooker, J. M.
Sci. Rep. 5, 9678 .
8. Nieto-Reyes, A., Duque, R., Montana, J. L. &
Lage, C. Sensors 17, 1679 .
9. Klein, E. et al. Brain-Computer Interfaces 3,
140–148 .
10. Parens, E. Shaping Our Selves: On Technology,
Flourishing, and a Habit of Thinking .
11. Kitcher, P. Science in a Democratic Society
 .
12. Datta, A., Tschantz, M. C. & Datta, A. Proc. Priv.
Enhancing Technol. 2015, 92–112 .
A full list of authors accompanies this
Comment online; see go.nature.com/2ij9bqt.
ROYAL SOCIETY
9 N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 5 1 | N A T U R E | 1 6 3
Cataloguers of the Royal Society developed the first record of published scientific research.
The catalogue that
made metrics, and
changed science
As new ways emerge to assess research, Alex Csiszar
recalls how the first one transformed the practice and
place of science in society.
n 1830, Charles Babbage had an unusual
idea. Exasperated by how little recogni­
tion science was getting in England, the
computer pioneer and scientific provocateur
suggested that quantifying authorship might
be a way to identify scientific eminence.
Like many of Babbage’s radical ideas, this
one persuaded almost nobody, but it eventu­
ally proved prophetic. Before the end of the
century, listing papers and comparing publi­
cation counts had become a popular pursuit
among scientific authors and other observ­
ers. Within a few decades, academic scien­
tists were coming to fear the creed of ‘publish
or perish’ (see ‘Catalogues and counts’).
This transformation can inform current
debates about the value of algorithms for
quantifying scientific credibility and