COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS WITHOUT
OPENING THE BLACK BOX: AUTOMATED DECISIONS
AND THE GDPR
Sandra Wachter,* Brent Mittelstadt,** & Chris Russell***
* Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St. Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK and
The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London, NW1 2DB, UK. Email: . This work was supported by The Alan Turing
Institute under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1.
** Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St. Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK,
The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London, NW1 2DB, UK,
Department of Science and Technology Studies, University College London, 22 Gordon
Square, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
*** The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London, NW1 2DB, UK,
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford,
GU2 7HX, UK.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Introduction ........................................................................................ 3
II. Counterfactuals ................................................................................. 5
A. Historic Context and The Problem of Knowledge ........................... 7
B. Explanations in A.I. and Machine Learning .................................. 10
C. Adversarial Perturbations and Counterfactual Explanations ....... 13
D. Causality and Fairness .................................................................. 15
III. Generating Counterfactuals ........................................................... 16
A. LSAT dataset .................................................................................. 18
B. Pima Diabetes Database ................................................................ 20
C. Causal Assumptions and Counterfactual Explanations ................ 21
IV. Advantages of Counterfactual Explanations .................................. 22
V. Counterfactual explanations and the GDPR ................................... 23
A. Explanations to understand decisions ........................................... 25
1. Broader possibilities with the right of access ............................ 32
2. Understanding through counterfactuals .................................... 34
B. Explanations to contest decisions .................................................. 35
1. Contesting through counterfactuals .......................................... 40
C. Explanations to alter future decisions ........................................... 42
Conclusion .......................................................................................... 43
Appendix 1: Simple Local Models as Explanations ............................. 48
Appendix 2: Example Transparency Infographic ................................. 51
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
I. INTRODUCTION
There has been much discussion of the existence of a “right to
explanation” in the EU General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”),
and its merits and disadvantages.1 Attempts to implement a right to
explanation that opens the “black box” to provide insight into the internal
decision-making process of algorithms face four major legal and technical
barriers. First, a legally binding right to explanation does not exist in the
GDPR.2 Second, even if legally binding, the right would only apply in
limited cases (when a negative decision was solely automated and had
legal or other similar significant effects).3 Third, explaining the
functionality of complex algorithmic decision-making systems and their
rationale in specific cases is a technically challenging problem.4
Explanations may likewise offer little meaningful information to data
subjects, raising questions about their value.5 Finally, data controllers
have an interest in not sharing details of their algorithms to avoid
1 See, e.g., Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt & Luciano Floridi, Why a Right to
Explanation of Automated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in the General Data
Protection Regulation, 7 INT’L DATA PRIV. LAW 76, 79–90 ; Isak Mendoza & Lee
A. Bygrave, The Right Not to Be Subject to Automated Decisions Based on Profiling, in
EU INTERNET LAW: REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT ; Tae Wan Kim & Bryan Routledge, Algorithmic Transparency, a Right to
Explanation,
SQUARESPACE
 
0c014cd06c/1498752022120/Algorithmic+transparency%2C+a+right+to+explanation+
and+trust+%28TWK%26BR%29.pdf [ Gianclaudio
Malgieri & Giovanni Comandé, Why a Right to Legibility of Automated Decision-
Making Exists in the General Data Protection Regulation, 7 INT’L DATA PRIV. L. 243,
246–47 ; Bryce Goodman & Seth Flaxman, EU Regulations on Algorithmic
Decision-Making and a “Right to Explanation,” ARXIV:1606.08813, at 6–7 ,
 [ Andrew Selbst &
Julia Powles, Meaningful Information and the Right to Explanation, 7 INT’L DATA PRIV.
L. 233, 233–34 .
2 Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 79; Kim & Routledge, supra note 1, at
3 Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 78.
4 See, e.g., Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 77; Edwards & Veale, supra
note 1, at 22; Joshua A. Kroll et al., Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. PA. L. REV. 633,
638 ; Tal Zarsky, Transparent Predictions, 2013 U. ILL. L. REV. 1503, 1519–20
5 Jenna Burrell, How the Machine “Thinks:” Understanding Opacity in Machine
Learning Algorithms, BIG DATA & SOC., Jan.–June 2016, at 5; Kroll et al., supra note 4,
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
disclosing trade secrets, violating the rights and freedoms of others (e.g.
privacy), and allowing data subjects to game or manipulate the decisionmaking system.6
Despite these difficulties, the social and ethical value (and perhaps
responsibility) of offering explanations to affected data subjects remains
unaffected. One significant point has been neglected in this discussion.
An explanation of automated decisions, both as envisioned by the GDPR
and in general, does not necessarily hinge on the general public
understanding of how algorithmic systems function. Even though such
interpretability is of great importance and should be pursued, explanations
can, in principle, be offered without opening the “black box.” Looking at
explanations as a means to help a data subject act rather than merely
understand, one could gauge the scope and content of explanations
according to the specific goal or action they are intended to support.
Explanations can serve many purposes. To investigate the
potential scope of explanations, it seems reasonable to start from the
perspective of the data subject, which is the natural person whose data is
being collected and evaluated. We propose three aims for explanations to
assist data subjects: (1) to inform and help the subject understand why a
particular decision was reached, (2) to provide grounds to contest adverse
decisions, and (3) to understand what could be changed to receive a
desired result in the future, based on the current decision-making model.
As we show, the GDPR offers little support to achieve any of these aims.
However, none hinge on explaining the internal logic of automated
decision-making systems.
Building trust is essential to increase societal acceptance of
algorithmic decision-making. As a solution to close current gaps in
transparency and accountability that undermine trust between data
controllers and data subjects,7 we propose to move beyond the limitations
6 Burrell, supra note 5, at 3; Brenda Reddix-Smalls, Credit Scoring and Trade Secrecy:
An Algorithmic Quagmire or How the Lack of Transparency in Complex Financial
Models Scuttled the Finance Market, 12 U.C. DAVIS BUS. L.J. 87, 94 ; Mike
Ananny & Kate Crawford, Seeing without knowing: Limitations of the Transparency
Ideal and its Application to Algorithmic Accountability, NEW MEDIA & SOC., 2016, at 8,
 
[ Roger A. Ford & W. Nicholson Price II, Privacy and
Accountability in Black-Box Medicine, 23 MICH. TELECOMM. TECH. REV. 1, 3 ;
Frank A. Pasquale, Restoring Transparency to Automated Authority, 9 J. TELECOMM.
HIGH TECH. L. 235, 237 .
7 Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 78; Mendoza & Bygrave, supra note
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
of the GDPR. We argue that counterfactuals should be used as a means to
provide explanations for individual decisions.
Unconditional counterfactual explanations should be given for
positive and negative automated decisions, regardless of whether the
decisions are solely (as opposed to predominantly) automated or produce
legal or other significant effects. This approach provides data subjects
with meaningful explanations to understand a given decision, grounds to
contest it, and advice on how the data subject can change his or her
behaviour or situation to possibly receive a desired decision (e.g. loan
approval) in the future without facing the severely limited applicability
imposed by the GDPR’s definition of automated individual decisionmaking.8
In this paper, we present the concept of unconditional
counterfactual explanations as a novel type of explanation of automated
decisions that overcomes many challenges facing current work on
algorithmic interpretability and accountability. We situate counterfactuals
in the philosophical history of knowledge, as well as historical and
modern research on interpretability and fairness in machine learning.
Based on the potential advantages offered to data subjects by
counterfactual explanations, we then assess their alignment with the
GDPR’s numerous provisions concerning automated decision-making.
Specifically, we examine whether the GDPR offers support for
explanations that aim to help data subjects understand the scope of
automated decision-making as well as the rationale of specific decisions,
explanations to contest decisions, and explanations that offer guidance on
how data subjects can change their behaviour to receive a desired result.
We conclude that unconditional counterfactual explanations can bridge
the gap between the interests of data subjects and data controllers that
otherwise acts as a barrier to a legally binding right to explanation.
II. COUNTERFACTUALS
Counterfactual explanations take a similar form to the statement:
“You were denied a loan because your annual income was £30,000. If
your income had been £45,000, you would have been offered a loan.”
8 Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 87–88; Mendoza & Bygrave, supra
note 1, at 83; Edwards & Veale, supra note 1, at 22.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Here the statement of decision is followed by a counterfactual, or
statement of how the world would have to be different for a desirable
outcome to occur. Multiple counterfactuals are possible, as multiple
desirable outcomes can exist, and there may be several ways to achieve
any of these outcomes. The concept of the “closest possible world,” or the
smallest change to the world that can be made to obtain a desirable
outcome, is key throughout the discussion of counterfactuals. In many
situations, providing several explanations covering a range of diverse
counterfactuals corresponding to relevant or informative “close possible
worlds” rather than “the closest possible world” may be more helpful.
Knowing the smallest possible change to a variable or set of variables to
arrive at a different outcome may not always be the most helpful type of
counterfactual. Rather, relevance will depend also upon other casespecific factors, such as the mutability of a variable or real world
probability of a change.9
In the existing literature, “explanation” typically refers to an
attempt to convey the internal state or logic of an algorithm that leads to
a decision.10 In contrast, counterfactuals describe a dependency on the
external facts that led to that decision. This is a crucial distinction. In
modern machine learning, the internal state of the algorithm can consist
of millions of variables intricately connected in a large web of dependent
behaviours.11 Conveying this state to a layperson in a way that allows
them to reason about the behaviour of an algorithm is extremely
challenging.12
The machine learning and legal communities have both taken
relatively restricted views on what passes for an explanation. The machine
learning community has been primarily concerned with debugging13 and
conveying approximations of algorithms that programmers or researchers
9 See infra, Section II.A.
10 See Burrell, supra note 5, at 1.
11 See, e.g., Kaiming He et al., Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, in
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE CONFERENCE ON COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN
RECOGNITION 770–78 .
12 See Burrell, supra note 5, at 1; Zachary C. Lipton, The Mythos of Model
Interpretability, in 2016 WORKSHOP ON HUMAN INTERPRETABILITY IN MACHINE
 
[ 
13 Osbert Bastani, Carolyn Kim & Hamsa Bastani, Interpretability via Model Extraction,
AʀXɪᴠ:1706.09773,
 
[ 
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
could use to understand which features are important14 while law and
ethics scholars have been more concerned with understanding the internal
logic of decisions as a means to assess their lawfulness (e.g. prevent
discriminatory outcomes), contest them, increase accountability
generally, and clarify liability.15
As such, the proposal made here for counterfactuals as
explanations lies outside of the taxonomies of explanations proposed
previously in machine learning, legal, and ethical literature. In contrast,
as we discuss in the next section, analytic philosophy has taken a much
broader view of knowledge and how counterfactuals can be used as
justifications of beliefs.16
A. HISTORIC CONTEXT AND THE PROBLEM OF
Analytic Philosophy has a long history of analysing the necessary
conditions for propositional knowledge.17 Expressions of the type “S
14 Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh & Carlos Guestrin, Why Should I Trust You?:
Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier, in PROCEEDINGS OF THE 22ND ACM
SIGKDD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA
MINING 1135 ; Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju et al., Grad-CAM: Why Did You Say
 
 
[ Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi & Andrew
Zisserman, Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising Image Classification
 
 [ 
15 See, e.g., Finale Doshi-Velez et al., Accountability of AI Under the Law: The Role of
Explanation, ARXIV:1711.01134, at 1 ; Finale Doshi-Velez, Ryan Budish &
Mason Kortz, The Role of Explanation in Algorithmic Trust, TRUSTWORTHY
ALGORITHMIC
DECISION-MAKING
 [ 
Mireille Hildebrandt, The Dawn of a Critical Transparency Right for the Profiling Era,
in DIGITAL ENLIGHTENMENT YEARBOOK 2012 41 ; Tim
Miller, Explanation in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Social Sciences,
 
& Frank A. Pasquale, The Scored Society: Due Process for Automated Predictions, 89
 
[ Tal Zarsky, Transparent Predictions, 2013 U. Iʟʟ. L.
 [ 
YDJG]; Tal Zarsky, The Trouble with Algorithmic Decisions: An Analytic Road Map to
Examine Efficiency and Fairness in Automated and Opaque Decision Making, 41 SCI.
TECH. HUM. VALUES 118, 118–132 .
16 See, e.g., DAVID LEWIS, COUNTERFACTUALS 1–4, 84–91 ; David Lewis,
Counterfactuals and Comparative Possibility, 2 J. PHIL. LOGIC 418, 418–446 ;
Peter Lipton, Contrastive Explanation, 27 ROYAL INST. PHIL. SUPP. 247, 247 ;
ROBERT NOZICK, PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLANATIONS 172–74 .
17 See generally ALFRED JULES AYER, THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
knows that p” constitute knowledge, where S refers to the knowing
subject, and p to the proposition that is known. Traditional approaches,
which conceive of knowledge as “justified true belief,” conceive of three
necessary conditions for knowledge: truth, belief, and justification.18
According to this tripartite approach, in order to know something, it is not
enough to simply believe that something is true: rather, you must also
have a good reason for believing it.19 The relevance of this approach
comes from the observation that this form of justification of beliefs can
serve as a type of explanation,20 as it is fundamentally a reason that a
belief is held and therefore serves as an answer to the question, “Why do
you believe X?” Understanding the different forms these justifications can
take opens the door to a broader class of explanations than previously
encountered in interpretability research.
Although influential, “justified true belief” has faced much
criticism21 and inspired substantial analysis of modifications to this
tripartite approach as well as proposals for additional necessary
conditions for a proposition to constitute knowledge.22 Modal conditions,
including safety23 and sensitivity,24 have been proposed as necessary
additions to the tripartite built on counterfactual relations.25
Sosa26 as well as Ichikawa and Steup27 define sensitivity as:
If p were false, S would not believe that p.
18 See generally Edmund L. Gettier, Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?, 23 ANALYSIS
121 ; Julien Dutant, The Legend of the Justified True Belief Analysis, 29 PHIL.
PERSP. 95 .
19 See Gettier, supra note 18, at 121.
20 See NOZICK, supra note 16, at 174.
21 See, e.g., Dutant, supra note 18, at 95; Mark Kaplan, It’s Not What You Know that
Counts, 82 J. PHIL. 350, 350 .
22 Jonathan Ichikawa & Matthias Steup, The Analysis of Knowledge, in STANFORD
ENCYCLOPEDIA
PHILOSOPHY
 
[ 
23 See Ernest Sosa, How to Defeat Opposition to Moore, 13 PHIL. PERSP. 141, 141–43
24 See Jonathan Ichikawa, Quantifiers, Knowledge, and Counterfactuals, 82 PHIL.
PHENOMENOLOGICAL RES. 287, 287 ; see also NOZICK, supra note 16, at 172–74.
25 See Ichikawa & Steup, supra note 22, Section 5 (reviewing these concepts and their
criticisms).
26 Sosa, supra note 23, at 141.
27 Ichikawa & Steup, supra note 22, Section 5.1.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Here, the statement “If p were false” is a counterfactual defining a
“possible world” close to the world in which p is true.28 The sensitivity
condition suggests that “in the nearest possible worlds in which not-p, the
subject does not believe that p.”29 Our notion of counterfactual
explanations hinges upon the related concept:
If q were false, S would not believe p.
We claim that in this case, q serves as an explanation of S’s belief in p,
inasmuch as S only holds belief p while q is true, and that changing q
would also cause S’s belief to change. A key point is that such statements
only describe S’s beliefs, which need not reflect reality.30 As such, these
statements can be made without knowledge of any causal relationship
between q and p.
We define Counterfactual Explanations as statements taking the
Score p was returned because variables V had values (v1,
v2,...) associated with them. If V instead had values (v1',
v2',...), and all other variables had remained constant, score
p' would have been returned.
While many such explanations are possible, an ideal counterfactual
explanation would alter values as little as possible and represent a closest
world under which score p' is returned instead of p. The notion of a
“closest possible world” is thus implicit in our definition.
Our version of counterfactuals perhaps most resembles a
structural equations approach in execution by identifying alterations to
variables. This approach is more similar to Pearl’s “mini-surgeries”31 than
Lewis’ “miracles.”32 In any case, our approach does not rely on
knowledge of the causal structure of the world,33 or suggest which
context-dependent metric of distance between worlds is preferable to
establish causality.34 In many situations, it will be more informative to
provide a diverse set of counterfactual explanations, corresponding to
different choices of nearby possible worlds for which the counterfactual
28 See LEWIS, supra note 16, at 1–4.
29 Ichikawa & Steup, supra note 22, Section 5.1.
30 For example, S could believe that a person is inherently more trustworthy (p) because
they are a Capricorn (q).
31 See JUDEA PEARL, CAUSATION 223–24 .
32 LEWIS, supra note 16, at 47–48.
33 See infra, Section II.D.
34 See Boris Kment, Counterfactuals and Explanation, 115 MIND 261, 261–309 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
holds or a preferred outcome is delivered, rather than a theoretically ideal
counterfactual describing the “closest possible world” according to a
preferred distance metric.35 Case-specific considerations will be relevant
to the choice of distance metric and a “sufficient” and “relevant” set of
counterfactual explanations. Such considerations may include the
capabilities of the individual concerned, sensitivity, mutability of the
variables involved in a decision, and ethical or legal requirements for
disclosure.36
Similarly, counterfactuals that describe changes to multiple
variables within the model can be provided. These would represent
possible futures brought about by changes to the individual’s
circumstances. As an example, the impact of changes in income could be
calculated in combination with changes to career, thereby ensuring the
counterfactual represents a realistic possible world.
B. EXPLANATIONS IN A.I. AND MACHINE LEARNING
Much of the early work in A.I. on explaining the decisions made by expert
or rule-based systems focused on classes of explanation closely related to
counterfactuals. For example, Gregor and Benbasat37 offer the following
example of what they call a type 1 explanation:
Q: Why is a tax cut appropriate?
A: Because a tax cut’s preconditions are high inflation and
trade deficits, and current conditions include these factors.
35 The merits of different metrics of distance between possible worlds have long been
debated in philosophy without the emergence of consensus. Meaningfully addressing
this debate goes beyond the scope of this paper which proposes a method for
counterfactual explanations, but will be explored in future work. For further discussion
of distance metrics and counterfactuals, see LEWIS, supra note 16, at 8–15; Ernest W.
Adams, On the Rightness of Certain Counterfactuals, 74 PAC. PHIL. Q. 1, 1–8 ;
Kment, supra note 34, at 262.
36 A discussion of appropriate metrics for making these choices goes beyond the scope
of this paper, but will be addressed in future work. With that said, relevant philosophical
discussion can be found on determining relevance of possible causal or contrastive
explanations, counterfactuals, and distance metrics. See, e.g., Peter Lipton, Contrastive
Explanation, 27 ROYAL INST. PHIL. SUPP. 247, 254–65 ; Adams, supra note 35, at
37 Shirley Gregor & Izak Benbasat, Explanations from Intelligent Systems: Theoretical
Foundations and Implications for Practice, 23 MIS Q. 497, 503 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Buchanan and Shortliffe38 offer a similar example:
RULE009 IF:
1) The gram stain of the organism is gramneg, and
2) The morphology of the organism is coccus
THEN: There is strongly suggestive evidence (.8) that the
identity of the organism is Neisseria
As is typical in early A.I., questions we now recognise as hard such as
“How do we decide inflation is high?” or “Why are these the
preconditions of a tax cut?” are assumed to have been addressed by
humans, and are not discussed as part of the explanation.39 As such, the
explanations do not provide insight into what people in machine learning
think of as the internal logic of black box classifiers. In fact, the first
example can be rewritten as two diverse counterfactual statements:
“If inflation was lower, a tax cut would not be
recommended.”
“If there was no trade deficit, a tax cut would not be
recommended.”
While the second example is closely related to the counterfactual:40
“If the gram stain was negative or the morphology was
not coccus, the algorithm would not be confident that the
organism is Neisseria.”
The most important difference between these approaches and
counterfactuals is that counterfactuals continue functioning in an end-toend integrated approach. If the gram stain and morphology in the MYCIN
example were also determined by the algorithm, counterfactuals would
automatically return a close sample with a different classification, while
these early methods could not be applied to such involved scenarios.
38 BRUCE G. BUCHANAN & EDWARD D. SHORTLIFFE, RULE-BASED EXPERT SYSTEMS:
THE MYCIN EXPERIMENTS OF THE STANFORD HEURISTIC PROGRAMMING PROJECT 344
39 See, e.g., Gregor & Benbasat, supra note 37, at 503.
40 However, they are not logically equivalent. The example from MYCIN differs in that
it is still possible that some samples that are either gram positive or have a different
morphology could still be classified as Neisseria.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
As focus has switched from A.I. and logic-based systems towards
machine learning tasks such as image recognition, the notion of an
explanation has come to refer to providing insight into the internal state
of an algorithm, or to human-understandable approximations of the
algorithm.41 As such, the most related machine learning work to these,
and to ours, is Martens and Provost.42 Uniquely among other works in
machine learning, it shares our interest in making interventions to alter
the outcome of classifier responses. However, the work is firmly linked
to the problem of document classification, and the only interventions it
proposes involve the removal of words from documents to stop websites
from being classified as “adult.”43 The heuristic proposed cannot be easily
generalised to either continuous variables,44 or even the addition of words
to documents.
The majority of works in machine learning on explanations and
interpreting models concern themselves with generating simple models as
local approximations of decisions.45 Generally, the idea is to create a
simple human-understandable approximation of a decision-making
algorithm that accurately models the decision given the current inputs, but
may be arbitrarily bad for different inputs.46 However, there are numerous
difficulties with treating these approaches as explanations suitable for a
lay data subject.
In general, it is unclear if these models are interpretable by nonexperts. They make a three-way trade-off between the quality of the
approximation, the ease of understanding the function, and the size of the
domain for which the approximation is valid.47 As we show in Appendix
1, these local models can produce widely varying estimates of the
importance of variables even in simple scenarios such as the single
41 Ribeiro et al., supra note 14, at 1135–37.
42 David Martens & Foster Provost, Explaining Data-Driven Document Classifications,
38 MIS Q. 73, 73–74 .
44 “Continuous variables” refers to variables whose assigned values are not restricted to
a small set of discrete values: such as `present’ or `not present’, but instead can take any
value in a given range. Measurements such as height, weight, or how bright a particular
pixel is in a photo, are often treated as continuous variables. See for example:
 
45 Ribeiro et al., supra note 14, at 1135; Selvaraju et al., supra note 14, at 1–3; Simonyan
et al., supra note 14, at 1.
46 See Ribeiro et al., supra note 14, at 1143; Selvaraju et al., supra note 14, at 1–3;
Simonyan et al., supra note 14, at 1.
47 Bastani et al., supra note 13, at 1; Himabindu Lakkaraju et al., Interpretable &
Explorable Approximations of Black Box Models, AʀXɪᴠ:1707.01154, at 1 ,
 [ 
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
variable case, making it extremely difficult to reason about how a function
varies as the inputs change. Moreover, the utility of such approaches
outside of model debugging by expert programmers is unclear. Research
has yet to be conducted on how to convey the various limitations and
unreliabilities of these approaches to a lay audience in such a way that
they can make use of such explanations.
In contrast, counterfactual explanations are intentionally
restricted. They are crafted in such a way as to provide a minimal amount
of information capable of altering a decision, and they do not require the
data subject to understand any of the internal logic of a model in order to
make use of it. The downside to this is that individual counterfactuals may
be overly restrictive. A single counterfactual may show how a decision is
based on certain data that is both correct and unable to be altered by the
data subject before future decisions, even if other data exist that could be
amended for a favourable outcome. This problem could be resolved by
offering multiple diverse counterfactual explanations to the data subject.
C. ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATIONS AND COUNTERFACTUAL
EXPLANATIONS
The techniques used to generate counterfactual explanations on
deep networks such as resnet48 are already widely studied in the machine
learning literature under the name of “Adversarial Perturbations.”49 In
these works, algorithms capable of computing counterfactuals are used to
confuse existing classifiers by generating a synthetic data point close to
an existing one such that the new synthetic data point is classified
differently than the original one.50
One strength of counterfactuals is that they can be efficiently and
effectively computed by applying standard techniques, even to cuttingedge architectures. Some of the largest and deepest neural networks are
used in the field of computer vision, particularly in image labelling tasks
48 See He et al., supra note 11, at 770.
49 See Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens & Christian Szegedy, Explaining and
Harnessing
Adversarial
 
 [ Seyed-Mohsen
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi & Pascal Frossard, Deepfool: A Simple and
Accurate Method to Fool Deep Neural Networks, in PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE
CONFERENCE ON COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION 2574–82 ;
Christian Szegedy et al., Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks, ARXIV:1312.6199,
at 2 , [ 
50 See Goodfellow, Shlens & Szegedy, supra note 49, at 1; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi &
Frossard, supra note 49, at 2574–82; Szegedy et al., supra note 49, at 2.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
such as ImageNet.51 These classifiers have been shown to be particularly
vulnerable to a type of attack referred to as “Adversarial Perturbation”
where small changes to a given image can result in the image being
assigned to an entirely different class. For example, DeepFool52 defines
an adverse perturbation of an image x, given a classifier, as the smallest
change to x such that the classification changes. Essentially, this is a
counterfactual by a different name. Finding a closest possible world to x
such that the classification changes is, under the right choice of distance
function, the same as finding the smallest change to x.
Importantly, none of the standard works on Adversarial
Perturbations make use of appropriate distance functions, and the majority
of such approaches tend to favour making small changes to many
variables, instead of providing sparse human interpretable solutions that
modify only a few variables.53 Despite this, efficient computation of
counterfactuals and Adversarial Perturbations is made possible by virtue
of state-of-the-art algorithms being differentiable. Many optimisation
techniques proposed in the Adversarial Perturbation literature are directly
applicable to this problem, making counterfactual generation efficient.
One of the more challenging aspects of Adversarial Perturbations
is that these small perturbations of an image are barely human perceptible,
but result in drastically different classifier responses.54 Informally, this
appears to happen because the newly generated images do not lie in the
“space of real-images,” but slightly outside it.55 This phenomenon serves
as an important reminder that when computing counterfactuals by
searching for a close possible world, it is at least as important that the
solution found comes from a “possible world” as it is that it is close to the
starting example. Further research into how data from high-dimensional
and highly-structured spaces, such as natural images, can be characterised
is needed before counterfactuals can be reliably used as explanations in
these spaces.
51 See Jia Deng et al., Imagenet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database, in IEEE
CONFERENCE ON COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION 248–55 .
52 See Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi & Frossard, supra note 49, at 2574.
53 See Jiawei Su, Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas & Sakurai Kouichi, One Pixel Attack for
 
 [ 
54 Niki Kilbertus et al., Avoiding Discrimination through Causal Reasoning,
 
 
[ 
55 See generally Simant Dube, High Dimensional Spaces, Deep Learning and
Adversarial Examples, ARXIV:1801.00634 , 
[ (presenting preliminary investigation of this matter).
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
D. CAUSALITY AND FAIRNESS
Several works have approached the problem of guaranteeing that
algorithms are fair, i.e. that they do not exhibit a bias towards particular
ethnic, gender, or other protected groups, using causal reasoning56 and
counterfactuals.57 Kusner et al.58 consider counterfactuals where the
subject belongs to a different race or sex, and require that the decision
made remain the same under such a counterfactual for it to be considered
fair. In contrast, we consider counterfactuals in which the decision differs
from its current state.
Many works have suggested that transparency might be a useful
tool for enforcing fairness. While it is unclear how counterfactuals could
be used for this purpose, it is also unclear if any form of explanation of
individual decisions can in fact help. Grgic-Hlaca et al. 59 showed how
understandable models can easily mislead our intuitions, and that
predominantly using features people believed to be fair slightly increased
the racism exhibited by algorithms, while decreasing accuracy. In general,
the best tools for uncovering systematic biases are likely to be based upon
large-scale statistical analysis and not upon explanations of individual
decisions.60
With that said, counterfactuals can provide evidence that an
algorithmic decision is affected by a protected variable (e.g. race), and
that it may therefore be discriminatory.61 For the types of distance
function we consider in the next section, if the counterfactuals found
change someone’s race, then the treatment of that individual is dependent
on race. However, the converse statement is not true. Counterfactuals
which do not modify a protected attribute cannot be used as evidence that
the attribute was irrelevant to the decision. This is because counterfactuals
describe only some of the dependencies between a particular decision and
56 See Kilbertus et al., supra note 54, at 1.
57 See Matt J. Kusner et al., Counterfactual Fairness, AʀXɪᴠ:1703.06856, at 16 ,
 [ 
59 Nina Grgic-Hlaca et al., The Case for Process Fairness in Learning: Feature Selection
for Fair Decision Making, in NIPS SYMPOSIUM ON MACHINE LEARNING AND THE LAW
60 See Andrea Romei & Salvatore Ruggieri, A Multidisciplinary Survey on
Discrimination Analysis, 29 KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING REV. 582, 617 .
61 Establishing the influence of a protected variable on a decision does not, by itself,
prove that illegal discrimination has occurred. Mitigating factors may exist which justify
the usage of a protected attribute. See, e.g., Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big
Data’s Disparate Impact, 104 CAL. L. REV. 671, 676 (discussing disparate
treatment in American anti-discrimination law).
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
specific external facts. This can be seen clearly in Section III.A, where
the counterfactuals proposed for a particular classifier involve ‘black’
people changing their race, while not suggesting that ‘white’ people’s race
should be varied.
III. GENERATING COUNTERFACTUALS
In the following section, we give examples of how meaningful
counterfactuals can be easily computed. Many of the standard classifiers
of machine learning (including Neural Networks, Support Vector
Machines, and Regressors) are trained by finding the optimal set of
weights w that minimises an objective over a set of training data.
Equation 1
Where yi is the label for data point xi and ρ(·) is a regularizer over the
weights. We wish to find a counterfactual x' as close to the original point
xi as possible such that fw(x') is equal to a new target y'. We can find x' by
holding w fixed and minimizing the related objective.
Equation 2
Where d(·,·) is a distance function that measures how far the
counterfactual x' and the original data point xi are from one another. In
practice, maximisation over λ is done by iteratively solving for x' and
increasing λ until a sufficiently close solution is found.
The choice of optimiser for these problems is relatively
unimportant. In practice, any optimiser capable of training the classifier
under Equation 1 seems to work equally well, and we use ADAM62 for all
experiments. As local minima are a concern, we initialise each run with
different random values for x' and select as our counterfactual the best
minimizer of Equation 2. These different minima can be used as a diverse
set of multiple counterfactuals.
62 Diederik Kingma & Jimmy Ba, ADAM: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,
 
 
[ 
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Of particular importance is the choice of distance function used to
decide which synthetic data point x' is closest to the original data point xi.
As a sensible first choice, which should be refined based on subject- and
task-specific requirements, we suggest use of the L1 norm, or Manhattan
distance, weighted by the inverse median absolute deviation. This is
written as MADk for the median absolute deviation of feature k, over the
set of points P:
Equation 3
We chose d(·,·) as:
Equation 4
This distance metric has several desirable properties. Firstly, it captures
some of the intrinsic volatility of the space, which means that if a feature
k varies wildly across the dataset, a synthetic point x' may also vary this
feature while remaining close to xi under the distance metric. The use of
median absolute difference rather than the more usual standard deviation
also makes this metric more robust to outliers. Of equal importance are
the sparsity-inducing properties of the L1 norm. The L1 norm is widely
recognised in mathematical and machine learning circles for its tendency
to induce sparse solutions in which most entries are zero when paired with
an appropriate cost function.63
When computing human-understandable counterfactuals, this
property is highly desirable as it corresponds to counterfactuals in which
only a small number of variables are changed and most remain constant,
making the counterfactuals much easier to communicate and comprehend.
This metric works equally well on the examples we consider.
To demonstrate the importance of the choice of distance function,
we illustrate below the impact of varying d(·,·) on the LSAT dataset. A
further challenge lies in ensuring that the synthetic counterfactual x'
corresponds to a valid data point. We illustrate some of the pitfalls and
63 See, e.g., Emmanuel J. Candes, Justin K. Romberg & Terence Tao, Stable Signal
Recovery from Incomplete and Inaccurate Measurements, 59 COMM. PURE & APPLIED
MATHEMATICS 1207, 1212 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
remedies for dealing with discrete features when computing
counterfactuals.
A. LSAT DATASET
We first consider the generation of counterfactuals on the LSAT64 dataset.
In particular, we consider a stripped-down version used in the fairness
literature65 that attempts to predict students’ first-year average grade on
the basis of their race, grade-point average prior to law school, and law
school entrance exam scores. This stripped-down version of the LSAT
dataset is used in the fairness literature, as classifiers trained on this data
naturally exhibit bias against ‘black’ people.66 As a result, we will find
evidence of this bias in our neural network in some of the counterfactuals
we generate.
We generate a three-layer fully-connected neural-network, with
two hidden layers of 20 neurons each feeding into a final classifier. Even
a small model like this has 941 different weights controlling its behaviour
and 40 neurons that exhibit complex interdependencies, which makes
conveying its internal state challenging.
Choosing d as the unweighted squared Euclidean distance
Equation 5
we consider the Counterfactual, “What would have to be changed to give
a predicted score of 0?”67 Directly solving for Eq. 2 gives the results in
the central block labelled “Counterfactuals” in Table 1.
Table 1 - Unnormalized L2
64 See R. Darrell Bock & Marcus Lieberman, Fitting a Response Model for n
Dichotomously Scored Items, 35 PSYCHOMETRIKA 179, 187–96 .
65 See, e.g., Chris Russell et al., When Worlds Collide: Integrating Different
Counterfactual Assumptions in Fairness, in ADVANCES IN NEURAL INFORMATION
PROCESSING SYSTEMS 6396–6405 ; Kusner et al., supra note 57, at 9–12
66 See Russell et al., supra note 65, at 6396–6405; Kusner et al., supra note 57, at 10.
67 The scores being predicted are normalised, with 0 corresponding to the average score.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Two artefacts are immediately apparent. The first is that although in this
dataset, race is modelled using a discrete variable that can only take the
labels 0 or 1, corresponding to ‘white’ or ‘black’ respectively, a variety
of meaningless values, either fractional or negative, have been assigned
to it. In the literature on adversarial perturbation, generally values are
capped to lie within a sensible range such as to stop some of these
artefacts from occurring. However, this would still allow the fractional
solutions shown in the bottom two examples. Instead, we clamp the race
variable forcing it to take either value 0 or 1 in two separate run-throughs,
and then take as a solution the closest counterfactual found in either of the
runs. These results can be seen in the rightmost column “Counterfactual
Hybrid.” The algorithm now suggests always changing the race to ‘white’
as part of the counterfactual. Of particular note is that the counterfactuals
show that ‘black’ students would get better scores.
The second artefact is that the algorithm much prefers
significantly varying the GPA than the exam results, and this is down to
our choice of distance function. We took as d(·,·), the squared Euclidean
distance, and this generally prefers changes that are as small as possible
and spread uniformly across all variables. However, the range of the GPA
is much smaller than that of the exam scores. Adjusting for this by
normalising each component by its standard deviation, i.e.
Equation 6
gives the set of counterfactuals shown in Table 2.
Table 2 - Normalised L2
After normalisation, the GPA remains much more consistent, and
naturally remains within an expected range of values. Note that for ‘black’
students, race does vary under the computed counterfactual, revealing a
dependence between the decision and race (which is often a legally
protected attribute).
Finally, we show the use of the L1 norm weighted by the inverse
median absolute deviation (Table 3). This returns similar but sparser
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
results to the weighted squared Euclidean distance, with the GPA not
being changed under the counterfactuals.
Table 3 - Normalised L1
These final Normalised L1 Hybrid Counterfactuals can be expressed in a
more accessible text form that only describes the alterations to the
original data:
Person 1: If your LSAT was 34.0, you would have an
average predicted score (0).
Person 2: If your LSAT was 32.4, you would have an
average predicted score (0).
Person 3: If your LSAT was 33.5, and you were ‘white’,
you would have an average predicted score (0).
Person 4: If your LSAT was 35.8, and you were ‘white’,
you would have an average predicted score (0).
Person 5: If your LSAT was 34.9, you would have an
average predicted score (0).
B. PIMA DIABETES DATABASE
To demonstrate Counterfactuals on a more complex problem, we consider
a database used to predict whether women of Pima heritage are at risk of
diabetes.68 We generate a classifier that returns a risk score between by training a similar three-layer fully-connected neural-network with
two hidden layers of 20 neurons to perform logistic regression. This
classifier takes as input 8 different variables of varying predictive power,
including number of pregnancies, age and BMI. Counterfactuals are
generated to answer the question “What would have to be different for
this individual to have a risk score of 0.5?” To induce sparsity in the
answer and generate counterfactuals that are easy for a human to evaluate,
with only a small number of changed variables, we make use of the L1
norm, or Manhattan distance, weighted by the inverse median absolute
68 Jack W. Smith et al., Using the ADAP Learning Algorithm to Forecast the Onset of
Diabetes Mellitus, PROC. ANN. SYMP. ON COMPUT. APPLICATION MED. CARE 261, 261–
62 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
deviation, instead of the Euclidean distance. We also cap variables to
prevent them from going outside the range seen in the training data.
With this done, the counterfactuals typically vary from the original
data only in a small number of variables, and these differences are
automatically rendered in human readable text form.
Person 1: If your 2-Hour serum insulin level was 154.3,
you would have a score of 0.51.
Person 2: If your 2-Hour serum insulin level was 169.5,
you would have a score of 0.51.
Person 3: If your Plasma glucose concentration was 158.3
and your 2-Hour serum insulin level was 160.5, you would
have a score of 0.51.
These counterfactuals are similar to the risk factors already used by
doctors to communicate, e.g. “If your body mass index is greater than 40
you are morbidly obese, and at greater risk of ill-health.” However,
counterfactuals may make use of multiple factors and convey a
personalised risk model that takes into account other attributes that may
mitigate or increase risk.
C. CAUSAL ASSUMPTIONS AND COUNTERFACTUAL
EXPLANATIONS
The reader familiar with causal modelling may have noticed that our
counterfactual explanations are not making use of causal models or
equivalently, that they make naive assumptions that variables are
independent of one another. There are several reasons for this. One
important use of counterfactual explanations is to provide the data subject
with information to make a guided audit of the data and check for relevant
inaccuracies in the data. Treating such errors as independent and drawn
from a robust distribution such as the Laplacian (corresponding to use of
the L1 norm in our objective) is a sensible model for these errors. More
importantly, creating and interpreting accurate causal models is difficult.
Requiring data controllers to build and convey to a lay audience a causal
model that accurately captures the interdependencies between
measurements such as the number of pregnancies, age, and BMI is
extremely challenging and may be irrelevant.
Counterfactuals generated from an accurate causal model may
ultimately be of use to experts (e.g., to medical professionals trying to
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
decide which intervention will move a patient out of an at-risk group).
However, the purpose of our paper is to illustrate how far you can go with
minimal assumptions and that such detailed causal models are
unnecessary for counterfactual explanations to be of use.
IV. ADVANTAGES OF COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Counterfactual explanations differ markedly from existing proposals in
the machine learning and legal communities (particularly regarding the
GDPR’s “right to explanation”),69 while offering several advantages.
Principally, counterfactuals bypass the substantial challenge of explaining
the internal workings of complex machine learning systems.70 Even if
technically feasible, such explanations may be of little practical value to
data subjects. In contrast, counterfactuals provide information to the data
subject that is both easily digestible and practically useful for
understanding the reasons for a decision, challenging them, and altering
future behaviour for a better result.
The reduced regulatory burden of counterfactual explanations is
also significant. Current state-of-the-art machine learning methods make
decisions based upon deep networks that compose together functions
more than a thousand times and with more than ten million parameters
controlling their behaviour.71 As the working memory of humans can
contain around seven distinct items,72 it remains unclear whether “humancomprehensible meaningful information” about the logic involved in a
particular decision can ever exist, disregarding whether such information
could be meaningfully conveyed to non-experts.73 As such, regulations
that require meaningful information regarding the internal logic to be
69 Although a right to explanation is not itself legally binding, data subjects are entitled
to receive “meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the significance
and the envisaged consequences” of automated decision-making under the GDPR's Art.
13–15. Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 16. Others have proposed that
these provisions require the data subject to be given information about the internal logic
and the rationale of specific decisions. The information sought aligns with the type of
explanation pursued in the machine learning community. For an explanation of why such
information is not legally required, and why Art. 13–15 do not constitute a de facto right
to explanation, see Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 10–11, 14–19.
70 Burrell, supra note 5, at 9.
71 See generally Kaiming He et al., Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition,
PROC. IEEE CONF. ON COMPUT. VISION & PATTERN RECOGNITION 770, 770–78 ;
Gao Huang et al., Deep Networks with Stochastic Depth, EUROPEAN CONF. ON COMPUT.
VISION 646, 646–61 .
72 George A. Miller, The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on
Our Capacity for Processing Information, 63 PSYCHOL. REV. 81, 91 .
73 Burrell, supra note 5, at 9.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
conveyable to a lay audience could prohibit the use of many standard
approaches. In contrast, counterfactual explanations do not attempt to
convey the logic involved and, as shown in the previous section, are
simple to compute and convey.
Such expectations of providing information regarding the internal
logic of algorithmic decision-making systems have surfaced recently in
relation to the GDPR and in particular, the “right to explanation.” The
GDPR contains numerous provisions requiring information to be
communicated to individuals about automated decision-making.74
Significant discussion has emerged in legal and machine learning
communities regarding the specific requirements and limitations of the
GDPR in this regard and in particular, how to provide information about
decisions made by highly complex automated systems.75 As
counterfactuals provide a method to explain some of the rationale of an
automated decision while avoiding the major pitfalls of interpretability or
opening the “black box,” they may prove a highly useful mechanism to
meet the explicit requirements and background aims of the GDPR.
V. COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS AND THE GDPR
Although the GDPR’s “right to explanation” is not legally binding, it has
nonetheless connected discussion of data protection law to the
longstanding question of how algorithmic decisions can be explained to
experts as well as non-expert parties affected by the decision.76 Answering
this question largely depends upon the intended purpose of the
explanation; the information to be provided must be tailored in terms of
structure, complexity, and content with a particular aim in mind.
Unfortunately, the GDPR does not explicitly define requirements for
explanations of automated decision-making and provides few hints as to
the intended purpose of explanations of automated decision-making.77
Recital 71 of the GDPR, a non-binding provision and the only place where
74 Regulation 2016/679 of Apr. 27, 2016, on the Protection of Natural Persons with
Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, and
Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) [hereinafter
GDPR], GDPR, recitals 63 & 71 & arts. 13(2)(f), 14(2)(g), 15(1)(h) & 22, 2016 O.J. (L
119) 12, 14, 41, 42, 43, 46 (EU).
75 See generally Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1; Mendoza & Bygrave,
supra note 1; Edwards & Veale, supra note 1; Malgieri & Comandé, supra note 1; Selbst
& Powles, supra note 1; Doshi-Velez et al., supra note 15; Christopher Kuner et al.,
Machine Learning with Personal Data: Is Data Protection Law Smart Enough to Meet
the Challenge?, 7 INT’L DATA PRIVACY L. 1 .
76 See Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 3–4.
77 See id. at 42.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
the word explanation is mentioned, states that suitable safeguards against
automated decision-making should be implemented and “should include
specific information to the data subject and the right to obtain human
intervention, to express his or her point of view, to obtain an explanation
of the decision reached after such assessment and to challenge the
decision.”78
This is the only time where an explanation is mentioned in the
GDPR, leaving the reader with little insight into what type of explanation
is intended or what purpose it should serve. Based on the text, the only
clear indication is that legislators wanted to clarify that some type of
explanation can voluntarily be offered after a decision has been made.
This can be seen as Recital 71 separates “specific information” which
should be given before a decision is made,79 from safeguards that apply
after a decision has been made80 (“an explanation of the decision reached
after such assessment” (emphasis added)).81 Further indications are not
provided of the intended content of such ex post explanations.82
The content of an explanation must reflect its intended purpose.
Given the lack of guidance in the GDPR, many aims for explanations are
feasible. Reflecting the GDPR’s emphasis on protections and rights for
individuals,83 here we examine potential purposes for explanations from
the perspective of the data subject. We propose three possible aims of
78 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 71, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 14 (EU).
79 Jörg Hladjk, DS-GVO Art. 22 Automatisierte Entscheidungen im Einzelfall
einschließlich Profiling, in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG 529, 535 .
80 The European Parliament makes the same distinction (information obligations vs.
explanations of automated decisions) in their draft report on civil law rules on robotics
when referring to the GDPR. See European Parliament Committee on Legal Affairs,
Draft Report with Recommendations to the Commission on Civil Law Rules on Robotics
 
//EP//NONSGML%2BCOMPARL%2BPE-
582.443%2B01%2BDOC%2BPDF%2BV0//EN
[ 
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt & Luciano Floridi, Transparent, Explainable, and
Accountable AI for Robotics, 2 SCI. ROBOTICS 1, 1 ; Hladjk, supra note 79 at 535–
36 (supporting this view that an explanation should be given after a decision has been
taken, while recognising that this is not legally binding).
81 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 71, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 14 (EU).
82 See generally European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and the Council on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the
Processing of Personal Data and On the Free Movement of Such Data (General Data
Protection
Regulation),
 
[ 
83 Christopher Kuner, The European Commission’s Proposed Data Protection
Regulation: A Copernican Revolution in European Data Protection Law, PRIVACY &
SEC. L. REP. 1, 6–7, 8 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
explanations of automated decisions: to enhance understanding of the
scope of automated decision-making and the reasons for a particular
decision, to help contest a decision, and to alter future behaviour to
potentially receive a preferred outcome. This is not an exhaustive list of
potential aims of explanations, but rather reflects how the recipient of an
automated decision, as with any type of decision, may wish to understand
its scope, effects, and rationale and take actions in response. In the
following sections, we assess how these three purposes are reflected in
the GDPR and the extent to which counterfactual explanations meet and
exceed the GDPR’s requirements.
A. EXPLANATIONS TO UNDERSTAND DECISIONS
One potential purpose of explanations is to provide the data subject with
understanding of the scope of automated decision-making, and the
reasons that led to a particular decision. Several provisions in the GDPR
can support a data subject’s understanding of automated decisionmaking, although the types of information that must be shared tend to
enhance a broad understanding of automated decision-making systems,
as opposed to the rationale of specific decisions.84 As a result, the GDPR
does not appear to require opening the “black box” to explain the
internal logic of the decision-making system to data subjects. With this
in mind, counterfactuals can provide information aligned with the
GDPR’s various informational requirements, while also providing some
insight into the reasons that led to a particular decision. Counterfactuals,
thus, could meet and exceed the requirements of the GDPR.
The description of explanations in Recital 71 does not include a
requirement to open the “black box.”85 Understanding the internal logic
84 See Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 5.
85 Id.; see also ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, GUIDELINES ON
AUTOMATED INDIVIDUAL DECISION-MAKING AND PROFILING FOR THE PURPOSES OF
REGULATION
 The Guidelines,
which are very ambiguous, seem to support the claim that such a requirement is not only
absent, but also might not have been intended. On the one hand transparency in how
decisions are made (Recital 71) appears to be very important. See Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party, Guidelines at 27. However, at the same time, the guidelines
state that the aim of Art. 15(1)(h) is not to create individual explanations that require
understanding the internal logic of the algorithm. Id. at 27. Hence, the guidelines suggest
that Art. 15(1)(h) calls for information about general system functionality, as is the case
with its counterparts in Art. 13(2)(f) and Art. 14(2)(g). This reading of Articles 13–15
would suggest that the Article 29 Working Party does not view non-binding Recital 71
as a requirement to explain the internal logic of individual decisions, as even the legally
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
of the algorithmic decision-making system is not explicitly required.
Elsewhere, the GDPR contains transparency mechanisms,86 notification
duties,87 and the right of access,88 all of which create informational
requirements concerning automated decision-making. Art. 13–15
describe what kind of information needs to be provided if data are
collected, either immediately when collected from the data subject,89 the
latest after a month when collected from a third party,90 or at any time if
requested from the data subject.91 Among other things, Art. 12 explains
how this information (as defined in Art. 13–14) should be conveyed.92
Art. 12–14 suggest that data subjects must be provided with “a meaningful
overview of the intended processing,”93 including “the existence of
automated decision-making, including profiling, referred to in Art. 22(1)
and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic
involved, as well as the significance and the envisaged consequences of
such processing for the data subject,”94 as opposed to a detailed
explanation of the internal logic of a system after a decision has been
made.95 Rather they aim to offer a generic overview of intended
processing activities, which enhances the data subject’s understanding of
the scope and purpose of automated decision-making.96
binding text in Article 15(1)(h), which is sufficiently vague to allow such an
interpretation, see Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, is not thought to create
such a requirement. For further support that Recital 71 does not hinge on opening the
black box, see Martini, DS-GVO Art. 22 Automatisierte Entscheidungen im Einzelfall
einschließlich Profiling, in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG Rn 35-37 .
86 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 39–40 (EU).
87 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13 & 14, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–42 (EU).
88 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
89 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 13–15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–43 (EU).
90 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 14, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 41–42 (EU).
91 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
92 Dirk Heckmann & Anne Paschke, DS-GVO Art. 12 Transparente Information,
Kommunikation, in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG 367, 370 .
93 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(7), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU).
94 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13(2)(f) & 14(2)(g), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 41, 42 (EU).
95 Lorenz Franck, DS-GVO Art. 12 Transparente Information, Kommunikation, in
DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG VO (EU) 2016/679 316, 320 ; Sebastian Schulz, DS-GVO Art. 22 Automatisierte Entscheidungen im
Einzelfall, in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG VO (EU) 2016/679 410, 418–19
 ; Suzanne Rodway, Just How Fair Will Processing Notices
Need to Be Under the GDPR, 16 PRIV. & DATA PROT. 16, 16–17 .
96 See Kuner, supra note 75, at 2; ROSEMARY JAY, GUIDE TO THE GENERAL DATA
PROTECTION REGULATION: A COMPANION TO DATA PROTECTION LAW AND PRACTICE
226 .
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Art. 12(7) clarifies that the aim of Art. 13-14 is to provide “in an
easily visible, intelligible and clearly legible manner, a meaningful
overview of the intended processing.”97 Two requirements are notable: (1)
that the information provided must be meaningful to its recipient and
broad in scope (a “meaningful overview”), and (2) that the notification
occurs prior to processing (“intended processing”).
To understand what would constitute a meaningful overview, the
envisioned medium of disclosure is instructive. Broadly applicable
information appears to be required, rather than personalised disclosures.
Legal scholars have suggested that notification duties can be satisfied via
updates to existing privacy statements or notices98 (e.g. those displayed
on websites or using QR codes).99 This requirement does not change
based on the form of data collection.100 When data are collected from a
third party,101 an email sent to the data subject linking to the data
controller’s privacy statement(s) could suffice.102 The same holds true for
personalised links103 referring to the privacy notice. Tools similar to those
currently used to make users aware of the usage of cookies or monitoring
shopping behaviour can be envisioned to satisfy the requirements in Art.
14, thus making data subjects immediately aware of data collection.104
Detailed information appears to not be necessary as Art. 12(7) states that
the required information can be provided along with standardised icons.105
In trilogue, the European Parliament proposed several standardised icons
that were ultimately not adopted (see Appendix 2). Despite this, the
proposed icons reveal the initial expectations of regulators for simple,
easily understood information.106
97 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(7), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU) (emphasis added).
98 See, e.g., ALAIN BENSOUSSAN, GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION: TEXTS,
COMMENTARIES AND PRACTICAL GUIDELINES 113 ; Franck, supra note 95,
at 320; JAY, supra note 96 at 223; Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 375–76;
Rainer Knyrim, DS-GVO Art. 14 Informationspflicht bei Erhebung von Daten, in
DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG 412, 417–18 .
99 Lorenz Franck, DS-GVO Art. 13 Informationspflicht bei Erhebung von Daten, in
DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG VO (EU) 2016/679 331, 338–39 .
100 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 25-6.
101 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 14, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 41 (EU).
102 Knyrim, supra note 98, at 415–19.
103 Franck, supra note 95, at 322–23.
104 Knyrim, supra note 98, at 420.
105 Id. at 417; ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, GUIDELINES ON
TRANSPARENCY UNDER REGULATION 2016/679 .
106 The European Commission is tasked in Art. 12(8) to develop such icons.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
These examples suggest Art. 13–14 aim to provide a general
overview of data processing that will be meaningful to all data subjects
involved (e.g., all users of Twitter). The captive audience is more likely
to be the general public or user base, not individual users, and their unique
circumstances.107 This format of disclosure suggests notifications should
be comprehensible to a general audience with mixed expertise and
background knowledge. An “uneducated layperson” may be the
envisioned audience for disclosures.108 This coincides with the general
notion of Art. 12(1) that all information and communication with the data
subject has to be in a “concise, transparent, intelligible and easily
accessible form,” suggesting in-depth technical information and
‘legalese’ would be inappropriate.109 At a minimum, each provision
suggests that information disclosures need to be tailored to their audience,
with envisioned audiences including children and uneducated laypeople.
Notifications regarding automated decision-making110 face
particular constraints within an overall “meaningful overview.”
According to the Article 29 Working Party,111 the UK Information
Commissioner’s Office,112 and other commentators,113 informing the data
subject about the “significance and envisaged consequences of automated
decision-making” in a very simple manner, including “how profiling
might affect the data subject generally, rather than information about a
specific decision” will be sufficient.114 For instance, an explanation of
107 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 58, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 11 (EU); Heckmann
& Paschke, supra note 92, at 378. Note that this information can also be provided orally.
See JAY, supra note 96, at 216–17 (noting this also but warning that data controllers
carry the burden to prove that the information was communicated).
108 Franck, supra note 95, at 322 (noting this for the elderly, uneducated people,
foreigners, or children); see also Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 376–77.
109 JAY, supra note 96, at 218; Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 376; Article 29
Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 25-6.
110 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 13(2), 14(2)(g), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 41–42 (EU).
111 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85.
112 Info. Comm’r Office, Feedback Request - Profiling and Automated Decision-making
 
[ Note the UK’s ICO is preparing new guidelines in the
form of a living document, which will be continuously updated. See: UK’s Information
Commissioner’s Office, RIGHTS RELATED TO AUTOMATED DECISION MAKING INCLUDING
 .
113 See, e.g., Rodway, supra note 95; Paal, DS-GVO Art. 13 Informationspflicht bei
Erhebung von personenbezogenen Daten bei der betroffenen Person, in DATENSCHUTZ-
GRUNDVERORDNUNG .
114 Info. Comm’r Office, supra note 112, at 16.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
how a low rating of creditworthiness can affect payment options,115 how
intended data processing may result in a credit or job application being
declined,116 or how driving behaviour might impact insurance premiums
would be sufficient.117 Similarly, “meaningful information about the logic
involved” is said to require only “clarifying: of the categories of data used
to create a profile; the source of the data; and why this data is considered
relevant”118 as opposed to a “detailed technical description about how an
algorithm or machine learning works.”119
This view is echoed in the Article 29 Working Party’s guidelines
on automated individual decision-making. First the “right to explanation”
is only mentioned once in the guidelines without any further details on
scope or purpose. This “right” is clearly separated from the legally
binding safeguards in Art. 22(3), implying that the Article 29 Working
Party sees a difference in the legal standing of Recitals and legally binding
provisions.120 In fact, the guidelines does not even list the right to
explanation in their “good practice suggestions” section.121 Transparency
about the fact that data controllers “are engaging in this type of activity,”
referring to automated decision-making, is essential and the main goal of
Art. 13 and 14. The aim of these articles is thus to provide ex ante
information.122 This is also evident in the fact that the guidelines states
that the phrase ‘significance’ and ‘envisaged consequences’ means “that
information must be provided about intended or future processing, and
how the automated decision-making might affect the data subject.”123
Elsewhere, the guidelines state that “details of the main characteristics
considered in reaching the decision, the source of this information and the
115 Paal, supra note 113 at Rn. 31-32; Info. Comm’r Office, supra note 112, at 16.
116 Rodway, supra note 95, at 2.
117 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 26.
118 Info. Comm’r Office, supra note 112, at 15.
119 Id. See also Eugen Ehmann, DS-GVO Art. 15 Auskunftsrecht der betroffenen Person,
in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG, 430–31 (arguing that Art. 15 only entitles the data subject to know about the
abstract logic and principles of data processing, but not the formula or code). Reference
is made to Recital 63 in the English and French versions of the GDPR to support this
claim. See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 25 (“The
controller should find simple ways to tell the data subject about the rationale behind, or
the criteria relied on in reaching the decision without necessarily always attempting a
complex explanation of the algorithms used or disclosure of the full algorithm.”).
120 ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, supra note 88 at 27.
121 Id. at 32.
122 Id. at 25.
123 Id. at 26. Further the guidelines state that data controllers can voluntary “to explain
how a past decision has been made” which indicates the this is the exception to the rule.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
relevance” should be provided under Art 13–14.124 Further, the
“controller should find simple ways to tell the data subject about the
rationale behind, or the criteria relied on in reaching the decision. The
GDPR requires the controller to provide meaningful information about
the logic involved, not necessarily a complex explanation of the
algorithms used or disclosure of the full algorithm.”125
However, it must be noted that this requirement, despite referring
to the decision-making rationale, seems to refer to general system
functionality rather than an explanation of an individual decision.126 The
guidelines state that Art 15(1)(h), which is seen to provide identical
information as Art 13(2)(f) and 14(2)(g),127 requires the data controller to
“provide the data subject with information about the envisaged
consequences of the processing, rather than an explanation of a particular
decision.”128 The is further supported as the guidelines state that
“meaningful information about the logic involved“ means that “Instead of
providing a complex mathematical explanation about how algorithms or
machine-learning work, the controller should consider using clear and
comprehensive ways to deliver the information to the data subject, for
example: the categories of data that have been or will be used in the
profiling or decision-making process; why these categories are considered
pertinent; how any profile used in the automated decision-making process
is built, including any statistics used in the analysis; why this profile is
relevant to the automated decision-making process; and how it is used for
a decision concerning the data subject.”129
Overall, according to the Article 29 Working Party, the aim of
Articles 13-15 is to demonstrate how automated processes help data
controllers to make more accurate, unbiased, and responsible decisions
and illustrate how the data, characteristics, and method used are suitable
to achieve this goal.130 In other words, the process of decision-making and
the algorithm itself do not need to be fully disclosed, but rather a
124 Id. at 26.
125 Id. at 25.
126 For an in-depth analysis between systems functionality and rationale of a decision see
Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1.
127 See ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, supra note 88 at 26.
128 Id. at 27. “The controller should provide the data subject with general information
(notably, on factors taken into account for the decision-making process, and on their
respective ‘weight’ on an aggregate level) which is also useful for him or her to challenge
the decision” is given as an example showing that only information about system
functionality will be required.
129 ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, supra note 88 at 31.
130 See id. at 26.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
description of the logic of the algorithm which may include a list of data
sources or variables.131 This position finds further support in the Working
Party’s guidelines on transparency,132 which state that the notification
duties in Art. 13-14 can be satisfied via standardised privacy notices,
visualisation tools, and icons.
Each disclosure under Art. 13–14 must occur prior to data
processing133 or at the time of data collection, but before automated
decision-making starts.134 Evidence of this is seen in the future-oriented
language used in Art. 13(2)(f) and Art. 14(2)(g),135 the obligation for
information about the necessity of providing data for processing,136 the
clarification in Art. 12(7) that information must be provided about
“intended processing,” the Article 29 Working Party’s guidelines on
transparency,137 and other provisions and jurisprudence.138 For automated
131 Paal, supra note 113, at Rn. 31-32 (seeing no difference between Art 13-15 in terms
what kind of information needs to be provided). See also Paal, DS-GVO Art. 15
Auskunftsrecht der betroffenen Person, in DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG, Rn. 31
 . Further support is offered by the text of Recital 51
proposed by the European Parliament during Trilogue, which referred to “the general
logic of the data that are undergoing the processing and what might be the consequences
of such processing.” European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and
Home Affairs, Report on the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal
Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data (General Data Protection Regulation)
A7-0402/2013,
 
0402&language=EN [ 
132 ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, supra note 108.
133 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(7), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU).
134 See Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 15; see also Franck, supra note
99; Knyrim, supra note 98; JAY, supra note 95, at 225 (arguing that the notification
duties in Art. 13 need to apply before the data is collected); Franck, supra note 95 at 328
(linking this to Art. 13(2)(e) that obligates the data controllers to state “whether the
provision of personal data is a statutory or contractual requirement, or a requirement
necessary to enter into a contract, as well as whether the data subject is obliged to provide
the personal data and of the possible consequences of failure to provide such data.”).
Information about the necessity to provide data must therefore be given before the data
is collected. See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 12-3.
135 See Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1, at 15; Frederike Kaltheuner &
Elettra Bietti, Data is power: Towards additional guidance on profiling and automated
decision-making in the GDPR, 2 J. INF. RIGHTS POLICY PRACT. ,
 
visited Mar 18, 2018).
136 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 13(2)(e), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 41 (EU).
137 ARTICLE 29 DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY, supra note 108 at 14 state that
“Articles 13 and 14 set out information which must be provided to the data subject at the
commencement phase of the processing cycle.”
138 See Rainer Knyrim, DS-GVO Art. 13 Informationspflicht bei Erhebung von Daten, in
DATENSCHUTZ-GRUNDVERORDNUNG 391, 411–12 ; Knyrim, supra note 98, at 418–19 (noting that prior notification is
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
decision-making, it is essential that information is provided before the
start, else the right not to be subject of an automated decision can never
be realised. The data subject has no chance to assess the associated
risks,139 or whether one of the grounds in Art. 22(2) actually apply that
allow automated decision-making. Under Art. 22(2), automated decisionmaking is only lawful if it “is necessary for entering into, or performance
of, a contract between the data subject and a data controller,”140 if it is
authorised by Member State law,141 or if the data subject has given
explicit consent.142 If notifications do not occur prior to processing or
decision-making, data subjects would only be able to contest decisions
after the fact. This can be time and cost intensive, and unable to repair
financial or reputational damage. Hence, one purpose of Art. 13–14 is to
make the data subject aware of future processing143 and to allow them to
decide if they want their data to be processed (e.g., consent),144 assess the
legitimacy (based on Member State law or contract), or exercise other
rights in the GDPR.145
1. Broader possibilities with the right of access
The requirement for notification prior to processing applies only to the
notification duties.146 In contrast, the right of access147 can be invoked at
any time by the data subject, opening up the possibility of providing
also in line with the Bara and others judgment of the ECJ which
will have major implication for the GDPR as it shows that the court views prior
notification of data transfer as essential). The ruling said that when information is
gathered from a third party and transferred to another data controller for further
processing (e.g. based on Member State law) prior notification of the data subject —
even if no consent is required — is essential. Not least because it enables the exercise of
Art. 15 (right of access) and Art. 16 (right to data rectification) as soon as data is
collected.
139 See Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 24-5.
140 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(2)(a), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
141 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(2)(b), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
142 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(2)(c), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
143 Franck, supra note 95, at 326–28.
144 On the importance to inform the data subject accurately (e.g., risks, safeguards, rights,
consequences, etc.) to allow for informed/explicit consent, see generally JAY, supra note
96, at 218; Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 374–75; Schulz, supra note 95, at
418–19; Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 12-3.
145 See Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 10/2004 on More Harmonised
Information
Provisions
 [ 
(describing the need to provide meaningful information (to raise awareness) about data
collection and the need to move away from long privacy statements); see also Heckmann
& Paschke, supra note 92, at 388–89.
146 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13 & 14 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–42 (EU).
147 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
information available after a decision has been made (i.e., the reasons for
a specific decision). However, scholars have argued that the information
supplied via notification duties and the right of access is largely identical,
meaning the right of access is similarly limited in terms of the scope of
“meaningful information about the logic involved as well as the
significance and the envisaged consequences.”148 Information can thus
largely be provided with identical tools (e.g., generic icons, privacy
statements)149 or generic templates150 used for both notification and in
response to access requests.
The narrower interpretation appears to be correct.151 The Article
29 Working Party supports this view, explaining that the information
requirements in Art. 13(2)(f), 14(2)(g), and 15(1)(h) are identical,152 while
Art. 15(1)(h) requires “that the controller should provide the data subject
with information about the envisaged consequences of the processing,
rather than an explanation of a particular decision.”153 A similar argument
has been made by the ICO stating that Art. 13–15 aim to “provide
information about how profiling might affect the data subject generally,
rather than information about a specific decision.”154 Additionally, the
GDPR indicates a restricted scope for the right of access when compared
to Art. 13–14. Personal data of other data subjects must not be disclosed,
as this could infringe their privacy. Access requests can also contravene
trade secrets or intellectual property rights (Art. 15(4) and Recital 63),
meaning an appropriate balance between the data subject and controller’s
interests must be struck.155
148 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15(1)(h), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
149 Paal, supra note 131, at Rn. 31; Franck, supra note 95, at 328; Lorenz Franck, DS-
Auskunftsrecht
betroffenen
DATENSCHUTZ-
GRUNDVERORDNUNG VO (EU) 2016/679 348, 349–50 ;
Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 382–83.
150 Franck, supra note 95, at 320 argues templates will be helpful, because as soon as
Art. 15 is lodged data controllers have to inform about all the information in Art. 15,
regardless of the actual request. See also Ehmann, supra note 119, at 431–32.
151 See Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1; Michael Veale & Lilian Edwards,
Clarity, Surprises, and Further Questions in the Article 29 Working Party Draft
Guidance on Automated Decision-Making and Profiling, COMPUT. L. & SECURITY REV.
 (manuscript at 3), 
[ 
152 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 26-7.
153 Id. at 27.
154 The intention of Art. 15 is to provide a control mechanism for data subjects to request
at any time more or less the same information as Art. 13–14, without having to rely on
legal compliance with the notification duties by data controllers. Ehmann, supra note
119, 426–427; Info. Comm’r’s Office, supra note 112, at 16.
155 Franck, supra note 149, 355; Ehmann, supra note 119, at 434–435.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
2. Understanding through counterfactuals
Counterfactual explanations meet and exceed the aims and requirements
of the GDPR’s transparency mechanisms156, notification duties157, and
right of access158, which provide data subjects with information to
understand the scope of automated decision-making. As argued above,
Recital 71 does not give any clear indication of the intended purpose or
content of explanations, including whether the internal logic of the
algorithm must be explained. By providing simple “if-then” statements,
counterfactuals align with the requirement to communicate information
to data subjects in a “concise, transparent, intelligible and easily
accessible form.”159 They simultaneously provide greater insight into the
data subject’s personal situation and the reasons behind relevant
automated decisions than an overview tailored to a general audience.
Counterfactuals are also less likely to infringe on trade secrets or the rights
and freedoms of others (e.g., privacy), since no data of other data subjects
or detailed information about the algorithm needs to be disclosed, in line
with restrictions on the right of access.160
Perhaps most importantly, counterfactuals offer an explanation of
some of the rationale of specific automated decisions, without needing to
explain the internal logic of how a decision was reached (beyond a
specific, limited set of dependencies between variables and the decision).
This type of information is in line with the guidance mentioned above
from the Article 29 Working Party161 and the UK’s ICO.162 While opening
the black box is not legally required, some information about the “logic
involved” in automated decision-making must be provided.163 Under the
Data Protection Directive’s right of access, disclosing the algorithm’s
source code, formula, weights, full set of variables, and information about
reference groups has generally not been required.164 The GDPR’s right of
access is likely to present similar requirements. Counterfactuals largely
follow this precedent by disclosing only the influence of select external
156 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 39–40 (EU).
157 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13 & 14, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–42 (EU).
158 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
159 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(1), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 39 (EU).
160 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 63 & art. 15(4), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 12, 43
161 See generally Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85.
162 See generally Info. Comm’r’s Office, supra note 112.
163 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13(2)(f), 14(2)(g) & 15(1)(h), 2016 O.J. (L
119) 41–43 (EU).
164 For an in-depth analysis of this jurisprudence, see generally Wachter, Mittelstadt &
Floridi, supra note 1.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
facts and variables on a specific decision. Although Art. 13(2)(f), Art.
14(2)(g), and Art. 15(1)(h) do not require information about specific
decisions,165 counterfactuals represent a minimal form of disclosure to
inform the data subject about the “logic involved” in specific decisions.
This form of disclosure regulatory burden for data controllers is
minimised, as resolving the technical difficulties of interpretability or
explaining the internal logic of complex systems to non-experts is not
required to compute and communicate counterfactual explanations.
Counterfactuals can thus be recommended as a minimally burdensome
and disruptive technique to help data subjects understand the rationale of
specific decisions beyond the explicit legal requirements of Art. 13(2)(f),
Art. 14(2)(g), and Art. 15(1)(h).
B. EXPLANATIONS TO CONTEST DECISIONS
Another possible purpose of explanations is to provide information that
helps contest automated decisions when an adverse or otherwise
undesired decision is received. A right to contest decisions is provided as
a safeguard against automated decision-making in Art. 22(3).
Contesting a decision can aim to reverse or nullify the decision
and return to a status where no decision has been made, or to alter the
result and receive an alternative decision. If the reasons that led to a
decision need to be explained, the affected party can assess whether these
reasons were legitimate and contest the assessment as required.
How a decision can be contested depends on whether the
safeguards in Art. 22(3) (i.e., rights to obtain human intervention, express
views, and contest the decision) are interpreted as a unit that must be
invoked together, or as individual rights that can be invoked separately or
in any possible combination.166 To gauge the scope of explanations
according to their purpose and aim, different possible models for
contesting an automated decision need to be assessed.
Four models are possible. If the safeguards are a unit and must be
invoked together, it is likely that some human involvement is necessary
to issue a new decision. This could either be a human making the decision
without any algorithmic help, hence the new result is a human decision
rather than an automated decision. Alternatively, a person could be
required to make a decision taking the algorithmic assessment and/or the
data subject’s objections into account, which would be human assessment
165 See Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 26-7.
166 See Martini, supra note 85.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
with algorithmic elements. In both cases data subjects would lose their
safeguards against the subsequent decision, as both types of decision are
not based “solely on automated processing” and thus do not meet the
definition of automated individual decisions in Art. 22(1).167 Another
possibility is that a person could be required to monitor the input data and
processing (e.g., based on the data subject’s objections), with a new
decision made solely by the algorithmic system. In this case the Art. 22(3)
safeguards still apply to the new decision.168 Finally, if the safeguards can
be separated, and data subjects can invoke their right to contest the
decision without invoking their right to obtain human intervention or
express their views, a new decision could be issued with no human
involvement. This decision could be contested again under Art. 22(3). It
is unclear which of these models will be preferred following
implementation of the GDPR.169
The question remains what explanations would be helpful to
contest decisions. This will depend on the contesting model. The first
model where a human makes a new decision and disregards everything
the algorithm suggested, an explanation of the rationale of the original
decision could be informative, but will not practically impact the new
decision made entirely by a human decision-maker. For each of the other
models, where algorithmic involvement is envisioned, an explanation of
the rationale of the decision could be helpful to identify potential grounds
167 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
168 However, if the new automated decision is communicated to the data subject by a
person, it may not be considered “solely automated” and not subject to the Art 22(3)
safeguards. The precise limitations on “solely automated” in Art 22(1) remain unclear.
See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 10 (explaining that
fabricated human involvement should not be used as a loophole).
169 Either interpretation is possible, as indicated by the European Parliament's proposal
to add the following text to Article 20 in an earlier draft of the GDPR, “[t]he suitable
measures to safeguard the data subject's legitimate interests referred to in paragraph 2
shall include the right to obtain human assessment and an explanation of the decision
reached after such assessment.” This text clarified that a human would need to assess the
decision in question. However, this text was not adopted in the end, which leaves
implementation of any of the four models possible. With that said, treating the safeguards
as individually enforceable may be the most sensible option. Individuals can have an
interest in expressing their views or obtaining human intervention when a decision is
poorly understood or misunderstood. Both interests do not, however, necessarily lead to
challenging the decision, particularly if challenges are costly or have a low likelihood of
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
for contesting, such as inaccuracies in the input data, problematic
inferences, or other flaws in the algorithmic reasoning.170
Even though an explanation of the rationale of a decision could be
helpful to contest decisions, it does not imply an explanation is required
by the GDPR or is the intended aim of the non-binding right to
explanation.171 Recital 71 does not specify the aim of the right or what
information should be revealed, and does not explicitly require the
algorithm’s internal logic to be explained. An explicit link is not
established in the GDPR between the right to explanation and the right to
contest, wherein the former would provide information necessary to
exercise the latter.172 Further, there is no reason to assume that the
safeguards in Art. 22(3) must be exercised together, rather than
independently of one another. Therefore, explanations under Recital 71
are not a necessary precondition to contest unfavourable decisions, even
though this might be helpful.
Similarly, an explicit link has not been made between the right to
contest and the transparency mechanisms,173 notification duties,174 right
of access,175 meaning the information provided through these rights and
duties need not be explicitly tailored to help data subjects successfully
contest decisions.176
Nonetheless, information provided by Art. 12–15 may be helpful
for contesting. Support is evident in the fact that notification duties aim
to facilitate the exercise of other rights in the GDPR to increase individual
control over personal data processing.177 To achieve this, Art. 13(2)(b),
14(2)(c), and 15(1)(e) obligate data controllers to inform data subjects
170 Brent Mittelstadt et al., The Ethics of Algorithms: Mapping the Debate, BIG DATA
 
[ 
171 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 71, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 14 (EU).
172 See Hladjk, supra note 79, at 535–536; Schulz, supra note 95, 419–420 (arguing that
“contesting” and “explaining” the decision are separate and independent safeguards).
173 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 39–40 (EU).
174 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, arts. 13 & 14, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–42 (EU).
175 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
176 At the same time, the Article 29 Data Protection Working Party argues that
transparency in processing is essential to contesting, and that the reasons for the
decisions and the legitimate basis should be known. See Article 29 Data Protection
Working Party, supra note 85, at 27. However, the guidelines leave open whether this
requires opening the black box and disclosing the algorithm. See id. This seems unlikely
as the guidelines state that not even Art. 15(1)(h) aims to offer an explanation about an
individual decision. See id. at 27. Hence it can be assumed that the information provided
does not need to include an explanation of the internal logic of a specific decision.
177 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(2), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU).
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
about their rights in Art. 15–21178 at the time when the data is collected,179
within one month when obtained from a third party,180 or at any time if
requested by the data subject.181 However, Art. 22 appears not to be
covered by these provisions due to the odd phrasing of the obligation to
inform of “the existence of automated decision-making, including
profiling, referred to in Art. 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases,
meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the
significance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the
data subject.”182
As argued above, Art. 13–15 will provide a meaningful overview
of automated decision-making tailored to a general audience. On the
surface, such an overview is not immediately useful for contesting
decisions, as information about the rationale of individual decisions is not
provided. In describing information to be provided about automated
decision-making, these Articles explicitly refer only to Art. 22(1) and (4).
It follows that data subjects do not need to be informed about the
safeguards against automated decision-making such as the right to
contest.183 This limitation is telling. If the aim of Art. 13–15 were to
facilitate contesting decisions by providing useful, individual-level
information, one would expect the right to contest or Art. 22(3) to be
explicitly discussed. Similarly, Art. 13–15 seem not require to inform the
data subject about their right not to be subject to an automated individual
decision,184 from which a right to contest decisions could be inferred.185
178 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU). If invoked via
Art. 15(1)(e), data controllers only have to inform about the rights enshrined in Art. 16,
17, 18, 19, and 21.
179 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 13, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–41 (EU).
180 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 14(3)(a), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 42 (EU).
181 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
182 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15(1)(h), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
183 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(3), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU); Schulz, supra
note 95, 419–420 (arguing that data controllers only have to inform about the safeguards
after an adverse decision has been issued). In fact, Art. 12(3) introduces a very
complicated model where the data controller has to inform upon request what kind of
measures have been taken to satisfy a request under Art. 15–22, without being informed
about the safeguards beforehand. See also, Martini, supra note 85, at Rn. 39–40 (also
acknowledging this loophole).
184 See Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(1), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
185 It is important to note that Art. 13–15 obligate to inform about the general right to
object to processing (which forces data controllers to stop processing) in Art. 21.
Together with the information about the legitimate basis for processing provided in Art.
13(1)(c) and Art. 14(1)(c), this information could be used to contest decisions. However,
this arrangement may place an unreasonable burden on the data subject. Contesting
should be made as easy as possible, not least because the chances of successfully forcing
the data controller to stop processing under Art. 21 are different from under Art. 22. For
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
In fact, in an earlier draft of the GDPR it was suggested that the
information rights should refer to Art. 20 as a whole.186 Ultimately, this
approach was not adopted, suggesting that the lack of useful information
for contesting decisions was intentional.
This lack of an explicit link to the safeguards against automated
decision-making is in many ways unsurprising. Art. 12–15 aim to inform
data subjects about the existence of their rights in the GDPR,187 and to
facilitate their exercise.188 This does not, however, mean that the
controller is required to provide other information to help the data subject
to exercise her rights.189 Rather, the data subject only needs to be informed
about the existence of her rights, and provided with the necessary
infrastructure for their exercise190 (e.g., web portals for complaints),
including the elimination of unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles,191 a
guarantee of reasonable response time to queries lodged192 as stated in
Art. 12(3), and the opportunity to interact with someone who has the
power to change the decision.193 However, the data subject remains
responsible to exercise her rights independently.194 As one commentator
notes, Art. 15 does not create a duty to legal consultancy;195 rather, it is
sufficient that the data controllers inform about the existing rights in the
GDPR. Unfortunately, Recital 60, which vaguely states that “any further
information necessary to ensure fair and transparent processing taking
into account the specific circumstances and context in which the personal
data are processed” should be provided to the data subject, does not offer
example, legitimate interest of data controller can trump a data subject right to object to
data processing under Art. 21. However, Art. 22 does not allow automated decisionmaking on the basis of legitimate interest of the data controller (only explicit consent,
law, or contract). This information will be useful for a data subject if they want to prevent
data controllers from making decisions or to contest decisions. See Regulation 2016/679,
GDPR, arts. 13–15 & 21–22, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40–43, 45–46 (EU).
186 See EUROPEAN DIGITAL RIGHTS, COMPARISON OF THE PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL
PROTECTION
REGULATION
 [ 
187 See Knyrim, supra note 98, 415–416.
188 See Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 371–372; Ehmann, supra note 119, at
189 See Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 378–379 (articulating that easily
understood information provided about data subject rights in Art. 15–22 is sufficient to
facilitate their exercise).
190 See Bensoussan, supra note 98, at 114.
191 See Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 379–380.
192 See Franck, supra note 95, at 323–324.
193 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 21.
194 See Heckmann & Paschke, supra note 92, at 379–380.
195 Franck, supra note 149, at 352.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
additional assistance to the data subject.196 This provision was
intentionally moved to the non-binding Recitals during trilogue
negotiations.197 Data controllers thus do not have a legal obligation to
provide information that will be particularly useful for the data subject to
exercise her other rights.
One final comparable restriction is notable concerning Art. 16, the
right for the data subject to rectify inaccurate personal data. Data
controllers are not required to specify which records most influenced a
specific automated decision, which could be extremely helpful to a data
subject attempting to identify inaccuracies as grounds to contest a
decision. If large amounts of personal data are held, then the subject may
have to check tens of thousands of items for inaccuracies.
1. Contesting through counterfactuals
Art. 13–15 thus do little to facilitate a data subject’s ability to challenge
automated decisions. Information is not provided about the safeguards in
Art. 22(3) (e.g., the right to contest). It appears that data subjects do not
need to be informed of their right not to be subject to an automated
decision, which itself could imply a right to contest objectionable
automated decisions. Similarly, Recital 71 has neither an explicit link to
contesting decisions nor to understanding the black box. Even though an
explanation could be helpful, they do not appear to be intended as a
precondition for challenging decisions. If explanations were a
precondition for contesting decisions, they would appear in the legally
binding text. To offer greater protection to data subjects, these
information gaps should be closed, meaning data controllers should
inform about the right not to be subject to an automated decision and its
safeguards. However, each of these seemingly intentional limitations on
the information provided to data subjects suggests that information about
196 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, recital 60, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 12 (EU).
197 The European Commission, European Council, and European Parliament in Art.
14(1)(h) proposed to create a legal duty for data controllers to provide any further
information beyond those in the notification duties to ensure fair and transparent data
processing. See generally EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Regulation of the European
Parliament and the Council on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the
Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data (General Data
Protection
Regulation)
 
[ 
9HX7]; EUROPEAN DIGITAL RIGHTS, supra note 186, at 126–127, 129. However, this
proposal was not adopted and moved to Recital 60, suggesting that there is no legal duty
to provide more information than required in Art 13–14; see Franck, supra note 99, at
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
the internal logic of an automated decision-making system (in compliance
with “meaningful information about the logic involved as well as the
significance and the envisaged consequences” in Art. 13(2)(4), 14(2)(g),
and 15(1)(h)), which could facilitate contesting decisions, does not need
to be provided.198
Given these restrictions, counterfactuals could be helpful for
contesting decisions, and thus provide greater protection for the data
subject than currently envisioned by the GDPR. Regardless of the legal
status of the right to explanation, the right to contest is a legally binding
safeguard.199 By providing information about the external factors and key
variables that contributed to a specific decision, counterfactuals can
provide valuable information for data subjects to exercise their right to
contest. This would also be in line with the guidelines of the Article 29
Working Party, which urge that understanding decisions and knowing
their legal basis is essential for contesting decisions, and is not necessarily
linked to opening the black box.200 An explanation that low-income led to
a loan application being declined could, for example, help the data subject
contest the outcome on the grounds of inaccurate or incomplete data
regarding her financial situation. Understanding the internal logic of the
system that led to income being considered a relevant variable in the
decision, which would require a technical explanation unlike a
counterfactual explanation (see Appendix 1), may be desirable in its own
right, but is not absolutely necessary to contest the decision based on that
Counterfactuals offer a solution and support for contesting
decisions by providing data subjects with information about the reasons
for a decision, without the need to open the black box. Although Art. 16
of the GDPR gives the data subject the right to correct inaccurate data
used to make a decision, the data subject does not need to be informed
which data the decision depended. Where a large corpus of data has been
collected, an individual without knowledge of which data is relevant or
most influential on a particular decision is forced to vet all of it. This lack
of information increases the burden on data subjects seeking a different
outcome. Counterfactuals provide a compact and easy way to convey
these dependencies (i.e., which data was influential), and to facilitate
effective claims that a decision was made on the basis of inaccurate data
and contest it.
198 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15(1)(h), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
199 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(3), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
200 See Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, supra note 85, at 25, 27.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
C. EXPLANATIONS TO ALTER FUTURE DECISIONS
From the view of the data subject, alongside understanding and contesting
decisions, explanations can also be useful to indicate what could be
changed to receive a desired result in the future. This purpose does not
necessarily relate to the right to contest. Accurate decisions can produce
unfavourable results for the data subject. The chances of successfully
challenging the decision will also be low in some cases, or the costs and
effort required too high. In these situations, the data subject may prefer to
change aspects of her situation by adapting her behaviour, and requesting
a new decision once more favourable conditions exist.
Using explanations as a guide to altering behaviour to receive a
desired automated decision is not directly addressed in the GDPR. This
does not, however, undermine the interest data subjects have in receiving
desired results from automated decision-making systems. For example, if
a subject was rejected for a loan due to insufficient income, a
counterfactual explanation will indicate if reapplying in the event of an
immediate pay rise is reasonable. The Article 29 Working Party seems to
agree, stating in relevant guidelines that “tips on how to improve these
habits and consequently how to lower insurance premiums” could be
useful for the data subject.201 For reasons outlined in Appendix 1,
technical explanations that try to provide “meaningful information about
the logic involved, as well as the significance and the envisaged
consequences” of automated decision-making are not guaranteed to be
useful in this situation.202
Counterfactuals can thus be useful for altering future decisions in
favour of the data subject. By providing information about key variables
and “close possible worlds” which result in a different decision, data
subjects can understand which factors could be changed to receive the
desired result. For decision-making models and environments with low
variability over time, or models that are “artificially frozen” in time for
individuals (i.e., future decisions will be made with the same model as the
individual’s original decision), this information can help the data subject
to alter her behaviour or situation to receive her desired result in the
future. Similarly, data controllers could contractually agree to provide the
data subject with the preferred outcome if the terms of a given
counterfactual were met within a specified period of time.
201 Id. at 26.
202 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
With that said, unanticipated dependencies between intentionally
changed attributes and other variables, such as an increase in income
resulting from a change in career, may undermine the utility of
counterfactuals as guides for future behaviour. Counterfactual
explanations can, however, address the impact of changes to more than
one variable on a model’s output at the same time. Further, regardless of
the utility of counterfactuals as guidance for future behaviour, their ability
to help individuals understand which data and variables were influential
in specific prior decisions remains unaffected.
CONCLUSION
We have proposed a novel lightweight form of explanation that we refer
to as counterfactual explanations. Unlike existing approaches that try to
provide insight into the internal logic of black box algorithms,
counterfactual explanations do not attempt to clarify how decisions are
made internally. Instead, they provide insight into which external facts
could be different in order to arrive at a desired outcome.203 Importantly,
counterfactual explanations are efficiently computable for many standard
classifiers, particularly neural networks. As our new form of explanation
significantly differs from existing works, we have justified its nature as
an explanation with reference to previous works in the philosophical
literature and early A.I.
From the view of the data subject, we have assessed three purposes
of explanations of automated decisions: understanding, contesting and
altering. We compared these aims with the provisions of the GDPR and
evaluated if they rely upon opening the black box. We concluded that the
framework offers little support to achieve these goals, and does not
mandate that algorithms are explainable to understand, contest or alter
decisions.
The GDPR itself provides little insight into the intended purpose
and content of explanations. Recital 71, the only provision that explicitly
mentions explanations, does not reveal their intended purpose or content.
Given the final text of the GDPR, it appears that explanations can
voluntarily be offered after decisions have been made, and are not a
203 The method described here is compatible with a proposal made by Citron and
Pasquale to allow consumers to manually enter “hypothetical alterations” to their credit
histories and view their effects. DANIELLE K. CITRON & FRANK A. PASQUALE, THE
SCORED SOCIETY: DUE PROCESS FOR AUTOMATED PREDICTIONS, 89 WASH. L. REV. 1,
28 [ 
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
required precondition to contest decisions. Further, there is no clear link
that suggests that explanations under Recital 71 require opening the black
Recognising this relative lack of insight into explanations, related
provisions addressing automated decision-making were examined.
Notification duties defined in Art. 13–14 apply prior to data processing or
before a decision is made (i.e. at the time of data collection), and provide
a simple and generic overview of intended data processing activities that
aims to inform a general audience.204 This type of “meaningful overview”
of automated decision-making is largely unsuitable to understand the
rationale of specific decisions. Art. 13–14 similarly do not facilitate
contesting decisions, owing to a lack of information to be provided about
the right not to be subject to automated individual decision-making,205 and
its safeguards.206 The right of access207 provides nearly identical
information to Art. 13–14, and thus offers similarly limited value for
understanding and contesting decisions. The rights and freedoms of others
(e.g. privacy or trade secrets) which are protected in Art. 15(4) and Recital
63 pose an additional barrier to transparency when access requests are
lodged. Across each of these Articles, technical explanations of the
internal logic of automated decision-making systems are not legally
mandated. Finally, offering explanations to give guidance how to receive
the desired result in the future does not appear to be an aim of the GDPR,
but could still be highly useful for individuals seeking alternative, more
desirable outcomes.
Any future attempt to implement a legally binding right to
explanation as a safeguard against automated decision-making within the
framework provided by the GDPR faces several notable challenges.
Automated decision-making must be based “solely on automated
processing,” and have “legal effects” or similarly significant effects.208
Additionally, exemptions from the safeguards against automated
decision-making can be introduced through Member State law.209
However, the data subject’s desire to understand, contest, and alter
decisions does not change based on these definitional issues. We therefore
204 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(7), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU).
205 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(1), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
206 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22(3), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
207 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 15, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 43 (EU).
208 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 22, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46 (EU).
209 Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 23, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 46–47 (EU). These
exemptions may be based, for example, on national security; the enforcement of civil
law claims; or the protection of the data subject or the rights and freedoms of others.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
propose to move past the limitation of the GDPR and to use
counterfactuals as unconditional explanations. These unconditional
explanations should be given whenever requested, regardless of outcome
(positive or negative decision), whether the decision was based on solely
automated processes and their (legal or similar significant) effects.
Counterfactual explanations could be implemented in several
ways. The transience of decision-making models suggests that
counterfactuals either need to be computed automatically at the time a
decision is made, or a copy of the model archived to compute
counterfactuals at a later time. As multiple outcomes based on changes to
multiple variables may be possible, a diverse set of counterfactual
explanations should be provided, corresponding to different choices of
nearby possible worlds for which the counterfactual holds. These sets
could be disclosed when automated decision-making occurs, or in
response to specific requests lodged by individuals or a trusted third party
auditor.210 In any case, disclosures should occur in a reasonable window
of time.211
Future research should determine appropriate distance metrics and
requirements for a sufficient and relevant set of counterfactuals across use
sectors and cases which have very different needs. While prior
philosophical debate may prove helpful, the absence of causal models in
most modern classifiers, as well as the preferences of the recipient(s) of
the set, must be accounted for in choosing appropriate metrics and
requirements. Compared to prior discussion of measuring “closest
possible worlds,” setting requirements for appropriate “close possible
worlds” represents a very different philosophical, social, and legal
challenge.
To minimise bureaucratic burdens for data controllers and delays
for data subjects and third party auditors, automated calculation and
disclosure of counterfactuals would be preferable. We recommend this
type of automated implementation going forward. One possible approach
is to provide individuals or third party auditors with access to “auditing
APIs,”212 which allow users to request counterfactual explanations from
210 See generally Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi, supra note 1.
211 See, e.g., Regulation 2016/679, GDPR, art. 12(3), 2016 O.J. (L 119) 40 (EU).
212 Who would shoulder the costs of hosting these APIs and computing counterfactuals
is an important political issue that would require resolution. This issue goes beyond the
scope of this paper. For related discussion of implementing algorithmic auditing, see
Christian Sandvig et al., Auditing Algorithms: Research Methods for Detecting
Discrimination on Internet Platforms, DATA & DISCRIMINATION: CONVERTING
PRODUCTIVE
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
the service provider, and perhaps compute them directly via the API.
Access to historical decision-making models used for the decision at
hand, as well as permissive terms of service that allow for such auditing,
would be required.213 This functionality could potentially be embedded in
existing APIs.
Counterfactual explanations provide reasons why a particular
decision was received (e.g., low income), offer grounds to contest it (e.g.,
if the data controller used inaccurate data about the income of the
applicant), and provide limited “advice” on how to receive the desired
results in the future (e.g., an increase of 4000 pounds/year would have
resulted in a positive application). Their usage would help to resolve two
primary objections to a legally binding right to explanation: first, that
explaining the internal logic of automated systems to experts and nonexperts alike is a highly difficult and perhaps intractable challenge; and
second, that an excessive disclosure of information about the internal
logic of a system could infringe on the rights of others, either by revealing
protected trade secrets or by violating the privacy of individuals whose
data is contained in the training dataset. In contrast, counterfactuals allow
an individual to receive explanations without conveying the internal logic
of the algorithmic black box (beyond a limited set of dependencies), and
are less likely to infringe the rights and freedoms of others than full
disclosure. Assuming reasonable limitations are set on the number of
counterfactuals that must be provided, counterfactuals are also less likely
to provide information that reveals trade secrets or allows gaming of
decision-making systems.
As a minimal form of explanation, counterfactuals are not
appropriate in all scenarios. In particular, where it is important to
understand system functionality, or the rationale of an automated
decision, counterfactuals may be insufficient in themselves. Further,
counterfactuals do not provide the statistical evidence needed to assess
algorithms for fairness or racial bias. Given these limitations, more
general forms of explanations and interpretability should still be pursued
 
[ 
J69E]; Brent Mittelstadt, Auditing for Transparency in Content Personalization Systems,
10 INT’L. J. COMM. 12 
[ 
213 Counterfactuals must be computed on the basis of the decision-making model at the
time the decision was taken. Assuming automated decision-making models change over
time, in implementations not involving automatic computation of counterfactuals at the
time a decision is made (which may be cost prohibitive), it will be necessary for data
controllers to keep ‘audit logs’ indicating the state of the decision-making model at the
time of the decision.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
to increase accountability and better validate the fairness and functionality
of systems.
However, counterfactuals represent an easy first step that balances
transparency, explainability, and accountability with other interests such
as minimising the regulatory burden on business interest or preserving the
privacy of others, while potentially increasing public acceptance of
automatic decisions. Rather than waiting years for jurisprudence to
dissolve all these uncertainties, we propose to abandon the narrow
definitions and conditions the GDPR imposes on automated decisionmaking, and offer counterfactuals as unconditional explanations at the
request of affected individuals.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
APPENDIX 1: SIMPLE LOCAL MODELS AS EXPLANATIONS
As discussed in Section II.B, ‘Explanations in A.I. and Machine
Learning,’ approaches such as LIME214 that generate simple models as
local approximations of decisions make a three-way trade-off between the
quality of the approximation versus the ease of understanding the function
and the size of the domain for which the approximation is valid.215
To illustrate the instabilities of the approach with respect to the
size of the domain, we consider a simple function of one variable. Even
for problems such as this, the notion of scale, or how large a region should
an explanation try to describe, is challenging with the ideal choice of scale
depending on what the explanation would be used for.
As a real-world example, consider being stopped by someone in a
car who asks which direction they should travel in to go north.
Fundamentally, this is a difficult question to answer well, with the most
appropriate answer depending upon how far north they wish to travel. If
they do not intend to travel far, simply pointing north gives them enough
information. However, if they intend to travel further, roads that initially
point north may double back on themselves or be cul-de-sacs and better
directions are needed. If they intend to travel a long way, they may be
better off ignoring the compass bearing entirely, and instead try to directly
join up with an inter-city network.
This exact issue is faced when automating explanations of
decisions: the generated explanations are generic, and designed to be
useful to the recipient of the explanation regardless of how they are used.
However, as shown in Figure 1, the explanation — or simplified model
— can vary wildly with the scale or range of inputs considered.
214 See Ribeiro, Singh, & Guestrin, supra note 14.
215 See Bastani, Kim & Bastani, supra note 13; Lakkaraju et al., supra note 47.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
Figure 1 - Local models varying with choice of scale. The red line in
each subfigure shows a local approximation of the same blue score
curve centred at the same location in each plot. The varying range over
which the approximation is computed is given by the region marked by
black bars. Different choices of range e.g. top left vs. bottom left can
lead to completely opposing explanations where the score either
increases or decreases as the value along the bottom axis increase.
As can be seen, the direction and magnitude of the linear approximation
(red) to underlying function (blue) vary dramatically with choice of
domain, and deciding which approximation is most helpful to a
layperson trying to understand the decision made about them is nontrivial.
To show the difficulties that would exist in either trying to use
local models to either compute counterfactuals, or simply for the data
subject to adjust their score, we assume that the subject desired to know
how to obtain a lower score of -10 or below. In this case, none of the local
approximations would be useful. The top left model, which is based on
exact description of the function around point x predicts that a score of -
10 would be obtained with a value of -2.5—corresponding to an actual
score of 91.5, while the two centre approximations suggest that it is not
possible to obtain any score except 0, and the bottom left approximation
says that -10 occurs at near 0.9—which actually corresponds to a local
In contrast, the counterfactual explanation for a query such as
“Why was the score not below -10?” would return the answer “Because
the x value was not 2.15” (the counterfactual is illustrated in figure 2 by
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
the green dot). Of course, it should be noted that the two approaches are
generally incomparable. In much the same way, if a data subject desired
to know a local linear approximation about their data point, knowledge of
counterfactuals would not be helpful. However, of the two approaches,
counterfactuals are the only one that will provide some indication if it is
worth reapplying for a loan in the event of a pay rise.
Figure 2 – Visual representation of the range of a counterfactual
explanation
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS
APPENDIX 2: EXAMPLE TRANSPARENCY INFOGRAPHIC
The figure below shows several icons proposed by the European
Parliament during trilogue that were ultimately not adopted as a standard.
They nonetheless reveal the level of complexity expected by EU
legislators when communicating information to data subjects under Art.
13–14. The reliance on generic icons suggests that individual-level,
contextualised information is not required, meaning Art. 13–14 are not
intended to provide a ‘de facto’ right to explanation comparable to the
right contained in Recital 71. The relative simplicity of the icons also
suggests that a broad audience is intended, comparable for example to
website privacy notices. Finally, although the icons were rejected, the EC
has been tasked with developing such standardised icons in the future
(Art. 12(8)), meaning comparable icons are seen as an acceptable way to
convey the information required by Art. 13–14.
COUNTERFACTUAL EXPLANATIONS