Brief Communication
Control of Attention Shifts between Vision and Audition in
Human Cortex
Sarah Shomstein and Steven Yantis
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218
Selective attention contributes to perceptual efficiency by modulating cortical activity according to task demands. Visual attention is
controlled by activity in posterior parietal and superior frontal cortices, but little is known about the neural basis of attentional control
within and between other sensory modalities. We examined human brain activity during attention shifts between vision and audition.
Attentionshiftsfromvisiontoauditioncausedincreasedactivityinauditorycortexanddecreasedactivityinvisualcortexandviceversa,
reflecting the effects of attention on sensory representations. Posterior parietal and superior prefrontal cortices exhibited transient
increasesinactivitythatweretimelockedtotheinitiationofvoluntaryattentionshiftsbetweenvisionandaudition.Thesefindingsreveal
that the attentional control functions of posterior parietal and superior prefrontal cortices are not limited to the visual domain but also
include the control of crossmodal shifts of attention.
Keywords:crossmodalattention;attentionalcontrol;visualattention;auditoryattention;posteriorparietalcortex;PPC;superiorparietal
lobule; SPL; functional magnetic resonance imaging; fMRI
Introduction
Attention is the cognitive mechanism by which salient or behaviorally relevant sensory information is selected for perception
and awareness . Attended visual
events are perceived more rapidly and accurately than ignored
ones , and attention to one sensory modality
can impair the perception of otherwise salient events in another
 . Evidence from functional neuroimaging
and neurophysiology has revealed that neural activity is greater and
neural spiking is more synchronous in sensory cortical regions responding to attended visual events than in those responding to ignored ones .Anetworkofareas
in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and prefrontal cortex (PFC)
has been implicated in the control of both spatial and nonspatial
deployments of visual attention .
Although the role of the frontoparietal network in controlling
visual selective attention is well established, its role in controlling
shifts of attention between and within other sensory modalities is
less well understood. Most relevant studies have only indirectly
suggested that the functions of the parietal lobe might include
goal-directed control of attention across modalities .
We examined cortical activity in human observers during
shifts of attention between vision and audition using rapid eventrelated functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Observers viewed a visual display containing five rapid serial visual presentation streams of letters appearing in the center of a computer
screen; at the same time, they listened via headphones to three
streams of letters spoken at the same rate as the visual stream (see
Fig. 1). The central visual stream or the central (binaural) auditory stream contained target digits to be detected and identified;
distractor streams of letters were continuously present in both
modalities. Before each run, an auditory instruction directed attention to either the auditory or the visual stream. The subjects’
task was to detect digits in the attended stream. Depending on the
identity of the digit, subjects were to either shift their attention
from one modality to another or maintain their attention within
the currently attended modality. This design permits the measurement of the neural events that are time locked to the act of
shifting attention, unconfounded by sensory responses to a distinct attention cue. The nearby distractors maximize sensory
competition and, hence, the opportunity for attention modulation 
Materials and Methods
Subjects. Eleven neurologically healthy young adults (19–35 years of age;
seven women; mean, 24.8) were recruited from the Johns Hopkins University community. Informed consent was obtained from each subject in
accordance with the human subjects research protocol approved by the
Institutional Review Board at Johns Hopkins University.
Stimuli. Auditory stimuli consisted of 16 letters recorded digitally using the Computerized Speech Lab software (CSL; Kay Elementics, Lincoln Park, NJ). One female and one male talker, both native English
speakers, produced two digits and 16 letters (2, 4, A, C, F, G, H, J, K, M,
N, P, R, T, U, V, X, and Y). The utterances were edited to be exactly 240
msec in duration with an additional 10 msec of silence added at the end of
each utterance, yielding a total duration of 250 msec for each utterance.
The male voice was presented binaurally and served as the central audi-
Received July 20, 2004; revised Oct. 7, 2004; accepted Oct. 8, 2004.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-DA13165 (S.Y.). We thank Ed Connor, Amy
Shelton, Brenda Rapp, J. T. Serences, T. Liu, J. B. Sala, F. Tong, M. Behrmann, X. Golay, T. Brawner, and K. Kahl for
comments, advice, and assistance.
Correspondence should be addressed to Sarah Shomstein, Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2939-04.2004
Copyright © 2004 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/04/2410702-05$15.00/0
10702 • The Journal of Neuroscience, November 24, 2004 • 24(47):10702–10706
tory target stream. Two different monaural sequences of letters spoken by
the female voice were presented to the left and right ears, respectively. The
amplitude of the auditory distractor streams were each 70% of the amplitude of the target stream; all streams were presented well above threshold.
The visual stimuli were white characters (the same set of letters and digits
as that used for the auditory stimuli) rendered on a black background. Each
letter subtended 0.65° horizontally of the visual angle and 0.8° vertically.
The target stream was presented in the center of the display, and four distracting streams were presented surrounding the central stream with edgeto-edge separation of 0.25°.
Procedure. At the beginning of each run, subjects heard the word “audition” or “vision,” which instructed them to begin the run by attending
to the auditory or visual target stream, respectively (Fig. 1). Subjects
pressed a button held in their dominant hand whenever they detected the
digits 2 or 4 within the attended stream. For one-half of the subjects, the
digit 2 instructed them to shift attention from the currently attended
stream to the unattended stream (e.g., vision to audition), whereas the
digit 4 instructed them to maintain their attention on the currently attended stream; this mapping was reversed for the remaining subjects.
The order of targets was random, with two constraints: (1) no more
than two hold events occurred in succession, and (2) targets never appeared in the unattended streams. Targets within the attended stream
were separated by a temporal interval that was pseudorandomly jittered
between 3 and 5 sec, with an average intertarget interval of 4 sec . Such temporal jittering allows for the extraction of individual event-related blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal time courses after the target events . Each subject
performed two practice runs and 10 experimental runs; each run was 2
min, 28 sec in duration and included eight occurrences of each of the four
target types: attend vision, attend audition, switch attention from vision
to audition, and switch attention from audition to vision (a total of 32
target events per run). The subjects were instructed to hold attention on
the currently attended stream even if they thought they had missed a
target. Only the detected target events were included in our analysis.
Monitoring eye position. To check for the possibility that switch-related
activity could be attributed to movement of the eyes away from the
central region of visual stimulation or to subjects closing their eyes whenever the targets were delivered within the auditory stream, eye position
was monitored for 6 of the 11 subjects while they performed the task in
the scanner via a custom-made video camera. The output of the camera
was digitally recorded and later analyzed for eye movements. A calibration procedure established that eye position deviations of 2.5° or more
could be detected reliably, as could blinks and eyelid closure. All of the
subjects kept their eyes open and directed to the center of the display
throughout the task, and no significant changes in fixation were made
during the experimental runs. This conclusion was supported by the
finding that the locus of attention modulated the magnitude of cortical
activity in early visual areas and did not cause a spatial displacement of
the locus of cortical activity, which would have been expected if observers
diverted their eyes from the visual streams during those intervals.
MRI data acquisition. Imaging data were acquired with a 3 T Philips
Gyroscan MRI scanner (Philips, Bothell, WA). Whole-brain echoplanar
functional images (EPIs) were acquired with a sensitivity-encoding
(SENSE) head coil (MRI Devices, Waukesha, WI). Twenty-seven transverse slices were acquired [repetition time (TR), 1480 msec; echo time
(TE), 30 msec; flip angle, 65°; SENSE factor, 2;
field of view, 240 mm; matrix, 64  64; slice
thickness, 3 mm with 1 mm gap, yielding voxels
that were 3.75  3.75  3 mm in size]. These
parameters allowed for a whole-brain coverage
with 100 volume acquisitions per run. Highresolution anatomic images were acquired with
T1-weighted,
magnetizationprepared rapid gradient echo sequence with
SENSE level 2 (TR, 8.1 msec; TE, 3.8 msec; flip
angle, 8°; prepulse T1 delay, 852.1 msec; isotropic voxels, 1 mm).
fMRI data analysis. Neuroimaging data were
analyzed using BrainVoyager software (Brain
Innovation, Maastricht, The Netherlands).
First, functional data were motion and slice-time corrected and then
high-pass filtered to remove components occurring three or fewer times
over the course of the run. Spatial smoothing was not used. To correct for
between-scan motion, each subject’s EPI volume was coregistered to the
10th run acquired for that subject (the last functional run performed
before the anatomical scan). After this interscan motion correction,
functional data were registered with the anatomical volume.
Using a general linear model, the magnitude of the hemodynamic
response was estimated for each time point after each event type. Specifically, we separately estimated the scaled fit coefficients (beta weights) at
the onset of the target and the subsequent 11 time points (0–16.3 sec) for
each event (hold vision, shift to audition, hold audition, and shift to
vision) ( The
magnitude of the beta weight associated with each time point reflects the
relative change in the BOLD signal at that time point after each event.
To test for modality-specific attentional modulations, two targeted
beta weight contrasts were constructed to represent the crossover interaction pattern observed in previous studies . For sensory regions that respond more to
audition than to vision, we constructed a contrast involving 24 weighted
regressors, including regressors associated with six time points after each
of the four targets (hold audition, hold vision, switch from audition to
vision, and switch from vision to audition). The six regressors indexing
activity 3–13 sec after hold audition targets were assigned positive values, and the six regressors indexing activity during this same interval after
hold vision targets were assigned negative values. To model the crossover
in activity evoked by the shift from vision to audition, the three regressors
corresponding to time points 2–4 after the target (3–6 sec after target
onset) were assigned a negative value, and the regressors corresponding
to time points 7–9 after the target (10–13 sec after target onset) were
assigned a positive value. Similarly, the three regressors corresponding to
time points 2–4 after switching from audition to vision targets were
assigned a positive value, and the regressors corresponding to time points
7–9 after the target were assigned a negative value. A second contrast was
conducted with the opposite sign to identify regions that respond more
to visual than to auditory input. The data were also analyzed using a
generic, less targeted contrast , and
this yielded similar results.
For each contrast, the single-voxel threshold in the group data were set
to t(11)  4.0, p  0.002, uncorrected. A spatial cluster extent threshold
was used to correct for multiple comparisons using AlphaSim (Alpha
Simulations) with 2000 Monte Carlo simulations and taking into account the entire EPI matrix ( This procedure yielded a minimum cluster size of three
voxels in the original acquisition space with a map-wise false-positive
probability of p  0.01.
Event-related averages of the BOLD signal were extracted from each
significantly activated cluster, as revealed by the two contrasts. The time
course was extracted for each subject using the following procedure: a
temporal window was defined, extending from 6 sec before the target
onset (4 TRs) to 16 sec after the target onset. Time courses were then averagedacrossallsubjectsforeachofthefoureventtypes.The“baseline”(or0%
signal change) was defined as the mean activity during the 6 sec preceding
eachtarget.Itisimportanttonotethatnegativedeflectionsinactivitycannot
Attentionshifttask.Thevisualdisplaycontainedatargetstreamoflettersatfixationandfoursurroundingdistractor
streams. A binaural target stream of spoken letters was accompanied by a monaural distracting stream in each ear. Either vision
orauditionwasattendedatthebeginningofarun.Participantspressedabuttonwheneveradigitwasdetected.Ifthedigitwas
2, they were to maintain attention on the currently attended modality; if it was 4, they were to switch attention to the other
Shomstein and Yantis • Crossmodal Control of Attention
J. Neurosci., November 24, 2004 • 24(47):10702–10706 • 10703
necessarily be interpreted as “deactivations” but
rather as relative differences in activity after a
given event.
Behavioral responses
Responses to auditory targets were slightly
slower than to visual targets, and there was
an additional delay associated with the
need to shift attention from one modality
to another. Mean response times were 556,
615, 640, and 654 msec for hold vision,
shift from vision to audition, hold audition,
and shift from audition to vision targets, respectively. A two-way repeated-measures
ANOVA was conducted, with target type
(hold and shift) and modality (vision and
audition) as within-subject factors (modality for the shift events was defined relative to
the starting modality, i.e., the shift from audition to vision was defined relative to the
auditory modality). There was a significant
main effect of modality (F(1,10)  9.18; p 
0.05) and of target type (F(1,10)  17.8; p 
0.01). The interaction approached significance (F(1,10)  4.35; p  0.085). Detection
accuracy was 98, 99, 97, and 98% for hold
vision,shiftfromvisiontoaudition,holdaudition, and shift from audition to vision, respectively. No significant effect of modality
or target was observed for accuracy (F  2).
Attentional modulation of sensory
cortical activity
Cortical regions exhibiting the crossover
time course characteristic of attention
shifts in auditory sensory regions are listed
in Table 1; these include bilateral activations along the superior temporal gyrus
(STG) in Heschl’s gyrus (Fig. 2a), the locus
of early auditory sensory cortex . The group mean eventrelated BOLD time course extracted from
the left and right STG is shown in Figure 2,
b and c, respectively.
The magnitude of the BOLD signal was
greater after hold audition targets than after hold vision targets. This difference was
already evident at the moment the targets
themselves were presented (time 0 on the
abscissa). This is because observers were
already attending to either the auditory stream or the visual
stream when the target in question appeared.
A markedly different BOLD time course in these regions was
elicited by shift targets. After the shift from audition to vision
targets, activity in STG (bilaterally) begins by closely tracking the
hold audition time course but, after 2 sec, decreases toward the
hold vision time course. The opposite pattern was observed for
shifts of attention from vision to audition. This crossover pattern
reflects the dynamics of sensory modulation during a crossmodal
shift of attention. The 2 sec delay before the crossover begins is
attributable to the sluggish hemodynamic response of the BOLD
signal .
Several brain regions exhibited greater activity when attention
was directed to vision than when it was directed to audition (Table 1), including the bilateral fusiform gyrus (Fig. 2d) and right
middle temporal cortex. These attentional modulations of cortical activity in auditory and visual sensory regions are similar to
those reported previously in vision and in comparisons of attention to vision
and touch . The crossover pattern that
accompanies shifts of attention from one modality to another
mirrors that reported previously in vision . They confirm that, in these
Table 1. Cortical regions exhibiting sensory attentional modulation and shift-related activity
Anatomical region
BA (x, y, z)
Number of voxels
Shift and hold audition  shift and hold vision
22 (53, 26, 5)
21 (60, 26, 7)
R IFG/insula
13 (38, 20, 8)
13 (37, 20, 2)
9 (46, 12, 26)
Shift and hold vision  shift and hold audition
37 (44, 56, 11)
21 (43, 56, 11)
39 (45, 66, 24)
9 (23, 46, 31)
8 (23, 24, 48)
Shift  hold
R Precun/SPL
7 (2, 60, 45)
40 (43, 47, 48)
R SFS/PreCeG
6 (29, 4, 56)
Coordinates (x, y, z) are reported in Talairach space ; t values are computed across all voxels within the activated cluster. BA,
Brodmannarea;L,left;R,right;STG,superiortemporalgyrus;IFG,inferiorfrontalgyrus;MFG,medialfrontalgyrus;Fus,fusiformgyrus;MTG,middletemporal
gyrus; SFG, superior frontal gyrus; Precun, precuneus; SPL, superior parietal lobule; IPL, inferior parietal lobule.
Corticalactivityinauditoryandvisualsensoryregionsduringtheattentionshifttask.a,Groupactivationpatternforregions
moreactiveduringattentiontoauditionthanattentiontovision(Heschl’sgyrus).b,c,Meanevent-relatedBOLDtimecoursefromactivated
voxelsintheright(b)andleft(c)auditorycortices,respectively,timelockedtoeachofthefourtargettypes.d,Groupactivationpatternfor
regionsmoreactiveduringattentiontovisionthanattentiontoaudition(fusiformgyrus).e,f,Meanevent-relatedBOLDtimecoursefrom
activatedvoxelsintheright(e)andleft(f)fusiformgyrus,timelockedtoeachofthefourtargettypes.
10704 • J. Neurosci., November 24, 2004 • 24(47):10702–10706
Shomstein and Yantis • Crossmodal Control of Attention
perceptually demanding tasks, top-down attentional modulation
serves to bias cortical competition in favor of behaviorally relevant sensory input .
Shift-related activity
The central focus of this study is to examine the control of crossmodal attention shifts. We contrasted the magnitudes of the regression weights associated with shift targets (shift to vision and
shift to audition) with the hold regressors (hold vision and hold
audition). Cortical regions exhibiting a significantly greater
BOLD response after shift events than after hold events included
right precuneus/superior parietal lobule (SPL), left inferior parietal lobe, and right medial frontal gyrus (Table 1). The group
mean event-related BOLD time course for each of the four target
types extracted from precuneus/SPL is shown in Figure 3.
Three aspects of these shift-related time courses distinguish
them from the time courses seen in the contrast of attention to
vision versus audition (Fig. 2). First, of course, is that shiftevoked responses occurred in parietal and frontal regions and not
in primary sensory regions. Second, these regions exhibited no
difference in activity for the attend-vision and attend-audition
events at the onset of the target event (i.e., time 0). This distinguishes the pattern seen here from that in sensory areas, in which
significant differences in the level of cortical activity were already
apparent at time 0. Third, unlike the crossover pattern seen in
sensory regions, BOLD activation differed only slightly in magnitude for shifts of attention from audition to vision versus shifts
from vision to audition.a
Discussion
The present study examined cortical activity changes measured
with fMRI during shifts of attention between vision and audition.
Attention significantly modulated the magnitude of cortical activity in early visual and auditory sensory regions, and the dynamics of attention shifts were reflected in a crossover pattern of
activity. These results corroborate and extend previous demonstrations of attentional modulation within vision and audition,
respectively , and confirm that our task effectively recruited
selective attention and therefore could be used to examine the
control of crossmodal attention shifts.
By holding constant the sensory input and response demands of
the task, we could examine cortical activity that reflected the initiationofavoluntaryshiftofattention.Weobservedtransientincreases
in activity that were time locked to the initiation of crossmodal attention shifts in PPC and PFC. These dorsal frontoparietal attentional control signals are similar to those reported previously during
shifts of attention within vision . Previous studies from our laboratory, using a very similar experimental
design but examining attention shifts in other perceptual domains
(locations, features, and objects, respectively), revealed similar transient increases in activation during attention shifts within similar
cortical regions . Because of differences in stimuli and the lack of withinsubjectcomparisons,strongconclusionsaboutthedegreeofoverlap
in activation loci must await future studies.
As noted earlier, there was no difference in the magnitude of
activity in these shift-related regions at the moment the target in
question appeared. This suggests that these areas do not provide a
sustained signal to maintain a modality-specific attentive state.
However, in this task, observers were never in a “neutral” or
“relaxed” attentive state; instead, attention was continuously focused on either vision or audition throughout each run (except
for brief intervals during the attention shifts themselves). It could
be the case that the frontoparietal regions are continuously active
throughout the task and maintain focused attention and that
their activity is transiently enhanced when a shift of attention is
required. Because we had no baseline for comparison, we could
not test this hypothesis in the present paradigm.
Studies of attention shifts within vision (e.g., shifts of attention from left to right) have often shown modulation of sensory
activity in early areas of the visual pathway, including V1, V2, and
V4 . In contrast, the present
experiment revealed attentional modulation in lateral occipital regions but not in striate or early extrastriate regions of the occipital
lobe.Onepossiblereasonisthatfullattentionalmodulationrequires
sensory competition from stimuli within the same modality, which
was the case in previous studies. Here, although targets in each modality were accompanied by distracting stimuli in that modality, the
primary locus of sensory competition came from stimuli in a different modality, and this may have limited the magnitude of modulation by attention in the earliest visual areas. If selective attention
operates by directly modulating competitive neural interactions,
stronger within-modality competition would be expected to lead to
stronger within-modality attentional modulation (e.g., shifting attention between two visual locations). Tests of this conjecture await
additional studies.
aArepeated-measuresANOVAwasconductedwithtime(4–10secafterthetargetonset)andshiftevent(shiftfrom
auditiontovisionandshiftfromvisiontoaudition)aswithin-subjectfactorsandpercentageofsignalchangeasthe
dependent measure. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of time (F(4,40)  7.82; p  0.001) and a trend
forasignificantinteraction(F(4,40)2.35;p0.07).Thisinteractionwasprimarilydrivenbythedifferenceevident
at the 7 sec time point. The same analysis in the inferior parietal lobe and superior frontal sulcus/precentral gyrus
yielded no significant interaction.
a,Corticalactivityinprecuneus/superiorparietallobuleduringtheattentionshift
task reveals greater activity when attention was shifted from one modality to another comparedwithwhenattentionwasmaintainedwithinasinglemodality.IPL,Inferiorparietallobe.
b,Meanevent-relatedBOLDtimecoursefromactivatedvoxelswithintheprecuneus/SPL,time
locked to each of the four target types.
Shomstein and Yantis • Crossmodal Control of Attention
J. Neurosci., November 24, 2004 • 24(47):10702–10706 • 10705
Our findings support several conclusions. First, as shown in previousstudies,earlysensorycorticalresponses(inauditoryandvisual
cortices) are modulated by attention. The “push–pull” effect of
switching attention between vision and audition suggests a neural
basis for behavioral evidence that focusing attention on auditory
input (e.g., a cellular telephone conversation) can impair the detection of important visual events (e.g., while driving an automobile)
 . When attention
must be directed to audition, the strength of early cortical representations in the visual system are compromised (and vice versa), leading to potentially significant behavioral impairments.
Second, we observed transient increases in activity in PPC and
superior frontal sulcus/precentral gyrus after signals to shift attention from vision to audition or vice versa (Table 1). This suggests that these areas mediate executive control over attention
shifts between vision and audition. Two possible implications of
this finding can be considered. First, PPC activity at the initiation
of a shift of attention from vision to audition and vice versa could
reflect a (crossmodal) spatial attention shift (from the center of
the head to the center of the computer screen and vice versa). On
this account, PPC provides a supramodal spatial map that determines the current locus of attention regardless of sensory modality [for a discussion of supramodal spatial maps in parietal cortex,
see the study by Macaluso et al. ]. In other words, when
attention is directed to the viewing screen during epochs of attention to vision, then (on the supramodal account) auditory attention is also directed there and is therefore directed away from the
location of the auditory letter stream (i.e., the center of the head).
Similarly, when attention is directed to the center of the head
during auditory epochs, then visual attention is also directed
there and is therefore directed away from the visual letter stream
(on the computer screen in front of the subject). This is consistent
with the known role of PPC in visually guided behavior
 and in mediating shifts of spatial
attention .
An alternative possibility is that PPC mediates both spatial and
nonspatial shifts of attention within and across multiple modalities.
This account is supported by findings that nonspatial visual attentionshiftsevoketransientactivityinPPC . This would indicate that the role of PPC in selective attention is more general than believed previously 
and is not limited to purely visual, visuomotor, or spatial cognitive
operations. Experiments investigating the control of nonspatial
shifts of attention within audition and other nonvisual sensory modalities will be required to discriminate among these possibilities.