UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Technical Report No. 244
LEARNING, REMEMBERING, AND UNDERSTANDING
Ann L. Brown
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
John D, Bransford
Vanderbilt University
Roberta A. Ferrara and Joseph C. Campione
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Center for the Study of Reading
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
51 Gerty Drive
Champaign, Illinois 61820
BOLT BERANEK AND NEWMAN INC.
50 Moulton Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
FOR THE STUDY OF READING
Technical Report No.
LEARNING, REMEMBERING, AND UNDERSTANDING
Ann L. Brown
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
John D, Bransford
Vanderbilt University
Roberta A. Ferrara and Joseph C. Campione
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign
51 Gerty Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
50 Moulton Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts
The preparation of this paper was supported in part by USPHS Grants
HD-05951, HD-06864, and Research Career Development Award HD-00111
from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
To appear in J. H. Flavell & E. M. Markman (Eds.), Carmichael's manual
of child psychology to provide an overview and
interpretation of the work already completed on children's learning,
remembering and understanding, and the vast majority of that work has been
on academic learning, and (2) to complement other chapters in the handbook.
Excellent treatments of effortless, social and hot cognition do appear
elsewhere in these volumes.
The importance of environmental factors,
particularly other people, on the forms and functions of human learning is
discussed at length in the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition (LCHC)
chapter in a companion volume of this handbook. Similarly, Dweck
(companion volume) gives an in-depth treatment of emotional factors
involved in learning effectiveness. And Mandler (this volume) deals with
scripted learning which guides a great deal of our day-to-day concourse
with the world. The early emergence of powerful scripted knowledge permits
much everyday cognition to be relatively effortless and undemanding of
cognitive resources, in contrast to the labor-intensive state often
required in academic learning situations.
Although we do deal with social
and emotional factors in the latter part of the chapter, in keeping with
our declared focus, we look at these primarily in terms of how they promote
effective academic learning.
Even within our restricted fQcus, this chapter will not represent a
review of the literature. First, this would be impossible because the
majority of experimental work in cognitive development in the seventies was
concerned with memory or learning in the broad sense, and there is just too
much to cover.
Second, this would be unnecessary, as previous reviews of
the topic are legion; predating this chapter are more than 60 quite
complete treatments, and an excellent book .
we have chosen to select for consideration areas of research that
illustrate some key theoretical questions and the two basic themes of the
chapter, the interactive nature of learning and the dynamic nature of
B. Plan of Chapter
The chapter is divided into four main sections. Section II is a brief
overview of the principal trends of the seventies and a statement of the
quite dramatic advances in our understanding of children's learning that
were made during that period. Section III is a selected review of the
literature that highlights the interactive nature of learning. The
literature is organized within a framework we refer to as the tetrahedral
model through which we consider the activities and characteristics of
learners in response to variations in criterial tasks and stimulus
materials. In Section IV, we deal with some of the controversies
surrounding metacognition and other concepts with which it shares a family
resemblance. In Section V, we concentrate on the implications of work in
this area for instruction, and the importance of considering instructional
effects when formulating basic developmental theory. As this chapter is so
long, we have attempted to write each section in such a way that, although
there is repeated cross-reference across sections, it is possible for the
reader to understand each section in isolation from the others.
II. Major Trends in Research and Theory between 1970 and 1980
As a chapter on children's learning, this paper is the historical
descendant of those of Stevenson , White , and to a lesser
extent Berlyne in the preceding handbook; and the reader is referred
to these excellent works for continuity. In this section, we will argue
that several fundamental changes, already heralded in the Stevenson, White,
and Berlyne chapters, occurred in the study of children's learning in the
past decade. Under the influence of American learning theory, the dominant
metaphor that was extended to children during the sixties was that of a
passive organism responding to enviromental influences. Gradually, the
metaphor became that of an active organism, with the child seen as acting
upon the environment, and through this action defining it, a metaphor of
the genetic approach that White contrasted with learning theory
approaches to children's learning. Throughout the seventies the emphasis
shifted to the learner's side of the learner-environment equation, and a
heavy concentration on learners' activities and strategies was a prime
characteristic of the decade.
A second major change in the decade was in the nature of the materials
that children were set to learn; this change resulted in a reconsideration
of knowledge factors. Compatibility between prior knowledge and new
learning, together with issues of access to and use of knowledge, became
prominent concerns. Another change that followed from the liberation of
the concept learning from its traditional boundaries was that essential
developmental questions of qualitative growth and change became a main
focus of discussion. And, finally, epistomological boundaries that
separated "learning theory" approaches from, for example, the "genetic"
approach were considerably weakened: psychologists from quite
disparate backgrounds became concerned with essentially similar issues.
These changes in emphasis had a dramatic effect on the kind of "childrens'
learning" considered, the methods by which it was examined, and the
developmental theories it generated.
Munn in an earlier version of the Handbook summarized the
"state of the art" in children's learning somewhat depressingly:
"so far as discovering anything fundamentally new concerning the
learning process, the investigations on learning theory in
children have failed.
One possible reason for this is that such
investigations have from the first been patterned too much after
the lines of earlier research with animals and adults in the
laboratory. A more likely reason, however, is that the
phenomenon of learning is fundamentally the same whether studied
in the animal, child, or adult."
 
The dominating learning theories at the time were those of Hull
 , Tolman and Skinner and, indeed, Munn was in accord
with their existing belief in the species-independence of the main
principles of learning. Although the critical differences between these
theories were sufficiently compelling to occupy empirical psychology for
thirty years, they also share common features that make them less than
ideal models for developmental psychology. All derived their primary data
base from rats and pigeons, learning arbitrary things in arbitrary
situations. All three hoped that their systems would have almost limitless
applicability. True to a creed of pan-associationism, they shared a belief
that laws of learning of considerable generality and precision could be
found, and that there were certain basic principles of learning that could
be applied uniformly and universally across all kinds of learning and all
kinds of species.
These principles were thought of as species-indifferent,
activity-indifferent and context-indifferent on a
ladder of increasing intellectual capacity. For example, fish were
designated less intelligent than rats because they display less of a
certain type of learning .
The skills selected as
measures of intelligence were quite arbitrary (species independent), as
indeed were the situations selected in which to test the presence/absence
of the skills (e.g., impoverished environments where the skills to be
learned had no adaptive value for the species in question).
In summary of
this type of enterprise, it has been said 
that by studying the behavior of pigeons in arbitrary situations we learned
nothing about the behavior of pigeons in nature, but a great deal about the
behavior of people in arbitrary situations.
Of more importance to this chapter, the theories had very little to
say about developmental issues. The growth of the knowledge base was
simply incremental. Although later there were some attempts to deal with
reorganization of small basic units into larger complex forms, it was by no
means dominant in these theories, and by no means an unqualified success.
Children learned by the same rules as adults (or pigeons for that matter)
and the result of experience was seen as an accumulation of associations
varying in strength, with strength determined by the amount and recency of
reinforcement/contiguity relations. In short the theories did not confer
special status to age or species differences, and thus provided a somewhat
unlikely metaphor for those whose primarily goal is to understand human
growth and learning .
Munn's theme was repeated in both the Stevenson and White chapters on
learning that appeared in the 1970 Handbook. Both agreed that "research on
children's learning is for the most part a derivation of psychological
studies of learning in animals and human adults" . And that "no learning theory has even been constructed from studies
of children or been specifically directed toward them. Strictly speaking,
there in no learning theory in child psychology" .
Note that in so stating, White contrasts the "genetic approach" of
Piagetian, Wernerian and Soviet origin with "learning theory," a commonly
accepted division before this decade.
Children's learning became included in the bailiwick of learning
theories because its proponents adopted the specialized methods common to
investigations of learning in animals.
"In most of the specialized procedures, the subject's time to
observe or act is partialed out in trials. The time and place of
learning is fixed and the environment is isolated, uninterrupted,
and asocial. Discrete cues are made prominent. Criteria, set up
by observer or instrument, are enforced so that countable,
timeable, scorable responses are fished from the stream of
behavior. These typical research procedures for the study of
learning have regularized it, made the learning situation more
repeatable across individuals and laboratories. The (dominant)
theories of learning were based upon the possibilities of
controlled variation and experimentation possible when learning
had been so regularized."
 
And a great deal of progress was made in systematizing the study of
children, by subjecting them to learning tasks developed originally for the
investigation of animal learning. Many of the main headings in Stevenson's
review reflect this influence:
conditioning, drive level, delay of reward,
stimulus familiarization, stimulus generalization, satiation and
deprivation, extinction, secondary reinforcement, discrimination learning,
learning sets, oddity learning, transposition, reversal-nonreversal shifts,
were all studied originally with animals. Stevenson and White provide
extensive reviews of the great deal of information that was gathered from a
consideration of children learning in those settings. This was a prolific
period of research and we gained a great deal of information of lasting
value, especially concerning selective attention ,
symbolization ,
hypothesis testing , curiosity and exploration , learning sets , stimulus differentiation
 , social learning and behavioral
engineering .
While Munn in 1954 seemed quite content with the age and species
independence of learning principles, Stevenson and White reflected the
concern during the sixties with species differences, and particularly age
differences in learning, which they review extensively.
But, furthermore,
in both chapters one senses the beginning of a dissatisfaction with the
types of learning investigated and their potential contribution to a
developmental theory of learning. For example, Stevenson questions whether
the principles of learning gained in the confines of the traditional
laboratory task will hold up in a variety of settings, particularly those
of a social or "everyday" nature. White queries whether "these
experimental situations and their variations offer too narrow a window
through which to explore the underlying developmental process" .
Further, White calls for a consideration of mechanisms of
age change rather than just descriptions of "before and after the learning
process," all themes that are current today.
White contrasted the learning theory approach to that of the genetic
tradition, always attractive to developmental psychologists, but supplanted
for a while because of the sheer elegance of the models and methods of
learning theory at a time when "the transcription of the genetic point of
view into a rigorous and tough-minded program for maintaining and
continuing research" had not taken place .
approaches were seen as essentially incompatible and a merger impossible
unless basic tenets were abandoned or softened to permit an accomodation.
We will argue that the seeds of such a merger were planted and did come to
fruition in the seventies. Next we will consider some of the shifts in
emphasis that could at least enable a merger even if not actually bring it
One legacy of the learning theory approach was that of an essentially
passive organism .
To improve learning from this perspective one would not try
to change the learner, one would change the stimulus environment to which
the learner is responsive. For example, one might improve learning by
increasing the number, immediacy and/or quality of the reinforcement, or
one might vary the type or saliency of the stimulus dimensions, etc.
is nothing wrong with this approach; apart from anything else, it works,
learning improves.
But the focus is heavily directed to one side of the
learner-context interaction. During the late sixties and early seventies
this focus shifted with the learner's activities receiving the lion's share
of attention. Influenced by European and
Soviet genetic traditions, and by the landmark work
of Bruner and Flavell , attention turned to the child's strategies for
One reflection of this shift is that by the middle seventies,
developmental journals were dominated by studies of children's knowledge
and use of strategies, particularly those devised in the service of
deliberate remembering. As many reviews predate this chapter , we will not review this work in detail. Suffice it to say that a
major contribution of the seventies was the impressive body of knowledge
generated on the subject of the development of active acquisition
strategies of learning, such as rehearsal ,
categorization , and elaboration , and
retrieval mechanisms , together with the
child's developing knowledge and control of her repertoire of strategic
action, i.e., metacognition .
A second major change that was consolidated during the seventies was
in the type of materials children were required to learn. Prior emphasis
on color-form stimuli, nonsense syllables and words and pictures in
isolation, was supplanted by a focus on organized or potentially
organizable material (see Mandler, this volume, for a review).
Children in
the seventies were asked to learn picture sequences , sentences , stories
 , and
expository texts .
Perhaps an even more dramatic change was in the subject matter to be
learned, for toward the end of the decade children as well as adults were
examined as they attempted to learn in semantically rich domains, such as
chess , physics , mathematics
 , and history and social sciences (Voss, in press). With
these shifts in emphasis, questions about the knowledge base also changed
from a consideration of the accumulation of facts and their reinforcement
histories, to a consideration of the organization and coherence of
information, along with the compatibility of new information to prior
experience . Providing an inspiration
for this trend in the developmental literature was the work of Bransford
and Franks with adults and the work on contextual
sensitivity of learning generated by cross-cultural psychologists .
The third major change that occurred during the seventies is that to
some extent, the boundaries that were clear in the chapters of the 1970
volume were weakened in the movement toward a cognitive theory of learning.
To illustrate we will give a brief and oversimplified description of the
major trends in the seventies as reflected in publications in the
developmental journals.
The beginning of the seventies saw the formation of a somewhat uneasy
alliance between developmental psychologists trained in the tradition of
neo-behavioral learning theories and their descendants, information
processing models, and psychologists influenced by the traditional
developmental schools such as those of Piaget and Werner. This alliance
was forged through a common interest in learning strategies.
Information processing psychologists, deeply influenced by the
prototypic memory model of Atkinson and Shiffrin , began to emphasize
the importance of control processes, i.e., strategies and routines for
making more efficient use of a limited capacity information processing
system. Such common control processes as rehearsal received considerable
attention. Typical of this approach in developmental psychology was the
work of Belmont and Butterfield , Brown and Campione , Hagen
 and Ornstein and Naus .
Contemporaneous with this work, influenced primarily by John Flavell's
pioneering efforts, cognitive developmental psychologists became interested
in memory strategies, defined as deliberate planful activities introduced
in the service of remembering. Following the landmark paper of Flavell,
Beach and Chinsky , rehearsal mechanisms again received the lion's
share of attention, followed closely by organization and elaboration.
Together, developmental psychologists from both backgrounds provided a rich
description of the development of mnemonics for learning common laboratory
(and often school) material. Thus, developmental psychologists originally
influenced by the dominant adult approaches and those initially influenced
by Piaget, all became interested in the activities of the learner and in
the acquisition of principled rules and strategies .
The result of these shared interests was a common concern with
production deficiencies, a term originally introduced in the context of
learning theories and adopted by Flavell,
Beach and Chinsky .
Flavell extended the concept "beyond the
simple cue-producing responses to which it had been limited in Hull-Spence
theory and applied it to mnemonic strategies and other complex cognitive
operations -- making it much more consistent with Vygotsky's usage" .
In short, from a variety
of backgrounds, developmental psychologists became interested in the use of
strategies, whether naturally evolved or deliberately trained. This led
the information processing group to embark on a series of training studies
in order to examine whether children's memory deficits were largely the
result of inefficient use of control processes or structural limitations to
the system .
Meanwhile, Flavell and his
co-workers were concerned with a very similar issue:
Do children fail to
use strategies 1) because they do not think to, or 2) because strategies
will not help, or 3) because children cannot use them. Neo-Piagetians were
also concerned with training studies as a method of revealing competencies
often obscured by performance factors .
Thus, one reason for a merger was methodological. Training studies
were employed by psychologists from diverse backgrounds to address
questions about the nature of developmental change. Regardless of the
theoretical impetus, the results of this spate of studies are clear.
Briefly, immature learners tend not to introduce strategies to aid their
learning. They can, however, be trained to do so and their performance
dramatically improves when they receive such instruction. Unfortunately, it
also became clear that in the absence of specific instructions the immature
learner rarely uses such strategic activities intelligently, even following
relatively explicit and extensive training .
Similarly, competencies of young children uncovered by workers
in the genetic tradition were also shown to be extremely
fragile .
The dramatic failure of training studies to effect major changes in
the intelligent use of strategies was a main feature of research in the
middle seventies and provided a prime impetus to the growth of the concept
metacognition (see Section IV).
Impressed by the pervasive nature of
production deficiencies, Flavell and his colleagues became interested in
children's awareness of their own memory processes and the subject, task
and strategy variables that influence learning .
It is this form of self-knowledge that Flavell dubbed metamemory ; and it was in performing these executive routines that young
children experienced difficulty. The work of Belmont and Butterfield
 , Brown and Campione and
Borkowski (in press) are good examples of this approach. Failures to plan,
monitor, and oversee were thought to be in large part responsible for
transfer failures in the young, as was the lack of relevant declarative
knowledge concerning the domain memory. These somewhat separable forms of
metacognition -- a) executive control and b) declarative knowledge -- were
examined extensively in the later part of the decade. Similarly, Piaget
and his colleagues also became
increasingly concerned with the twin forms of metacognition, selfregulation during learning and conscious control of the learning process.
Despite some thorny theoretical confusion, there is considerable agreement
concerning the young child's peculiar difficulties in this domain (see
Sections IV and V).
Toward the later part of the seventies, points of common interest so
far outnumbered original differences that the old barriers between learning
theorists and cognitive development theorists were no longer viable. The
common interest in strategies and their control, never a major concern in
the adult literature, weaned a great many developmental psychologists from
their dependence on adult models and paved the way for a merger between
those from the.genetic tradition and those whose training had been
primarily influenced by dominant adult models. From all directions came a
concern for developing a cognitive theory of learning that would give a
central place given to the developmental issues of growth and change
 .
Janus-faced at the onset of the eighties, developmental psychologists
seem to be in remarkable agreement concerning the major advances in the
seventies and the key questions facing the construction of a cognitive
learning theory in the eighties. First it is increasingly clear that the
model will be essentially interactive.
To illustrate this point, we have
chosen to organize our review of the literature around a tetrahedral
interactive learning model introduced by Jenkins .
To understand
learning, it is necessary to consider both subject (activity, prior
knowledge, capacity, etc.) and environmental factors (task demands,
materials, contexts, etc.) as well as the state of mutual compatibility
between them.
A second major issue that has an honorable history is that of stages
versus continuous age changes in acquisition ; plus Brown, 1982; Case, 1981; Feldman, 1980;
Fischer, 1980; Flavell, 1971b, 1982; Gelman, 1978; etc. for recent reviews
of this question).
One current instantiation of this traditional topic is
the question of accessibility of knowledge .
The prime question concerns
the fragility of early competence versus the robust transsituational nature
of mature forms of the same skill.
In an influential paper on the topic of
access, Rozin made two main points.
First is the notion of welding
 ; intelligence components can be
strictly welded to constrained domains, i.e., skills available in one
situation are not readily used in others, even though they are appropriate.
Quite powerful computational processes may be available to the very young
child, but only for the performance of quite specific types of computations
 . Rozin argues that young children's programs are "not yet
usable in all situations, available to consciousness or statable" . Development is "the process of gradually extending and
connecting together isolated skills with a possible ultimate extension into
consciousness."
The second part of both the preceding quotes refers to
Rozin's second main point, that of conscious access. Even if skills are
widely applicable rather than tightly welded, they need not necessarily be
conscious and statable. Conscious access to the routines available to the
system is the highest form of mature human intelligence (see Section IV).
Pylyshyn made a similar distinction between multiple and
reflective access. Multiple access refers to the ability to use knowledge
flexibly. Knowledge is informationally plastic in that it can be
systematically varied to fit a wide range of conditions. Reflective access
refers to the ability to "mention as well as use" the components of the
system. Similarly, Gardner cites as hallmarks of human intelligence
(a) generative, inventive, and experimental use of knowledge rather than
preprogrammed activities (multiple access) and (b) the ability to reflect
upon one's own activity (reflective access).
The twin concepts of
flexibility and reflection are important issues with wide implications for
theories of learning and development, and they will be a main theme of this
chapter (see Section IV and V).
Finally, a main theme of the chapter which we believe will be the
principal question of the eighties is that of mechanisms of growth and
change. A basic problem in understanding learning is to explain how the
learner progresses from knowledge gained in specific learned experiences to
the stage when she can use knowledge flexibly. This is the question behind
access theories -- how do isolated skills become connected together,
extended and generalized ?
Development is the process of going from the specific context bound to the
general context-free, although truly general, context-free, statable laws
may be a chimera, an idealized end point. Knowledge in some sense must
always be context bound, but contextual binding permits of degrees. It is
the range of applicability of any particular process by any particular
learner that forms the diagnosis of expertise or cognitive maturity. The
less mature, less experienced, less intelligent suffer from a greater
degree of contextual-binding, but even the expert is bound by contextual
constraint to some degree . Thus, a key developmental question
is how children go from strict contextual binding to more powerful general
laws. One commonly suggested mechanism is conflict -- conflict induces
change, a notion basic to learning theories , dialectic
theories as well as Piagetian models .
A serviceable hypothesis is maintained until a
counterexample, an invidious generalization, or an incompatible outcome
ensues. Conflict generated by such inconsistencies induces the formulation
of a more powerful rule to account for a greater range of specific
experiences (see Section IV).
Brown described three methods that developmental psychologists
are beginning to use widely in order to attack the problem of development
head-on. The first method is to provide as rich and detailed a description
as possible of the qualitative differences in both factual and strategic
knowledge between young (novice) and older (expert) learners .
Based on this information, it
is then possible to address the transition process directly by observing
learning actually taking place within a subject over time. This is
essentially the microgenetic approach advocated by Vygotsky and
Werner .
The majority of developmental data to date has been crosssectional. The performance of groups of children, varying in age or level
of expertise, is compared and contrasted. Even a great deal of
longitudinal research has a surprisingly cross-sectional flavor in that we
tend to see frozen shots of behavior taken at quite long intervals.
approaches provide a picture of cognition in stasis rather than evolving,
as it were, right before one's eyes. The revived interest in microgenetic
analysis of both adult and children's learning enables psychologists to concentrate not only on
qualitative descriptions of stages of expertise but also to consider
transition phenomena that underly the progression from beginning to expert
states. As we come to understand more about qualitative descriptions of
the stages of expertise, and of the mechanisms that seem to induce change,
the third approach is made possible, that is to attempt to understand
change better by engineering it (see Section V).
Each approach serves a
complementary function in contributing to our knowledge about learning
processes. As a result of such an attack, we should become better able to:
a) describe the stages of development, i.e., model developmental
progressions and trajectories within a domain; b) model self-modification
processes in individual learners acquiring expertise; and c) engineer
transition by the provision of appropriate experience. If so, we must come
to understand better the essential elements of learning. Armed with such
understanding we would be in a better position to help the less mature
acquire the appropriate self-awareness to enable them to learn how to learn
(Section IV and V).
Central themes of this chapter are, then, acquisition of information,
access and use of knowledge, and transition mechanisms that are involved in
change. We argue that the learning model that will be necessary to
incorporate these themes will be an interactive model.
Redressing earlier
unbalanced treatments that were either heavily learner-centered or heavily
task-centered, the interactive models of the eighties will be primarily
concerned with learner-task compatibility. We would like to emphasize,
however, that it is only because of the exponential increases in our
knowledge concerning activities, knowledge, materials, and task variations
in relative isolation that we are in the current position of preparedness
to attack the complexity of interactive models, the subject of our next
III. A Tetrahedral Framework for Exploring Problems of Learning
The majority of developmental memory research conducted in the late
sixties and throughout the seventies led to the establishment of a fairly
detailed picture of how the child becomes a school expert, i.e., how the
young learner acquires academic skills and comes to know how to learn
deliberately. To illustrate the current state of our knowledge, we would
like to introduce the diagram in Figure 1, which we borrowed from Jenkins
 and have used liberally in several publications .
At first glance this
Insert Figure 1 about here.
seems like a simple model, particularly in comparison with the elaborate
flow diagrams favored by modern cognitive psychologists who were imprinted
on the computer in their formative years. Unfortunately, as is often the
case in psychology, the simple model becomes more complex on closer
examination. It does, however, provide a useful aid to help us remember
the major factors that should be taken into account when considering any
aspect of learning. We would like to stress that not only should we, the
psychologists, consider the tetrahedral nature of the learning process, but
this is exactly what expert learners come to consider when they design
their own plans for learning .
There are a minimum of four factors that comprise the learner-incontext, and these factors interact in nontrivial ways. The four factors
are (a) the learner's activity, (b) the characteristics of the learner, (c)
the nature of the materials to be learned, and (d) the criterial task.
Because of the sheer weight of empirical evidence, we will give only a few
illustrations of the types of factors that have been considered under each
of these rubrics and then provide selected examples of the essentially
interactive nature of the model.
A. Learning Activities
The activities that the learner engages in are a prime determinant of
efficiency. Some systematic activities that learners use are referred to
as strategies, although what is strategic and what is not has not been made
particularly clear in the literature. We will concentrate primarily on
deliberate plans and routines called into service for remembering, learning
or problem solving, although we recognize that a great deal of cognition is
not as effortful as this .
Under instructions to remember, the mature learner
employs a variety of acquisition and retrieval strategies that are not
readily available to the developmentally less mature individual.
As we stressed in Section II, this is an influential area of
developmental psychology where a great deal of progress has been made. We
would like to emphasize just how robust the strategy-performance link is by
pointing out both the reliability of the finding that increased strategy
use leads to increased memory performance and the magnitude of the effect
that is due to strategic intervention. For example, there is ample
evidence that the extent, consistency and type of rehearsal use is
intimately related to recall efficiency . Mature use of a rehearsal strategy following
training can increase the performance of retarded children to the level set
by untrained adults .
Similarly, mature
application of an organizational strategy increases recall of college
students by a large order of magnitude and
although there is currently increasing research activity in this area
 , it is still true that our knowledge about early
cognition is somewhat limited and rather negative, consisting of many more
descriptions of what young children cannot do, than of what they can do
 .
The problem of defining early competence has been especially acute in
the area of memory research. Until recently, the prime concern was with
the competencies that define the school-aged child, specifically the shift
to more adequate understanding that seems to occur between five and seven
years .
The bulk of studies during the early seventies
concerned rote learning of lists, and the emergence of rehearsal,
categorization, or elaboration as tools to enhance performance .
These strategies tend to emerge in a recognizable form
between five and eight years of age. One by-product of this focus is that
indeed we do know a great deal concerning the development of classic
strategies (rehearsal, etc.) during the grade school years but we know less
about the precursors of these strategies.
If young children are not, for
example, rehearsing on a deliberate memory task, we have no way of knowing
what it is that they are doing.
The second gap in our knowledge about strategic development is again
due to paucity of data, this time concerning the development of memory and
learning strategies after the middle grade school years. There are several
excellent programs of research that detail the refinement and elaboration
of list learning strategies during the high school years, notably those of
Belmont and Butterfield , Ornstein and Naus , Neimark
 , and Rohwer ; but, until recently there was little attention
paid to strategies other than rehearsal, categorization, and elaboration.
This question is beginning to be addressed in interesting and exciting ways
and we will review some of the recent work on strategic development in
adolescents in this section.
A third change in our attack on the strategy development issue has
been greater emphasis on the interplay of knowledge factors and strategic
action. Although no one denied the importance of knowledge it has only recently been the subject of extensive
empirical investigation , at least intraculturally. Elegant intercultural
demonstrations of the importance of knowledge factors in memory performance
 
still provide the most extensive empirical support for the position.
As it would clearly be impossible to give a detailed review of the
development of strategic learning, and there are many prior sources for
perusal by the devotee, we will illustrate this topic with a brief
description of one classic example, the development of rehearsal. The
remainder of this section will be devoted to the relatively neglected areas
of 1) the early emergence of precursors of strategic intervention, and 2)
the development of strategies in the adolescent period. Knowledge based
issues will be reserved until the section on the characteristics of the
1. A Prototypic Memory Strategy:
Rehearsal. Developmental
psychologists are not alone in their dependence on rehearsal strategies for
theory building. A strong dependence on rehearsal can be found in the
proliferation of memory models in the adult literature of the early
seventies, and this is true of both the "modal model" and the "levels of processing"
varieties .
We have chosen rehearsal as our
illustration of traditional strategies research, not because we accord
undue status to this activity, but simply because the description of
developmental processes is particularly rich in this domain.
A typical study of the late sixties and early seventies was one where
the relationship of strategy use to memory performance was investigated.
Prototypical experiments of this genre consisted of an assessment phase and
a training phase .
It was readily shown
that young or slow children tended not to produce mnemonic strategies in
the assessment phase but could readily be trained to do so; and, in so
doing they greatly improved their memory performance. We would like to
stress that this prototypical finding has been replicated many times and is
one of the most robust findings in the developmental literature .
A neat twist on this procedure is that if older students are prevented
from using a strategy, for example, rehearsal, they produce levels and
patterns of performance that are very similar to younger or slower learners
 .
findings were taken as strong evidence in favor of the utility of strategic
intervention. Young children trained to rehearse perform like older
spontaneous users of the strategy; spontaneous users prevented from so
indulging perform like the young children (for limitations on the effects
of training, see Section V).
Considerable evidence exists to support a basic presence/absence
position; when rehearsal is present the result is good performance, when
rehearsal is absent the result is bad performance. However, the
presence/absence argument was always bedevilled by confusion as to what
rehearsal was and what activities could be counted as rehearsal-like.
Thus, in studies where observation or
electromyographic recordings of lip activity have been
used to denote rehearsal, children as young as four or five are credited
with strategy use. Evidence of systematic coordination of acquisition and
retrieval demands for complex rehearsal plans is not readily apparent until
well into the high school years .
A thumbnail sketch of the development of spontaneous rehearsal
strategies follows a path that could be traced through studies concerned
with other acquisition and retrieval strategies .
Primitive precursors of rehearsal are preschooler's sporadic attempts to
maintain material via naming, pointing or eye fixation .
By five years of age, children attempt to name (label)
some of the items some of the time. Labelling becomes well established
during the early grade school years and is a prime example of what has been
called maintenance rehearsal .
The prototypical pattern of rehearsal from third graders
would be a rote repetition of single items. With increasing
sophistication, children begin to employ more items in their rehearsal
sets, and hence, are said to engage in cumulative rehearsal .
Development during the later grade school and early
high school years consists of the continual refinement of a cumulative
rehearsal strategy that includes planning of both the acquisition and
retrieval components and increasing
attention to the size and composition of the rehearsal set .
Finally, children begin to produce elaborated rehearsal (the
contrast to maintenace rehearsal). They become increasingly sensitive to
the presence of conceptual organization in the to-be-remembered list and
capitalize on this inherent structure whenever possible .
Finally, even with this supposedly most content-free of
all strategies, rehearsal use is intimately related to knowledge and
capacity factors .
2. Early Emergence of Strategies. In the mid to late sixties
developmental psychologists were interested in a phenomenon known as the
five-to-seven shift , i.e., did a qualitative change in
cognitive functioning occur at the point where children were making the
passage to formal schooling ? Interest in this question was shown by developmental psychologists
with quite diverse backgrounds. Learning theorists disputed whether a
qualitative shift occurred between non-mediated learning in the preschooler
to mediated learning in the older child .
Similarly, a shift from absolute to relational learning was
contested .
At the same
time, Piagetians were interested in the qualitative changes that accompany
the transition from preoperational to concrete operational thought, also
believed to occur between five and seven years of age (see Gelman &
Baillargeon, this volume).
It was in this context that the early work on the development of
memory strategies was often interpreted as yet another exemplar of the
ubiquitous five-to-seven shift. Although Flavell and his colleagues did
consider earlier production of strategies , there was some question concerning the leniency of the criteria that
attributed strategic thinking to the preschool child .
the most part, investigators concentrated on the emergence of the three
common strategies:
rehearsal, categorization and mnemonic elaboration; and
the age trend they found tended to confirm the impression of another fiveto-seven shift.
Prior to five years of age, children were deemed passive,
nonstrategic and nonplanful in memory tasks, just as they were judged to be
preoperational, precausal, and egocentric in classical Piagetian tasks, and
non-mediated responders in learning tasks.
Recent evidence suggests that in many domains preschool children have
more competence than was initially supposed . A successful
method for uncovering early competence is to situate the experiment in a
manner ideally suitable for the preschoolers' interests and abilities. The
idea is to look for evidence of competence, not only in the traditional
laboratory tasks, but also in situations where that competence could most
readily be shown. To considerably oversimplify the comparative literature,
the two major techniques that have been used to expose early competency
have been (1) to strip away all but the most essential elements of the task
in order to reveal its cognitive demands in the simplest possible form and
(2) to situate the experiment in the familiar. A combination of these two
techniques marks the better cross-cultural experimental work (Laboratory of
Comparative Human Cognition, companion volume) and also reveals early
competence in preschool children. For example, Shatz argued
cogently that earlier (or later) competence in communicative situations can
readily be accounted for by the "excess baggage" of the task. In
unfamiliar situations, with arbitrary stimuli, where the children must
expend considerable cognitive effort identifying the items and
comprehending the nature of the game, they appear unable to communicate
adequately with a peer. In situations where the game is familiar, the
information to be conveyed is meaningful and, therefore, cognitive
"capacity" is freed for the communicative aspect of the task, the younger
children look far more reasonable; they communicate well. Flavell and his
colleagues have also shown
that complexity and familiarity are important factors leading to a
diagnosis of egocentricism in children. Similarly, Gelman and her
colleagues have made this point quite graphically for several
"concrete" operational tasks .
A consideration of the memory development research in the seventies
also suggests that a gradual progression to competency is more
representative than the idealized five-to-seven shift from non-strategic to
strategic status. Although full-blown forms of rehearsal, categorization
and elaboration are not apparent before five and relatively stable by seven
to eight (at least in a recognizable form), it is an illegitimate inference
to conclude that, therefore, the propensity to be planful is absent prior
to the emergence of these activities. Recent concentration on preschool
learners and memorizers has revealed a very early propensity to be
strategic in situations where the goal of the activity is clear to the
child, the setting familar and the index of strategic use more lenient
 .
We will consider some of this evidence
There have been two major approaches to the study of preschool memory.
That of Perlmutter and Myers and their associates is to assume that
strategies are largely absent before five years of age and then to find an
alternative explanation of why memory on both recall and recognition
improves from two to four years. They assume that the improvement is due
to increased knowledge, and, of course, they are right. Increases in
knowledge are very likely to result in changes in memory performance on
tasks that tap that knowledge. Perlmutter and Myers have successfully
documented this point. Their evidence concerning the absence of strategies
is largely inferential, however, and indeed it is very difficult to
distinguish between changes due to strategies and changes that are due to
knowledge on a free recall task, a point to which we will return.
The second main approach is to assume that although full-blown
versions of rehearsal, categorization, and so on are not likely to be
present before seven, early indices of strategic intervention can be found;
and they are related to efficiency.
Istomina provided a rich picture of the gradual emergence of strategies in
preschool children. Istomina set children the task of remembering a list
of items either to be bought at a play store, or as a "lesson."
Recall was
superior in the game situation. Istomina argued that the improved memory
in the shopping condition followed because the goal of the activity made
sense to the child. Although the youngest children knew what it meant to
remember, this was not enough:
"They must not only know what remembering
is by itself, but also be able to see it as an end result, an objective to
which activity must be directed, i.e., to grasp it as a goal" .
Istomina's study produced a delightful set of protocols
detailing individual children's emergent procedures for remembering. The
strategies adopted and the way in which they were used became increasingly
complex and sophisticated over the age period of four to six.
Two contemporary research programs aimed at the early emergence of
planful memory have shown competence at even younger ages than Istomina.
Wellman and his colleagues have been concerned with engineering
situations in which evidence could be found for the emergence of primitive
precursors of strategic action. For these reasons, Wellman abandoned the
traditional free recall task in favor of such problems as memory for future
activities, preparation for future retrieval demands, and search strategies
 .
A nice example of this approach is a study by Wellman, Ritter and
Flavell . Two- and three-year-old children were shown a toy dog that
was subsequently hidden under one of a set of containers. The experimenter
left the room and asked the child either to wait with the dog or to
remember where the dog was hidden. Their behavior in the experimenter's
absence was observed via a one-way mirror. It proved difficult to obtain
data from the two-year-olds who preferred not to wait around in the
experimenter's absence!
The three-year-olds in the memory condition,
however, displayed a variety of delightful strategies, such as looking
fixedly at the hiding place, retrieval practice (such as looking at the
target container and nodding yes, looking at the non-target containers and
nodding no), and baiting the correct container (by resting their hand on
it, by moving it to a salient position, etc.). Children who demonstrated
some activity in anticipation of future recall did remember better.
Wellman and his colleagues have also studied logical search strategies
in young children. An object might be lost in a particular location in
their playground and the children's attempts to retrace their steps in a
logical fashion measured. For example, in a study by Wellman, Somerville
and Haake , a search was conducted for a camera lost in one of eight
locations on a playground. The child's picture was taken by the to-be-lost
camera at locations 1, 2 and 3. Evidence of logical search would be the
child's initial search directed to location 3 as the site of the last place
the camera had been used. From age 3 1/2 upwards, the evidence for such
logical search is quite compelling.
Some recent work by DeLoache and Brown combines the
location search method of Wellman, Ritter and Flavell and the large
scale environmental quality of the Wellman, Somerville, and Haake 
study. Using an overlearned hide-and-seek game, they found evidence of
planful preparation for memory tests in children as young as 18 months of
age. In a series of six studies the children were required to find a toy
hidden in a location in a large scale environment (e.g., behind a chair,
under a pillow, etc.).
The main difficultly in these tasks was finding
conditions that produced less than ceiling performance! We will discuss
only one of these studies here, because of the somewhat unusual pattern of
results. Children between 18 and 23 months of age were divided into two
groups; one group played the hide-and-seek game in the laboratory, the
other in the home. During the delay interval the child's activities were
videotaped. Evidence of planning for future retrieval included (1)
verbalizing about the toy or its hiding place, (2) looking toward the
hiding place, (3) pointing at the hiding location, (4) approaching the
hiding location (the child walked toward and hovered around the correct
location), (5) peeking at the hidden toy, and (6) attempting to retrieve
the toy (reaching for it, an attempt that was foiled by the experimenter).
The proportion of overt indices of planning was twice as high in the
laboratory than in the home.
This might at first seem surprising (it was
replicated twice), as it is generally assumed that familiar settings afford
a suitable environment for the display of any strategic propensities that
young children might be harboring. But consider one factor, accuracy. In
both conditions, the children's performance was extremely high (85% or
above correct).
We argue that it is only in the unfamiliar setting that
planning is necessary. Faced with the more demanding task of locating a
hidden object in an unusual location, even children under two will show
some overt signs that they plan for their anticipated retrieval attempts
 .
The early emergence of learning strategies is an area wide open for
future research. For example, we need to understand more about the
conditions under which primitive precursors of memory strategies occur, the
stability with which they are used by the same child across different
settings, the similarities and differences between earlier and later forms
of the activity, etc.
Similarly, we know little about the influence of
knowledge based factors; and the terms "familiar setting", "ecological
validity", etc. need a great deal of "unpacking." But, the initial work on
these topics is both exciting and illuminating.
3. Late Development of Strategies.
The majority of work
concerned with the development of strategies has focused on activities that
enhance rote recall of words or pictures, but these are not the only form
of learning; indeed, in the high school years, although list learning is
still a common activity, the emphasis shifts to strategies for coping with
much richer semantic domains. And learning shifts to texts; students must
not only perfect their reading but they must learn how to learn from
reading .
A great deal of the adolescent's school
life is devoted to learning content areas from text and developing skills
of scientific reasoning. The student must develop strategies for dealing
with materials that are principled, organized and coherent.
In this section, we will consider examples of the strategies students
develop to enable them to handle such situations. We would like to point
out, however, that although the strategies have changed, the developmental
methodology and theory that guided the investigation of "simple" rote
recall activities has also been influential in guiding the investigations
of more complex activities.
In many senses, the qualitative developmental
pattern found between grades 6 and 12 on reading and writing tasks is very
similar to that found between grades 1 and 6 on simple rote recall tasks.
First there is the early sporadic emergence of an appropriate activity,
followed by increasing stability and transituational application with
repeated use. These activities gradually become systematized and
consolidated into a robust, reliable pattern of attacking reading and
writing tasks. Production deficiencies and inefficiencies 
occur along the way and these are related to performance decrements exactly
as they are in young children undertaking simpler list learning tasks.
Precocious maturity with the strategies leads to adult-like patterns and
levels of performance. Mature learning is in large part the result of
strategic application of rules and principles and the systematic
suppression of serviceable, but less mature, habits. And, even more
striking in this domain, strategic activities cannot be understood in
isolation from the other factors in the tetrahedron.
Literacy is the primary aim of schooling. Learning to read and write
demands strategies that are appropriate to the "literacy domain," just as
learning to remember demands strategies appropriate to the "remembering
In this section, we will examine some aspects of studying from
texts, expository writing, and scientific reasoning, the three prime tasks
of academic literacy.
a) Studying. There is a long history of interest in the types of
knowledge and strategies students bring to the task of learning from texts
-- notetaking, underlining, adjunct aids, question-asking, outlining, etc.
 .
In the past,
however, the work has been limited in several ways: first, the majority of
prior work has concentrated almost exclusively on the study activity of
adults, usually college students. Second, the majority of studies have
been correlational rather than manipulative. And third, the most important
limitation is that the majority of studies have shared a concentration on
product rather than process.
That is, the main focus has been on some
outcome measure such as the test scores of students who do or do not use a
certain strategy. Little or no consideration has been given to the
activity of the studier, what she is actually doing while studying. An
example of this is the large number of experiments that have considered the
product (how well studiers do on tests), for example, of note-takers, but
have ignored the processes that the note-taker employs: even the notes
themselves are not examined for evidence of the process that the taker of
notes might be using .
In a series of studies with high school students, Brown and her
colleagues have been investigating these common study strategies, using
theories and methodologies adapted from developmental psychology. Of
particular interest has been the relation between the activity
spontaneously generated as an aid to learning and the performance levels
achieved on a variety of retention and comprehension measures. A main
focus has been on the influence of various forms of knowledge on the
development and maintenance of a variety of selective attention and effort-allocation (Wellman, in press) strategies.
As a preliminary to this program of research, Brown and Smiley 
estimated the ability of students from third to twelth grade to rate the
units of complex texts for importance to the theme. Twelfth graders could
reliably distinguish the four levels of importance that had been rated
previously by college students.
Seventh graders did not differentiate the
two intermediate levels of importance, but they did assign their lowest
scores to the least important and highest scores to the most important
elements. Third graders made no reliable distinction between levels of
importance in their ratings and even fifth graders could only distinguish
the highest level of importance from all other levels.
These initial findings have important implications for studying. To
go beyond retention of just a few main points, i.e., to achieve a more
complete "fleshed-out" memory of the text, one must engage in active
strategies to ensure increased attention to important material that will
not be retained automatically. If young children have difficulty
distinguishing what is important, they will also have difficulty studying.
Quite simply, one cannot selectively attend to important material in the
absence of a fine sensitivity to what is important .
As children mature they become better able to identify what are the
essential organizing features and crucial elements of texts .
Thanks to this foreknowledge, they make better use of
extended study time .
For example, when given an
extra period for study the majority of younger students (fifth to seventh
grade) appear to favor the strategy of passive, even desperate, rereading.
But a certain proportion of students at all ages take notes or underline
during study; the proportion increases with age.
An analysis of the notes
taken reveals a clear concentration on text segments previously rated as
important.
The subsequent recall of the strategy users was superior to that of
non-strategy users, and there was a clear relation of strategy use to
increased efficiency after extra study time. Even fifth and seventh
graders who spontaneously underlined or took notes showed an adult-like
pattern and used extra study to differentially improve their recall of
important elements. We would like to emphasize that efficiency of recall
after extra study was not a function of age per se, but of efficient
strategy use. Seventh graders who took effective notes recalled as well as
college students. Eleventh graders who did not take suitable notes
recalled like seventh graders. Similarly, in a summary-writing task, fifth
and seventh graders who make adequate rough drafts before attempting a
final version perform like college students . Here we will describe only one project in detail because it
illustrates a pervasive problem we wish to emphasize, that is, students are
often impeded in their development toward more mature study habits by the
existence of a serviceable, well-used, inferior strategy that results in
partial success.
Within the series of studies conducted by Brown and her colleagues,
qualitative differences were repeatedly found in the type of notes,
summaries and outlines produced by spontaneous users of a selective
attention strategy. For example, the principal condensation rules used to
summarize were found to be: deletion of trivia, deletion of redundancy,
substitution of a superordinate term for a list of exemplars or a
superordinate event for a list of subordinate episodes, selection of topic
sentence if one were thoughtfully provided by the writer, or invention of a
topic sentence if one were needed. To map the developmental progression
associated with the use of the basic condensation rules, Brown and Day (in
press) examined the ability of students from grades 5, 7, and 10 as well as
various college students to use the rules while summarizing. Even the
youngest children were able to use the two deletion rules with above 90%
accuracy; but, on the more complex rules, developmental differences were
apparent. Students became increasingly adept at using the topic sentence
selection rules, with college students performing extremely well. However,
the most difficult rule, invention, was rarely used by fifth graders, used
on only a third of appropriate occasions by tenth graders and on only half
the occasions when it was appropriate, even by college students. Of
interest is the fact that junior college students, a population suspected
of having difficulty with critical reading and studying, performed like
fifth graders on the summarization task (Brown & Day, in press). Experts
(rhetoric teachers), however, used the selection and invention rules almost
perfectly.
One explanation for the differential difficulty of the basic
condensation rules is that they demand differing degrees of cognitive
manipulation and they depart to a greater or lesser extent from the already
existing strategy favored by the younger participants, the copy-delete
strategy. Fifth graders tend to treat the task of summarizing as one of
deciding whether to include or delete elements that actually occur in the
surface structure of the original text. The strategy is as follows-
read text elements sequentially; (b) decide for each element whether to
include or to delete; (c) if inclusion is the verdict, copy the unit more
or less verbatim from text (Brown, Day, & Jones, in press).
general strategy is employed by fifth and seventh grade notetakers , and it is also applied to the task of outlining. Interviews
conducted with seventh-eighth grade students concerning their study and
research habits again suggest that this is a common method .
The simple copy-delete strategy is then used consistently in a variety
of text processing tasks by 11-14 year old students, and it works
relatively well, in that it gets the job done; it results in a product that
is recognizably a summary, an outline, or a set of notes.
It is because
the simple copy-delete strategy is so generally applicable and meets with
partial success that it is difficult to get students to attempt to use more
complex rules. The fact that a student must replace a primitive strategy
that works adequately with a more sophisticated approach is often a
difficult impediment to progress.
Experts' strategies are a radical departure from the copy-delete
strategy. They systematically depart from both the surface wording and the
temporal sequence of the text, combining across paragraphs, rearranging by
topic cluster, and stating the gist in their own words. They rely heavily
on the invention rule that demands a synopsis in their own words of the
implicit meaning of the paragraph. The invention rule requires that the
students add information rather than just delete, select or manipulate
sentences. It is these processes that are the essence of good
summarization, that are used with facility by experts and that are most
difficult for novice learners (Brown & Day, in press; Brown, Day, & Jones,
in press).
In summarizing the results of an extensive series of experiments on
study skills, Brown emphasized four main points. The first three
were (1) the gradual emergence of strategic planning; (2) the relationship
between effective plans and efficiency; age per se is not the crucial
variable; and (3) the close interdependence of strategic action and the
remaining points in the tetrahedron. During the junior high and high
school years, students develop and increasingly fine-tune a battery of
serviceable skills for learning from texts. These include:
underlining
and taking notes on main ideas , developing
macrorules for comprehension, retention, and synopsis writing (Brown & Day,
in press), outlining and mapping , self-questioning
 , concentrating on previously missed or difficult
segments of text , and the general propensity of treating studying as a
purposive attention-directing and self-questioning act.
A fourth, more speculative point is that partially adequate strategies
are often developed and that these impede progress toward the more
efficient strategy. Once students have developed the inefficient strategy,
they tend to apply it consistently in a variety of situations and maintain
it for quite long periods of time.
It is only with a great deal of
practice that they abandon it in favor of the more mature strategy. Indeed
many high school (and college) students never do.
We will examine other
examples of this phenomenon in the work of Scardamalia and Bereiter on
writing and Kuhn on scientific reasoning.
b) Writing. Expository writing is the second major school activity
that has recently received considerable attention from cognitive and
instructional psychologists. As we do not have space to detail the natural
history of the development of writing and revising skills, the reader is
referred to excellent recent papers by Collins and Gentner , Bereiter
and Scardamalia , Scardamalia and Bereiter 
and Nold .
Here we will concentrate primarily on the development of
the partially adequate knowledge-telling strategy found
that children who ceased writing after producing less than 100 words
invariably reported that their problem was simply that they could not think
of anything more to say. With a little prompting, however, it could
readily be shown that such children had a great deal of potentially usable
knowledge. Nondirective prompts, such as "another reason is" or "on the
other hand" were sometimes all it took to get the writing process going
again .
Planning problems in writing are
apparent even when the child is writing about a domain of which she has
considerable knowledge.
A typical composition of primary grade children will consist of the
form, I think X because of Y. The child might then give another reason for
X or (rarely) explicate the link between X and Y. Usually at this junction
the child will indicate that there is nothing left to say. The second
common tactic that young children employ to extend their texts is to
introduce a new theme based on Y. For example, when writing an essay on
winter, the child might begin with "I think winter is the best time of year
because you can make snowmen;" the child will then proceed for many more
sentences telling all she knows about snowmen. Having exhausted that
topic, the child will declare that the composition is ended, seemingly
having "forgotten" the original purpose of the essay .
This general ploy is referred to as the knowledgetelling strategy (Bereiter & Scardamalia, in press).
A prototypical example of the knowledge-telling strategy is that
adopted by many college students. In an essay examination, there is a
question that cannot be answered. Instead of leaving the question blank,
the student writes down everything she knows about that topic, even though
the product in no way constitutes an adequate answer to the specific
question. College students resort to knowledge-telling in times of
desperation. However, knowledge-telling is the dominant mode of the young
writer who, using key words to set the process in motion, tells all she
knows about a domain without tailoring or fine-tuning the output in
response to the actual question. Flower has referred to this
approach, charitably, as writer-based prose, i.e., prose dominated by the
writer's memory of the domain, rather than the reader's needs.
The knowledge-telling strategy is a device favored by many novice, and
not so novice, writers. And it bears many similarities to the copy-delete
strategy used by students of the same age in note-taking, outlining and
summary writing task (Brown, in press c).
Like the copy-delete strategy,
the knowledge-telling strategy is difficult to eradicate because it gets
the job done.
Copy-delete produces a product that is recognizably a
summary, an outline, or a set of notes; and teachers will accept the
product as adequate. Knowledge-telling also results in a recognizable
product acceptable to teachers. Writing gets done on the topic in
Flower and Hayes , considering talk-aloud protocols during
writing, have noted the absence of advanced planning strategies in
knowledge-telling subjects. Elaboration, restatement, and revision of the
goals and subgoals of the assignment are repeatedly stated by experts.
Knowledge-telling, writer-based novices do not often indulge in these
refinements.
Reader-based, expert writers have reasonable criteria for terminating
their writing task. The job is done, the goal is reached, the question is
answered. How then do knowledge-telling writers exit the arena?
Termination rules for them include more mundane criteria such as "the end
of the page," ".I
have three paragraphs and an essay must have three
paragraphs," and so on.
The knowledge-telling strategy is distinguished by (1) a lack of
goal-related planning; (2) a lack of internal constraints in the text, one
sentence being as deletable as any other; (3) a lack of interconnectedness
in the written output; (4) reliance on purely forward-acting serial
production rather than recursive forward-backward revision processes; and
finally (5) a remarkable lack of anything other than merely cosmetic
revision .
The knowledge-telling strategy gives way to reader-based, responsive,
mature writing only with great difficulty. It is an inefficient strategy
that is retained because it meets with at least partial success. Like most
production inefficiencies , it lies halfway between the
younger child's failure to find any content for writing, and the mature
strategy of tailoring the output to the goal via executive strategies of
goal-directed actions. It shares with the copy-delete strategy its resistence to change because it results in a product that in many
cases is acceptable; and it shares with copy-delete the problem that it
impedes the development of high level activities. Fortunately, it also
shares with copy-delete the fact that training can be introduced to
overcome this obstacle to effective performance .
For example, Scardamalia and Bereiter (in press)
describe a variety of training devices for helping children develop (1)
search and selection strategies prior to writing and (2) on-line processes
needed to revise, evaluate and correct written output. The primary aim of
these procedures is to get children to concentrate on the higher level
nodes in their discourse structure and prevent them from "downsliding"
 to details or lists of possible entries under a
node. They aim to keep the child focused on the task, for example, of
writing about winter and discourage downsliding to all the information in
the node snowman. The child learns to forego knowledge-telling terminated
by arbitrary exit rules and to develop reader-based, topic-responsive,
mature expository writing.
Scientific Reasoning. High schools demand of their successful
clients not only increased sophistication in literacy skills but also the
development of formal operational skills of mathematic and scientific
reasoning. Space limitations are such that we cannot deal with this topic
in any reasonable detail (see Siegler, companion volume).
Instead, we will
describe one program that again illustrates the difficulty learners have in
abandoning an existing strategy that results in partial success.
Kuhn and Phelps (in press) examined the development of scientific
reasoning in the combination of elements task introduced by Inhelder and
Piaget .
Their approach was to select fourth and fifth grade
students who are (or should be) at a transition point for the skill in
question and to examine their increasing sophistication with the task over
a period of three months.
By adopting a microgentic approach , they hoped to study the "process of development directly."
of Piagetian learning situations, the only feedback the students received
was that generated by their own actions on the physical material .
The problem requires that the students determine which chemical of
three present in a demonstration mixture is responsible for producing a
chemical reaction (simplest problem); students must systematically isolate
elements in such a way that they are able to determine unambiguously which
of the potential elements is causally related to the outcome of chemical
change. The "mature" strategy is to test in isolation each element in the
outcome producing combination in order to assess its individual effect.
Subjects were judged to have solved the initial problem if they specified
the single effective element and excluded all other elements; they then
moved on to more complex problems where two elements, and then three, were
combined to produce the effect.
We will give only the flavor of the results.
The most striking
feature was the variability in the strategies a subject applied to the
problem both within and across sessions. Far from a smooth gradual
progression in expertise, the students, at least in the initial sessions,
were very "patchy" in their strategy use. Students' "insight" into the
problem shown in early sessions did not necessarily carry over to later
sessions. Although many of the advanced strategies appeared in the intital
sessions, stabilization and consolidation of this early competence was not
achieved until quite late. Performance mastery was attributable to both
this consolidation and systematization of advanced strategies and a gradual, reluctant discarding of previously used, but
less adequate, strategies. Kuhn and Phelps argue that it is the second of
these processes, i.e., the freeing from the clutches of inadequate but
attractive strategies, that was the most formidable impediment to learning.
The most attractive lure in the combination of elements task was the
tendency to seek evidence that confirms rather than refutes a current
hypothesis .
The second inadequate but preferred strategy was that of false-inclusion,
the tendency to infer that whatever occurs in
conjunction with the
outcome is causally related to that outcome. These two false strategies
were difficult for subjects to relinquish on the easy problems, thereby
impeding initial success: and they tended to recur among subjects who went
on to the more advanced problems. We would like to argue that the
confirmation-seeking and false-inclusion strategies share common features
with the copy-delete and knowledge-telling strategies just reviewed.
are maintained because they do result in partial success and are
recognizable attempts to get the job done. They are resistant to change
because they are typical of everyday reasoning , where demands for the most efficient strategy are
rarely stringent. The process of development is not just one of acquiring
increasingly more refined and sophisticated strategies: development
involves the systematic consolidation, and growing conviction of the
appropriateness, of the mature strategies, combined with the rejection of
plausible but less efficient habits.
4. Strategy Development Revisited. In summary, we are beginning
to map out the development of strategies for learning over a greatly
increased age range and over a greater diversity of tasks than was the case
in the late sixties and early seventies.
Strategic activities can be
observed at very young ages if the observer knows what to look for. In
contrast, faced with the academic task of writing, studying texts, or
scientific reasoning problems, much older learners are surprisingly
sporadic in their strategic intervention. But, we would argue that the
development of complex strategies demanded by advanced academic tasks
traces a route that is similar in kind to that followed during the
acquisition of list learning routines. Rather than being a question of
presence or absence, development involves the systematic organization and
refinement of effective routines at the expense of ineffective activities.
Major impediments to progress are attractive intermediate strategies that
meet with partial success and are consistent with the type of reasoning
that dominates everyday cognition .
We argued that for any strategic activity one must distinguish between
the early fragile state and its later robust quality .
that the child thinks to prepare for retrieval in a toy hiding game does
not necessarily mean that she will select a suitable cue to bait the
correct container in a very similar retrieval cue selection task. The
appearance of strategies is patchy, the propensity to be strategic has not
become so ingrained that the child will routinely search for ways to be
strategic.
Although we have ample evidence from the early memory literature that
stripping away unessential demands and/or situating the experiment in the
familiar are procedures that result in surprising competence in preschool
children, we would not like to give the impression that it is only the
nature of laboratory tasks that has led us to underestimate the cognitive
maturity of the preschooler .
It is just as important to
note that two-year-olds show fleeting glimpses of their capabilities only
under circumstances where considerable ingenuity has been expended in
selecting a suitable setting.
And, even then, young children's learning
and problem solving strategies are unreliable. Sometimes they do show
signs of knowing a great deal more than was previously supposed. But more
often they do not. In the current trend to prove the early emergence of
almost any cognitive capacity, we should not overlook the obvious fact that
six- and seven-year-olds are able to show their understanding in a wider
range of situations, including the much maligned laboratory task. The
cognitive competence of the grade school child is far more robust; it is
manifested on many criterial tasks.
This compares sharply with the fragile
nature of the preschooler's fleeting moments of insight. We would like to
argue that early
competence tends to be rather tenuous, consisting of a set of juxtaposed
procedures that have not been organized into a systemic, coherent body of
knowledge.
It is the coherence, sturdiness, and resistance to countersuggestions
that sets the older child apart from the very young learner. The
propensity to be strategic on a variety of learning tasks is much greater,
and a considerable degree of ingenuity is often needed on the part of the
experimenter to prevent the older child from being strategic. The mature
form of the strategy differs from the earlier forms not only in terms of
its stability, but also in terms of its relatively transituational quality.
For example, the young child's use of a primitive rehearsal strategy is
unreliable; she fails to refine it to conform with changing task demands
and she often fails to use it in a variety of situations where it would be
applicable. Strategy use in mature users is characterized by its robust
nature, its internal coherence, and its transituational applicability.
There are, of course, limits to this transituational flexiblity.
Everyone's knowledge is context-bound to a certain degree and
this is true of strategy utilization. We will return to this point later
(Section V).
Our final point on strategies is that we cannot emphasize enough the
importance of other factors in the tetrahedron for determining the form and
function of strategic intervention. Strategies and knowledge factors are
intimately related. Even the prototypic "knowledge-free" strategy of
rehearsal (one can perfectly well rehearse meaningless material) is
influenced by the nature of the material to be rehearsed and the knowledge
that the subject has concerning the potential organization of that material
 . The nature of the criterial task is again a
crucial factor in determining whether a strategy will be used. Adults do
not rehearse when the list is either too long or too short, or when another
strategy can be applied with less effort. And young children are only
spontaneously strategic in circumstances where the criterial task
represents a goal that they understand (e.g., finding a toy); remembering
for remembering's sake is not a situation that will reveal young children's
propensity to make active attempts to learn. Strategic action must be
evaluated as one part of the tetrahedron, influenced by the subjects'
knowledge and capacities, the nature of the materials to be learned, and
the end point of learning, the criterial task.
B. Characteristics of the Learner
We turn now to the general question of what it is that the learner
brings to the learning situation.
This is no small topic! The
characteristics of the learner include, of course, the previously described
repertoire of strategic skills that the learner may or may not access when
planning her learning activities.
Some of the many other factors that can
be considered under this heading are those general "catch-all" categories
of knowledge, variously referred to as "knowledge-of-the-world," "the
knowledge base," "memory in the broad sense," "schematic knowledge," etc.
 .
Further, there is the popular topic of metacognition
 ; one characteristic of the learner is, indeed,
the declarative knowledge that she has concerning her own knowledge, be it
factual or strategic. And finally, a major characteristic of the learner
that continues to be controversial is her "capacity."
In this section we will consider only (a) some recent work reaffirming
the importance of subjects' factual knowledge in determining their learning
activities and efficiencies and (b) the topic of capacity limitations
affecting efficiency of learning. Both topics will be treated primarily as
illustrative of the necessity to consider the learners' characteristics
when viewing the interactions of the tetrahedron. We will defer to a
separate section our discussion of metacognition (see Section IV and V).
1. Factual Knowledge. The obvious fact that what a person currently
knows must influence what she can learn has received considerable attention
in recent years. Developmental psychologists must be concerned with issues
of differential knowledge, because age and knowledge are usually highly
correlated.
There has been, however, a tendency to act as if the prime
consideration was to control or equate for knowledge factors.
Developmental variations in knowledge are often regarded as a source of
extraneous variability. For example, in standard memory tasks an attempt
is made to insure that even the youngest subjects are familiar with the
stimuli, at least to the level that they can name them.
If a name is not
readily given by a small participant, the experimenter generously provides
one and then operates as if stimulus familiarity were equated across ages.
That familiarity may involve more than access, or even speed of access, to
the name code was rarely considered in early studies of memory development.
Variations in performance across ages were attributed to factors other than
variations in knowledge, e.g., capacity limitations or strategy deficits
 .
Perhaps a more enlightened way that developmental psychologists have
expressed concern with differential knowledge has been in their treatment
of instruction.
If one wishes to instruct a child to perform in a way she
previously could not, the most intelligent way to proceed is to uncover her
starting level of competence.
It is a widespread assumption of
developmental psychologists of quite divergent theoretical viewpoints that
the distance between the child's existing knowledge and the new information
she must acquire is a critical determinant of how successful training will
be .
it is a critical concern for those involved in instruction to detail the
stages through which the learner must pass. The map between the child's
current understanding and the instructional routine selected is a critical
determinant of the success of that instruction.
Then there is the question of task difficulty. A task is easy or hard
and material is comprehensible or not to the extent that it maps onto the
preexisting knowledge and preferences of the learners. Little thinkers.
who lack some basic knowledge, should be hindered in their comprehension
and retention of any information that presupposes the existence of that
prior knowledge. A good example would be studies that show a clear link
between children's ability to free recall material and the compatibility of
that material with their own knowledge .
of research is plagued with methodological difficulties , but there does seem to be support for the influence of
stimulus familiarity on children's recall performance.
For example,
Richman, Nida, and Pittman used familiar words known to all their
subjects; but the children's judgment of their meaningfulness varied as a
function of age. When common lists were used, the older children
outperformed the younger ones; but when the lists were tailored to the
child by equating them for meaningfulness in an age-appropriate manner, no
age differences were reported. Similarly, Lindberg used standard
taxonomic lists vs. lists made up of categories relevant to the children's
lives (i.e., names of school teachers, television shows, books in their
reading curriculum, etc.).
Again, the age difference disappeared on the
familiar materials, thus providing strong positive evidence of the effects
of knowledge on recall performance.
Another successful ploy is to show that experimentally induced
preexisting knowledge determines what is understood and retained from
passages. This has been successfully demonstrated with both children
 and adults ; even young
children disambiguated vague or misleading sections of text in a manner
congruent with their preexisting expectations (Stein & Trabasso, in press).
Indeed, it is not necessary in a standard prose-recall situation to
manipulate age as well as preexisting knowledge. Inducing adults to take
different perspectives before reading a passage is an ideal way of
demonstrating that comprehension is an interaction of expectations and
actual textual materials .
Recent work by Chi has shown an intriguing inverse finding that is
just as pertinent to our argument. Chi has been investigating the memory
and metamemory performance of skilled chess players, an honorable
psychological pursuit dating back at least to Binet (1894). Chi's twist is
that in her sample of players knowledge is negatively correlated with age;
the children are the experts whereas the adults are the novices.
experts who outperform the novices both in terms of actual memory
performance and in predicting in advance how well they will perform.
Let us consider another of Chi's studies in detail, the dinosaur
expert (Chi & Koeske, in press).
Chi's subject was a 4 1/2-year-old boy
who knew more than anyone need know about dinosaurs. The child was asked
to generate the names of all the dinosaurs he knew. In seven sessions the
child generated 46 dinosaurs of which 20 were selected to be the betterknown and 20 the lesser-known set.
Assignment to set was based on
frequency of generation (4.5 vs. 1) and the frequency with which the
dinosaurs occurred in the texts from which the child had been read.
Chi established both the properties the child could recognize and
generate in a clue game in which the experimenter and the child took turns
generating properties which the other had to identify. Using the
properties and frequency data, a network representation was mapped with
directional links between nodes representing generation or recognition.
The number of links between nodes indicated the frequency of mention. The
links fell into seven main types: habitat, locomotion, appearance, size,
diet, defense mechanism (e.g., spines), and nickname. On the basis of
these mappings, Chi could identify what knowing more means; knowing more is
identified with the number of property nodes associated with each concept
node, the number of interrelations among the nodes, and the frequency with
which each dinosaur node shows a particular property node. The betterknown set differed from the lesser-known set quite dramatically in terms of
the complexity, density and interrelatedness of the representation.
Although it may not be possible to "equate" for knowledge in psychological
experiments, Chi's elegant study does point to ways of mapping a child's
representation and of quantifying what it means to know more.
Having mapped the knowledge base concerning well-known and not-sowell-known dinosaurs, Chi looked at the child's free recall of the two
sets. The lists were read to the child and he was required to recall them
three times. The number of items recalled across trials for the betterknown dinosaurs it was 10, 9 and 9, and for the lesser-known dinosaurs was
6, 5 and 4. The child's recall for the better-known set was twice as high
as for the lesser-known set.
What is not clear in the dinosaur study is the significance of the
findings vis-a-vis the strategies and knowledge interrelationship. The
free recall task is a difficult vehicle for studying the interaction of
strategies and knowledge. Improved recall over trials, and even
clustering, occur in adults and children exposed to taxonomic lists that
they are not set to learn deliberately, i.e., under incidental learning
situations . Chi would like to argue,
as does Lange , that improvement in both the quality and quantity of
recall across ages is not solely the result of strategic intervention, as
has often been claimed, but is more the result of the corresponding growth
in knowledge as a function of age. Hence, she concludes that "the
elaborateness and richness of the representation of the concepts in memory
determines the quantity and quality of recall" (Chi & Koeske, in press).
We would argue that although Chi has positive evidence for the
importance of knowledge factors, she has only indirect evidence concerning
strategic factors. And further, we would argue that the critical
experiment, although technically difficult, is feasible and has not yet
been undertaken.
Consider the recall trials data. Chi's dinosaur aficionado "recalled"
10 of the 20 well-known animals and five of the less well-known.
Performance, if anything, dropped over the three trials.
If the learner
were using an organizational strategy to guide recall, one would expect him
to improve over trials; indeed, in developmental work it is essential to
give multiple trials for evidence of strategy use to show up .
Chi's learner did not show this prototypical
improvement over trials, thus providing some indirect evidence that
strategies for learning were not employed. But Chi's expert was four years
Consider a fictitious eight-year-old dinosaur expert who has at her
command not only an organized knowledge base but also a serviceable
repertoire of memory strategies.
We presume that this learner would show a
superiority based on knowledge factors, i.e., she would recall more from
her familiar than from her unfamiliar set. But, in addition, she would be
able to employ deliberate strategies to help her improve over trials on
both sets.
If the task were modified somewhat, so that the dinosaurs were
presented on cards (pictures), one might gain additional evidence of
strategic activity such as sorting into categories (habitat, locomotion,
etc.) in the service of memorizing. Sorting should be easier and more
stable for the familiar than less familiar sets; if so, one might predict
greater improvement over trials for the better known set.
Relationships
between input and output organization might also provide additional
evidence of the interrelation of strategies and knowledge.
Persistent controversy in the memory development literature has
surrounded this issue of inferring something about the nature of the
representation of knowledge (semantic memory) on the basis of performance
in memory tasks.
One controversial instantiation of this problem was the
concern with putative improvements over time in "memory" for logical
organizations .
A less esoteric
version of the problem is the routine attribution of knowledge structures
only to those who "use them" in the common free recall task. Furthermore,
there is no reason to suppose that the presence of organized recall
necessarily implicates the use of deliberate strategies. Lange has
pointed out that clustering may very well be the more-or-less automatic
result of strong interitem associations in the knowledge base. Lange's
argument is one of semantic capture; that is, the compatibility between the
organization of the material and the organization in the head is such that
willy-nilly output is organized. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
distinguish between effects that are due to "automatic" semantic capture
and the use of deliberate organization strategies in free recall tasks
(Mandler, this volume).
Tasks other than free recall that tap the child's organizational
structure provide a different picture of the child's knowledge base. For
example, in a semantic priming task , the speed of identifying the second word of a pair is greater if the
two words are drawn from the same, as opposed to different, categories.
The latency to identify "cat" is faster if the previous word was "horse"
than if it had been "house."
On such tasks, very young and quite severely
impaired learners appear to be sensitive to the taxonomic structure of the
lists. Comparable data can be gleaned from developmental studies of
release from proactive inhibition .
We would like to argue that the nature of the criterion task is in
large part responsible for the attribution of a certain kind of knowledge
to a certain kind of knower. At least this is true in the current
literature. We should also .be wary about leaping to conclusions about
knowledge factors without systematically examining the nature of both the
materials and the criterion task. Consider the following study by Smiley
and Brown .
Children from kindergarten, first and fifth grade,
college students and elderly adults were given a picture-matching task and
asked to indicate which two items of three were alike. The items could be
paired taxonomically or thematically, i.e., a horse could be paired either
with a saddle (thematic grouping) or a cow (taxonomic grouping); a needle
with a pin (taxonomic) or a thread (thematic).
Younger (kindergarten and
first grade) and older (CA = 80) subjects reliably chose the thematic
grouping whereas the "schooled" samples (fifth graders and college
students) chose the taxonomic grouping. But consider a slight change in
the criterial task. After the students had made and justified their
original choice, they were asked if there were any way that the alternate
pairing could be justified; the subjects were perfectly happy to give the
alternative explanation. Choice of thematic or taxonomic organization
reflected preference rather than a fundamental change in underlying
organization. This preference affected both learning rate and memory performance .
Whereas there is little evidence as yet to suggest that there are
fundamental qualitative differences in the nature of representation as a
function of age (see Mandler, this volume, for a detailed discussion),
there are differences in preference for various organizational formulas,
and differences in the facility with which experts and novices can gain
access to the organization that they have. For example, the young child's
taxonomic knowledge may be revealed in "passive" situations like the
semantic priming task, but this does not mean that she can access that
organization to form the basis of a systematic sort, or even more
demanding, harness that organization to design a strategy in the service of
deliberate remembering.
If we use only the most demanding task, we will
have a pessimistic picture of what the child knows. The nature of the
criterial task must be scrupulously examined before we make inferences
concerning the organization of knowledge or the child's propensity to be
strategic.
2. Dynamic vs. Static Conceptions of Knowledge. It is not uncommon
for theorists to attempt to explain performance differences between young
and old, good and poor, expert and novice learners in terms of the adequacy
of their factual knowledge base. The group that performs well does so
because it has already acquired the background knowledge necessary to
perform the task, whereas the less successful group lacks this knowledge.
These claims are undoubtedly true, but perhaps of greater interest to a
developmental psychologist is how these differences in knowledge came about
and how these differences affect strategy utilization, etc.
Issues concerning the importance of content knowledge can be
approached from two different perspectives that are complementary rather
than mutually exclusive. From a static perspective, the major question is,
"How does the current state of one's knowledge affect performance?" The
major question from the alternate perspective, the dynamic perspective, is
"How did one's knowledge base get to be the way it is, and how does it
Many of the traditional theories borrowed from the adult, cognitive
literature reflect the static perspective. Theories of frames, scripts and
schemata represent a case in point. From the perspective of these
theories, it seems clear that lack of relevant knowledge "causes" many
problems such as the inability to learn or remember new sets of
information.
The dynamic perspective suggests a different approach to this
lack of relevant content knowledge can be viewed as a symptom, as
well as a cause. Thus, a theorist can assume that the knowledge base is
one major determinant of current performance (a static perspective) yet
still believe that "something else" accounts for, or at least contributes
to, differences in the development of the knowledge base (a dynamic
perspective).
We argue here that the something else is access; people
differ in the degree to which they spontaneously utilize potentially
available information in order to understand and learn.
Imagine a prototypical developmental study. One group of children
(the older, more experienced, etc.) performs better than the other. But,
for the sake of argument, make the additional assumption that both groups
possess the content knowledge necessary for successful performance. In
such cases the key factor is the degree to which people spontaneously
access or utilize potentially available resources in order to understand
and learn new information. For example, in a recent study by Bransford,
Stein, Shelton and Owings , academically successful and less
successful fifth graders were asked to learn a passage about two kinds of
The first paragraph of the passage included a brief introduction
and a description of the function of each robot. The extendible robot
could extend itself to the height of a two-story house and was used to wash
outside windows in two-story houses. The non-extendible robot was designed
to wash outside windows in tall highrise apartment buildings. The
remaining paragraphs described particular properties of each robot,
-properties that were potentially meaningful given the tasks that each robot
had to perform. For example, the robot for highrise buildings had suction
cup feet to help it climb; it was light and had a parachute in case it
should fall. The robot for two-story buildings was made of heavy steel for
stability and had spiked feet to stick into the ground, etc. The relevance
of the various properties was not explicitly explained.
Academically successful students spontaneously used information about
the function of each robot to understand the relevance of various
properties. Their memory for the properties was excellent and the students
were generally able to explain why each robot possessed its various
properties. Another group of academically successful students received an
explicit version of the robot passage in which the relevance of each
property was explained in the text. The ability of these students to
remember the properties and explain their significance was no better than
that of students in the implicit group.
The academically less successful students exhibited a different
pattern of performance. Those who received the implicit version had a
difficult time recalling properties and explaining their significance.
Performance for those receiving the explicit version was considerably
better. It became clear that the less successful students who received the
implicit version had the potential to understand the significance of the
properties (or the vast majority of the properties, at least), but they
failed to ask themselves how previously available information about the
functions of each robot might make each fact more relevant or significant.
The less successful students did not spontaneously activate knowledge that
could clarify the significance or relevance of the properties. They had
the potential to do so but did not do this spontaneously; they had to be
explicitly prompted to ask themselves relevant questions about the
information they were trying to learn. These additional prompts were not
required by the successful students who could provide them for themselves.
The tendency of some children to miss significant details that would
alter their interpretation can have pervasive effects on their abilities to
learn from experience. For example, Bransford et al. asked their
fifth graders to read a passage about camels: part of the passage
emphasized problems such as surviving desert sandstorms, other parts
discussed facts such as "Camels can close their nasal passages and have
special eyelids to protect their eyes."
Many of the academically less
successful students failed to utilize information about the sandstorm to
interpret the significance of facts about the camels" nasal passages and
However, successful students who did understand how various
properties of camels help them survive desert sandstorms had a basis for
understanding a new passage that described the clothing worn by desert
people (e.g., these students could understand the significance of wearing
veils or other forms of face protection). Hannigan, Shelton, Franks and
Bransford have devised analogues of situations where particular
events are or are not interpreted as instances of more general principles
and have assessed the effects on students' abilities to deal with novelbut-related materials. Students who were prompted to interpret each
acquisition event as an instance of more general principles exhibited a
much greater ability to transfer to novel-but-related events have discussed several studies designed to
explore how children approach the problem of learning new information.
children in these studies had the background knowledge necessary to learn
the information, but some of them consistently failed to access this
knowledge; they failed to ask themselves how potentially available
information could clarify the significance or relevance of new factual
content. The failure to perform these activities could affect the
development of an adequate knowledge base and hence jeopardize the chance
to learn subsequent related information. Repeated superficial processing
of this type would lead to a cumulative deficit, or a knowledge base
impoverished over a wide range of factual topics. Inadequacies in the
development of the knowledge base are not only causes of various problems
but may be symptoms as well.
Of course, the performance of less successful learners can be improved
by explicitly prompting them to use appropriate strategies or to activate
relevant knowledge. This prompting may take the form of "leading
questions," or it may involve direct instruction. One problem with this
approach to directed learning or teaching is that a teacher or writer
cannot always anticipate what each learner needs to know in order to
understand a message. An even greater problem is that this approach may
indeed help people better understand and remember particular sets of
materials, but it does not necessarily help them how to structure their own
learning activities. The development of the ability to learn on one's own
is the learning to learn problem .
3. Capacity. A continuing controversy in the literature surrounds
our second characteristic of the learner, i.e., her working memory, or
attentional capacity. This is, indeed, an important feature of the
learner. Few would doubt that novices and young children are hampered in
their efforts to learn by a limit on what they can hold concurrently in
memory. And convincing arguments have been put forward that overloading a
child's working capacity is an important factor that leads to immature
behavior on a variety of tasks. For our purposes here, we will concentrate
on the central idea that one cannot talk about capacity differences without
considering all four factors of the tetrahedron.
It has been amply demonstrated that the functional capacity of the
human information processing system increases developmentally .
However, whether this
reflects changes in capacity per se, or in the efficient use of that
capacity is a debatable issue. The resolution of this controversy has been
hampered by the complexity of an essentially interactive system. The
answer is not going to be a simple "it's all knowledge," "it's all
strategies," "it's amount of space," "it's durability," etc.
Concomitant
to the observed increase in "capacity" with age, other characteristics of
the child, e.g., the complexity of her knowledge base and her repertoire of
learning activities, are also developing and the rate at which these
factors are changing varies widely both within and between individuals.
Moreover, the interdependencies existing between these factors have not
been completely specified.
This greatly complicates the task of
constructing a pure measure of capacity that can be applied to people of
different ages.
We will elaborate upon this problem in the following
discussion of the developmental data. Research suggesting that changes in
(a) mental space, (b) basic processing operations, (c) the knowledge base,
and (d) strategy use underlie observed changes in functional capacity will
now be considered.
Mental Space and Capacity. Pascual-Leone hypothesized that the
Piagetian stages of cognitive development are determined primarily by the
growth in capacity of a central computing space, a construct that he terms
M space. M space is equivalent to the number of schemes or discrete units
of information that can be operated upon simultaneously.
This quantitative
construct is assumed to develop as a linear function of age (i.e., from 1
unit at age 3 to 7 units at age 15).
To test this hypothesis, Pascual-
Leone constructed the "compound-stimuli visual information" task.
His subjects (ages 5, 7, 9 and 11) first learned a different response
(e.g., clap hands, open mouth) to each of a number of positive instances of
a variety of visual stimulus dimensions (e.g., red color, large size). The
children were then presented with compound visual stimuli that were to be
"decoded" by responding appropriately to each of the cues present in the
stimuli. According to Pascual-Leone, the number of correct responses a
child emitted in this task corresponded to the maximum number of schemes
that she could integrate without exceeding her available information
processing capacity. In support of the model, Pascual-Leone found that
performance increased as a function of age; he concluded that these
developmental increments were primarily due to increased M space.
Corroborating evidence has been obtained within other domains by Case
 .
Pascual-Leone's model and his tests of that model have been
criticized on a number of grounds including procedural, statistical and
metatheoretical ones; but by far the most damaging criticisms concern the
confounding of M demands with demands on certain basic processes, on
strategies, and on executive control .
Case 
asserts that "according to Pascual-Leone's neo-Piagetian theory of
development, a subject's performance on any given cognitive task is a
function of three parameters:
the mental strategy with which she
approaches the task, the demand which the strategy puts on her mental
capacity (its M-demand), and the mental capacity which she has available
(her M- space)."
Thus, in order to infer a difference in M space between
two children of different ages, it is necessary at minimum to insure that
they are using the same strategy that places an equivalent drain on mental
capacity in each case. The tasks used by Pascual-Leone and Case
 are obviously facilitated by certain skills and strategies
(e.g., analysis of complex stimuli and ordering skills) that undergo
development during the age range of interest.
Basic Processing Operations and Capicity: More recently, Case and his
colleagues (Case, Kurland, & Goldberg, in press) have suggested that a
person's total processing space is composed of space available for storing
information and space available for executing cognitive operations.
Although total processing space is assumed to remain constant as one
develops, its two components are believed to fluctuate with a trade-off
existing between them. Thus, Case et al. propose that the improved
functional capacity that accompanies development reflects increases in
storage space, which accompany the decreasing amounts of operating space
necessary for performance. The decrements in necessary operating space
occur as a result of the growing speed, efficiency, and automaticity of
basic processes (e.g., encoding and retrieval).
Case et al. reported a series of studies supporting their model. In
the first study, they demonstrated that between the ages of three and six,
word span (i.e., roughly the maximum number of words that a person could
repeat in any order) was linearly related to the speed of repeating
individual words.
In a second study, word familiarity was manipulated
(i.e., adults were given nonsense words) in order to equate adults and
six-year-olds on their speed of word repetition. This manipulation
resulted in the disappearance of age-related differences in word span. The
amount of space the adults required for basic operations increased in the
case of nonsense words, with a concomitant decrease in the amount of
available storage space in short-term memory.
Similar results were reported in a third study in which a counting
span task was administered to children from kindergarten through sixth
grade. This test required the children to count each of a number of arrays
and subsequently to recall the number of dots in each of those arrays. A
linear relationship was found between developmental increments in counting
span and developmental increments in counting speed. Furthermore, in a
fourth study, by requiring adults to count in an artificial language, both
the speed of counting and the counting span of adults were reduced to a
first grade level. Case et al. concluded that there is no developmental
increase in total processing space, but rather that reductions in the
necessary operating space are responsible for the developmental increments
in span. They acknowledge, however, that this conclusion rests upon the
validity of their operational definitions of the amount of required
operating space.
The source(s) of any increases in operational efficiency
(e.g., maturation, experience) and the mechanisms by which such changes
might increase memory span (e.g., less "attentional interference," more
time for rehearsal or other strategies) are also issues which remain to be
addressed.
Huttenlocher and Burke arrived at a similar conclusion. They
obtained measures of digit span from four-, seven-, nine- and eleven-yearolds. Their experimental manipulation was to vary the sound pattern
(melody, prosody or monotone) and the temporal groupings.
The effects of
sound pattern were quite small and not clearly related to age. Temporal
grouping, however, improved the spans of all age groups to roughly the same
extent, suggesting that differences in subject-imposed organization cannot
be responsible for developmental differences in memory span. They conclude
that the growth of memory span is probably not due to the development of
active strategies and that, therefore, it probably results from
improvements in basic processes, such as the identification of individual
items and the encoding of order information. In a comprehensive review of
the literature, Dempster came to a similar conclusion.
Knowledge Base and Capacity:
It is possible that knowledge base
restrictions may underlie the child's relatively poor memory span and
perhaps her processing inefficiencies as well.
Chi suggests that a
young child can be restricted by her knowledge base in three different
ways. First, the chunks of information that constitute her knowledge base
may be smaller .
Materials that are less familiar to a
child than to an adult may correspond to more chunks of smaller size for
the child.
Second, the chunks in the child's knowledge base may be less
accessible in the sense of fewer associations between chunks in the
network. Third, the child may simply lack chunks in her knowledge base for
totally unfamiliar stimuli. Chi reviewed research demonstrating
that materials supposedly varying in familiarity (i.e., digits, letters,
concrete words and geometric figures) resulted in varying memory spans for
adults, but not for children, and concluded that this is due to greater
variations in the structure of the knowledge base for different types of
material on the part of adults than of children.
Strategies and Capacity:
It has been suggested throughout the
cognitive literature that grouping and rehearsal are the two major
strategies that provide advantages in tasks such as memory span, but there
is not a great deal of evidence to support this position. Experimenterimposed grouping does not eliminate age differences in span performance
 .
On the contrary, such manipulations have
sometimes accentuated age differences.
For example, McCarver found
that ten-year-olds and college students displayed greater probed short-term
memory for pictures when spatial and temporal cues, as well as grouping
instructions, were provided, but that six- and seven-year-olds did not
improve under these conditions. Generally, however, grouping improves the
performance of young and old alike .
We know of no positive research demonstrating active recoding of
stimulus items in short-term memory tasks by young children and in general
little investigation has been done in this area. Failure to recode might
be due to at least a couple of different problems .
child may not know when and/or how to go about recoding. Second,
recognizable chunks appropriate for recoding might not yet exist in the
knowledge base for many types of stimuli.
In general, then, there is
little evidence to suggest that developmental increases in memory span are
due to the acquisition of grouping strategies, although the paucity of data
should be noted. The same might be said for rehearsal strategies .
We regard the capacity development issue as moot given current
evidence. But we tentatively conclude that there is little evidence to
suggest that total processing capacity per se changes at least after four
years of age (there are no data on younger children).
developmental increases in span are due to an interaction of three general
factors that undergo changes during childhood. These factors are the
structure of the knowledge base, the use of strategies, and the efficiency
of basic processes. Which of these variables will be most responsible for
differential performance across ages may depend upon such things as the
constraints of the task, the type of materials, and the ages of the
We would also like to argue that many of the changes that underlie
age-related increases in functional capacity may be similar to those that
occur with the development of expertise in general.
Furthermore, it
remains to be seen to what extent the allocation of short-term memory
capacity is automatic and to what extent it is a volitional process,
requiring fairly sophisticated executive monitoring skills .
Equally speculative at this stage is Chi's 
implication that the development of "metacognitive" skills may play a role
in the increasing efficiency of capacity allocation with age.
Despite the flurry of recent activity in this area, we have little
evidence to refute or substantiate Olson's characterization of
capacity increments as follows:
The changes we find are associated with the child's ability to
recode or encode, to plan and monitor, to integrate and unitize.
Broad limits on information processing capacity, which may be
biological in origin, are relatively constant, but how the child
operates within these limits undergoes systematic and profound
development. (p. 153)
C. The Nature of the Materials
The third point of the tetrahedron concerns the nature of the
materials. We will use only one example here of the importance of
considering the materials to be learned, that is, the controversy
surrounding developmental trends in recognition memory. However, an
important theme throughout the chapter is the influence varying forms of
materials have on the learning process (see Mandler, this volume, for a
full treatment of this question).
1. Recognition Memory
One issue that concerned developmental psychologists during the early
seventies was the existence of developmental effects in recognition memory.
The original question that motivated the research was whether there existed
some class of "memory" task that would place little demands on capacity
limitations, and/or strategies, and/or knowledge factors and, therefore,
would result in excellent performance in young subjects notorious for their
poor memory performance. The argument was that it is uninteresting to
point out that retarded children, for example, have poor memories. More
informative would be studies showing areas of relative strength as well as
areas of weakness . The initial studies in recognition
memory did, to some extent, provide the needed data. Young children and
retarded learners showed excellent recognition memory for particular kinds
of stimulus materials; such children could readily identify previously seen
distinct familiar pictures from a set including novel items . Children could even tolerate some quite similar distractor items
such as the same character in a different pose , or
two quite similar instances of the same conceptual category .
The original work with recognition memory was interpreted as an
attempt to show that the process of recognition itself was developmentally
insensitive, as if "recognition" were somehow identifiable in isolation.
We would like to argue that this question is not well motivated, because it
is impossible to consider the development of recognition memory without
asking, "recognition of what?"
A particular recognition memory task will
be easy or hard depending on (1) the "nature of the materials," e.g., the
similarity of the distractors along physical and/or conceptual dimensions;
(2) the compatibility of the materials with the analyzing structures of the
learner (knowledge base factors); and (3) the extent to which deliberate
strategies can be used to enhance learning (learning activities). If the
subsequent spate of recognition memory studies are analyzed in this light,
the picture to emerge becomes quite cohesive.
Perlmutter and Myers reviewed the research on recognition
memory in the years prior to five and found that age-related increases in
performance, if they occur at all, can be attributed to (1) acquisition
factors such as more efficient scanning, encoding and information pickup;
(2) knowledge factors -- if the items are differentially familiar to the
older and younger children a developmental trend accrues; (3) comparison
factors, such as matching; and (4) response factors, such as response bias
changes with age.
In general, Perlmutter and Myer's early recognition
memory studies suggest excellent performance if the materials are familiar
and the items distinct. There are no age differences under such
circumstances. Age differences become apparent, when the stimuli are
complex and/or differentially familiar and when sustained, systematic
scanning and comparison processes are required.
A similar pattern emerges when older children serve as subjects.
Dirks and Neisser asked adults and children from grades 1, 3, and 6
to view complex scenes and then tested them on recognition items with
elements of the scene deleted or rearranged. There was a sizable
improvement in performance as a function of age.
On the basis of these
data, Dirks and Neisser rejected the notion that picture recognition is a
"unitary or automatic process that undergoes no development."
Recognition
performance improved with age, and the cause of its improvement depends on
the particular kind of information being tested (i.e., the nature of the
materials).
Not only did the nature of the materials affect the developmental
trend but also the differential use of strategies. Dirks and Neisser found
that their older subjects had at their disposal various strategies useful
for picking up and storing the kinds of information the test required.
Older children were more likely to scan the array systematically, to notice
that neighboring items can form meaningful groups, to pay attention to
nuances of spatial arrangement, or to formulate verbal descriptions of
minor details. Dirks and Neisser conclude that "recognition is not based
on automatically encoded visual traces; it depends on specific and
gradually developing cognitive skills."
The work of Jean Mandler and her colleagues confirms the picture:
Mandler has been interested in recognition memory for complex visual arrays
that are organized or disorganized and for orientation and spatial
information in complex pictorial arrays .
For our purposes here, it is
sufficient to state that the improvement with age found in these complex
recognition memory tasks is a function of changes in the nature to the
materials (stimulus complexity), scanning strategies, and knowledge.
The accumulated literature suggests that recognition memory is clearly
not impervious to developmental differences. A prime determinant of levels
of performance is the nature of the stimulus materials and the relationship
among target and distractor items.
By cleverly manipulating the
compatibility of the stimulus materials with the child's existing
knowledge, it should be possible to generate any pattern of age effects in
recognition.
For example, one might adopt Chi's procedure and
manipulate stimulus familiarly in such a way that younger children are the
experts and hence can recognize what to the older novice look like very
similar stimuli. Or one could vary the similarity of the distractor and
target items along some scale of semantic similarity not yet salient to the
young but distracting to the old. The less mature child would not be
snared by the "related" distractor and should outperform the confused older
participant.
In summary, the recognition memory literature provides an excellent
illustration of the interactive nature of the tetrahedral framework. To
predict performance on any recognition task, one would need to know
something about the nature of the actual task (number of distractors,
response demands, etc.), the nature of the materials (the relationships
between target and distractor items), the compatibility of the organization
in the material with the child's extant knowledge, and the demands placed
on active strategies, such as scanning and systematic comparison processes
 .
D. The Criterial Task
We turn now to the last entry in our tetrahedral framework, the
criterial task. Learning is not undertaken in a vacuum; there is always an
end product in mind, and effective learners are often cognizant of this end
product and tailor their learning activities accordingly . For example, to be effective in a
memory task, learners need to know whether the demand is for gist rather
than for verbatim recall, for recognition rather than reconstruction. They
need to know if memory for the material is required as the end product or
whether they will be called upon to apply the acquired information to novel
instances .
In short, learners' activities
are purposive and goal-directed and the nature of the criterial task will
play an important role in determining the effective activity that must be
undertaken.
It follows, then, that an appropriate learning activity must be one
that is compatible with the desired end state. One cannot, therefore,
discuss appropriate learning activities unless one considers the question
"appropriate for what end?," or the compatibility between the learning
activity and the goal of that activity. Effective learners tailor their
strategies in tune with changes in task demands. And there is a great deal
of evidence in the educational research literature that the more the
student knows concerning the criterial task to which her knowledge must be
put, the better the outcome of reading and studying (Baker & Brown, in
press b; Anderson & Armbruster, in press).
Consider the following example from Bransford, Stein, Shelton, and
Owings concerning where and when a certain strategy is appropriate.
Imagine that students are given a passage about blood circulation and that
they must learn to differentiate between arteries and veins, that arteries
are thick, elastic and carry blood from the heart that is rich in oxygen;
veins are thinner, less elastic, and carry blood rich in carbon dioxide
back to the heart.
To the biological novice, even this relatively simple
set of facts can seem arbitrary and confusing. Was it veins or arteries
that are thin?
Was the thin one or the thick one elastic? Which one
carries carbon dioxide from the heart (or was it to the heart)?
There are several ways to deal with the problem of learning factual
content that initially seems unfamiliar and arbitrary. One is simply to
rote rehearse the facts until they are mastered, the brute force approach.
Sometimes, a more efficient approach is to use various mnemonic elaboration
strategies .
For example, the fact that arteries are thick
could be remembered by forming an image of a thick, hollow tube that
flashes "artery." An alternate technique is to use verbal elaboration; for
example, Art(ery) was thick around the middle so he wore pants with an
elastic waistband..." There is a considerable amount of literature
documenting the fact that the formation of images and linking sentences can
facilitate retention and researchers have also explored the
possibility of explicitly teaching various mnemonic techniques in order to
improve people's abilities to learn .
Mnemonic techniques are useful for remembering facts about veins and
arteries, but one may have to take a very different approach to learning in
order to develop an understanding of the functions of veins and arteries;
an understanding that would be necessary if the criterial task were not
remembering facts but, for example, designing an artificial artery. If
students used only mnemonics, however clever, intended to produce rote
recall of facts, they would not necessarily be prepared for a criterial
task demanding understanding of principles.
In order to understand, learners must seek information about the
significance or relevance of facts.
For example, the passage about veins
and arteries stated that arteries are elastic. What's the significance of
elasticity?
Because arteries carry blood from the heart, there is a
problem of directionality. Why doesn't the blood flow back into the heart?
This will not be perceived as a problem if one assumes that arterial blood
always flows downhill, but let's assume that our passage mentions that
there are arteries in the neck and shoulder regions. Arterial blood must,
therefore, flow uphill as well. This information might provide an
additional clue about the significance of elasticity. If arteries expand
from a spurt of blood and then contract, this might help the blood move in
a particular direction. The elasticity of arteries might, therefore, serve
the function of a one-way valve that enables blood to flow forward but not
If one were to design an artificial artery it might, therefore,
be possible to equip it with valves and hence make it non-elastic.
However, this solution might work only if the spurts of blood did not cause
too much pressure on the artificial artery. Suppose that our imaginary
passage does not provide enough information about pressure requirements; if
so, the learner would have to look elsewhere for this information. Note,
however, that an efficient learner would realize the need to obtain
additional information. The learner's activities are not unlike those
employed by good detectives or researchers when they confront a new
problem. Although their initial assumptions about the significance of
various facts may ultimately be found to be incorrect, the act of seeking
clarification is fundamental to the development of new expertise. In
contrast, the person who simply concentrates on techniques for memorizing
facts does not know whether there is something more to be understood
 .
This somewhat detailed example illustrates that the nature of the
criterion task determines the appropriate processing strategy. If the
desired outcome is rote recall, perhaps the most appropriate strategy is
mnemonic elaboration; if, however, the desired outcome is comprehension of
the significance of information contained in the material or the
application of the information to a novel problem, then the appropriate
activity would change. Consider an experimental example from Nitsch
Students heard definitions of six new concepts (such as, to minge:
to gang up on a person or thing) and then received a series of study-test
trials that required them to identify examples of each concept. Students
in one group learned the concepts in the same contexts; each of the
examples for a particular concept was drawn from a common context (all
examples of "minge" involved restaurants, examples of "crinch" involved
cowboys; etc.).
Students in the second group also learned the concept
definitions but they were presented in varied contexts (examples for
"minge" might, therefore, range over restaurant contexts, cowboy contexts,
and so forth).
After students had learned the concepts, they were asked to
rate their degree of mastery. There were no differences between the
groups, and students in both groups were relatively confident that they
knew the concepts, which they did by some criteria. They were then given a
new test requiring them to identify examples of concepts that occurred in
novel contexts, contexts never experienced during acquisition. Students
who had received the varied context training performed much better on the
new test. Varied context experience was a better preparation for the
actual criterial task of using the concept, whereas same context experience
produced faster rote learning of the particular exemplar in the original
An important aspect of Nitsch's study is that students who received
training on same context examples had an inaccurate and overinflated "sense
of mastery."
However, one does not want to argue that students in Nitsch's
same context condition had fewer "metacognitive skills" than students who
received the varied context training. A much more plausible interpretation
is that students who received same context training had set up
inappropriate expectations concerning the actual criterial task, i.e., they
were expecting a test that was similar to their acquisition training but
not anticipating the type of transfer task actually administered. Their
assessment of mastery was accurate given their assumptions about the type
of criterial task to be performed.
Nitsch asked the students to rate their feelings of mastery a second
time; this time after they had taken the transfer test. Under these
conditions the sense of mastery ratings for the same context students were
lower than those of the varied context students. Thus, an important
question concerns the degree to which students learn something when
confronted with a criterial task that they are not prepared to handle
adequately. For example, imagine that students in Nitsch's same context
condition had taken the transfer test and were then asked to learn six
additional concepts. Assume further that they could structure their own
acquisition activities, ask questions, and so forth. Would these students
inquire about the nature of the test?
Would they learn in a way that would
enable them to identify novel examples? In other words, would they modify
their learning strategy in light of their new found knowledge concerning
the actual nature of the criterion task?
A recent study by Bransford and his colleagues is relevant to the present discussion. They presented academically
successful and less successful fifth graders with pairs of sentences. One
member of each pair was completed with a precise (or meaningful)
elaboration (e.g., The hungry man got into the car to go to the
restaurant), the other with an imprecise (or random) elaboration (e.g., The
hungry man got into the car to go for a drive).
Children were shown that
each pair of sentences was about a different type of man (hungry, short,
etc.) and were informed that their task was to choose the member of each
pair that would make it easier to remember which man did what .
The majority of academically successful fifth graders performed like
college students and chose the sentences that were precisely elaborated.
In contrast to the successful students, all but one less successful student
chose sentences on the basis of something other than "precision." Most
chose the sentence that was shorter because they felt that shorter items
would be easier to remember. This is a reasonable hypothesis, of course.
On a subsequent memory test, the children were much better at
remembering precise sentences; they, therefore, had an opportunity to use
their memory performance to evaluate their original hypotheses about the
variables that influenced sentence memory. The few successful students who
initially had not entertained hypotheses about precision changed their
hypothesis on the second set of sentence pairs; they chose the precise
sentences and adequately explained why. One less successful student
changed his hypothesis after the first test and focused on precision; the
rest of the less successful children made no change at all. These data are
consistent with other reports that immature learners often fail to revise
hypotheses in the face of conflicting information, or fail to change their
strategies after doing poorly on a test .
The ability to modify one's activities in
light of changes in the criterial task is an essential factor in efficient
E. Summary
We have argued that in order for psychologists to fully understand
learning, it is necessary to design experiments that are sensitive to the
four points of the tetrahedral model. We would like to argue that just as
psychologists need to understand how the four points interact , so, too do learners. On her road to becoming an expert in the
domain of intentional learning, the child will be greatly helped if she can
develop the same insights into the demands of the tetrahedral model that
the psychologist needs. To be an effective learner, she will need to know
something about her own characteristics, her available learning activities,
the demand characteristics of various learning tasks, and the inherent
structure of materials .
She must tailor her
activities finely to the competing demands of all these forces in order to
be a flexible and effective learner. In other words, she must learn how to
The use of terms such as "know," "be aware of," etc., brings us faceto-face with the controversial topic of metacognition in its various
manifestations. As this is a popular area of research, we will turn in
Section IV to a relatively in depth treatment of some of the issues.
IV. Metacognition, Executive Control, Self-Regulation. and Other Even More
Mysterious Mechanisms
A. What is Metacognition
In this section, we will describe some of the historical roots and
discuss the current status of the fashionable but complex concept of
metacognition and other topics with which it shares a family resemblance.
Various forms of metacognition have appeared in the literature and some of
these instantiations are puzzling and mysterious. For example, Marshall
and Morton refer to the mechanism that permits the detection and
correction of errors in speech production as an EMMA, or "even more
mysterious apparatus," that could be an "optional extra."
We will argue
that far from being an optional extra, the processes that have recently
earned the title "metacognitive" are central to learning.
Metacognition refers to one's knowledge and control of the domain
cognition. Two primary problems with the term are that (1) it is often
difficult to distinguish between what is meta and what is cognitive and (2)
there are many different historical roots from which this area of inquiry
Consider first the interchangeability of cognitive and metacognitive
functions. Recent reviews of the literature on, for example, metacognition
and reading have been justly criticized on the grounds that they have
encouraged the practice of dubbing as metacognitive any strategic action.
For example, metacognitive skills of reading include the following
activities previously dignified with the title of mere strategies -establishing the purpose for reading; modifying reading rate because of
variations in purpose; identifying important ideas; activating prior
knowledge; evaluating the text for clarity, completeness and consistency;
compensating for failures to understand, and assessing one's level of
comprehension (Baker & Brown, in press b).
Just which of these activities
should be deemed metacognitive, or, more subtly, which components of these
complex activities are meta, is not clear.
A second source of confusion concerning the widespread use of the term
metacognition is that, within the modern psychological literature, it has
been used to refer to two distinct areas of research, namely knowledge
about cognition and regulation of cognition. The two forms of
metacognition are indeed closely related, each feeding on the other
recursively; attempts to separate them lead to oversimplification.
However, they are readily distinguishable, and they do have quite different
historical roots.
Knowledge about cognition refers to the relatively stable, statable,
often fallible, and late-developing information that human thinkers have
about their own cognitive processes and those of others . This form of knowledge is relatively stable; one would expect that
knowledge of pertinent facts about a domain, for example, memory (that it
is fallible, that is is severely limited for short-term verbatim retention,
etc.), would be a permanent part of one's naive theory on the topic. This
form of knowledge is often statable, in that one can reflect on the
cognitive processes involved and discuss them with others. Of course, this
form of knowledge is often fallible, in that the child (or adult for that
matter) can perfectly well "know" certain facts about cognition that are
not true. Naive psychology is not always empirically supportable.
Finally, this type of knowledge is usually assumed to be late developing,
in that it requires that learners step back and consider their own
cognitive processes as objects of thought and reflection .
The second cluster of activities dubbed metacognitive in the
developmental literature consists of those used to regulate and oversee
learning. These processes include planning activities prior to undertaking
a problem (predicting outcomes, scheduling strategies, and various forms of
vicarious trial and error, etc.), monitoring activities during learning
(testing, revising, and re-scheduling one's strategies for learning) and
checking outcomes (evaluating the outcome of any strategic actions against
criteria of efficiency and effectiveness).
It has been assumed that these
activities are not necessarily statable, somewhat unstable, and relatively
age independent, i.e., task and situation dependent .
Can people have conscious access to their
own cognitive processes? Can they report on these processes with
verisimilitude? And how does the act of reporting influence the processes
in question?
Second, there is the issue of executive mechanisms within an
information processing model of human and machine intelligence. What is
responsible for regulation of cognition? With what knowledge or form of
knowledge must an executive be imbued? How do such models deal with the
infinite regression of homunculi within homunculi?
And with the problems
of consciousness, intention and purpose? Third, we will deal with the
issues of self-regulation and conceptual reorganization during learning and
development that have always been featured in Genevan developmental
psychology and have played a major role in Piaget's modern writings and those of his co-workers, notably Karmiloff-Smith and Inhelder .
And, finally, we will discuss the transference from otherregulation to self-regulation central to Vygotsky's theory of
development.
1. Verbal Reports as Data. Several theorists from quite
disparate schools agree that the most stringent criteria of understanding
involve the availability of knowledge to consciousness and reflection, thus
permitting verbal reports . Early investigations into children's knowledge about cognition
focused on metamemory; many studies relied on the direct approach of simply
asking children to report what they knew. Kreutzer, Leonard, and Flavell
 interviewed children in kindergarten and grades one, three, and five
about the effects of a number of variables on remembering. They found that
even the youngest subjects knew that information in short term memory can
decay rapidly, that the relearning of forgotten information tends to be
faster and easier than the original learning, that study time affects
subsequent retrieval attempts, and that the number of items and their
familiarity also affect retention. Children at all ages tended to rely on
external mnemonic resources (e.g., other persons, notes) rather than
internal ones. Third and fifth graders seemed to be more planful and
self-aware; they suggested a greater variety of mnemonic strategies, and
showed better understanding of the potential interactions among variables
in their effects upon memory. Wellman's (in press) findings that 10-yearolds were far better than 5-year-olds in judging the interaction of two
memory relevant variables, although not in judging the effect of a single
variable, are consistent with the results of Kreutzer et al.
Even preschoolers have some information concerning what makes a memory
task easy or hard ; they come to understand the memory
relevance of certain variables according to the following developmental
(1) number of items, (b) distraction, (c) age of rememberer,
assistance from others, study-time, and (d) associative cues. Wellman also
found that the knowledge that certain factors (e.g., body-build, type of
clothing, etc.) are irrelevant to memory increased from ages 3 to 5 years.
Wellman suggested that children will tend more easily to recognize the role
of a relevant variable if it occurs frequently in their own experience, if
it concerns their own behavior, and if its various manifestations are
easily discriminable to the young child.
Since the original questionnaire studies, a great deal of evidence has
accumulated that demonstrates older children's greater knowledge about
memory , attention ,
communication , reading , studying , problem solving , etc. As Kreutzer et
al. point out, questionnaire studies provide an interesting insight
into the child's understanding of a particular domain; however, these data
should be followed with careful empirical examination of the phenomena in
As part of a body of converging evidence, verbal reports of cognitive
processes are extremely valuable. But there are nontrivial problems
associated with reliance on self-reports in the absence of corroboration.
An obvious problem is the difficulty associated with asking children to
inform on the content of their own conscious processes. As Piaget and
others have pointed out, children are as likely to distort and modify their
observations of their thought processes as they are their observations of
the world around them. Eyewitness testimony is fallible, no less for the
objects and events of the internal world than for the external.
Another problem concerns reliability. Will children be consistent in
their opinions and beliefs about cognitive processes?
Few investigators
have considered the problems of reliability or validity, an equally thorny
problem. What is the relationship between what an informant says and what
she does? Studies with children have yielded only a moderate relation, for
example, between performance on a restricted class of memory tasks and
children's statable knowledge of (sometimes a different) class of memory
phenomena ; although there have been some recent studies
where a clearer relationship was found .
Similarly, as Flavell and Wellman
 point out, there are many reasons why there should not be a close
link between metamemorial knowledge and memory performance in any one
particular task.
Many forms of knowledge about things cognitive can be assumed to be
stable, others transient and elicited only in certain situations. Stable
forms are the kinds of declarative knowledge learners may possess about
themselves (and others) in the learning context, the tetrahedral model if
you will. People know about the demands of certain classes of problems and
the necessity of tailoring their learning activities finely in tune with
specific criterial tasks. These are the types of knowledge that Flavell
and his colleagues have classified
as person, task and strategy variables. Learners possess naive theories of
what it takes to learn certain classes of materials and to meet certain
criterial task demands, as well as theories of their repertoire of
available strategies to accomplish certain ends, etc. That young children
are less informed about stable characteristics of learning is amply
documented .
Transient forms of knowledge include insights that are elicited while
actually performing a particular task; with adult subjects this is often
the form of information obtained from on-line talk aloud protocols.
Protocol analyses of performers actually solving problems have been
restricted to adult subjects or adolescents, supposedly because young
children are judged to be incapable of the split mental focus that is
required for simultaneously solving problems and commenting on the process.
Instead, developmental psychologists have typically asked children to
predict what they will do in imaginary situations. For example, preschool
and early grade school children have difficulty predicting their span for
lists of pictures , and they are likely to
predict that categorized lists are as easy to recall as random ones
 .
Predicting in
advance of an actual trial is difficult for the young, although they do
seem better able to report retrospectively on their own actually
experienced performance , and do take
this information (and false norms about other learners) into account when
predicting again .
But it is a common and problematic procedure in the developmental
literature to ask children to describe how they would behave in certain
hypothetical situations. Asking adult informants to imagine possible
worlds and how they might act in them is one of the practices highlighted
by Nisbett and Wilson in their attack on the status of verbal
reports as data; it was also heavily criticized by Ericsson and Simon
But the questionnaire studies of children's knowledge consist
primarily of situations in which the child must imagine scenarios and how
she might act in them. Of the fourteen main items contained in the
Kreutzer, Leonard and Flavell questionnaire, ten are completely
imaginary, e.g., the child is asked to imagine how other children might
perform in a task. It might help to clarify matters if a distinction were
made between (1) predictive verbalizations about possible performance
before the event; (2) concurrent verbalizations as one is actually
performing; and (3) retrospective verbalization after the event has
transpired.
Another important distinction is whether information is being sought
concerning specific or very general knowledge. Questions of the form "How
do you perform these tasks?" implicitly request very general information
and leave open to the informant the creative task of constructing a general
rule by drawing on a variety of specific experiences, including general
knowledge of what one ought to do in such tasks. As Ericsson and Simon
 point out, in areas of applied psychology where verbal questioning
has a long history, subjects are rarely asked for their general theories or
impressions. Instead, Flanagan and others used what is referred to
as the critical incident technique whereby informants are asked to report
only about very specific incidents.
For example, combat pilots would be
asked to describe a particular, actually experienced incident, and then to
answer questions on how they thought or felt within that specific event.
In general, however, questionnaire and experimental studies of children's
metacognition demand reflection on quite general cognitive processes.
Asking children to describe general processes that they might use in
imaginary situations is the least favorable circumstance for producing
verbal reports that are closely linked with the cognitive processes under
discussion.
Finally, an adequate theory of the relation of verbal reports to
actual performance should include some a priori predictions of when verbal
reports will be related to or will influence performance and when they will
not. Ericsson and Simon believe that verbal reports will have a
positive, negative or neutral effect on performance depending on the
function of the reports in the ongoing learning process. The effect will
be neutral under circumstances where the subject is asked to describe
information that is already available (i.e., in STM).
If the subject is
asked to report on information that is available but not in verbal or
propositional form, the translation process may slow down performance but
will not otherwise interfere. Ericsson and Simon quote a great deal of
experimental evidence to support these claims.
Of greater interest are situations where the relation between
"thinking aloud" and problem solving can be beneficial.
This occurs most
commonly when the type of verbalization that is required is a statement of
a rule, or a reason for an action. Good problem solvers (adults) spend
more time than poor learners identifying and evaluating what they did or
are doing, stating rules and evaluating their efficiency .
And, on standard
laboratory puzzles such as the Tower of Hanoi, instructions to state a rule
significantly accelerate the learning process and facilitate transfer
across isomorphic and homomorphic versions of the same physical puzzle
 or story problem . Although
there is little data, the same effect seems to work for children. On
mathematic problems requiring invention ,
Pellegrino and Schadler required children to "look ahead" by
verbalizing a sequence of goals, a procedure that produced a dramatic
increase in the number of successful inventions by grade school children.
And, in an ongoing study, Crisafi and Brown (work in preparation) found
greater transfer across problem isomorphs of an inferential reasoning task
when three- and four-year-old learners were required to describe the
solution after each problem (to Kermit the frog so that Kermit could also
do the task).
Verbal reports can often have a negative effect on the learning
process. Prime examples of such situations are where the requirement for
overt verbalization competes for central processing capacity with the
processes that must be reported.
In on-line protocols it is characteristic
that verbalization stops when the going gets difficult and starts up again
when the cognitive load is lessened. Similarly, requiring verbal reports
of information that is not generally available to consciousness is a
disruptive procedure.
For example, one reason why Piaget 
experienced so much difficulty getting children to describe their actions
may be because the subjects of those descriptions were just that, actions.
Perceptual motor activities are notoriously difficult to describe, and it
is, indeed, true that we can do a great deal that we cannot describe
 .
And, as many current information processing models
claim, many of the intermediate steps of both thought and action become
automatized with repeated practice, and, thereby, even less available to
conscious introspection . Asking subjects to report on internal
events that are not readily available to such inspection can significantly
impair the processes upon which they must report.
In summary, desperately needed in the developmental literature are
systematic evaluations of children's verbal reports on their own cognitive
processes when stringent attention is paid to (1) the temporal relation
between these reports and the cognition in question, (2) the nature of the
cognitions under evaluation, and (3) the influence of reflection on the
operations of thought. It is simplistic to ask whether or not a certain
group of children have reflective access to their own cognitions without
specifying exactly the conditions under which these observations are made.
Ideally one would like to see programmatic research aimed at uncovering a
certain child's range of understanding within a task domain. Under what
conditions is it reasonable to ask for verbal reports? Can the child make
predictive, concurrent, or retrospective statements about actual or
potential cognitive activity within a problem space? Do the specific
restrictions on adults" verbalizations under varying circumstances apply to
children, or do young learners experience particular difficulties with, for
example, imagining possible actions in situations as yet unexperienced?
children have particular problems talking about general rules rather than
specific activities?
In short, we need to progress from the current
piecemeal study of certain isolated metacognitions concerning intuitively
appealing but somewhat haphazardly chosen cognitive tasks, to a systematic
evaluation of the function of verbal reports in specific learning
situations.
Such data would provide an invaluable source of evidence
concerning what a child knows, when she knows it, and how knowing
influences performance.
2. Executive Control. The second historical root of things
metacognitive is the notion of executive control taken from information
processing models of cognition. The majority of information processing
models attribute powerful operations to a central processor, interpreter,
supervisor, or executive system that is capable of performing intelligent
evaluation of its own operations:
The basic requirements of such an executive demonstrate the
complexity of the issue.
It must include the ability to (a)
predict the system's capacity limitations, (b) be aware of its
repertoire of heuristic routines and their appropriate domain of
utility, (c) identify and characterize the problem at hand, (d)
plan and schedule appropriate problem-solving strategies, (e)
monitor and supervise the effectiveness of those routines it
calls into service, and (f) dynamically evaluate these operations
in the face of success or failure so that termination of
activities can be strategically timed .
Thus, very complex operations are attributed to something within the
system, a problem of attribution that is, to say the least, theoretically
problematic .
Information-processing theories emerged in the mid-sixties, along with
the growing interest in computer competence and machine simulation of
thought. The concurrent development of psychological models was greatly
influenced by the theories and jargon of synthetic intelligence, and the
computer metaphor has dominated theories of human cognition during the past
fifteen years. By adopting the notion of a central processor or executive
system imbued with very fancy powers, developmental psychologists gained a
powerful analogy through which to consider the development of efficient
learning. 
Central within the prototypical information processing model are the
concepts of executive control, whether implicitly or explicitly stated, and
automated and controlled processes; these notions are interlinked. We will
describe the automated-controlled distinction and then the executive
Automatic and Controlled Processes. A two-process approach to
thinking predates information-processing models. A notably lucid
description of the distinction between automatic and controlled process was
provided by James (1890) who stressed the freedom from attention and effort
that automatization provides- "The more details of our daily life we can
hand over to the effortless custody of automatism, the more our higher
powers of mind will be set free for their own proper work."
Automatic processing is a fast, parallel process, not limited by
short-term memory, that requires little subject effort, and demands little
direct subject control.
Controlled processing is a comparatively slow,
serial process, limited by short-term memory constraints, requiring subject
effort, and providing a large degree of subject control .
The distinction between automatic and controlled processing is now a
common feature of both the adult and developmental literatures, although it
masquerades under different titles. For example, in the adult literature
are Posner and Snyder's "conscious strategies" and "automatic
activation," Shiffrin's "controlled vs. systemic processing," Norman
and Bobrow's "resource limited" and "data limited processing," and
LaBerge's "automatic focusing."
Nineteen-seventy-five was obviously
a good one for this theoretical concept. More recent theories come from
Shiffrin and Schneider and Logan .
Developmentalists
also discuss "deliberate and involuntary" , "effortful and
automatic" and "strategic versus automatic" processing.
There are many interesting questions for developmental psychologists
concerning automatization. A major notion is that a great deal of the
development that occurs with increasing expertise (age) is the result of
processes that were originally controlled, effortful and laborious becoming
automated .
A second well-aired notion is that processes that do not
demand a great deal of strategic control are efficient even in the young
and are less sensitive to developmental changes .
But of particular interest in this section is the notion of
who or what does the controlling, and who or what deciphers the output of
the automatized system.
Heterarchies, Hierarchies, and Demons All the Way Down. Within the
information processing system, executive power in large or small degrees
must be attributed, and it is with this attribution that the models run
into epistemological problems of long standing, problems that have proven
particularly recalcitrant and uncomfortably metaphysical for a psychology
never truly weaned from a strict radical behaviorist tradition. The major
problem is the traditional one of consciousness and who has it.
problem is nicely stated by Norman in his inaugural address to the
Cognitive Science Society:
Consciousness is a peculiar stepchild of our discipline, agreed
to be important, but little explored in research and theory.
There are legitimate reasons for this relative neglect. This is
a most difficult topic, one for which it is very difficult to get
the hard, sensible evidence that experimental disciplines require
* . . We cannot understand (thinking) until we come to a better
appreciation of the workings of the mind, of the several
simultaneous trains of thought that can occur, of the differences
between conscious and subconscious processing, of what it means
to focus upon one train of thought to the exclusion of others.
What-who-does the focusing? -- And what does it mean to have
conscious attention? Can there be attention that is not
conscious? What -- who -- experiences the results of conscious
attentional processes?
 
Norman's self-conscious use of "who" or "what" immediately conjures up
a spectre traditionally feared and derided by psychologists, the ghost in
the machine, the homunculus. Skinner refers to this entity as the "inner
man" whose function is "to provide an explanation which will not be
explained in turn" .
Such theories are, indeed, easy
to deride, but hard to replace with an alternative. As Dennett 
points out , Skinnerian outrage at such
"mentalisms" can be reduced to the axiom, "don't use intentional idioms in
psychology."
It is one of the liberations of current theories of cognitive
science that we admit that human beings are intentional and that an
adequate explanation of human behavior necessitates reference to the
intention, or the meaning of the behavior to the individual who performs
it, i.e., the individual's understanding of what she is doing .
How do information processing models deal with the inner man? Most of
the original models were hierarchical, uni-directional systems with a
central processor initiating and interpreting lower level actions. More
recent models tend to be heterarchical so that control can be distributed
throughout the system .
Heterarchical control is clearly evident in animal
physiological systems , skilled
performance and action , and human speech perception .
recent theorists have claimed that heterarchies are the simplest class of
system that could perform processing tasks of the complexity typical of
human behavior .
Such systems do not rid themselves of inner men making decisions; the
demons do not go away; they get distributed; a democratic solution that is
much favored in current information processing models that trace their historical roots to
Selfridge^s original Pandemonium model. But, even within the
democratic confederacies or heterarchies there are supervisory processors
 or decision demons who listen to
the pandemonium produced by the lower level demons and select the most
obtrusive.
Conflicts for attentional resources must occur when several
subordinate processors compete for the same resources. Some conflict
resolution procedure must be provided in such systems ; it is these conflict resolution devices
that sound very like metacognitive demons to the untrained ear.
Planning. Most central to the issues of metacognition are computer
planning models that attempt to model problem-solving behavior. The
concept of planning was introduced to artificial intelligence by the
programmers of General Problem Solver .
planning strategy of GPS was means-end analysis, a hierarchical planning
strategy that works backward from a clear idea of the goal to be achieved.
GPS works quite well for closed problem systems that have well defined
goals that can be reached by fixed means.
But, GPS is a simple state-bystate planning strategy that does not produce an overall strategic plan of
the problem before the solution is started. Such a decision maker has
limited flexibility in revising and evaluating plans. Sacerdoti 
argues that although it is not sensible to formulate an epistemologically
adequate plan before attempting problem solution, a broad outline of the
plan should be scheduled first so that the system can see what adjustments
need to be made during execution. Machine programs can no more foresee all
possible contingencies than can humans and, therefore, some form of
contingency planning is needed.
Sacerdoti's Network of Organized Action Hierarchies (NOAH) constructs
a preplan that can be altered on a contingency basis during execution; NOAH
works by means of a successive refinement approach to planning. But NOAH
is essentially a "top-down" processor with the planner making high level
making high level abstract plans that guide and restrict the subsequent
development of low-level details. Similarly, the model assumes that the
initial plan is relatively complete and subject only to refinement at lower
levels. NOAH is, therefore, essentially a hierarchical planning model.
Recently, Hayes-Roth and Hayes-Roth have developed an
opportunistic planning model (OPM) that departs from the top-down,
hierarchical, complete preplan assumptions of prior planning models. The
OPM permits planning at many different levels, allows several tentative,
incomplete plans to coexist and is, therefore, essentially a heterarchical
system. The OPM has great flexibility, in that it can shift among several
planning levels opportunistically. At any one point in the planning
process, the planner's current decisions and observations afford new
opportunities for plan development, and these are followed up by the model.
Sometimes these opportunistic decisions result in orderly top-down routes,
but often less coherent sequences are engaged in, just as in human
The OPM achieves this flexibility by assuming that the planning
process consists of the independent actions of many distinct cognitive
specialists (demons), each able to make tentative decisions for potential
incorporation within a plan. As in the classic Pandemonium model
 , the specialists record these decisions in a common data
structure known as the blackboard, thus enabling them to interact with each
other, to influence and be influenced by each other's decisions.
The blackboard is divided into five conceptual planes that correspond
to different categories of decision. These include:
(1) metaplan
decisions that deal with the general approach to the problem; (2)
plan-abstraction decisions that describe ideal plans, that may or may not
be feasible, i.e., what kinds of actions are desirable; (3) plan decisions
that cover what specific actions to take; (4) world-knowledge decisions
that take note of specific problem environments; and (5) executive
decisions that are involved with the on-line organization of the planning
process itself. Each plane on the blackboard is also potentially served at
several levels of abstraction. For example, the levels of the metaplan
involve problem definition, selection of an appropriate problem-solving
model, policy-setting, and establishment of appropriate evaluation
criteria. The executive plan involves decisions of priority, scheduling,
and general allocation of cognitive resources.
In a recent series of studies, Goldin and Hayes-Roth tested the
OPM model by examining the planning strategies of adults. The task was to
schedule a series of errands in a fictional town. The subjects read a
scenario that described a series of desired errands, a starting time and
location, an ending-time and location, and sometimes some additional
constraints. The allotted time was invariably insufficient to perform all
of the errands and, therefore, the planners were obliged to set priorities
concerning which errands to perform as well as to organize their schedule
in the most economical manner. The primary data consisted of the protocols
of the subject's on-line descriptions of their planning processes.
Good planners made many more metaplan and executive decisions and
exercised more deliberate control over their planning processes. Good
planners also made more use of world knowledge information. They showed
greater flexibility than poor planners in that they frequently shifted the
focus of their attention among the different plans of decisions (within the
OPM framework) and among the different loci within the route. More of the
decisions of good planners were at a high level of abstraction; good
planners recognized the importance of global planning, in contrast to the
heavy reliance on local control or bottom-up plans shown by the poor
planners. Poor planners tended to switch back and forth between objectives
in an idiosyncratic (and often chaotic) fashion. In contrast, effective
planners developed a prototypical procedure for accomplishing the errands
which they maintained over several instantiations of the task.
The details of GPS, NOAH, and OPM are not important for our purposes
here; the lesson is that with increasing sophistication, informationprocessing and artificial intelligence models have gained more power by
paying increasing attention to the "metacognitive" aspects of thinking.
Crudely, all such models distinguish between preplanning and planning-inaction (Rogoff & Gardner, in press), planning and control , pre-action and trouble-shooting , and planning and monitoring .
Preplanning involves the
formulation of general methods of procedure prior to the actual onset of
action. During the ongoing attempt to solve the problem there is continual
planning-in-action, trouble shooting, or control processing that involves
monitoring, evaluating and revising. Intelligent systems, be they machine
or human, are highly dependent on executive orchestration, resource
allocation, and monitoring functions. Non-intelligent systems, be they
inadequate programs or humans, are assumed to be deficient in these
planning functions.
Poor problem solvers lack spontaneity and flexibility in both
preplanning and monitoring. Extreme examples of planning deficits in
adults come from the clinical literature on patients with frontal-lobe
syndrome. Such patients typically omit the initial pre-action component
 ; they also experience extraordinary difficulty with error
correction .
Such patients have been described as
simultaneously perseverative and distractible, a failure in intelligent
focusing attributed to damage to the supervisory attentional mechanism or
executive system .
Although pathological cases
are extreme, many descriptions of young and retarded children's planning
are very similar.
Developmental Studies of Monitoring. Currently, there is considerable
interest in planning and monitoring processes, and developmental data to
support the theoretical models are accumulating in a variety of domains,
notably studies of social planning ,
problem solving , planning and monitoring during reading and studying and training
research designed to improve the ability to plan and monitor in the
developmentally young .
We will illustrate with two related examples of on-line monitoring from the
area of learning from texts:
(1) comprehension monitoring while listening
and reading and (2) effort allocation while studying.
Comprehension Monitoring is a topic that has received considerable
attention and been subjected to a great deal of theoretical speculation
 , although the data base to support these
speculations is somewhat sparse.
Studies by Markman reaffirmed a
traditional claim that children are surprisingly tolerant
of ambiguities, inconsistencies and just plain untruths in passages they
must listen to or read had children in third, fifth and sixth
grades listen to short essays containing inconsistent information; they
were then probed for their awareness of the inconsistencies.
Some of the
inconsistencies could only be noticed if the child made an inference,
whereas others were quite explicit. Children in all grades were poor at
reporting the inconsistencies, although they were somewhat more successful
with the blatant problems. Markman also found that when children were
specifically warned in advance that a problem might be present in the text,
both third and sixth graders were more likely to report the inconsistency.
Nevertheless, many children still failed to report the inconsistencies.
In a recent series of experiments, Garner and her colleagues have shown that
junior high students, particularly those identified as poor readers, are
also poor at evaluating texts for internal consistency. The students were
asked to rate brief passages for ease of understanding and to justify
whatever low ratings they gave. Poor readers were less likely to rate
inconsistent text as difficult to understand although good readers were by
no means proficient at this task. The poor readers were better at
identifying comprehension problems that were due to difficult vocabulary
items than to inconsistencies (Garner, in press).
Garner and Taylor also found differences in the amount of
assistance required to notice inconsistencies. After reading a brief
passage, fourth, sixth and eighth graders were provided with increasingly
more specific hints as to the source of difficulty. Even after the
experimenter underlined the two sentences that conflicted with one another
and told the child they did not make sense, fourth graders and older poor
readers were rarely able to report the exact nature of the problem.
However, the intervention did increase the likelihood that better readers
would notice the inconsistency.
Listeners and readers are more likely to notice inconsistencies if
they are in a single sentence or in adjacent
sentences , than if they are separated by a more substantial
body of text, suggesting that one common shortcoming in children's
comprehension monitoring is a failure to consider relationships across
noncontiguous sentences in a text. Although they may be capable of
evaluating their understanding of single sentences, they still need to
develop the skills to integrate and evaluate information across larger
segments of text. Even college students may have difficulty with the more
demanding task .
One possible problem with these studies is that children were required
to report the inconsistencies, and their putative lack of sensitivity could
be due to a reluctance to criticize, or to the general problems with verbal
reports discussed earlier. This interpretation is a little far fetched,
however, because the insensitivity is reported in studies that used button
pressing (Markman & Gorin, in press), rating comprehensibility (Garner, in
press), and replaying a recorded message as the index of comprehension failure.
One method to avoid the problem of verbal reporting is to take on-line
evidence of comprehension monitoring. For example, adults return to
previously read information and make regressive eye movements when they
encounter pronouns whose referents are unclear , and they require more time to read
paragraphs that violate conventional organizational structure . When such on-line measures are used, children
are credited with more sensitivity to textual anomalies. We will give two
examples, one with quite young children listening to confusing taperecorded messages, the other with older children reading confusing text.
The similarity in pattern of results across disparate tasks and ages is
Flavell et al. instructed kindergarten and second grade
children to construct block buildings identical to those described on tape
by a confederate child.
Some of the instructions contained ambiguities,
unfamiliar words, insufficient information, or unattainable goals.
Children were encouraged to replay the tape as often as necessary in order
to help them construct the buildings. The children were videotaped as they
attempted to carry out the instructions, and the videotapes were analyzed
for nonverbal signs of problem detection, i.e., looking puzzled or
replaying the tape. The children later were asked if they had succeeded in
making a building exactly like the confederate's and if they thought the
other child did a good job in conveying the instructions.
As expected, the older children were more likely to notice the
inadequancies in the messages than were the younger. Even though both
kindergartners and second graders showed nonverbal signs of puzzlement at
appropriate points during the task, the kindergartners were less likely to
report later that some of the messages were inadequate. Several other
investigators have also reported on-line evidence of problem detection in
listening tasks despite failures to report the inadequacies verbally
 .
Turning to comprehension-monitoring while reading, Harris, Kruithof,
Terwogt and Visser reported an analogous finding; eight and eleven
year olds were asked to read passages that contained sentences that were or
were not anomalous depending on the title. For example, the sentence "He
sat in the chair and watched his hair get shorter" would be acceptable if
the title were "A Visit to the Barber," but anomalous if the title were "A
Visit to the Dentist."
Children at both ages read the anomalous sentence
more slowly but the proportion of subjects reporting that they had detected
a text problem was much greater in the eleven-year-old sample. This
finding has also been reported by Capelli and Markman ; of interest
in their study was that sixth graders decreased their reading time more
dramatically than third graders in response to text anomaly. Capelli and
Markman, Flavell et al. , and Harris et al. all suggest that
younger students have difficulty interpreting their own feelings of
discomfort in the face of hitches in smooth comprehension.
One problem then with estimating children's comprehension monitoring
ability is the measure that is used for assessing sensitivity; on-line
measures, such as time expended, facial signs of confusion, etc. reveal
earlier sensitivity than the more stringent demands for verbal reporting.
A second problem is that familiarity of materials or knowledge base factors
are extremely influential in both listening and reading (Patterson,
O'Brien, Kister, Carter, & Kotsonis, in press; Stein & Trabasso, in press).
If children are familiar with the domain in question, they are more likely
to note inconsistencies and to devise plausible hypotheses on how to
resolve them. Furthermore, the development of the ability to monitor one's
comprehension is not due to the development of a unitary "metacognitive
faculty" or "demon" that automatically sounds an alarm at every possible
misinterpretation or lack of mastery. One of the difficulties of
constructing such a "comprehension-monitoring" demon to assess the
adequacies of one's current state of understanding and mastery is that
different information is necessary for different purposes. For example,
nearly all adults know the concept of gold (as in gold watch or gold bar)
and most adults would also confidently proclaim they knew the concept
 ; indeed, they do know it sufficiently well for many
purposes.- If forced to differentiate real gold from fool's gold, however,
most would quickly realize the need for more information. Technical
concepts of gold are necessary for some purposes, but most adults
experience no difficulties with their non-technical knowledge of gold. If
a "comprehension-monitoring" demon sounded an alarm at anything less than
non-technical knowledge, it would be an extreme pain in the head (or
elsewhere depending on one's theory of localization).
In summary, the ability to monitor one's comprehension of texts is not
just a function of age. The blatancy of the anomaly, its centrality to the
reading task at hand, relevant background information, and the ability to
interpret correctly the discomfort generated by various degrees of
misunderstanding are all important factors determining efficiency. An
important point here is that obtaining non-verbal measures of comprehension
monitoring is an important addition, because such non-verbal measures are
often more sensitive to on-line monitoring than retrospective reporting.
Effort and Attention Allocation. Another non-verbal method of
measuring on-line monitoring is to observe how learners deploy their
attention and effort. The ability to attend selectively to relevant
aspects of a task is a traditional index of learners' understanding of that
task, be it discrimination learning , rote memorizing , or learning from texts . Shifting attention as
a response to increments in learning is a non-verbal reflection of on-line
monitoring that can be examined developmentally. For example, consider
such a shift in a rote memory task. Belmont and Butterfield 
observed students who were trained to use (or who spontaneously devised) a
cumulative rehearsal strategy for remembering lists of digits. Without
warning, a particular list was presented repeatedly, a departure from the
usual procedure of presenting a novel list on each trial. Clear
developmental differences were found in the speed and efficiency with which
the students (a) abandoned the strategy when it was no longer needed (i.e.,
the list was learned) and (b) modified the strategy when it was appropriate
(when lists composed of old and new segments were used).
The link between
effective monitoring and effort-allocation was quite clear.
There is considerable evidence in the educational literature that good
learners adjust their degree of effort commensurate with the difficulty of
the test they face. For example, Smith reported that students of
high school age who were good readers adjusted their reading efforts
depending on whether they were reading for details or general impressions,
whereas those who were poor readers used the same behaviors for both
Similarly, Forrest and Waller asked third through sixth
grade good and poor readers to read stories for four different purposes!
(1) for fun, (2) to make up a title, (3) to find one specific piece of
information as quickly as possible, and (4) to study. The older and better
readers were more likely to expend additional effort on the more demanding
tasks and to distribute effort to relevant parts of the text (skim
appropriately).
Interestingly, in light of the preceding discussion
concerning the relation of non-verbal to verbal indices of monitoring, by
fourth grade, the majority of children know how to skim for specific facts
although they cannot describe how they do this until much later
(Kobasigawa, Ransom, & Holland, in press).
As they become more experienced
text learners, children become better able to adjust their effortallocation in an economical manner.
An excellent method of studying effort-allocation is the study-time
apportionment task introduced by Masur, McIntyre and Flavell .
school children were given lists of pictures to learn in a multi-trial free
recall study. On each trial but the first, they were permitted to select
half of the items for further study. By third grade, students selectively
selected for extra study items they had missed on previous recall attempts.
Even retarded children can be trained to use this strategy .
This strategy is not so simple, however, if one wants to apply it to
the task of learning from texts.
The learner must still select for extra
study material she has failed to recall, but judging one's mastery of the
gist of texts is more difficult than judging verbatim recall of a list of
items .
While attempting to learn a text
to mastery it is necessary to shift attention finely in tune with one's
subjective impression that certain points are known well enough to risk a
test and that others need extra study. In addition, one must estimate
which segments of the material are important enough to warrant attention
and which are trivial and can, therefore, be ignored. For example, the
ideal strategy is to concentrate first on the most important elements of
text and then, as these become well known, shift to lesser and lesser
elements until a full representation of the text is built-up:
degree of learning improves, one must shift attention from a concentration
on main points to an attempt to fill in the details.
Brown and her colleagues examined effort and attention allocation as
an index of memory monitoring while studying texts .
Students from fifth through twelfth grade, together with
college students, were asked to study prose passages until they could
recall all the details in their own words. They were allowed repeated
study trials.
The passages were divided into constituent idea units rated
in terms of their importance to the theme; there were four levels of rated
importance. On each trial the students were allowed to select a subset
(15%) of the idea units to keep with them while they attempted recall.
On the first trial, the majority of students at all ages selected the
most important units to help them recall. Children below high school age
continued to do this, even though they became perfectly able to recall the
most important information without aid, but persistently failed to recall
additional details.
College students, however, modified their selection as
a function of their degree of learning:
on the first trial they selected
predominantly important (Level 4) units for retrieval aids.
On the second
trial they shifted to a preference for Level 3 units, whereas on the third
trial they preferred Level 2 units. As they learned more and more of the
material, college students shifted their attention-allocation to reflect
their estimated state of knowledge.
Older high school students showed the same basic pattern as the
college students but they were one trial behind; they did not begin to
shift to less important units until the third trial. This lag could be due
to slower learning, i.e., both groups shifted when they reached the same
criterion of learning but the younger students took an extra trial to reach
that criterion. It could also be due to a slower shift in attentionallocation, i.e., both groups learned as much on each trial but it took
high school students longer to realize that they should adjust their
attention. The latter appears to be the correct interpretation for, even
when students were matched on the basis of degree of learning on each
trial, the younger students still took longer to change their effortallocation pattern in the face of their level of mastery.
The ability to fine-tune one's allocation of attention to reflect
mastery level is a late developing skill, perhaps because it requires the
coordination of various forms of knowledge. To allocate his attention in a
manner responsive to his state of existing knowledge, the learner must have
1) information concerning the current state of knowledge, i.e., what he
knows and what he does not yet know; 2) knowledge of the task demands of
gist recall; 3) knowledge of the fine gradiation of importance of various
elements of texts, i.e., what is important to know and what can be
disregarded; and 4) the strategic knowledge to adjust his allocation of
effort in response to this information.
In short, the ability to monitor one's state of learning depends on
the sensitivity one has to the factors in the tetrahedral model; strategy,
knowledge, material, and task demands all influence the degree to which a
child will be able to coordinate his plans and engage in active monitoring.
Nonverbal indices of monitoring seem to be more reliable than verbal
reports, although the exact relationship between the two deserves
attention. Effort allocation as measured by reading speed or attention deployment seems to be a sensitive index of memory, learning,
and comprehension monitoring that deserves further attention.
3. Self-Regulation. Any active learning process involves continuous
adjustments and fine-tuning of action by means of self-regulating processes
and "other even more mysterious" mechanisms .
Psychologists interested in mechanisms of growth and change have
traditionally been concerned with such self-regulating processes. Of
course, substantial contributions are made by external agents, which we
will discuss in the next section.
But even without external pressure,
human thinkers "play" with thinking , i.e., subject their
own thought processes to examination and treat their own thinking as an
object of thought. Similarly, learners regulate and refine their own
actions, sometimes in response to feedback concerning errors, but often in
the absence of such feedback. Indeed, even if the system with which they
are experimenting is adequate, active learners will improve upon their
original production .
Recently, the term metacognition has been extended to encompass such
regulatory functions as error-detection and correction , but the historical roots of such concepts can be
found in most of the major developmental theories.
For example, Binet was
fascinated by individual differences in his daughters' cognitive styles of
self-regulation and, following intensive study with
both normal and retarded children, he selected autocriticism 
as a central component of intelligence.
Given space limitations we will concentrate in this section primarily
on relatively recent Genevan research on self-regulatory mechanisms in
children's thinking and on the growing emphases in developmental
psycholinguistics on error correction, systematization, and metalinguistic
awareness.
Piaget's Theory of Regulation
In the latter part of his career, the transformational period , Piaget became more and more interested in mechanisms of learning and
the influence of both conscious and unconscious regulatory functions in
promoting conceptual change.
Again owing to space restrictions, we cannot
begin to describe the complex theory of Piaget's latter years and the
reader is referred to the excellent treatment by Gelman and Baillargeon
(this volume).
Briefly (and probably too simplistically), Piaget
distinguished between three primary types of self-regulation' autonomous,
active, and conscious.
Autonomous regulation is an inherent part of any "knowing act;"
learners continually regulate their performance, fine-tuning and modulating
actions, however small the learner and however simple the action . Active regulation is more akin to trial
and error, where the learner is engaged in constructing and testing
"theories-in-action" . Under the
guidance of a powerful theory-in-action the learner tests a current theory
via concrete actions that produce tangible results. Not until a much later
stage can the learner mentally construct and reflect upon the hypothetical
situations that would confirm or refute -a current theory without the need
for active regulation. Conscious regulation involves the mental formulation
of hypotheses capable of being tested via imaginary counterexamples or
confirmatory evidence.
Consciousness first emerges as the child becomes capable of reflecting
upon her own actions in the presence of the actual event. At this initial
stage, consciousness is tied to concrete action but does not direct it.
The child's "reactions remain elementary, the subject is likely to distort
conceptualizations of what he observes, instead of recording it without
modification."
Such distortion can be quite dramatic. For example, having
witnessed an event that is contrary to a tenaciously held belief, the
"subject contests the unexpected evidence of his own eyes and thinks that
he sees what he predicted would happen" .
At the most mature level, which Piaget would prefer to restrict to the
stage of formal operations, the entire thinking process can be carried out
on the mental plane. The learner can consciously invent, test, modify, and
generalize theories and discuss these operations with others.
Finally, at the third level (from eleven to twelve years) which
is that of reflected abstraction (conscious products of reflexive
abstraction) the situation is modified in that cognizance
[consciousness] begins to be extended in a reflexion of the
thought itself--This means that the subject has become capable of
theorizing and no longer only of "concrete," although logically
structured, reasoning. The reason for this is the child's new
power of elaborating operations on operations--he thereby becomes
capable of varying the factors in his experiments, of envisaging
the various models that might explain a phenomenon, and of
checking the latter through actual experimentation .
In brief, the developmental progression is from unconscious autonomous
regulation to active regulation but in the absence of anything more than a
"fleeting consciousness."
The beginning of conscious reflection occurs
when the child is capable of considering her actions and describing them to
others, albeit sometimes erroneously. The mature level of reflected
abstraction, however, is characterized by conscious processes that can be
carried out exclusively on the mental plane. Mature learners can create
imaginary worlds, and theories to explain actions and reactions within
them. Such theories can be confirmed or refuted by means of the further
construction of mental tests, conflict trials, or thought experiments, that
extend the limits of generality of the theory. This is the essence of
scientific reasoning and the end state for a Piagetian development
progression of "child as scientist."
The progress to conscious regulation of problem solving via thought
experiments, hypothesis testing, and reflected abstraction is well
illustrated in Anzai and Simon's microgenetic analysis of an adult
who is systematically refining her procedures for solving a five disc Tower
of Hanoi problem. Within a single session the subject progressed through
three stages.
First, she was totally concerned with the goal of completing
the task by whatever means possible.
In the intermediate stage, she became
theory-driven, seeking to understand the principles behind the task,
guiding herself explicitly by mentioning intermediate goals, and pausing
after each goal had been reached to plan for the next goal. Theories-inaction were being created and tested
in this phase. In the third phase, the subject shows Piaget's
"transcendance of action by conceptualization," that is "reflection
directing action." Before undertaking to solve the puzzle again, the
subject tested her understanding by reviewing the moves of the component
one, two, three and four disc problems.
In so doing, she explicitly stated
the main principle of recursivity, and the essential notion of the transfer
of pyramids of discs .
The microgenetic learning route followed by this adult subject is
recapitulated macrogenetically. Piaget collected protocols on children
solving The Hanoi Tower .
In the early stage of solution,
children complete a three-disc problem by trial-and-error, without being
conscious of the principles. None of the younger subjects (five years old)
made a plan, or were able to predict how they were going to move the tower
 .
After the fact, their justifications and explanations were noninformative.
In an intermediate stage, correct solutions became stable for three-disc
problems but were not readily transferred to more difficult problems.
There was some evidence of planning ahead and the beginning of the ability
to describe the procedures used during a successful attempt. The final
stage (approximately eleven years of age) was characterized by rapid and
stable success on three-disc problems and increasingly inferential
anticipation of the rules for solving five-disc problems. Having completed
a four-disc problem, one child asked to predict how to solve a five-disc
problem responded:
"There's one more, you have to make more moves, otherwise it's
the same system--you always take away the smaller one, then the
middle one, then you put the small one on the middle one and you
can get at the bigger one; that makes a small pyramid there, and
then the way is clear to do it all again. I can start all over
again; it's the same story afterward" .
By Piaget's stage III, the child's understanding of the principles of
recursivity and the pyramid-subgoal strategy is not
only fully articulated, but it directs the subsequent problem solving
attempt. The entire procedure can be corrected, examined, and revised in
thought, before it is attempted in action. This is the essence of
conscious control of action, the hallmark of formal operations.
Metaprocedural Reorganization and Systematization
Piaget's colleagues, Inhelder and Karmiloff-Smith, have introduced
another concept relevant to this discussion of self-regulation, that of
metaprocedural reorganization .
The basic idea is that learning within a domain
follows a predictable sequence that is characterized by internal pressure
to systematize, consolidate, and generalize knowledge. The prototypical
microgenetic sequence is that the child first works on developing an
adequate partial theory for a salient aspect of the problem space: the
partial theory is practiced and perfected until it is fully operational.
Only when the partial theory is consolidated and functioning efficiently
can the child step back and consider the system as a whole. Typically, the
child will develop several juxtaposed theories adequate for various parts
of the problem space, each theory operating in isolation from the other.
Once the procedures are functioning well, the next stage of development is
possible and the child "steps-up" and reconsiders the problem-space
metaprocedurally. Once children become aware of the discrepancies or
contradictions resulting from the simultaneous existence of several
different partial theories, they begin attempts to reconcile the
differences and obviate contradictions resulting from the juxtaposition
 .
A concrete example might help to clarify this complicated theoretical
notion. Karmiloff-Smith and Inhelder asked four- to nine-yearold children to balance rectangular wooden blocks on a narrow metal rod
fixed to a larger piece of wood. Length blocks had their weight evenly
distributed, and the correct solution was to balance them at the geometric
center. Weight blocks had the weight of each "side" varied either
conspicuously (by gluing a large square block to one end of the base
rectangular block) or inconspicuously (by inserting a hidden weight into a
cavity on one end of the rectangular block).
At first, the children made the blocks balance by brute trial and
error using proprioceptive information to guide action. Behavior was
purely directed at the goal of balancing. This ploy was obviously
successful; the children balanced each block in turn. There was no attempt
to examine the properties of the objects that led to balance and no attempt
to subject each block to a test of a unifed theory.
This early errorless, but unanalyzed, phase was supplanted by the
emergence of strong theories-in-action. These theories were directed at
uncovering the rules governing balance in the miniature world of these
particular blocks. Unfortunately, they were incomplete rules that produced
errors. A common early theory developed by the children was to concentrate
exclusively on the geometric center and attempt to balance all blocks in
this fashion. This works for unweighted blocks. When the theory did not
result in balance, the blocks involved were discarded as exceptions
("impossible to balance").
After this theory was well established and working well for length
blocks the child became discomforted by the number of, and regularity of,
the errors. A new juxtaposed theory was then developed for the conspicuous
weight blocks.
For these, the children compensated for the weight that was
obviously added to one end and adjusted the point of balance accordingly.
For a time, however, length and weight were considered independently.
Length blocks were solved by the geometric center rule and conspicuous
weight blocks were solved by the rule of "estimate-weight-first and then
compensate."
Inconspicuous weight problems still generated errors; they
looked identical to the unweighted blocks and were, therefore, subjected to
the dominant geometric center rule. When they did not conform to the
theory they were discarded as anomalies that were "impossible to balance."
The children's verbal responses reflected these juxtaposed solutions, with
exclusively length justifications given for unweighted blocks and weight
justifications given for conspicuously weighted blocks.
Gradually and reluctantly, the children entered the period of
metaprocedural reorganization which was only possible when both their
juxtaposed procedures were working smoothly. Now, the young theorists were
made uncomfortable by the remaining exceptions to their own rules and began
to seek a rule for them. In so doing, a metaprocedural reorganization was
induced that resulted in a single rule for all blocks. The children
abandoned the simple theories and reorganized the problem space so that a
single unifying theory predominated. Now, the children paused before
balancing any block and roughly assessed the point of balance. Verbal
responses reflected their consideration of both length and weight, e.g.,
"You have to be careful, sometimes it's just as heavy on each side and so
the middle is right, and sometimes it's heavier on one side." After
inferring the probable point of balance, and only then, did the child place
the block on the bar.
There are three main points to note about this example:
first, there
is the finding of a developmental lull or even a seemingly retrogressive
stage when errors predominate. Initially, the children made no errors; all
blocks were balanced. But, during the quest for a comprehensive theory of
balance, the children generated partially adequate procedures that resulted
in errors. Only when the unifying theory was discovered did the children
revert to perfect performance. If errors alone formed the data base a Ushaped developmental growth curve would be apparent .
It is essential that the child gain control of simple theories in her quest
for a more complex and more adequate theory. Karmiloff-Smith and Inhelder
refer to this as creative simplification.
The construction of false theories or the overgeneralization of
limited, ones are in effect productive processes.
Overgeneralization, a sometimes derogatory term, can be looked
upon as the creative simplification of a problem by ignoring some
of the complicating factors (such as weight in our study). This
is implicit in the young child's behavior but could be
intentional in the scientist's. Overgeneralization is not just a
means to simplify but also to unify; it is then not surprising
that the child and the scientist often refuse counterexamples
since they complicate the unification process.
However, to be
capable of unifying positive examples implies that one is equally
capable of attempting to find a unifying principle to cover
counterexamples . . .
[there is] a general tendency to construct
a powerful, yet often inappropriate hypothesis which [learners]
try to verify rather than refute. This temporarily blinds the
[learner] to counterexamples which should actually suffice to
have them reject their hypothesis immediately .
Progress comes only when the inadequate partial theory is well
established and the learner is free to attempt to extend the theory to
other phenomena. In this way the theorists, be they children or
scientists, are able to discover new properties that in turn, make it
possible for new theories to be constructed.
The third main point is that metaprocedural reorganization is not
solely a response to external pressure or failure, but rather occurs
spontaneously when the child has developed well functioning procedures that
are incomplete but adequate for the task at hand. It is not failure that
directs the change but success, success that the child wishes to extend
throughout the system.
A similar U-shaped developmental pattern has been observed in
children's language acquisition (Bowerman, in press; Karmiloff-Smith,
The phenomena under consideration are "errors" in children's
spontaneous speech. The particular errors of interest are those that are
preceded by a period of correct usage; these are hence referred to as "late
errors" (Bowerman, in press).
For example, consider the child's use of
plural (-s) and past tense (-ed) morphemes. The typical developmental
progression is that children produce correct instances of plural and past
tense forms of both the regular (dogs, cats, trees, or walked, jumped,
climbed) and irregular (mice, feet, went, broke) kinds (Bowerman, in
Next, the irregular pattern is replaced by an incorrect,
overgeneralization of the regular form (foots, mouses, goed and breaked).
Eventually the correct forms reappear.
The explanation for this U-shaped development is that the original
correct usage was due to the child having learned the irregular (as well as
regular) forms as individual cases. With repeated experience with the
regular pattern, the child recognizes the systematicity involved, abstracts
the general rule, and applies it too broadly to all plurals (hence, mouses)
or all past tense forms (hence, goed and breaked). Errors occur where they
had not previously. When the system is fully established, the child is
ready to admit exceptions to the dominant rule and the irregular forms
reappear; this time they are part of an integrated theory, however, being
regarded as exceptions to the rule, not just isolated forms.
other examples, see Bowerman, in press, and Karmiloff-Smith, 1979a.)
Levels of Self-Regulation. In this brief and oversimplified synopsis
of latter day Genevan psychology and language acquisition data, a central
place in theoretical speculation is afforded to the concept of selfregulation; there is basic agreement that self-regulatory functions are
integral to learning and are central mechanisms of growth and change.
Similarly, in the emergent field of metacognition, the notion of selfregulatory mechanisms has a central place .
All agree that there are many degrees of self-regulation and that
self-regulation is essential for any "knowing act."
It is important to
note, however, that a sharp distinction is made in both theories of
language acquisition and in Genevan psychology, a sharp distinction that
has not been made as clearly in the metacognitive literature. The
distinction is between conscious awareness and direction of thought, versus
self-correction and regulation that can proceed below this level.
Piaget distinguishes sharply between active regulation as
part of any knowing act and conscious regulation and direction of thought,
the keystone of formal operations. The first process is age independent,
even the young learner succeeds in action by regulating, correcting, and
refining his current theories.
Some form of error correction must be part
of any active learning attempt, even very young children are capable of
regulating their activities by means of a systematic procedure of error
detection and correction. For example, in a recent study, DeLoache,
Sugarman, and Brown observed young children (24-42 months) as they
attempted to assemble a set of nesting cups. Children in this age range
did not differ in the likelihood of their attempting to correct a set of
non-seriated cups. They did, however, differ in their strategies for
correction.
The most primitive strategy, used frequently by children below 30
months, was brute force. When a large cup was placed on a smaller one, the
children would press down hard on the non-fitting cup. Variants of brute
pressure were twisting and banging, but the same principle held; the
selected cup will fit if only one can press hard enough. Older children
also used the brute force approach, but only after an unsuccessful series
of maneuvers; for them it appeared to be a last resort.
A second strategy initiated by some of the younger subjects was that
of trying an alternative. After placing two non-fitting cups together the
child removed the top cup and did one of two things: He either looked for
an alternative base for the non-fitting cup or he tried an alternative top
for the original base. Both ploys involve minimal restructuring and
necessitate considering the relation between only two cups at any one time.
The third characteristic ploy of children below 30 months was to respond to
a cup that would not fit into a partially completed set of cups by
dismantling the entire set and starting again.
Older children (30-42 months) faced with a non-fitting cup engaged in
strategies that involve consideration of the entire set of relations in the
stack. For example, one sophisticated strategy was insertion; the children
took apart the stack at a point that enabled them to insert the new cup in
its correct position. A second strategy, reversal, was also shown by older
children. After placing two non-fitting cups together, the child would
immediately reverse the relation between them study of self-correction in
young children is used as one example '
of the obvious fact that even very young children correct their errors
while solving a problem. Of more interest is the demonstration that the
child's error correction strategies provide us with a window through which
to view the child's theories-in-action. The very processes used to correct
errors reflect the level of understanding the child has of the problem
space. Similarly, developmental psycholinguists have argued that
production errors are very informative; "the tongue slips into patterns"
 .
Such errors reveal a great deal about the organization
of the semantic knowledge of the speaker (Bowerman, in press; Clark, in
Important though these early regulatory actions may be, the
distinction between theories-in-action and reflection should not be
overlooked. Error correction during language production is integral to the
processes of using language and is present no less in young children
(Bowerman, in press; Clark, in press) than in adults . Metalinguistic awareness, in contrast, is assumed to be a
product of adolescent rather than childhood thinking. The ability to step
back and consider one's own thought (or language) as itself an object of
thought and, to go further, use the subsequent conceptualization to direct
and redirect one's cognitive theories, is currently believed to be late
developing.
Confused in the metacognitive literature, even lost in some versions
of the concept, is this essential distinction between self-regulation
during learning and knowledge of, or even mental experimentation with,
one's own thoughts. Whatever distinctions must be made to render
metacognition a more malleable concept, this one is a fine candidate for
inclusion in the list.
4. Other-Regulation. The last strand of metacognitive inquiry to be
addressed is the notion of a transference from other-regulation to selfregulation. Important as the processes of self-regulation may be, a great
deal of learning occurs in the presence of, and is fostered by, the
activity of others.
Supportive-others such as parents, teachers, peers,
etc. guide a novice to mastery and there seems to be a systematic
regularity in how this guidance works.
A great deal of the work conducted on other-regulation has taken place
within the framework of Vygotsky's theory of internalization.
Vygotsky argues that all psychological processes are initially social,
shared between people, particularly between child and adult, and that the
basic interpersonal nature of thought is transformed through experience to
an intrapersonal process. Thus, for Vygotsky, the fundamental process of
development is the gradual internalization and personalization of what was
originally a social activity.
Social settings where the child interacts with experts in a problem
solving domain are settings where a great deal of learning occurs. Indeed,
some would argue that the majority of learning is shaped by social
processes (Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, in press a,b:
companion volume).
A great deal of this learning involves the transfer of
executive control from an expert to the child. Children first experience
active problem solving procedures in the presence of others, then gradually
come to perform these functions for themselves. This process of
"internalization" is gradual; first, the adult (parent, teacher, etc.)
controls and guides the child's activity, but gradually the adult and the
child come to share the problem solving functions, with the child taking
initiative and the adult correcting and guiding when she falters. Finally,
the adult cedes control to the child and functions primarily as a
supportive and sympathetic audience observed
one mother-infant dyad longitudinally, starting when the child was only
eight months old and terminating (unfortunately) when he was 18 months old.
From the very beginning their interaction could best be described as a
dialogue with the timing of the mother's and the child's behavior following
an almost complete alternation pattern, strikingly similar to the turntaking conventions observed in dialogue. In this dyad, the mother
initially was very much in command, and any participation from the child
was encouraged.
Indeed, Ninio and Bruner point out that the mother
accepted an astonishing variety of responses as acceptable turn-taking
behavior, interpreting anything as having a "specific, intelligible
The "imputation of intent and content" to the child's activities
constitutes "an important mechanism by which the child is advanced to more
adult-like communicative behavior" .
A dramatic shift in responsibility, however, came when the child began
to use labels by himself. The mother began to act as if she believed the
child had uttered words rather than babble. The mother's "theory of the
child" changed and so did her actions. At first she appeared to be content
with any vocalization, but as soon as actual words could be produced the
mother "stepped-up" her demands and asked for a label with the query
"what's that?"
The mother seemed to increase her level of expectation,
first "coaxing the child to substitute a vocalization for a nonvocal sign
and later a well-formed word for a babbled vocalization" (p. 12).
Initially the mother did all the labeling because she assumed that the
child could not, but later the mother started
a cycle with a label ONLY if she thinks that the child will not
label the picture himself, either because he does not yet know
the correct word, or because he is not attentive enough to make
the effort at labeling. If circumstances seem more favorable for
labeling to occur, she will usually start the cycle with a
"What's that?" question .
Responsibility for labeling is transferred from the mother to the
child in response to his increasing store of knowledge, finely monitored by
the mother. During the course of the study, the mother constantly updated
her inventory of the words the child had previously understood, and
repeatedly attempted to make contact with his growing knowledge base. For
(1) You haven't seen one of those; that's a goose.
(2) You don't really know what those are, do you? They are mittens;
wrong time of year for those.
(3) It's a dog; I know you know that one.
(4) We'll find you something you know very well.
(5) Come on, you've learned "bricks."
DeLoache (in preparation) repeated many of these observations in a
cross-sectional study of mothers reading to their children. In this study,
the children ranged from 17-38 months. The mothers of the youngest
children pointed to the objects and labelled them, sometimes providing some
additional information. In the middle age group, the children were much
more active. Their mothers asked them to point to and label objects and to
provide other information about the picture. These children often
spontaneously provided labels ("There^s a horsie"), or asked the mothers
for labels ("What's this?").
In the oldest group studied, more complex
stories were introduced and the mothers again assumed control, but they did
much more than simply point to and label objects. They talked about the
relation among the objects in the picture, related them to the child's
experience, and questioned the child about their outside experience (e.g.,
"That's right, that's a bee hive. Do you know what bees make?
honey. They get nectar from flowers and use it to make honey, and then
they put the honey in the bee hive.").
When the child was quite advanced
with respect to naming the objects and knowing something about them, the
mother then used the situation and the material to provide the child with a
great deal of background information only loosely related to the actual
pictures. It is not simply that the amount of help changes as the child
becomes more competent, but the quality of help is finely geared to the
child's current level.
In both the Ninio and Bruner and DeLoache dyads, the mother is
repeatedly seen functioning in the child's "region of sensitivity to
instruction" or "zone of proximal development"
 .
As the child advances so does the level of collaboration
demanded by the mother. The mother systematically shapes their joint
experiences in such a way that the child will be drawn into taking more and
more responsibility for the dyad's work. In so doing, she not only
provides an optimal learning environment, but also models appropriate
comprehension-fostering activities; these crucial regulatory activities are
thereby made overt and explicit.
Ideally, teachers function as just such mediators in the learning
process, acting as promotors of self-regulation by nurturing the emergence
of personal planning as they gradually cede their own direction. In
schools, effective teachers are those who engage in continual prompts to
get children to plan and monitor their own activities and model many forms of critical thinking for their students (Collins
& Stevens, in press), processes that the students must internalize as part
of their own problem solving activities if they are to develop effective
skills of self-regulation (Brown, Palincsar, & Armbruster, in press).
In a recent study, Palincsar and Brown developed a training
procedure based on this theory of the internalization of comprehensionfostering skills first experienced in social contexts. The basic situation
was an interactive tutoring dyad, where seventh graders were receiving
instruction aimed at improving their reading comprehension skills.
children were referred by their teachers because, although they were able
to decode at grade level, they had severe comprehension problems. Over
many sessions the tutor and the child engaged in an interactive learning
game that involved taking turns in leading a dialogue concerning each
segment of text.
Both the tutor and the child would read a text segment,
and then the dialogue leader would paraphrase the main idea, question any
ambiguities, predict the possible questions that might be asked about that
segment and hypothesize about the content of the remaining passage
segments. The dialogue leader would then ask the other a question on the
segment. In the next segment the roles were reversed.
Initially, the tutor modeled these activities, and the child had great
difficulty assuming the role of dialogue leader when his turn came. The
tutor was forced to resort to constructing paraphrases and questions for
the tutee to mimic.
In this initial phase, the tutor was modeling
effective comprehension fostering strategies, but the child was a
relatively passive observer.
In the intermediate phase, the tutee became much more capable of
playing his role as dialogue leader and by the end of ten sessions was
providing paraphrases and questions of some sophistication.
For example,
in the initial sessions, 55% of questions produced by the tutees were
judged to be non-questions or questions needing clarification, but by the
end of the sessions only 4% of responses were so judged. At the beginning
of the sessions, only 11% of the questions were aimed at main ideas.
by the end of the sessions, 64% of all questions probed comprehension of
salient gist. Similar progress was made in producing paraphrases of the
main ideas of the text segment. At the beginning of the sessions, only 11%
of summary statements captured main ideas whereas at the end 60% of summary
statements were so classified.
The comprehension monitoring activities of
the tutees certainly improved, becoming more and more like those modeled by
the tutor.
With repeated interactive experiences, with the tutor and child
mutually constructing a cohesive representation of the text, the tutees
became able to employ these monitoring functions for themselves.
This improvement was revealed not just in the interactive sessions but
also on privately read passages where the students were required to answer
comprehension questions on their own. In the laboratory, such tests of
comprehension were given throughout the experiment. On these independent
tests, performance improved from 10% to 85% correct. And in the classroom,
the students moved from the seventh to the 40-70 percentile when compared
with all other seventh graders in the school. Not only did the students
learn to perform comprehension fostering activities in interaction with
their tutor, they were also able to internalize these procedures as part of
their own cognitive processes for reading. Through the intervention of a
supportive, knowledgeable other, the child is led to the limits of his own
understanding. The teacher does not, however, tell the child what to doshe enters into an interaction where the child and the teacher are mutually
responsible for getting the task done. As the child adopts more of the
essential skills initially undertaken by the adult, the adult relinquishes
control. Transference of power is gradually and mutually agreed on.
Although the supportive other in the laboratory is usually an
experimenter, these interactive learning experiences are intended to mimic
real-life learning. Mothers , teachers and mastercraftsmen all function
as the supportive other, the agent of change responsible for structuring
the child's environment in such a way that she will experience a judicious
mix of compatible and conflicting experiences. The interrogative,
regulatory role becomes internalized during the process, and the child
becomes able to fulfill some of these functions for himself via selfregulation and self-interrogation.
Mature thinkers are those who provide conflict trials for themselves,
practice thought experiments, question their own basic assumptions, provide
counterexamples to their own rules, etc. And, while a great deal of
thinking and learning may remain a social activity (Laboratory of
Comparative Human Cognition, in press a,b), through the process of
internalization, mature reasoners become capable of providing the
supportive other role for themselves. Under these systems of tutelage, the
child learns not only how to get a particular task done independently, but
also learns how to set about learning new problems.
In other words, the
child learns how to learn .
C. Status of Metacognition as a Concept
In the preceding review, it is clear that metacognition is not only a
monster of obscure parentage but also a many-headed monster at that.
this final section, we will make an attempt to estimate the current status
of the offspring and list some of the problems we see with the current use
of the term.
We would like to emphasize our belief that in many ways this status
report is premature.
Scientific theorizing, like any other, must pass
through stages. Consider, as an example, the novice block balancers
 described earlier. Initially, they
are merely goal oriented; they concentrate on getting the new theory to
work. The next stage is to develop and refine juxtaposed subsystems so
that they work fluently. Only when these subsystems are functioning
efficiently can the theorist step back and consider the entire problem
space and systematize or reorganize it into a cohesive whole.
The recent history of theory development in the realm of metacognition
can be viewed in this light.
In the early seventies, attracted by the lure
of a new sounding concept, developmental psychologists engaged in
demonstration studies to see how the new idea would work. These early
studies were often ingenious and the wave of enthusiasm they provoked was
justified.
The initial stage is now over and we believe that the current stage
is, and should be, devoted to the task of developing workable theories and
procedures for separate parts of the problem space. It is for this reason
that we chose to look separately at the strands of inquiry that gave rise
to the step-child, metacognition. Currently a great deal of systematic
work is being undertaken that we hope will lead to fluently functioning
subsystems that are juxtaposed, existing and developing side-by-side. But
this is an essential stage of theory building. Later, perhaps, when the
main subsystems are better understood, metaprocedural reorganization
 may be possible and a full understanding of the
domain, metacognition, will be attained.
Doubt remains, however, concerning whether the domain(s) covered by
metacognition will be tractable enough for such a total systematization.
If one takes the wide view, metacognition as currently used refers to
understanding in a very broad sense. What we have on our hands is no
simple problem space!
In a recent review, Wellman (in press) referred to metacognition as a
fuzzy concept, as others have done before. Wellman, however, went on to
discuss four features of the fuzzy concept.
First, the concept encompasses an essential, central distinction.
However, this distinction serves to anchor the concept not
intentionally define it.
Second, prototypic central instances of
the concept are easily recognized.
However, third, at the
periphery agreement as to whether an activity is legitimately
metacognitive breaks down; the definitional boundaries are truly
fuzzy. Related to this, and fourth, different processes all of
which partake of the original distinction may be related only
loosely one to another. Thus the term metacognition or
metamemory serves primarily to designate a complex of associated
phenomena (Wellman, in press, p. 3-4).
This is nicely put and well illustrates the loose confederation of
topics included under the blanket term, metacognition. Of some concern,
however, is whether the associated phenomena are closely linked enough to
warrant the use of a single family name, that is:
are we talking about
family resemblances within an ill-defined, natural or fuzzy category, or
about many categories? Would we not be better off at this stage to abandon
the global term and work at the level of subordinate concepts, which are
themselves somewhat fuzzy?
One suggestion is that the use of the term could be limited to one of
its original usages, knowledge about cognition, where that knowledge is
stable and statable (Gleitman, in press). Process terms, such as planning
ahead, monitoring, resource-allocation, self-questioning, self-directing,
etc., would then be used alone without the addendum, metacognition. Thus,
for clarity and communicative efficiency, a case could be made that the
term metacognition should be pensioned-off, or at least severely restricted
in its extensional reference. Let us hasten to add that this is not
because the phenomena subsumed under the term are trivial but rather
because issues of fundamental importance may be obscured by the current
arguments surrounding things metacognitive; arguments that are obscured
because the participants do not always make it clear which head of the
beast they are attacking or defending.
This brings us back to the problems mentioned at the beginning of this
section. At present it is difficult to answer critical questions about
metacognition, such as:
"Is it late developing?" "Is it general or domain
specific?" "Is it conscious?" without pausing to ascertain which type of
knowledge or process is in question. Although metacognition may turn out
to be a fuzzy concept with indistinct boundaries, this degree of
imprecision provides an insecure basis for scientific inquiry. By
referring to the process/knowledge under discussion by its subordinate
name, i.e., planning ahead, error-correction, hypothesis-testing, etc.,
many of the current controversies, but by no means all, would evaporate.
At least, we would know where we have real problems and which problems are
those of communication failures.
We end by emphasizing one of the real advances spurred by the interest
in metacognition, i.e., the revived concern for mechanisms of change. This
has always been the hidden agenda of developmental psychologists but, until
recently, there have been surprisingly few attempts to study change
directly. Many of the studies reviewed here depart from the typical
cross-sectional age comparison approach, and this is because many of the
studies that have been inspired by the metacognitive boom have involved
microgenetic analyses of children learning-by-doing on their own, or
learning to develop self-regulatory skills through the intervention of
supportive others. We turn now to a more detailed consideration of
training studies, another area that has been considerably influenced by the
interest in metacognition.
V. Intervention Research
A. Introduction
In this section, we will concentrate on research that has involved
some attempt to elevate the performance of groups of learners; the major
issue concerns the ways in which cognitive developmental research and
theory can inform these attempts. A more traditional title for this
section might be "educational implications," although that title would not
be inappropriate, we believe it suggests a unidirectional flow of
information -- "basic" research leads to advances in understanding, which
in turn enables increasingly sophisticated and powerful treatment of more
"applied" problems; as we learn more about cognitive development, we are in
a position to outline more effective instructional packages. This will in
fact be the major emphasis here. However, we would argue strongly that the
flow of information is bi-directional.
Intervention research itself represents one important way of
attempting to build and evaluate cognitive theory.
If we understand the
cognitive processes and learning mechanism involved in some domain and
something about developmental differences, we should be in a strong
position to teach someone to perform more effectively. The outcome of such
training attempts allow us to evaluate the quality of our underlying
theories of the domain, learning, and individual differences. Further,
consideration of the way(s) in which intervention fails and must be
supplemented or modified to effect improvement in performance provides not
only information about shortcomings in the original guiding theories, but
also positive suggestions about the way in which those theories need to be
altered. In this view, intervention research serves both as a way of
providing converging evidence for a variety of theoretical formulations and
as a tool for developing and refining those theories.
As we have described thus far, we have come quite a long way in our
understanding of the factors and their interactions that comprise adequate
performance in a variety of learning and comprehension situations.
Compared with a decade or so ago, we have a better representation of
expertise within a variety of domains, more detailed descriptions of the
developmental path toward expertise, and a considerably more elaborated
analysis of the ways in which the "typical" developmental trajectory can
break down. Armed with this information, we are better able to specify
some of the skills that need to be taught, as well as some of the ways in
which they might be taught.
The majority of the studies we will describe fit into the broad
category of intervention research. Within this category, it is possible to
distinguish a number of different emphases, those aimed at changing the
learner, those concerned with altering the learning materials, and those in
which the essential approach is to modify the learning situation in
general. As with many subdivisions, these approaches are not mutually
exclusive; nonetheless, different studies and educational practices do rest
primarily on one or another of these emphases. As a simple example of the
difference, consider a group of students who are having difficulty in
learning some material from a reading assignment. To circumvent the
problem, we might attempt to teach them strategies for studying and
comprehending texts (modify the learner).
An alternative would be to
design more readable, better formed narratives that would minimize the need
for more powerful comprehension activities (modify the materials).
teacher might do both. An additional choice she has is to inform, or not
to inform, the students of her purposes.
In our review, we will be concerned with three classes of questions:
1) What to teach; that 2) How to teach it: that 3) How to adapt what and
how to individual differences, i.e., who is being taught. Note that (1)
requires a theory of the components of academic performance, both within
and across academic disciplines; that (2) requires a theory of learning:
and that (3) requires theories of developmental and comparative differences
-- how do students of varying ages differ; and within age, how do good and
poor performers differ. Although a complete theory does not as yet exist,
we argue that the data available constrain those theories sufficiently so
that it is possible to derive some important conclusions.
To begin with, we will center our discussion on the issue of what
should be taught, and return to the how and who later. One way of
providing a context for this topic is to assume, as Rohwer did in the 1970
Handbook, that on the most general level, the aims of education are-
teaching the content knowledge, both declarative and procedural, sufficient
for expertise within some academic domain; and 2) teaching learning to
learn, i.e., enabling students to proceed more efficiently and
independently.
Although these aims might be regarded as complementary, it may be more
accurate to say that they are somewhat antagonistic in practice. Teachers
frequently regard the amount of time they have to teach a particular course
as insufficient for that purpose. If a large amount of time is devoted to
teaching learning skills, that of necessity reduces the amount of time
available for transmitting course content. And it is course content on
which the students (and teachers) are generally evaluated.
A fairly clear example of the conflict can be seen in debates
regarding various types of teaching formats. For example, the use of
Socratic dialogue as a teaching approach embodies the modeling of many
important learning activities, such as self-questioning, seeking relations,
probing for further examples and counterexamples, etc. (Collins & Stevens,
in press).
In this way, it would seem to represent a promising vehicle for
teaching students how to learn. Its less than universal acceptance,
however, can be attributed in part to the fact that the rate at which
specific content is transmitted is relatively low .
From our perspective, the emphases of educational practice and
cognitive developmental research have been somewhat different, and for good
reasons. The main target of school programs has been the goal of teaching
content knowledge; the preferred criterion measures have been performance
on knowledge-based examinations.
Students do well in school to the extent
that they perform well on achievement tests in various subject areas.
Given this criterion measure, it should not be surprising that the main
goal is to somehow instill a powerful, well-organized knowledge base. But
achievement tests provide only indirect measures of learning ability. If
students were tested for the efficiency of their learning, there would be a
greater likelihood that learning processes would be a part of the school
curriculum; that is, there is a tendency for teachers to "teach to the
test," or more positively stated, they take the criterion task into account
in designing their instruction.
If learning skills were to be evaluated,
they would be more likely to be taught. We do not wish to leave the
impression that it would be an easy task to evaluate learning skills.
Those who would undertake the task of developing a theory-based assessment
instrument of learning would have to confront most of the thorniest
problems in cognitive development.
A central subset of the issues would
Do learning skills as such exist?
If so, what are they? How
might they be assessed in such a way as to minimize the influence of
specific knowledge? These are in fact some of the questions that have
recently been attracting the attention of investigators interested in
instructional research (Chipman, Segal, & Glaser, in press).
In contrast to the knowledge emphasis in schools, the major target in
the developmental research literature has been on procedures for learning,
or more recently on learning to learn. As an example of the difference
between the two areas, we might say that a target of a geography curriculum
would be to have the students know what the 50 states and their capitals
are. More typical research questions would concern the specific strategies
different children would use to set about the task of learning the
information. There would also be concern with a specification of the
factors underlying any developmental differences in the approaches adopted.
More recently, this research on the role of specific strategies has been
supplemented by a renewed interest in identifying more general "contentfree" activities such as the metacognitive skills discussed in depth in
Section IV.
This emphasis on learning.activities in the research literature
represents both a strength and a weakness. On the positive side, the work
has documented the centrality of such activities to learning, and has shown
that their inclusion in training programs can have important consequences.
One weakness of this emphasis on learning activities, both specific and
general, is that we know less about the development of extensive knowledge
bases and the overall effects of increases in domain-specific knowledge
(see Section III.B).
In this regard, the recent work on knowledge factors
is welcome. This relative lack is also not surprising; the acquisition of
a well-articulated knowledge base in a semantically rich domain takes a
considerable amount of time .
Ideally, what we would like to
be able to do is track the development of a knowledge base in some domain
in a sample of students differing in age and ability. We would then be in
a position to ask what the specific and general effects of incrementing
knowledge are in students who differ in their experience with, and success
in, school learning tasks. This would involve extensive longitudinal
analysis of relatively few subjects, i.e., a case study methodology
(Campione et al., in press).
As we argued earlier, the use of microgenetic
investigations is already contributing substantially to our understanding
of learning mechanisms.
Having characterized educational practice as emphasizing knowledge
rather than learning factors, we can also speculate on why this might be
the case. First, note that we believe the difference is one of emphasis.
We do not wish to argue that educators are not concerned with teaching
students to learn. Instead, our point is that general learning activities,
or cognitive skills (cf. Chipman, Segal, & Glaser, in press), tend not to
be taught directly. By directly, we mean an explicit attempt on the part
of teachers to transmit the skills.
This in turn could be because the lack
of such instruction is defensible or appropriate; this view does have its
proponents. Reasons for not teaching general cognitive skills include:
they do not exist; 2) if they do, they are a consequence of a welldeveloped knowledge base; or 3) if they do exist, they are acquired
incidentally as a result of the modeling that is an integral part of
instruction, and hence do not need to be taught explicitly.
The first point is straightforward.
Schools may not teach general
thinking skills because such skills do not exist. The second is also
popular; all skills are heavily context-dependent and thus are an inherent
part of the knowledge base of any semantically rich domain. This
specificity-generality issue is one of the oldest debates going, and has
been a central issue at a number of recent conferences on thinking and
problem-solving skills .
For example, in his role as the concluding speaker at the Carnegie-Mellon
conference on Problem Solving and Education, Newell noted that "...if there
is one dichotomy that permeated this conference, it concerned the basic
nature of problem solving. Specifically the poles are
Domain independence of
Domain-specificity of
Problem-Solving
Problem-Solving
The dichotomy is an old one."
 .
Thus, one important set of research questions deals with the existence
and identification of any general learning skills.
For example, on the one
hand, Goldstein asserts that "...the fundmental problem of
understanding intelligence is not the identification of a few powerful
techniques, but rather the question of how to represent large amounts of
knowledge in a fashion that permits their effective use."
On the other
hand, Simon argues that "...bare facts, however they are stored in
memory, do not solve problems."
The weight of the current evidence is that
some fairly general skills have been identified and that their acquisition
is essential for efficient learning. For example, Simon argues that is
The evidence from close examination of AI programs that perform
professional-level tasks, and the psychological evidence from
human transfer experiments, indicate both that powerful general
methods do exist and that they can be taught in such a way that
they are relevant.
 
Similarly Brown, Collins and Harris argue that:
We have come to see some surprising similarities in the kind of
strategies and knowledge used in these different domains (story
comprehension, solutions to mathematical problems and eletronic
circuits).
This suggests that there may be general learning
strategies that will enhance a student's comprehension over a
wide range of content areas. Rigly has claimed that 'the
approach to teaching students cognitive strategies has been
through content-based instruction and maybe this is wrong and
should be reversed; that is content-independent instruction.
 .
In summary, we have argued that schools have emphasized the
acquisition of domain-specific knowledge bases, whereas cognitive
developmental researchers have centered their more recent efforts on the
development of learning skills, both "specific" (e.g., rehearsal
strategies) and "general" (e.g., performance monitoring).
This emphasis on
knowledge development could be justified in several ways:
a) if there were
no general learning skills, or b) if learning skills, general or specific,
emerge without being explicitly taught. Relevant research questions then
concern the existence of general skills, the extent to which they result
automatically from a developing knowledge base, and the extent to which
they are acquired incidentally through modeling in specific content areas.
Although the evidence is far from overwhelming, we argue that there are
general, but weak , skills and that in many cases they do
need to be taught explicitly. This view is coming to be adopted more
frequently by educators (cf. Chipman et al., in press), particularly,
although by no means only by those concerned with poorer learners.
Schools have emphasized the knowledge aspect of the tetrahedral model
and researchers the activities component. Over the last decade, the two
groups have come to the realization that both knowledge factors and
learning activities along with their interaction need to be considered. In
the next sections, we will argue that developmental research has much to
say about ways in which educational programs might be modified, and that
some of the implications we can draw are, in fact, being implemented.
B. Intervention Studies in Developmental Research:
Early Trends
A notable feature of the last decade has been an increase in the
number of studies aimed at the instruction of simple learning or
remembering activities.
An intervention methodology has become
increasingly prominent, and investigators have asked a wide variety of
questions about the way(s) in which performance in a number of domains can
be improved. The vast majority of studies in the sixties and seventies
were entirely theoretically motivated.
In fact, the training study has
historically been one of the favorite tools in the repertoire of the
developmental psychologist, because it lends itself well to the analysis of
a number of central issues (see Section II).
It represents a vehicle for
investigating key factors involved in learning and development. For
example, one way of studying change is to attempt to engineer it.
interest in theories of change can lead fairly naturally to the use of
intervention research .
Although the use of training studies is popular, their interpretation
is not a simple matter. A great deal has been written about both the
importance of training studies in comparative and developmental research
and their underlying rationale.
Athough we will touch on some of those
issues later, we do not have the space available to go into any detail.
depth discussions of the various strengths and weaknesses of this approach
to theory construction can be found in Belmont and Butterfield ,
Brown and Campione , Butterfield, Siladi, and Belmont ,
and Campione, Brown, and Ferrara (in press).
Over the course of the decade, the type of instructional study has
changed as researchers have begun to pay more attention to educational
issues. These changes have stemmed from two, not independent, causes. One
is that a number of psychologists have become more interested in questions
of potential educational significance and have expended more of their
efforts on understanding the components of performance in more typical
academic pursuits, such as math and reading. At the same time, this decade
has seen a steady increase in our knowledge about cognitive development and
individual differences. As the emergent data and theories provided more
detailed insights into a number of pertinent issues, developmental
psychologists were better able to address educational issues. We would
argue that it was these advances in our understanding that encouraged many
to undertake instructional research.
Here we will trace some of the changes that have occurred in the
learning strategies training literature have classified training studies
into three broad categories'
blind, informed, and self-control. They
differ in terms of when they were conducted historically, the nature of the
interaction between the subject and the experimenter, the reasons for
undertaking the research, and the criterion against which the outcomes were
evaluated.
1. Blind training studies. These studies were historically the first
in the sequence we will describe. The term "blind" was not intended to be
perjuratative. These studies are termed "blind" because they tended to
leave the subject in the dark about the importance of the activities they
were being induced to use. The studies were by no means blind from the
perspective of the experimenter. The choice of the activities to be
trained was based on a well-articulated and insightful analysis of the
demands of a number of memory or problem-solving situations, and the
studies' main purpose was to evaluate hypotheses regarding both the
processes involved in efficient performance on some tasks as well as the
sources of developmental or comparative differences on those tasks.
this regard, they were extrememly successful; one impressive feature of a
number of these studies was the finding that large improvements in
performance could be engineered.
It was this fact that encouraged those
interested in educational issues to expend more effort on instructional
research aimed at improving subjects' use of learning activities.
summary, these studies were designed for theoretical reasons, and were not
addressed to educational issues, in contrast to some of the later studies
we will describe. They were, however, directly responsible for the ensuing
A prototypical study might begin with the hypotheses that:
efficient performance requires the use of some task-appropriate strategy or
learning activity; and 2) differences between individuals, or groups of
individuals, reflect variations in the spontaneous use of such activities.
If those hypotheses were correct, the question of why the less efficient
were less likely to exploit such activities was addressed. Were the
differences due to a failure to engage a usable activity such as rehearsal
(production deficiency), or an inability to profit from the activity
(mediation deficiency)? To address these questions, a training study might
be conducted to induce the younger subjects to rehearse. If performance
improved significantly and approached the level of older subjects, support
for three propositions would be inferred:
(1) rehearsal is an important
component of task performance; otherwise, training its use should not help;
(2) developmental differences are in part due to differential rehearsal,
because inducing the younger children to use it did reduce the performance
difference; and (3) the deficiency operating prior to training was one of
production, not mediation. Very simple training studies provide data
relevant to a number of important developmental issues, although their
interpretation is not unequivocal (Campione, in press a).
The typical procedure in blind training studies is that children are
instructed or induced to perform particular processing routines but are not
helped to understand the significance of such activities. They are told
what to do or are led to do it but they are not informed why they should
act this way, or that it helps performance, or that it is an activity
appropriate to a particular class of situations, materials, goals, etc.
Although for some children this is sufficient in that they can infer the
significance of the activity for themselves, for many this is not so.
As one illustration, consider tasks involving free recall of
categorizable materials. Children can be induced to categorize through the
use of clever incidental orienting instructions , the
material can be blocked into categories , or recall
can be cued by category names .
None of these procedures
guarantee that the child understands why or even if recall is improved.
But, all these methods are extremely successful in improving children's
performance on a particular set of materials.
Similarly, in the area of paired-associates learning, subjects can be
instructed to generate either verbal or imaginal elaborations involving the
to-be-associated items - or the experimenter can engage
the subjects in an activity that results in such elaborations .
Alternatively, the pairs of items can be
introduced in an already "elaborated" form, either verbal or visual. They
can be presented in a sentence frame or in a scene involving some
interaction between them .
Any of these methods can speed
The sheer frequency and, on occasion, magnitude of intervention
effects caught the attention of those interested in remediation. Although
there are numerous examples, we will mention only two here. One involves
elaboration and the other rehearsal. In an experiment by Turnure, Buium
and Thurlow , educable retarded children (IQ's around 70) and normal
children matched for CA (about seven years) were given a 21-item pairedassociates list to learn. There was one study trial followed by a single
test trial.
In the labeling condition, subjects simply repeated the names
of the items (e.g., soap-jacket) after the tester. In three other
conditions, the subjects were required to answer "what" or "why" questions
about the pair, e.g., "What is the soap doing under the jacket?," "Why is
the soap hiding in the jacket?," etc. The aim of these procedures was to
lead the subjects to think about the meaning of the individual items and to
force them to generate elaborations involving possible relations between
the members of each pair.
The differences among the conditions were dramatic. The children in
the labeling condition averaged 2.0 items correct, whereas those in the
"what" and "why" groups were correct on an average of 14.4 items, an
increase in recall of over 600%. This finding was true of both the
retarded and nonretarded children; normal children of this age have not yet
begun to use these kinds of elaborative strategies spontaneously ; as a result, they performed poorly unless given
the questioning procedures during study, in which case they also improved
dramatically.
The rehearsal study we will describe represents a much more intensive
attempt to improve the short-term memory performance of retarded children:
the goal was to bring them to the level of untrained college students. It
is an important study both for the magnitude of the effects it produced and
because the study addressed a number of additional theoretical points.
Butterfield, Wambold and Belmont employed a standard probed shortterm memory paradigm in which subjects were shown a series of six items and
then asked to indicate the position in which a randomly selected one had
appeared. They used a subject-paced procedure in which the participants
pressed a button to view each successive item; thus, the subject was
allowed to pause as long as she wished at any point in the series.
students deal with tasks of this type through the use of rehearsal
strategies. A typical strategy would involve
studying the first three items as a set (i.e., pausing for an extended
period following exposure of the third item), and then inspecting the last
three items quickly (a "3-3 active passive" strategy).
adolescents, like normal children below ten years of age, showed no
evidence of the use of rehearsal strategies and performed poorly -- they
were correct on approximately 35% of the trials.
They were then programmed to use the "3-3" strategy adopted by adults.
The subjects were told to view the first three items and then to pause and
repeat them as a set a number of times. After this, they were to expose
and view the last three items quickly. This strategy raised the level of
performance for the first three letters in the sequence, but recall of the
last items was surprisingly poor. Butterfield et al. hypothesized that
although the subjects were using the rehearsal strategy, they were not
using an appropriate retrieval strategy. The most effective retrieval
strategy would have two parts.
First, when the probe item was presented
the last three items would be "searched," taking advantage of the fact that
these items would not yet have faded from memory. Second, if the letter
were not among the last three, the rehearsed items would then be searched.
An alternative approach, that of searching the initial rehearsed set first,
would result in the subjects' "converting" the task to one of serial
recall, a task for which the "3-3" study strategy would be inappropriate.
The fact that after initial training retarded adolescents performed
relatively well on the initial set of three items, together with some
subsequent analyses of latency data, indicated that this "conversion" did
take place, thus impairing performance. This result emphasizes the
interactive nature of the various components of performance in a given
task. The study strategy is effective only if coupled with a compatible
retrieval plan. In this case, the instructional design problem was
complicated by the fact that the students were setting themselves a
criterion task that was different from the one assumed by the experimenter.
These considerations led to a revised training procedure aimed at both
the acquisition and retrieval component. The subjects were initially
taught the acquisition strategy. They were then informed about, and led
through, the correct retrieval plan. Finally, they were given explicit
instruction in the coordination of the two.
In the most detailed
condition, the subjects achieved an accuracy level of around 85%, some 140%
above their initial level and comparable to that of nonretarded adolescents
given some, but not so detailed, training. It is important to note that
the provision of the components of the overall plan was not sufficient to
result in their effective use. Butterfield et al. also had to include
explicit instruction in their sequencing and coordination. This is one of
the earliest training studies in which the importance of executive
functioning was emphasized. Butterfield et al. conclude from the series of
studies that:
We can now elaborate two deficiencies in addition to the lack of
rehearsal that hold retarded subjects so far below their
capacity. They do not properly sequence rehearsal and nonrehearsal learning techniques, and they neither intercoordinate
multiple retrieval strategies nor coordinate these retrieval
strategies with strategies of acquisition 
If this failure of executive control is transsituational, and we
assume that it is, then the appropriate level of analysis for
future research is the level of selecting, sequencing, and
coordinating processes that are in the cognitive repertoire.
Trying to train executive function instead of the particular
skills for whose success it must ultimately be responsible may
save much effort and yield more general theory in the bargain
 .
Inducing subjects to employ task-appropriate activities can result in
dramatic improvements in their performance. This can be done by teaching
them the routines necessary , augmenting the
original learning situation , or by modifying the
learning materials .
(As we will see, the same
findings obtain when the goals are comprehension of text.)
Although direct
comparisons are impossible, it also appears that altering the learning
activities of the learner has a larger effect than restructuring the
materials .
What particularly caught the
attention of those interested in education was the impressive magnitude of
the effects achievable through direct instruction of learning activities.
The implications of this work are clear. If the goal is to enhance
the learning and retention of specific (although presumably limited) sets
of information, there are ways of engineering that learning. We have come
to know a great deal about some of the activities that result in rapid
learning and durable memory, and intervention studies have shown that
getting young or poor learners to carry out some of those activities does
result in greatly enhanced performance.
It does not matter much whether
the learner knows why or even what is being done. This is not trivial, as
in many cases the learning of specific packets of information is either a
goal in itself or necessary for further learning.
There are, of course, also limitations to these conclusions.
first problem is that there are clear limits on the extent to which
restructured learning environments can be expected to lead to positive
effects. What can be learned depends upon the initial knowledge or
capabilities of the performer. The learner's entering knowledge can
determine if a particular intervention will be successful. 'An extremely
simple case of instruction is to provide for learners examples from which a
rule can be inferred. An example of this approach and of a knowledge x
instruction interaction can be found in a number of experiments involving
the balance beam problem reported by Siegler .
Subjects are
shown a series of weight arrangements and asked to predict whether the beam
will balance, or whether one side or the other will fall if support is
withdrawn. Siegler has analyzed the problem in terms of a number of
increasingly complex rules that represent progressive changes toward a full
understanding of the principles involved. Rule I in Siegler's taxonomy is
based on a consideration of weight factors only. If the amount of weight
on either side of the fulcrum is the same, the scale will balance:
otherwise, the side with more weight will drop.
Siegler worked with groups of three- and four-year-olds who had
not yet acquired this rule. Their predictions were essentially random.
Interested in how his subjects might acquire Rule I, Siegler administered a
series of feedback trials. The subjects would predict what would happen to
the beam when supports holding it in place were removed, then the supports
were withdrawn and the subjects were allowed to observe what actually
happened. The process of formulating hypotheses, obtaining data, and then
re-evaluating those hypotheses could be said to be being simulated. The
main result was that the four-year-olds tended to learn, or more
specifically to acquire Rule I, whereas the three-year-olds did not.
Subsequent experiments showed that four-year-olds, although random
responders on prediction trials prior to any feedback did encode, or attend
to the relevant weight dimension, whereas threeyear-olds did not.
In some sense, the four-year-olds may be said to know
more about the balance problems, i.e., that weight is a relevant dimension,
than the three-year-olds, and that this knowledge is necessary for the
intervention to produce learning. In fact, three-year-olds taught to
encode weight and then given the feedback trial showed an increase tendency
to acquire Rule I.
In this situation, we would like to emphasize the developmental
pattern obtained. The performance of the three- and four-year-olds did not
differ significantly prior to the presentation of the feedback series (they
were both random).
However, after the treatment, the groups did differ
significantly. This "divergent effect," in which intervention results in
increasing the difference between younger and older children, is a far from
uncommon finding; in fact, as we will emphasize later, it is quite typical
in some classes of instructional studies. This effect stems from the fact
that the instruction afforded requires some underlying competency for it to
be effective. Older childre'n tend to exploit that competency and profit
from instruction, whereas younger children do not; thus, the instruction is
less effective.
A second problem is that blind training techniques can, and often do,
help people learn a particular set of materials, but existing data suggest
that they do not necessarily help people change their general approach to
the problem of learning new sets of materials. In short, these procedures
fail to result in maintenance (durability) and generalization (transfer) of
the learning strategies .
Children neither perform these activities subsequently on their own
volition nor transfer them to new but similar learning situations.
Something other than "blind training," therefore, seems to be necessary to
help many children learn on their own.
In summary, blind training studies demonstrated powerful effects
following training or the inducing of appropriate activities during the
acquisition and retrieval of to-be-learned material. One immediate
implication of these studies is that it is possible to design instructional
interventions to facilitate the mastery of specific bits of information.
These implications are limited by a number of other considerations. One is
that simply simulating the desired activities does not result in,
facilitation for all learners in all situations (i.e., the activities x
subject characteristics or activities x knowledge interactions inherent in
the tetrahedral model). Another is that although such interventions may
lead to mastery of specific materials, they may not lead to transfer (the
activities x criterial task interaction).
The transfer issue, or the learning vs. learning to learn distinction,
can be seen in many school situations. For example, consider the case of a
teacher providing the acronym HOMES to students in an attempt to help them
learn the names of the Great Lakes. This is a very reasonable thing to do,
and it does work. If the goal is learning the lake names, nothing else is
of much import. If, however, the teacher also wants the students to come
to use this mnemonic/retrieval activity to help them learn other sets of
arbitrary material, the problem would be an entirely different one; and the
subjects' ability to generate those activities appropriately on new
occasions would be the target of instruction.
This distinction maps nicely onto the state of affairs in the early
seventies.
Brief instruction could result in impressive improvements in
task-specific performance, but transfer following that intervention was
exceedingly limited.
The strongest statement that could be made was that
extending the amount of training seemed sufficient to produce greater
maintenance ; but generalized effects of
instruction were more difficult to bring about .
But it was necessary to first identify appropriate learning
activities and show that teaching them to young or poor learners would
result in enhanced performance before it would make any sense to consider
transfer issues. Transfer of non-helpful activities would not be of much
It was the successes obtained in the early training studies that
led to more intensive research on factors involved in transfer.
As investigators shifted their criterial task, seeking transfer rather
than only task-specific improvement, they also searched for suggestions
about how to go about modifying instruction. Providing the requisite
learning activities to immature learners did not seem sufficient to lead to
flexible access to those routines. To redesign instruction, it would be
necessary to know what other skills or activities would have to be taught
to improve access.
It was around this time that some of Flavell's early
work on metamemory began to appear . In an
insightful series of studies, Flavell and his colleagues demonstrated that
younger children tended not to know as much about their memory system as
older children and did not appear as capable as older children of
regulating and monitoring that system. Similarly, mildly retarded children
also appeared to demonstrate particular problems in these areas .
One global statement of the overall pattern of results is
that young children and poor learners, those who were the targets of the
blind training studies, did not seem to know much about the memory system
that the trainers were attempting to modify, nor were they particularly
capable of overseeing the resources that instructors provided for them.
It is interesting to note that Flavell's early interest in
metacognitive factors arose in the context of production deficiencies.
Brief training was sufficient to induce the use of a number of memoryenhancing activities, and one question which was raised by this finding was
why the subjects failed to employ those activities spontaneously. Even
more provocative were those cases where subjects, for example, rehearsed when told
to do so and performed significantly better; when prompting to rehearse was
withdrawn, rehearsal was abandoned, and performance returned to baseline
levels. These data could be explained if the subjects did not know why
rehearsal was helpful or even that it was helpful, that is, if the subjects
did not understand the significance of the activities.
And the metamemory
data seemed to support these notions.
In this context, the failure to find transfer of instructed routines
could be assumed to result from an incomplete "treatment" of the initial
problem(s) responsible for the strategy deficits. At this point, research
aimed at assessing the effects of inducing metacognitive supplements to
strategy training was undertaken. As a rough distinction, we can consider
two types of experiments, those involving informed training and those
involving self-control training .
Generally subjects
in informed training studies are given some additional information about
the strategy they have been instructed to use; and those in self-control
studies are also given explicit instruction about overseeing, monitoring,
or regulating the strategies (Campione, in press a,b).
2. Informed Training. Brown, Campione and Day refer to
intermediate levels of instruction as informed training. Here, children
are not only prompted to perform particular activities, but they are also
provided with information about the significance of these activities. As
one example, Kennedy and Miller were able to show that an instructed
rehearsal strategy was more likely to be maintained in the absence of
experimenter prompts if it had been made clear to the subject that the use
of the strategy did result in improved recall. This effect can be obtained
with a variety of strategies and subject populations. For example, a
similar result with retarded children was obtained by Kendall, Borkowski
and Cavanaugh in work centering on the use of elaborative strategies
to hasten paired-associates learning. Somewhat more elaborate
instructional packages have been investigated by other authors, including
Burger, Blackman, Holmes, and Zetlin with retarded children and
Ringel and Springer with children in regular classes. The hallmark
of these studies was the inclusion, during and following training, of much
more detailed information about the need for, and effects of, the
instructed routines. Again, the result of these extended instructions was
to lead to enhanced transfer. For example, in the Burger et al. study the
subjects, who were taught to use a categorization plan to facilitate free
recall, continued three weeks after training to show significant
superiority'over an untrained control group with regard to both clustering
and amount recalled.
One can also inform subjects indirectly of some aspects of strategy
use. To demonstrate the transituational nature of a strategy, one can
train the use of a particular routine in multiple contexts .
For example, Belmont, Butterfield and Borkowski compared groups of
subjects who had received rehearsal training in one vs. two contexts.
two contexts differed slightly in their response requirements, thereby
demanding that the rehearsal strategy be varied accordingly to take this
into account. The two context group was more likely to show transfer to a
third context. This is, of course, not a new finding; precedents can be
found in the discrimination learning literature .
In that literature can also be found
evidence that, on some occasions, multiple training is effective only if
appropriate exemplars are found .
Another relevant finding is that the tendency to maintain a strategy
seems to be a function of the efficiency and precision with which the
strategy was carried out during training .
Students who execute a strategy well
at the time of training are more likely to maintain that strategy
subsequently. For example, Paris, Newman and McVey (in press) looked at
the process of strategy acquisition in a study that included a number of
the features of informed training. After two days of baseline performance
on free recall of categorized lists, Paris et al. divided their seven- and
eight-year-old subjects into two training groups. In one, the nonelaboration (blind in our terminology) group, the subjects were told how to
carry out some mnemonic activities: grouping, labeling, cumulative
rehearsal, and recalling by groups. The second, or elaboration (informed)
group, was in addition given a brief rationale for each of the different
behaviors; they were also provided feedback about their performance after
recall. The elaboration group outperformed the non-elaboration group on
both the training session and on subsequent maintenance probes. In this
study, information was provided prior to training, and the effect was to
augment the immediate effects of training. Furthermore, as in the other
informed studies, there was a longer-term effect; i.e., increased
maintenance.
Elaborated training resulted in better "acquisition" performance.
Subjects so trained carried out the strategies more frequently and
effectively and were also the ones who showed greater maintenance. We
might generalize a bit and propose that any procedure that leads to
efficient strategy execution during training will result in maintenance.
One suggestion from these data is that to facilitate transfer subjects need
to be run to some criterion of mastery during acquisition.
Paris et al. (in press) prefer another explanation and offer some data
in support. They argue that provision of information about the rationale
underlying each component activity leads subjects to understand the
significance of those activities, i.e., they become aware of the
strategies' benefits; and that this awareness is, in part, responsible for
continued unprompted use. To evaluate this possibility, they obtained
metacognitive judgments throughout the course of the experiment. In fact,
the subjects in the elaborated training condition did show increased
awareness of the role of sorting activities compared with those in the
nonelaborated condition. Also, awareness scores were significantly
correlated with both strategy use and recall performance.
We conclude this section with a general comment. Many of the studies
included here could be said to be "multiply-confounded," in the sense that
the training packages include many components, e.g., extended practice,
information about significance, information about effectiveness, general
praise and attention, etc. As such, it is difficult, if not impossible, to
ascribe benefits unambiguously to one factor or set of factors. Although
this is of course a problem, it also represents one reasonable research
strategy. Given that transfer is difficult to obtain, it makes sense to
assemble a powerful package designed to elicit it. If the intervention is
successful, follow-up studies can be designed to track down the more
specific components responsible. Such tracking down is theoretically
necessary. Regarding the implications for education, confounded treatments
that work are extremely interesting in themselves. Clarification of the
specific factor(s) responsible for positive effects may allow refinements
of the package (Campione & Armbruster, in press), but an intervention that
works (for any of a number of reasons) is a desirable outcome in its own
3. Self-Control Training Studies. The final category involves selfcontrol studies, the main feature of which is the inclusion of explicit
training of general executive skills, such as planning, checking, and
monitoring. In the informed training approach, instruction of the target
activities is supplemented with the provision of information about the
activity and its effects. In self-control studies, the instructions
include help with overseeing the activity.
Direct instruction of self-control skills should be particularly
important in the context of transfer. For subjects participating in blind
training, the experimenter does the executive work, telling the learner
what to do and frequently for how long to do it .
Self-control training can be regarded as an
attempt to emulate more closely the activity of the spontaneous producer -the trained subject is taught to produce and regulate the activity.
Telling subjects to monitor and regulate their activities should produce
the effects aimed at in informed training attempts; that is, if a subject
does monitor his performance, he can see for himself that performance is
improving, and he provides his own information about strategy
effectiveness. To the extent that this occurs, training self-regulation
might be expected to lead to more widespread effects than would the
provision of information about specific strategies, because a consistent
tendency to monitor performance would enable subjects to ascertain the
effectiveness of a number of routines (see Campione, in press b).
Although there are fewer self-control training studies available than
those from other categories, the initial results are encouraging. For
example, in a series of experiments with mildly retarded children, Brown
and her colleagues adapted the recall readiness paradigm employed by Flavell, Friedrichs
and Hoyt .
The subjects were required to study a supraspan set of
items for as long as they wanted until they were sure they could recall all
the items.
Baseline performance was poor and instruction was undertaken.
In one condition, subjects were taught a rehearsal strategy to learn the
list; in another, they were asked to anticipate list items before exposing
In both conditions, the subjects were also induced to engage in
self-checking activities to see that learning was occurring. The effects
of this strategy plus regulation training for a older group of subjects (MA
= 8 years), but not for a younger group (MA = 6 years), were: immediate
(1) beneficial effects of training, (2) maintenance of the strategy over a
one-year period; and (3) evidence for generalization to a quite different
task, that is, studying and recalling prose passages. The younger group
showed only immediate effects of training: on maintenance probes, they
reverted to baseline levels of performance, although mild prompts were
sufficient to elicit the trained activities even one year later.
We would like to emphasize two points from this study. The first is
that teaching strategy use in a fashion that also instilled self-checking
or monitoring activities did lead to more impressive transfer performance
than previously had been the case. Inclusion of executive control
components in training is important. The second point is that these
transfer effects were obtained only for the older group. To appreciate the
developmental pattern a bit more, note that if we adjust performance for
entering memory span differences, the older and younger groups did not
differ prior to instruction. If we consider performance on unprompted
maintenance tests later, there were large and significant differences
between the groups.
Thus, as in the Siegler experiments, the
effect of providing training was to increase the difference between the
older and younger subjects.
4. Summary. The series of blind, informed, and self-control studies
leads to a number of conclusions. It is clear that the learning activities
engaged in are an important determinant of performance, and that we can
specify in some detail a number of those activities. We also see that the
evidence indicates the existence of both specific sets of activities, which
are powerful but limited to a highly constrained set of circumstances, as
well as more general ones, which are weaker but both broadly applicable and
possibly necessary for the effective use of, or access to, the more
specific routines.
As we have begun to know more about essential
processing components, we have become better able to program the student to
execute them. Finally, for those effects to be obtained, it is not
necessary that the learner be aware of what is being done to bring about
That represents the good news, but there are also clear limitations.
First, the beginning competence of the learner needs to be considered.
Knowledge differences can limit the benefits that might result from
inducing the subjects to carry out reasonable learning activities .
As Case has emphasized, it is also important to
identify the particular strategies or approaches that students bring with
them to the training situation. Examples of the importance of
identification of entering states have been provided in Section III in the
context of composing (Bereiter & Scardamalia, in press; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, in press), summarizing prose passages (Brown & Day, in press),
and scientific reasoning (Kuhn & Phelps, in press). Differences in
functional memory capacity can also result in training programs that are
successful with some students, but less so for others .
Even in the best cases, where the learner can be led to use the
activities to speed learning, the impact is lessened by transfer
limitations.
In this arena, recent research has resulted in some
worthwhile results. One is that it is not difficult to get learners to
maintain activities on new occurrences of familiar problem types.
there appear to be considerable "savings."
Mild prompts to use a
previously taught strategy can result in its effective use . Finally, as investigators have become more interested in
programming transfer, rather than simply expecting it , the evidence for transfer has begun to increase. In these efforts,
the major factor has been an increasing attempt to foster the understanding
of the specific skills being taught, both by providing knowledge about
those skills (informed training) or by explicitly including general selfregulatory, or executive, functions in the tutorial interaction (selfcontrol training).
How effective these training attempts to orchestrate
transfer will be in the long run remains to be seen, but the early results
are encouraging.
C. Intervention Research:
More Recent Questions and Emphases
In classifying the studies contributing to our conclusions thus far,
the reader will note that they have involved almost exclusively young or
poor learners in situations requiring deliberate memorizing or problemsolving.
This feature of our review reflects the bias in the literature;
the majority of the instructional work stimulated by cognitive
developmental theory has featured this combination of learners and domains.
Although we will speculate why this might be the case later, the obvious
questions concern the extent to which the findings and conclusions can be
generalized to situations involving older or more capable learners
performing in other areas. We will deal first with the
comparative/developmental issue, and then summarize some recent work on
comprehension-fostering interventions. These discussions will be somewhat
brief, in part a result of the relative paucity of data. We argue that the
overall patterns do generalize quite broadly and that the results obtained
to date do indicate some areas where more work is needed.
A third issue is that of transfer, or more accurately, the difficulty
of inducing learners to transfer the fruits of their learning experiences.
In this context, we have discussed the role of more general learning skills
in fostering learning to learn. We will return to a consideration of the
general-specific tradeoff after discussing the developmental/comparative
issues and work in the area of comprehension.
1. Developmental/comparative considerations. When young or poor
learners are the targets of instructions to remember, it is clear that they
need to be taught both specific powerful procedures and their overseeing
and control. In the majority of training studies, only young or poor
learners are involved. Although we cannot prove it, we believe this
feature of the literature reflects the assumption that older or more
capable learners already have or soon will have both the specific skills
and the means for overseeing them. There are, of course, data consonant
with this assumption. Although the memorization skills studied in the
laboratory are not taught explicitly in schools, they are in fact acquired
incidentally; and one outcome of schooling does appear to be the emergence
and use of such learning activities .
Given this view, it is not necessary to teach such skills to
developmentally more capable students.
There is, however, another possibility. More advanced students may
not be as capable as this view would have us believe, with the result that
they would also profit from instruction. Even if they do show evidence of
using memorization strategies, their use may be far short of optimal. That
even highly selected learners are far from "expert" is clear if we contrast
the performance of college students with that of expert mnemonists. More
generally, there are increasing numbers of educators and educational
researchers questioning the competence of college students' study skills
(Chipman et al., in press). There is little doubt that there is still room
for improvement.
Such speculation aside, the matter is an empirical one -- the
necessary experiment involves instructing groups of learners differing in
level of cognitive maturity, young versus old or less successful versus
more successful, an instruction x levels factorial design. To illustrate
the need for such designs and their potential complexity, consider the
typical training study as it appears in the developmental literature. A
young group of subjects, who initially perform less well than an older
group, are given training on some process, the more effective use of which
is presumed responsible for the developmental difference. Following such
training, the performance of the young group improves, let us say to the
level of the older group. One conclusion might be that the training was
necessary for one group but not the other, the assumption is that training
would have little or no effect on the efficient because they are already
carrying out the trained process well. An excellent example of this
approach is that of Butterfield et al. in which training of
cumulative rehearsal resulted in bringing the performance of retarded
adolescents up to the level of untrained adults and to the level of less
stringently trained nonretarded adolescents. Note that the best learners
in this example were not trained; we simply assume their ceiling
performance.
An evaluation of that assumption requires that the older or more
capable groups be given the same instruction. There are then a number of
possible outcomes to the hypothetical expanded experiment. These different
outcomes are of both theoretical and educational significance, because they
indicate where remediation is or is not necessary and allow us to sharpen
our account of developmental differences. We emphasize again that the
interpretation of training studies, even the elaborated ones called for
here, is not simple .
illustrate the various outcomes and indicate the types of information they
can provide, we will describe five different patterns.
Three involve
relative convergence, in which developmental differences are reduced after
training. A fourth is parallel improvement. And the final outcome is
divergence, where instruction results in an increase in the magnitude of
developmental differences.
Consider first a pattern of results that would allow the strongest
conclusion about developmental differences and the assumed competence of
older learners.
In our hypothetical factorial design, age and
presence/absence of instruction interact in the following way:
instruction
improves the performance of the younger but not older students, and
following instruction, there are no developmental differences. A clear
example of such a pattern was obtained by Brown in a judgment of relative recency task. There
were no developmental differences between young and old on the task if
there were no background cues to anchor the temporal series.
If background
cues were provided, however, the old capitalized on this information and
outperformed the young. It seemed that the old, but not the young,
exploited the background cues and that this alone was responsible for the
difference.
Instructing students how to use the background cues did not
change the excellent (but not ceiling) performance of the old, but it did
succeed in bringing the young up to their level. This outcome is the
strongest possible evidence that differential use of the trained component
was the major, if not sole, determinant of developmental differences and
that training was in fact unnecessary for the older.
A number of other outcomes involving relative convergence after
instruction would also be informative. For example, instruction might
affect only the young subjects, but their performance could still be poorer
than the older students -- the implication here might be that the old are
proficient with regard to the trained process and that there are additional
sources of developmental differences involved in task performance.
Alternatively, both the young and old groups might improve, but the younger
might more so. The simplest conclusions in this case would be that the
older subjects were not completely proficient in the use of the target
process (else training would not help), that differential use did
contribute to the original developmental differences (equating use did
reduce those differences), and that there remain further sources of
performance variations.
It is also possible, however, that training would have the same effect
on both ages, i.e., in our Age x Instruction design, there would be two
main effects but no interaction. Although there are a number of ways in
which such interactions could arise, a simple interpretation would be that
the process trained was important for performance on the target task, but
that it did not contribute to developmental differences. As one example,
Huttenlocher and Burke set out to evaluate the hypothesis that
developmental differences in digit span were due to the fact that older
children grouped the input into richer "chunks."
In a standard condition,.
they found the usual developmental differences.
In a grouped condition, in
which the input string was grouped by the experimenter to simulate the
chunking presumably done by older subjects, both the young and old subjects
improved, and to about the same degree. Thus, the intervention that might
have been expected to reduce the developmental difference by being more
effective or necessary for the younger group was equally effective for all
Similar effects have been obtained by Lyon using college
students who differ in terms of memory span. Interventions designed to
reduce individual differences by providing "expert help" to the lower
scorers improved everyone's performance and had no effect on the magnitude
of individual differences.
A final possibility is that age (or ability) and instruction will
interact, but that group differences will get larger rather than smaller.
For example, young children may do more poorly than an older group before
training, but after both groups have been trained, the difference may have
increased. This "divergent effect" has already been noted in the Siegler
 and Brown et al. studies reviewed earlier, and is a far from
infrequent finding . In fact, when
performance in some open-ended domain is being investigated, it may be the
modal outcome. The implication of this pattern would be that the trained
routine was not exploited efficiently (if at all) by the more advanced
students prior to training and that its use requires some additional skills
or knowledge before it can be utilized to maximal effect. More capable
learners are better able to profit from incomplete instruction as they are
more likely to possess those necessary resources and Brown et al. studies reviewed
earlier. It is also important to emphasize that the particular pattern
obtained in any study -- convergence, parallel improvement, or divergence
-- can depend upon the criterion against which the training is evaluated.
To illustrate this point, consider the Brown et al. recall readiness
training study . Which of the three patterns best
typifies the results?
Recall that if we adjust for memory span
differences, the MA 6 and MA 8 groups did not differ significantly prior to
training. Immediately after training, the subjects were given a prompted
posttest (on which they were told to continue executing the trained
activity); both groups improved significantly, and there was still no
reliable difference between them. Given these data, parallel improvement
could be said to be the result. When unprompted tests were given a day
later, however, the younger group abandoned the trained routines, and their
performance reverted to baseline levels.
The older subjects, in contrast,
continued to perform well, and for the first time, there was a significant
difference between the groups.
If degree of independent (unprompted)
learning is the criterial task, a divergent pattern is obtained.
to that the fact that the older children demonstrated transfer to a recall
task, the divergent pattern becomes even more pronounced. Thus, even
studies which produce convergence when initial response to instruction is
the metric might turn out to produce a divergent effect if maintenance and
transfer probes are included (Campione & Brown, in press).
To the extent
that this is true, the frequency of these effects would be underestimated
in the literature, as the majority of studies have centered on the
immediate effects of training.
As Snow and Yalow (in press) have suggested, a divergent effect is a
frequent finding. Our interpretation is that it indicates that advanced
students can profit from some of the same, or at least similar, programs
administered to less capable students. The kinds of instructional
variables and interventions investigated with young and poor learners, far
from being unnecessary or inappropriate with average to above average
learners, may actually produce more pronounced benefits when applied to
them. We will elaborate on this conclusion after considering some work in
the area of comprehension.
2. Comprehension research. Although there has been considerably less
relevant instructional research in the area of comprehension, we would
argue that the patterns that are beginning to emerge are very similar to
those in the memory area. We might first note that there is a good reason
why there has been a relative lack of intervention research in this area -we do not understand understanding as well as we understand deliberate
memorizing. Whereas we can specify in some detail the activities and
variables that can be expected to lead to durable memory of some set(s) of
information, and can, thus, be quite explicit in terms of instruction, this
is not true to the same extent for comprehension. Although it may be true
that a learner need not be aware of a set of processes being employed in
the service of memory or comprehension for those processes to produce the
desired effect, it is much more difficult to see how a teacher could
transmit such skills explicitly if she is not aware of them. As more
empirical and theoretical attention has been expended on comprehension
processes , we have become better able to
devise methods of improving students' ability to comprehend texts; and the
number of instructional studies is increasing rapidly.
Before addressing the instructional research, we can note some high
level similarities between the comprehension and memory areas.
tetrahedral model offered by Jenkins as a way of organizing the
memory literature works equally well with only minor modifications when
applied to comprehension .
To illustrate
some parallels, comprehension and recall of texts are influenced by the
reader's activities, the reader's schematic and specific knowledge, and the
interactions among these variables.
In this sphere of activities, Brown and Smiley reported that
over a wide age range, subjects' ability to profit from a study period
depended upon the study behaviors they displayed. Subjects, regardless of
age, who demonstrated some appropriate study activity, either underlining
or notetaking, recalled more on their second attempt; again ageindependent, those who did not show evidence of such activities failed to
improve from their first to second recall.
Regarding schematic knowledge, research inspired by the story grammar
approach has succeeded in formalizing some of the
structural properties of well-formed stories, properties that are
appreciated by even quite young children. Texts that correspond closely to
this structure tend to be more readily comprehended and recalled .
Furthermore, as discussed in
Section III.B, the availability of specific background knowledge influences
both the form and amount of what is comprehended and recalled from a
narrative, be the learner a college student 
or a child .
An example of a learning activities x knowledge interaction can also
be found in the Brown and Smiley series of experiments. The ability
of their subjects to profit from reasonable learning activities depended
upon those subjects' ability to make use of specific knowledge about the
domain being studied.
Subjects who underlined or took notes during study
did not benefit from those activities unless they were able to identify the
main points of the story. That is, subjects at any of the different ages
studied could profit from an additional study period only if they knew what
the main points of the narrative were and engaged in an appropriate
learning activity.
We can now turn to some of the parallels in the intervention research.
Again, there are two major avenues open to those who would try to enhance
performance -- modify the materials or modify the learner. Regarding
materials, the data generated by the story grammar approach represent one
relevant example. Stories written to conform to a canonical form are
better understood than those that are not.
A second example of the modify materials approach, and an extremely
popular one among researchers, is to provide adjunct questions to go along
with the text question would be "successful" if students were more likely to
answer a subsequent (test) question on specific material than if it had not
been highlighted during reading. A "successful" comprehension-inducing
question would result in an increase in test accuracy on both items that
had and had not been specifically questioned. As Anderson and Biddle
 report, the specific effects are much more impressive than the
general ones.
One implication of these results is that such adjunct aids can be used
to increase the likelihood that students know what the main points of the
lesson are, an accomplishment that is far from trivial. The immediate
benefit is that students are more likely to learn the important points
given a single reading of the text than might otherwise be the case. An
additional, and more subtle, outcome is that they should be in a better
position to benefit from additional study than they would be without the
questions. Recall that in the Brown and Smiley experiments, only
students who were able to demonstrate that they could identify the main
points of a passage demonstrated further gains in recall as a result of
extra study time; simply rereading the passages produced no improvement.
In these ways, attention-directing questions can be extremely helpful.
Note that the interventions aimed at the materials follow the general
format of blind training studies. Stories are restructured, or additional
questioning is provided, but the students are not taught to facilitate
their own learning in situations where the narrative is not well-formed, or
where helpful questions are not provided. In our view, these studies are
aimed at facilitating learning of a particular text, but not learning to
learn from texts in general .
There are also a number of studies in which the main aim has been to
modify the activities of the learner by teaching them some comprehensionrelated skills. One prerequisite of training studies of this type is the
specification of the critical skills or activities in sufficient detail to
enable an instructor to outline them to the student. We will use as an
example training basic rules of summarization. Brown and Day (in press)
described in detail the developmental progression associated with the use
of five rules that were (in order of difficulty):
(1) deletion of trivia,
(2) redundancy, (3) superordination of examplars of a concept, (4)
selection, and (5) invention of topic sentences (see Section III for a
discussion). Day taught these rules to junior college students.
The students differed in ability and in the type of instruction afforded
them. The "control" treatment was similar to traditional summary writing
instructions; the students were told to be economical with words, include
all the main ideas, etc., but no further details were provided to help
students follow these instructions. Another condition involved a listing
and demonstration of the set of rules developed in the prior research
(similar to informed training); and yet another included both the rules and
explicit instructions regarding the managment and overseeing of those rules
(self-control training).
Consider first only the highest ability group, students with no
diagnosed reading or writing problems. Prior to training, their summaries
were generally poor; they used the simplest deletion rules quite well but
showed little evidence of use of the more complex rules. They did,
however, respond to training and began to produce better summaries.
of significance, the students continued to manifest this improvement in
class assignments administered several weeks later by their teachers.
As with less mature learners in the earlier memory studies, it appears
that these older students have not acquired some specific skills that are
needed to facilitate performance in summarization tasks. Instruction based
on an in-depth analysis of the underlying cognitive processes (Brown & Day,
in press) does lead to substantial improvement. Consider also a comparison
of the informed and self-control treatments. Differences as a function of
instructional conditions were found, but only in the case of the most
complex rule taught. For simple and intermediate difficulty rules
(deletion, superordination and selection), informed training was sufficient
to lead to maximal performance levels; however, for the most difficult
rule, invention, use was better in the self-control than in the informed
condition. When complex (for the particular learner) routines are being
taught, inclusion of a self-control component appears necessary for optimal
use of those routines.
Day also worked with students varying in ability.
She included
groups of junior college students who were average (in regular classes) or
poor (in remedial classes) writers.
For the simplest rules, nothing
dramatic occurred; all students used those rules well prior to and
following training. We will consider here only the more difficult rules --
superordination, selection, and invention. The ability groups did not
differ significantly in their use of any of these rules prior to training.
For the superordination rule, both groups improved, and to approximately
the same extent; a pattern of parallel improvement was obtained. With the
most difficult rules, a divergent ability x instruction interaction was
found; although both groups improved significantly following training,
average writers improved significantly more than poor writers. Thus,
within this experiment, the form of the ability x instruction interaction
varied as a function of rule difficulty. The more difficult the rule being
taught, the greater the tendency toward a divergent effect. Day also
included a group of students who were taking both remedial reading and
writing courses. These more severely learning impaired students did not
differ from the other groups prior to training, but the divergent effect
was even more pronounced on, for example, the selection rule when their
data were included. With the most difficult invention rule, these students
with severe reading and writing problems did not improve at all, even after
the most explicit (self-control) instruction. Overall, the tendency toward
divergence increased as rule difficulty increased, and the magnitude of
that divergence increased as the ability difference increased.
In summary, if we consider a number of instructional experiments which
have included groups of students differing in age or ability and/or have
involved manipulations of the complexity of the skills being taught, a
general pattern begins to emerge. The most basic point is that poor
performance often results from a failure of the learner to bring to bear
specific routines of skills important for optimal performance. In this
case, she needs to be taught explicitly what those rules are. This in turn
requires a detailed theoretical analysis of the domain in question;
otherwise, we cannot specify the skills in sufficient detail to enable
instruction. A second recurrent theme is that this requirement is more
pronounced the poorer the learner, because the need for complete
instruction increases with the severity of the learning problem.
Given that specific skills need to be taught, is it necessary for
their teaching to be supplemented by the inclusion of more general selfcontrol routines? One generalization that emerges is that the answer to
this question depends upon the complexity of the routines being taught. We
emphasize, however, that complexity is determined not only by the specific
skills to be trained but also by learner characteristics such as prior
knowledge, interest, overall ability, etc. Complexity does not reside
solely in the skills but is an interactive function of the factors involved
in the tetrahedral model. More mature learners already have some practice
with executive/regulatory skills in other domains and hence are better able
to supplement blind training regimes for themselves; but even in their
case, as complexity increases, "metacognitive supplements" to instruction
may be needed before optimal effects of instruction can be found.
3. General and/or specific skills? Throughout the discussion of
training studies, we have made reference to specific and general skills,
although we appreciate that the terms are problematic. Nonetheless, there
are a number of important questions that arise in this context concerning
the kinds of activities we should target for instruction. Should we teach
specific skills, or general skills, or both? To reduce the ambiguity, we
can refer to a helpful discussion of the general-specific issue provided by
Newell . He made use of an inverted cone metaphor, the base of which
contains many (hundreds?) of specific routines; these specific routines are
also powerful ones. They are specific in that they are serviceable in only
a highly limited number of cases; they are powerful in that once they are
accessed, problem solution should follow (assuming only that they are
executed properly).
An example would be a task-specific rehearsal
strategy. It is important to note that as we move up the cone, there is a
tradeoff between generality and power. At the tip of the cone, there are a
few highly general but weak routines -- general in that they are applicable
to almost any problem-solving situation but weak in that they alone will
not lead to problem solution. Examples here include exhortations to stay
on task, or to monitor progress. These are weak in that, for example,
merely noticing that progress is not being made or that learning is not
occurring cannot rectify the situation unless the student brings to bear
more powerful routines that can result in better learning.
In this view, one answer to the question of teaching general or
specific skills is clear. Both types are necessary. If there are students
who do possess most of the specific procedures needed for mastery within
some domain, instruction aimed primarily at general self-regulatory skills
would be indicated. It is in situations of this type that Meichenbaum
 has produced very impressive results.
In contrast, there may be students who have internalized many of the .selfregulatory routines and are highly likely to employ them whenever learning.
What they may lack in a new problem are the powerful and specific
procedures unique to that domain. As we have already discussed, the
relative emphasis on general and specific skills in a particular case will
vary as a function of both the ability of the learner and the complexity of
the procedures being taught.
Within this view, we can characterize the research we have described
thus far as involving very specific and very general skills. This
general-specific dimension is also related to ease of transfer. Specific
skills are powerful enough to enable problem solution if they are accessed;
but the problem of access or transfer remains a major one. The executive,
self-regulatory skills that are weak evade the transfer problem, as they
are appropriate in almost any situation; no subtle evaluation of task
demands is necessary. The result of including both types of skills in
training programs is clear; use of the instructed activity is more
effective on the original training task (cf. Paris et al., in press), and
there is evidence of increased transfer .
however, that the experimental work has involved single strategies and
their use, not larger sets of specific skills -- and it is the latter case
that is more typical of educational settings.
For example, some reading
programs involve upwards of 200 separate skills (cf. Campione & Armbruster,
in press). Even presuming that the list could be dramatically reduced, the
task of accessing, coordinating, and sequencing those skills remains a
formidable one.
Rather than teaching a large number of specific routines and some
extremely general supervisory ones, an alternative approach would be to
identify and teach "intermediate level" skills, or packages of skills.
These would be more general than the extremely specific routines
investigated in much of the literature and taught in many school settings,
but at the same time more powerful than the self-regulatory skills that
have attracted so much recent interest. We will describe one example of a
successful attempt of this type, and at the same time indicate some of the
interplay between theory development and instructional research.
The experiment we will use, reported by Palincsar and Brown can
be related to the adjunct question literature. One major difference is
that whereas in prior research, the questions were provided for the student
in an attempt to facilitate learning, Palincsar and Brown attempted to
teach students to provide their own questions.
In this way, they hoped to
foster both learning and learning to learn. A second major difference is
in the nature of the questions involved. In the adjunct question
literature, the effects were extremely limited; students' learning of
specifically questioned items improved, but the more general
comprehension-inducing consequences were limited at best. This is not
surprising in retrospect, as there was no compelling theoretical rationale
underlying the construction and choice of questions.
In fact, many
investigators did not even believe it necessary to provide examples
 .
It is in the context of question generation that recent theoretical
ideas become important. The notion that readers should engage in periodic
self-interrogation while reading is not new, although it has become an even
more common suggestion of late .
direct interest are specific suggestions about the kinds of questions
students should be taught to ask. Although the list is a long one, there
is considerable agreement that the questions should both allow
comprehension monitoring and facilitate comprehension.
To cite a few examples, Collins and Smith (in press) emphasize the
continuous process of hypothesis generation, evaluation, and revision while
reading. They distinguish between two main types -- interpretations and
predictions. Interpretations are hypotheses about what is happening now;
predictions are hypotheses about what will happen next. It is clear that
good readers engage in these activities while reading, just as they make
and test inferences of many kinds (Trabasso, Stein, & Johnson, in press).
They also engage in critical evaluation of ambiguous and contradictory
segments of texts . Poor
readers are much less likely to generate these activities. Novice readers
also experience difficulties with "lower-level" functions such as checking
that they remain on task and simply paraphrasing sections to see if they understand
and remember the gist of sections they have read (Brown & Day, in press).
As described in section IV, the training program devised by Palincsar
and Brown was based on these analyses; and they set out to teach students
to paraphrase and summarize sections of the texts they were reading,
anticipate questions that might be asked, and predict what the author might
go on to say next.
As the results have already been described, we will
simply mention that large improvements in comprehension and recall (500 -
600% increases on laboratory measures) were obtained, and that those
improvements were found on passages that the students read independently,
in both laboratory and classroom settings. Compared with the skills
typically investigated in instructional research, teaching this routine was
not easy. The instructor worked individually with students for many
sessions, modeling the kinds of questions she wished students to produce
and initially helping them formulate some of their attempts. Students were
continually reminded of why these activities were useful, given feedback
concerning their effectiveness, and told that they should engage in such
self-questioning any time they studied.
Improvement took time, but
eventually the students were able to generate appropriate questions without
help. The return on the investment appears well worth the extra time and
effort. The self-questioning approach is quite general, being applicable
to a wide variety of texts.
In this way, the transfer problem is in some
sense "finessed," as the occasions for use of the instructed activities are
quite clear.
D. The Problem of Transfer
We have spent considerable time talking about transfer and its
importance to both developmental theory and educational practice.
Throughout, we argued that major differences between young and old learners
reside in their ability to access and flexibly use competencies they are
known to possess .
No one would want to claim
that a student had learned how to remember if the only data involved the
student's ability to recite one set of materials that had been practiced
frequently. Thus, the entire discussion of learning to learn is really a
discussion of the importance of transfer. In this section, we would like
to elaborate upon our earlier discussions and deal with the transfer issue
in more depth.
1. Relationships between learning and transfer. Our first point
concerns the interdependence of learning and transfer. Consider some
prototypical situations where transfer tasks are used for purposes of
assessment. When evaluating training studies or school curricula, we
frequently say that one method produced greater transfer than the other;
similarly, we sometimes speak of individuals who "learned the training
material but failed to transfer." Statements such as these can often be
misinterpreted in that transfer is seen as some process that occurs after
"learning" has taken place.
Imagine a situation where students practice until they are able to
solve all the problems in a text (a statistics text, for example) and then
receive new, but similar, problems on an exam. If they fail the exam, does
it make sense to say that they learned but failed to transfer? It seems
equally if not more appropriate to say that, in a very important sense,
they failed to learn. Similarly, imagine that groups of children receive
instruction on calculating the area of squares and triangles; some learn by
memorizing formulas and others learn by "insight" .
Imagine that the two groups now receive a new problem which requires them
to calculate the area of a parallelogram and that the "insight" group does
better. Has this second group "transferred farther" or has it learned
different things?
It seems clear that the concepts of learning and transfer are closely
interrelated .
Furthermore, it could be
misleading to assume that transfer is solely due to some process that
happens after learning occurs. A major problem with the latter assumption
is that it presupposes a unitary and clearcut definition of "learning," yet
there are many ways to define learning. For example, Bransford 
describes the study activities of a student preparing for an exam in
statistics. The student could solve all the problems on the study sheets
and hence felt prepared for the exam. A friend cut out the problems from
each sheet, shuffled them and asked the student to try again. This time
the student failed miserably; he thought he had learned to solve the
problems, but he was inadverently relying on chapter cues in order to
choose the formulas and principles that were applicable to each problem.
The student had learned something, of course, but he had not learned in a
way that would allow him to function without the explicit use of chapter
(Note that the "experiment" conducted by the friend could have been
done by the student herself. We will argue that such self-testing is the
kind of activity that characterizes successful academic performers.)
Although it may be possible operationally to specify an "acquisition
point," where some skill or bit of knowledge is originally acquired and a
later transfer or "retrieval" point where that information is to be used,
nonetheless it is a mistake to think of the processes involved as
unrelated. What is learned and the related issue of how it is learned
influence subsequent use. Indeed, one traditional use of transfer tests is
to assess what it is that people have learned. And, the act of learning
something new is itself a type of transfer task; people must activate
potential skills and knowledge in order to understand and master new
content and principles. But this is not to say that learning automatically
leads to transfer. When the new learning situation is introduced, it is
frequently necessary for the student to search actively for the resources
she has which are relevant to the solution of that problem (see Section
III.B.2); both the tendency to search for, and the ability to find,
appropriate resources are initimately involved in successful performance.
To advance our theories of development and refine our educational programs,
we need to identify the kinds of search and problem-solving strategies,
both strong and weak, used by successful learners.
2. The Recognition of Problem Isomorphs. Many of the difficulties of
transfer seem to involve the process of recognizing "problem isomorphs"
 -- recognizing that che new
situation is similar to one encountered previously. For example, Gick and
Holyoak presented college students with a task such as Duncker's
 radiation story. The problem is that a certain ray can destroy a
malignant tumor. If the rays reach the tumor with sufficient intensity,
the tumor will be destroyed. Unfortunately, at this intensity, healthy
tissue will also be destroyed. The solution is to send the rays from
different angles so that they meet simultaneously at the point of the tumor
and hence summate to produce the required intensity. Healthy tissue is not
destroyed because the single rays are not strong enough to do damage.
Students who had successfully solved this problem were given the
structurally isomorphic problem of the attack-dispersion scenario. A
fortress is located in the center of a country, many roads radiate from the
fortress but they are guarded such that any large body of men attempting to
infiltrate the fortress would be apprehended. A general who wishes to
attack the fortress must adopt the solution of dispersing his troops and
sending them in small groups to meet at the attack point, the fortress.
The disperse and summate rule is nearly identical to the rule required for
the radiation-tumor problem.
In the absence of hints to use the preceding story to help them solve
the new problem, students' transfer was less than impressive. Similar
studies examining transfer between homomorphic or isomorphic versions of
well-defined laboratory puzzle problems, such as missionaries and cannibals
 and Towers of Hanoi ,
have also failed to find a great deal of spontaneous transfer. It should
not be surprising, therefore, that young children also need hints that
formally identical problems with different surface structures are indeed
occasions for transfer (Crisafi & Brown, in preparation).
What is at issue in the recent research on problem isomorphs is a
revival of the traditional Thorndike and Woodworth transfer theory
of identical elements. They argued that transfer will occur across tasks
only to the extent that the tasks share identical elements. Some version
of identical elements theories has persisted .
Thorndike and Woodworth defined identical elements
primarily in terms of physical features of the task. But as an earlier
identical elements theorist, Hoffding (1892), pointed out, the real problem
with transfer lies not in the physical dimensions of the task environment
but in the perceived similarity of task domains as constructed by the
learner. Hoffding's position is very similar to contemporary theories of
tranfer of training.
In additional to noting that degree of physical
similarities among task context can determine transfer, Hoffding was
concerned with perceived similarity between situations; how new situations
elicit old responses, how a new situation comes to be connected with the
stored trace of previous learning, i.e., the famous Hoffding step (1892)
that is still in its many guises a central problem for psychology.
Common elements may be the key to transfer, but they are difficult to
define. And if people use the wrong elements for classifying the current
situation, one would expect many errors. Studies of expert versus novice
problem solvers suggest that the "elements" used to recognize problem types
can have important effects on performance. For example, novices tend to
use key words in the problem format when they are asked to sort problems
into types; in contrast, experts generally sort on the basis of underlying
conceptual identities . An important outcome of increasing expertise
within a domain and an important determinant of transfer may, therefore,
involve the ability to recognize the appropriate types of commonalities;
otherwise, a problem may be misclassified and hence approached in an
inappropriate way.
Assumptions about the importance of recognizing that a new situation
is similar to old ones seem to underlie many methods of training. When we
explicitly "train for transfer" we often try to help people learn to
identify appropriate "elements."
For example, "training in multiple
contexts" is a principle that is endorsed by many theorists because it
decreases the likelihood that a particular piece of information will be
welded to a particular context, and hence it increases the probability of
performing well on transfer tasks .
Similarly, the practice
of encouraging learners to state a general rule is effective in inducing
transfer.because it highlights that general rule and makes it explicit
 .
Training in multiple
contexts with explicit statements made concerning the general rule
increases the probability of effective transfer.
Related examples of training for transfer involve what Feuerstein and
colleagues call "bridging." Students may learn a general principle
and then be helped to see how it applies to particular situations such as
social problem solving, learning mathematics and so forth. That is,
explicit instruction is given in the range of applicability of the concept
 .
The assumption underlying bridging
is that the children need to see how particular principles apply to new
situations; otherwise, they may fail to utilize the principles in these
situations.
To summarize, the preceding examples suggest that "problem
recognition" plays an important role in transfer.
If people are unable to
see how a new situation is related to ones previously encountered, it is
difficult to imagine how transfer could occur. When we "train for
transfer" we are implicitly acknowledging the importance of problem
recognition; people who are simply asked to memorize principles, formulas
or concept definitions or who learn a strategy only in one context may not
recognize that these are applicable in other situations.
By illustrating a
variety of situations or contexts in which learners may profitably use
their knowledge and strategies, we are increasing the probability that
transfer will occur.
3. Static vs. dynamic approaches to transfer. In many of the
examples we have discussed, the aim is to modify instruction to lead to
transferrable learning products. Training in multiple contexts, for
example, is designed to teach not only a rule (strategy, bit of knowledge,
etc.), but also to provide information that the rule is of somewhat general
use. Further, an attempt is made to illustrate something about the range of
applicability of the rule in question. Seeing the rule applied in several
contexts allows the learner to understand its significance and to infer
some of the properties of situations in which it is applicable. The rule
thus learned has become in some sense a "transferrable" item in the
learner's knowledge base. We see this as a static aspect of transfer. The
learner has acquired a resource that can be brought to bear in a number of
situations; when those situations appear, she is likely to access the
specific rule and, thus, perform well.
There is, however, another aspect of transfer we would like to
emphasize. We can consider situations in which specific resources
necessary for problem solution are not in the learner's repertoire and ask
what, if any, transfer might be expected in that case. To be more
concrete, the present authors would be unable to solve numerous physics
problems because we lack the content knowledge necessary to do so; in this
situation, whatever general skills and strategies we possess would do us
little good.
Should one, therefore, conclude that there is no transfer
from the present author's area of psychology to many areas of physics?
answer is that it depends upon the approach to transfer that one takes.
The transfer task just described (asking psychologists to solve
physics problems) represents a static approach to transfer; the basic
question being addressed is "What do these psychologists know at this
particular point in time?" This is very different from the question:
these psychologists learn to solve physics problems?"
From the perspective
of this dynamic approach, there can be transfer from psychology to the
physics domain.
Recently, one of the present authors (JDB) decided to learn about a
new area of physics and to keep a log of the experience. A physicist
picked a particular topic and supplied relevant material to be read. The
psychologist found the task difficult but it seemed clear that there were
many general skills and strategies that facilitated learning. These
included (a) a general sense of what it meant to understand something
rather than merely memorize it, (b) the ability to recognize that some
texts were more advanced than others and that the advanced texts were not
the place to begin, (c) the ability to recognize when certain technical
terms were crucial and needed to be understood more adequately, (d)
knowledge of the need to search for relevant examples of certain concepts
and principles that were defined abstractly in a particular passage, (e)
knowledge of the importance of removing examples and example problems from
the text context, randomizing them, and seeing if one really understood
them, (f) the ability and willingness to formulate questions to ask a
physicist when the texts would not suffice, and (g) the ability to
determine whether the physicist's answers to those questions made sense (to
the learner, that is).
Perhaps the most important information available to the experienced
learner was that the texts were objectively difficult, fault did not rest
with his learning potential but with inadequacies in his background
knowledge. The learner was, therefore, willing to ask questions of the
expert rather than give up the endeavor for fear of seeming stupid. In
general, the learner knew something about how to learn and hence was aware
of the difficulties to be expected as well as some of the mistakes to avoid
(merely memorizing rather than trying to understand, looking up each and
every unknown word, placing equal weight on all concepts, for example).
Note that the psychologist's knowledge of how to approach the problem
of learning new information could not be tapped by a static measure that
simply assessed the ability to solve physics problems. The psychologist
lacked information necessary to solve these problems; if this information
is not available in the testing environment it is impossible to assess the
degree to which someone is able to use it in order to learn. Questions
about learning and transfer require a dynamic approach (Brown & Ferrara, in
Both the static and dynamic approaches to transfer are important and
valid; we sometimes want to assess what someone knows (static approach) and
at other times to assess what they can learn (the dynamic approach).
example, most current measures of achievement are static measures that
assess the current state of people's knowledge and skills.
information can be important and useful; we often need to know whether a
learner has the necessary skills and knowledge for handling a particular
course or job. It would be unwise for a physics department who needed an
expert in astrophysics to hire our psychologist who knows no physics
"because the psychologist knows how to learn."
Even efficient learners
would require too much time to develop the necessary expertise; expertise
takes time to acquire .
There are other situations where the static approach becomes much more
questionable, where we use static measures to make claims that actually
require the dynamic approach. Measures of "intelligence" are a prime case
in point. Like achievement tests, most intelligence tests are also static
measures of an individual's current level of skills and knowledge.
However, when interpreting intelligence tests we tend to translate a static
score into a ranking number (e.g., IQ = 92) that is assumed to "hold for
all time."
We argued earlier that a static test makes it difficult for us to
measure people's abilities to learn to perform more adequately. Imagine
that we give a physics test to our psychologist who know no physics (but
knows how to learn) and compare his performance with student who has
muddled through one course in physics but does not know how to learn
efficiently. The physics test may reveal that student X is much "better"
than the psychologist, but this tells us nothing about the latter's
abilities to learn physics; indeed, the learning skills of our hypothetical
psychologist may be far superior to student X.
If we used the initial test
to measure the "intelligence" of the two individuals we would be using a
static test to make a claim that actually requires a dynamic test.
Of course, creators of general intelligence tests do not use items
such as those found on physics tests because they know that people differ
greatly in terms of their experience with physics concepts.
Intelligence
tests are, therefore, putatively composed of "familiar" items that everyone
should have had an equal opportunity to learn or that are relatively
unfamiliar to everyone. Needless to say, there are many debates about
whether these conditions can ever be met, thus, we may always face some
version of the psychologist-person X problem when using static measures.
However, imagine that we could ensure that everyone had had equal exposure
to information required for answering questions on an intelligence test.
We could then assess the degree to which people were adept at learning from
their experience; however, the fact that Person A learned less from her
experience than Person B does not mean that Person A cannot learn how to
learn. If one is interested in learning potential, the problem requires a
dynamic rather than static approach ; they expect that what they learn may be relevant elsewhere and
entertain hypotheses about where and when. Simply knowing that transfer is
desirable from prior situations to the current one, or from the current one
to future ones, is itself part of the battle. Good learners perform
thought experiments, seek appropriate analogies, and understand some of the
principles involved in learning and reasoning from incomplete knowledge
 .
To repeat, good learners
supplement incoming information in a number of clever ways to facilitate
their own learning. Instruction may well be incomplete, but they have the
skills to "complete" it for themselves.
We conclude this section by noting that these skills tend not to be
taught explicitly, and that there is growing evidence that even many
college students do not acquire them incidentally (Chipman et al., in
Given this growing awareness, fostered in large part by basic
research efforts, it is not surprising that this situation is changing, and
the amount of attention devoted to teaching "cognitive skills" is
increasing.
E. Beyond Cold Cognition
In this section, we would like to emphasize that there is more to
effective learning to learn than the issue of how instructors should impart
"pearls of cognitive wisdom."
Important factors involved in learning to
learn are emotional as well as strictly cognitive. Poor performance can be
due to objective facts such as deficient materials, inappropriate learning
activities, or unexpected criterial tasks. But many children may add to
their difficulties by attributing their poor performance to themselves (to
their "lack of intelligence," for example) rather than to other factors in
the tetrahedral framework .
Variations in opinions about oneself as a learner seem to be extremely
important for understanding normal and atypical development and for
designing programs that might help students learn to learn more
effectively.
Virtually everything we have discussed so far involves what many would
call the "cold cognitive" aspect of learning .
But there are
other dimensions to learning that are extremely important; for example,
people have feelings about particular learning tasks and about themselves
as learners that can have pervasive effects on their performance
 , or of their incapacity to solve
certain types of problems. Some children actively resist learning because
their peers think it inappropriate or demeaning or
because of their own diagnosis of personal incompetency. A particularly
sweeping self-diagnosis was given by Daniel, a learning disabled ten-yearold, who worked with the first author. Upon encountering his first
laboratory task, Daniel volunteered this telling comment:
"Is this a
memory thing?" (it wasn't) -- "Didn't they tell you I can't do this stuff?"
-- "Didn't they tell you I don't have a memory?" Given this devastating
estimate of his own ability, it is not surprising that Daniel would be
diagnosed as passive, even resistant in situations that he classifies as
tests of his non-existent faculty. It would take many sessions of
systematically mapping out the specific nature of his memory problem,
providing feedback about just where the problem was acute, but also where
there were no problems at all, before Daniel could derive a more realistic
evaluation of his learning problem, and as a consequence, would be willing
to attempt active learning strategies, to overcome a recognized problem.
It is by no means difficult, therefore, to imagine ways that negative
feelings about a task or about oneself can affect learning. Nor is it
surprising that people tend to avoid situations that tap their area of
weakness, thus conspiring to provide themselves with less practice in areas
where it is most needed. Teachers inadvertently conspire to help students
do this by, for example, addressing questions to students capable of
answering and passing by those that need help, to save everyone
embarrassment. For example, recent observations of reading groups have shown that good and poor readers are not
treated equally. Good readers are questioned about the meaning behind what
they are reading, asked to evaluate and criticize material, etc. By
contrast, poor readers receive primarily drill in pronunciation and
decoding. Rarely are they given practice in qualifying and evaluating
their comprehension .
There is considerable evidence that
teachers give less experience in this learning mode to those who, because
of their lack of prior experience, need it most .
A plausible emotional block to effective learning involves an
inefficient use of limited attention because a significant amount of
cognitive effort is being directed to self-defeating, anxiety-producing,
self-evaluation.
If learners focus on thoughts such as "I can't do this"
or "I'm going to fail again," they will not be able to attend to the
details of the actual problem. Such negative ideation 
can have a paralyzing effect on learning (Dweck, companion volume).
Another related block to learning includes a lack in the confidence
necessary to debug one's own errors. Some learners may not be sufficiently
secure to enable them to tolerate mistakes; hence, they may ignore any
errors they make, or forget about them as quickly as possible .
Others may refuse to take the risk of responding
incorrectly and hence be deprived of valuable feedback. It seems clear
that the "cold cognitive" aspects of learning are only part of a much
larger system that influences development; indeed, the purely cognitive
aspects may be less primary than we like to think they are.
F. Beyond Isolated Cognition
In this last section, we would like to stress that learning is not
only a less purely cognitive activity than we often suppose; but it is also
a less individual activity than might be readily apparent from a
consideration of learning studies. We do not have space to deal in depth
with this issue, but an excellent treatment is given in the Laboratory of
Comparative Human Cognition chapter in a companion volume to this. Here we
will discuss only one issue to illustrate the importance of social
mediation in learning.
We will concentrate on tutors as agents of change
in cognitive development (see also Section IV.B).
In our previous discussion -of training studies we portrayed parents,
teachers, and researchers as dispensers of "pearls of cognitive wisdom."
Effective mediators do much more than focus on particular concepts and
strategies that may improve task performance; they respond to individuals
who may feel confident, anxious, enthused, threatened, defiant and so
forth. Cognitively oriented developmental researchers who derive most of
their developmental information from laboratory tasks often deal almost
exclusively with relatively "enthused" individuals .
experimenters go to considerable lengths to design experiments that are
interesting and non-threatening; they attempt to structure the situation in
ways that will minimize potential problems of "hot" cognition. This
strategy is both practical and humane, of course, but it can also lead
researchers to overlook emotional resistance to learning because they
rarely confront it in their experimental work . In
addition, many of the experimental procedures for insuring cooperation,
enthusiasm, and so forth are relegated to the domain of "lab lore" rather
than viewed as an integral part of a theory of development.
researchers, we routinely use our intuitions to structure "optimal"
learning environments, yet give little thought to the fact that the learner
and experimenter are interacting within the confines of that environment.
If the situation were changed, if we were unable to convince people to
cooperate in a training study, for example, any pearls of cognitive wisdom
we wished to offer would have very little effect.
The literature on parent/child interactions provides illuminating
examples of the social basis of teaching and learning. The basic unit of
learning and teaching is one of dialogue (both verbal and non-verbal)
rather than a monologue ; children
and their mediators influence one another and make mutual adjustments.
example, effective mediators use feedback from the learner in order to
determine whether to repeat an instruction, put the instruction into
simpler words, and so forth. Effective mediators estimate the child's
"region of sensitivity to instruction" and work from there ; even teachers who seem to be lecturing in a monologue
attempt to anticipate the needs of their audience and make use of student
Many of the activities employed by effective mediators are
specifically focused on "cold cognitive" aspects of instruction, on
particular concepts, factual knowledge, or strategies, for example. But
effective mediators do much more than impart cognitive lore. They
encourage children, try to help them stay on task, express joy at the
child's accomplishments, and so forth. Learning proceeds smoothly when
child and mediator are in "synchrony" .
But, it is
often very difficult to establish and maintain this synchrony; many of the
moves made by effective mediators are designed to do just this.
To give one example, a side benefit of the zone of proximal
development testing procedures being developed (Brown & Ferrara, in press;
Campione, Brown, & Ferrara, in press) is that of increasing the child's
feelings of competence. The procedure is such that if children fail to
solve a problem unaided, they are given a set of increasingly explicit
hints toward solution. The interactive and collaborative value of the
adult/child relationship is such that the children believe that they are
collaborating in the problem solving process. Even when the adult provides
such explicit clues that the answer is virtually given to the children, the
prior collaboration leads the children to maintain faith in their own vital
part in the learning solution. They seem to feel they have worked towards
a solution that they eventually discover for themselves (Brown & Ferrara,
in press).
This interpretation was not generally made by a group of
elderly women who took part in a similar zone of proximal development study
 .
Threatened by the test-like problems, and deeply unsure of
their own cognitive competence, the women interpreted the hints as a
indication of their failure. Help often had to be terminated after two or
three hints as the situation became intolerable. These data point out the
importance of the learner's attitude in training studies and testing
situations. Having in general a healthy self-image, academically
successful children are able to capitalize on hints even when given
inadvertently in standard testing situations .
who have already experienced more than their fair share of academic failure
often fail to benefit from such aid because they are too busy covering up
their supposed incompetence.
Mediators vary in how effectively they can establish the necessary
empathy so that learning can occur. The present authors have had the
opportunity to observe video tapes of Feuerstein working with
academically less successful adolescents. Feuerstein is a gifted
clinician, a "cognitive therapist," if you will. He does a great deal of
prompting in order to help children improve their approaches to various
academic problems, but this is only part of his function; many of the moves
that he makes are designed to alter the child's general reactions to the
situation and the task. For example, one child faced with her first
figural analogy problem said, in an extremely agitated and whiney voice:
"I can't do that! I'm not used to that kind of problem."
Feuerstein's
response was:
"Of course you can't do it -- yet. Nobody can do things
well until they have learned them. You can learn to do these problems, and
I'm going to help you learn to do them."
The girl did indeed learn to
solve the problems (much to her amazement as well as her parents');
furthermore, the session ended with the girl demanding to be given more
problems when Feuerstein decided that it was time to stop.
Note that the moves Feuerstein made were designed to alter the
student's reactions to the situation; to move her from a whiney "resistive
state" dominated by negative ideation to a more
positive self-appraisal.
Feuerstein did much more than simply dispense
"pearls of cognitive wisdom." The literature in clinical psychology
contains some valuable information that is relevant in this context; for
example, Strupp and his colleagues discuss the importance of developing a "working alliance" and
Horowitz analyzes the importance of helping clients move from
"resistive states" to "working states."
Feuerstein's success has been criticized on the grounds that "it's all
Feuerstein."
A similar argument is that children learn simply "because of
good teachers" or that clinical therapy works "because of gifted
therapists."
The assumption behind such criticisms seems to be that some
mediators are "gifted" or "magic" and that is all there is to it. Much of
cognitive development is an inherently social phenomenon that depends on
effective mediation; it is not then sufficient to simply assume that some
mediators are "magic" or "gifted" and some are not. In their fascinating
book, The Structure of Magic, Bandler and Grinder analyze the
procedures used by successful therapists in order to make their procedures
more explicit and hence learnable by novices.
Similar analyses of the
methods of effective agents of change, be they teachers, tutors,
mastercraftsmen, priests, politicians or clinicians, represent important
activities for cognitive psychologists. The recent attempt by Collins and
Stevens (in press) to seek regularities in the activities of a variety of
outstanding Socratic teachers is an important contribution to the
literature.
There is an everpresent conflict faced by mediators, a conflict
between their "humanitarian side" and their "cold cognitive" side.
Mediators hesitate to push too hard for fear of making learners anxious and
unhappy (sometimes rebellious, perhaps).
But, the failure to push at all
may protect the child from learning something new. Effective learning
environments are those where the "humanitarian" and "cold cognitive" side
of mediators are not in direct conflict. Many of the moves made by
successful mediators can be viewed as attempts to create and maintain a
balance between these two dimensions.
If the balance is not developed and
maintained, effective mediation does not occur.
There are many things that mediators do intuitively that eventually
need to become part of a comprehensive theory of learning. When working
with less successful students who are anxious about being tested, an
effective mediator may adapt the role of helper or benefactor rather than
There are other common ploys that enhance learning. For
example, rather than emphasizing the student's ability (or inability) to
remember information one can focus on the degree to which the material is
easy or difficult. Students then focus on evaluating the material rather
than themselves and are open to suggestions concerning methods of making
difficult materials easier to learn.
Similarly, the ability to detect
errors in one's own work and then make revisions can be viewed as a
positive achievement rather than a sign of failure.
One of the most important aspects of effective mediation may involve
procedures that enable children to experience a sense of mastery, that let
them see that they have some control over learning situations and that
systematic analysis can lead to successful performance. An important
outcome of such mediation may be a more positive attitude toward the
general task of learning and problem solving and toward one's self as a
learner. These outcomes may be as important as "number of problems solved
successfully" although one would hope that they would be positively
correlated. Successful mediation involves much more than the act of
dispensing "pearls of cognitive wisdom."
Successful researchers in
cognitive development implicitly know this, of course, and use the
information to design effective experiments and training studies; but it is
important to move this knowledge from the domain of "lab lore" to the
domain of theory. If we do not, we may be ignoring some of the most
important influences on development that exist.
The emotional cannot be
divorced from the cognitive, nor the individual from the social.