Marital Status and Twins’ Health and Behavior: An Analysis of
Middle-Aged Danish Twins
Merete Osler, MD, DrMedSc, Matt McGue, MSc, PhD, Rikke Lund, MD, PhD, and Kaare
Christensen, MD, DrMedSc
Danish Ageing Research Center Epidemiology Unit (M.O., M.M., K.C.), Institute of Public Health,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; Department of Psychology (M.M.),
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; and Institute of Public Health (M.O., R.L.),
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Objective—To disentangle the influences on health of selection processes related to genetic and
rearing environmental factors from factors related to marriage benefits. We compared health status
among same-sex male and female twin pairs who lived together during childhood and were
discordant or concordant on adult marital status.
Methods—A cross-sectional survey of a random sample of middle-aged Danish twins was
conducted in 1998 to 1999. This study included 1175 same-sex twin pairs (52.5% monozygotic
(MZ) and 47.5% dizygotic (DZ)). Data were obtained on adult marital status and on height, body
mass index (BMI), depression symptoms, self-rated health, cognitive function, physical activity,
smoking, and alcohol intake.
Results—Among all 2350 individual twins, men who were divorced/widowed or never married
had higher depression scores, lower cognitive test scores, lower physical activity scores, and were
also less often moderate drinkers and nonsmokers compared with married men. Divorced/
widowed women had higher depression scores and those divorced/widowed or never married were
more often smokers than married women. Within twin pairs discordant on marital status, the
divorced/widowed twin had higher average depression scores and was more likely to be a smoker.
Never married twins had lower physical activity scores and never married male twins had higher
BMI and higher depression scores than their married co-twin.
Conclusion—This study suggests that the relationships of adult divorce with depression and
smoking in Danish twins are due to the stressful effects of marital dissolution, but that marital
differences in other health and behavioral outcomes are most consistent with selection effects
related to genetic or rearing environmental factors.
marital status; health status; twin study
INTRODUCTION
Living alone or being unmarried are well-known risk factors for poor health, whereas
becoming divorced or widowed is a strong predictor of mortality (1–4). At least two possible
Copyright © 2008 by the American Psychosomatic Society
Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Merete Osler, Institute of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Østre
Farimagsgade 5, 1014 Copenhagen K, Denmark. .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
 
Psychosom Med. 2008 May ; 70(4): 482–487. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e31816f857b.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
mechanisms have been suggested to explain the association between marital status and
health—marriage benefits and health selection. The protection hypothesis focuses on the
beneficial effects of marriage through, for example, better economic security, social
integration, and health behavior. The selection hypothesis assumes that persons with certain
traits or behaviors that are influenced by their genotypes or early rearing environments are
selected into marriage although some persons, for example, people with health problems, are
at a higher risk of never getting married or of getting divorced (4,5). It is difficult to
distinguish the beneficial impact of marital status on health from the confounding effect of
selection into the married state (4). However, the study of twins provides an opportunity to
isolate the effects of adult marital status from the genetic and social influences operating
early in life. Twins not only share either all (monozygotic (MZ)) or on average half
(dizygotic (DZ)) of their genes but nearly always also their childhood family environment.
Consequently, differences in MZ twin pairs implicitly control for mechanisms linked to
selection. Thus, studies of twins discordant for current marital status offer a unique
opportunity to determine whether the association of marital status with health outcomes is
consistent with marriage benefits or early selection effects.
If the association of adult marital status and health outcomes reflects selection effects only,
then we do not expect health outcome differences in MZ pairs discordant on adult marital
status because these twins are matched on early rearing environmental and genetic factors.
Alternatively, health outcome differences in DZ but not MZ pairs discordant for adult
marital status would suggest that genetic factors underlie selection effects because DZ twins
share the same rearing environment but are imperfectly matched on genotype. Finally, a
beneficial effect of marriage would be implicated by finding that both MZ and DZ twins
discordant for marital status are also discordant on health and behavior outcomes. In the
present study, we investigate whether differences in marital status influence the health and
behavior of same-sex twins who share genetic constitution and rearing environment. We use
data from a cohort of Danish twins born 1931 to 1952 and compare health status and
behavior among male and female, MZ and DZ twin pairs who lived together during
childhood and were either discordant or concordant on adult marital status.
We have used a similar approach to investigate whether differences in adult socioeconomic
circumstances influence the health and behavior of twins who share genetic constitution and
rearing environment (6). This analysis showed that, for most health outcomes, the variability
within twin pairs was related to zygosity (higher for DZ than for MZ) but not to
occupational social class, and it was concluded that the relationship between social class and
health is due mainly to selection effects rather than a causal effect of social class exposures
on health and behavior. However, marital dissolution is considered to be a stressful life
event (2,3) and marital status may have other effects on health. Thus, in the present study,
we address the following questions:
Is there an association between marital status and health in Danish twins and is the
relationship the same in men and women?
In MZ and DZ twin pairs discordant for marital status, does the health of the
married twin differ from that of the never married or divorced/widowed twin and
are any such differences larger among DZ than MZ twin pairs?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Population
The twin pairs included were members of the Middle Age Danish Twin (MADT) study (7).
The MADT sample was ascertained through the Danish Twin Registry and the Danish
Central Person Registry. This sampling framework targeted 240 twins from 120 intact twin
Osler et al.
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
pairs for each of the 22 consecutive birth
years that were randomly selected from all available twin pairs from
each of these birth years. The 120 twin pairs from each birth year consisted of 20 pairs each
of monozygotic males, monozygotic females, same-sex dizygotic males, and same-sex
dizygotic females as well as 40 pairs of opposite-sex DZ pairs. Of the 5280 individual twins
in the sampling framework, 90 died before the time the survey was undertaken and 4314
(83%) of the 5190 surviving twins participated in a personal interview and a health
examination in late 1998 or early 1999. A total of 546 participants whose twin was a
nonrespondent were excluded, leaving 1884 intact twin pairs. There were 1266 same-sex
twin pairs (52.5% MZ and 47.5% DZ) and 617 opposite-sex DZ pairs; only the same-sex
pairs are reported in the present study. The sample was further reduced by excluding 42 twin
pairs where both twins had not lived together until at least age 14 years.
Measurements
Interviews were conducted by trained interviewers from the Danish National Institute of
Social Research. The survey, which lasted on average 1½ hours, comprised a questionnaire,
and tests of cognitive and physical functioning.
Information on marital status was retrieved during the interview where participants were
asked: “What is your current marital status?” with response categories: married, living with
a partner, divorced, separated, widowed, or never married. Twin pairs were classified with
respect to their adult marital status as concordant married or living with partner (849 pairs),
discordant married or living with partner/divorced or widowed (242 pairs), and discordant
married or living with partner/never married or living with partner (84 pairs). Nine pairs
with both twins never married, 26 pairs with both twins divorced or widowed, and 14 pairs
with the combination never married/divorced or widowed were excluded. This left 1175
intact twin pairs (n = 2350 individuals) for the present analyses (Table 1).
Further, the following data on health and health behavior were collected:
Height in cm and weight in kg were self-reported and were used to calculate body mass
index (BMI).
The depression score used in the present study was based on the factor analytically derived
depression score described by McGue and Christensen (8,9). The scale consists of 17
individual symptoms of depression that cover mood and affect (e.g. “Are you happy with
your life?” “Do you sometimes feel life is not worth living?”) and the somatic sequelae of
depression (e.g. “Do you find it difficult to concentrate?” “Have you lost pleasure or interest
in doing things?”). The total depression scale score used in the present study is both
internally consistent (α > 0.85) and stable (r > .60) over a 2-year interval (9). Self-reported
health was based on responses to a single item (“How do you consider your health in
general?”), which were dichotomized as excellent/good versus fair/poor. Cognitive
functioning was assessed using a composite of six brief tests covering four major domains of
cognitive functioning (semantic memory, working memory, episodic memory, and
perceptual speed). The specific tests included in the composite were 1) fluency (the number
of different animals named in a single minute, 2) forward digit span, 3) backward digit span,
4) immediate recall of a 12-item list, 5) delayed recall of the 12-item list, and 6) a speeded
digit symbol task in which the respondent was asked to write the digit for each of a sequence
of symbols as quickly as possible. The multiple cognitive tests were positively
intercorrelated, supporting the formation of a composite score computed by summing the six
component scores after standardization. Physical activity was assessed using a 9-item self
report of the frequency and intensity of walking, running, and biking (a common form of
transport in Denmark). The resulting scale has an internal consistency reliability of 0.75.
Osler et al.
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Alcohol consumption was assessed as the number of drinks per day. Results were similar
when responses were treated as either continuous or dichotomized data (i.e., drinking 1–21
(males) or 1–14 (females) drinks per week) (yes/no), so we only report those for the
dichotomous variable. Further, we included data on current smoking (dichotomized as yes/
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Fynen and the Danish Data Protection
Statistical Analyses
Analyses were undertaken at both the individual level (the first research question, reported
in Table 2) and in terms of discordant twins pairs (the second research question, reported in
Tables 3 and 4). In the individual analyses, we used multivariable linear and logistic
regression controlling for age to investigate the association of marital status with each of the
eight outcomes (height, BMI, depression, cognitive function, physical activity, alcohol use,
smoking, and self-rated health). Possible gender differences were examined by adding an
interaction term between gender and marital status in regression models with both sexes
combined. Models with and without the interaction term were compared using likelihood
ratio tests. This revealed that gender was an interactive determinant for several outcomes;
hence, analyses were carried out for each gender separately. There is a substantial
dependence within twin correlation for many traits (e.g., height); to account for this
dependency within twin pairs, we used the Hubert-White-Sandwich (robust) estimator of
variance with a cluster option in STATA (StataCorp, College Station, TX) that relaxes the
independence assumption and only requires that the observations are independent across
clusters. Thus, the scores that enter the calculation of the estimator of variance are the sums
of the individual scores within the twin pair (10). In the second, or co-twin analyses, we
used matched pair analysis where the health score (for continuous) or the risk (odds for
dichotomous) of the outcome in the exposed (divorced or unmarried) twin is compared with
the married co-twins. Differences in the association of marital status with health/health
behavior between MZ and DZ pairs were evaluated by tests of interaction terms between
zygosity and marital status. All analyses were performed in STATA version 8 (StataCorp).
A total of 1175 twin pairs were included in the analyses and of them 51% were male, 49%
were female same-sex twin pairs (Table 1).
Table 2 describes the association of marital status with the various outcomes with the 2340
twins classified as individuals. In males, marital status was a significant predictor of all the
examined outcomes, whereas in female twins, the differences in health among the marital
status groups were small and nonsignificant, except for depression and smoking, where the
scores were highest among the divorced/widowed. The tests for gender differences in
marital status effects were significant for height, BMI, cognitive function, and physical
activity (p = .06).
Table 3 shows that among all male twins discordant on marital status, the divorced/widowed
twin had a higher depression score, a lower cognitive score, and a higher prevalence of
smoking than the married co-twin. Among all female twins discordant on marital status, the
divorced/widowed twin had a higher depression score and a borderline significant (p = .08)
higher prevalence of smoking than the married co-twin. The test for statistical interaction
between gender and marital status was significant for cognitive function. For some of the
estimates, the effects seemed to differ between MZ and DZ twin pairs; however, the
confidence intervals were wide and none of the tests for statistical interaction between
Osler et al.
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
zygosity and marital status reached significance (all p > .15). The number of discordant twin
pairs with the combination married/never married was smaller and we again found only few
differences within the discordant pairs (Table 4). Thus, never married twins of both sexes
were less physically active than their married co-twins; never married male twins had a
higher BMI and higher depression scores than their married co-twin. All the tests for
interaction with zygosity and gender were also insignificant.
DISCUSSION
This study of the association of marital status with health and behavior among randomly
sampled middle-aged Danish twins revealed the following: 1) being married was associated
with having better health status and behavior; and 2) the effects of marital status were
diminished within MZ and DZ twin pairs discordant for being married versus divorced/
widowed, and were only significant for smoking and our measure of depression. The
discordant twins did not differ consistently on other health and behavioral indicators.
In the overall sample of 2350 twins, the marriage benefit was generally greater for males
than for females, although both divorced/widowed males and females had significantly
higher rates of depression and smoking than those who were married. This is in agreement
with a number of studies showing that men seem to have a greater health benefit from
marriage than women (1,2,5,11). The rationale for the co-twin control study is that it allows
us to adjust for all mediators or confounders linked to genetic factors or rearing
environment. We chose not to include opposite sex pairs because the main purpose of the
intrapair comparison was to distinguish between the causal and the selection effects within
each gender. In the present study, male twins discordant for marital status did not differ for
levels of height, BMI, physical activity, alcohol use, and self-rated health. This finding
suggests that the marital status effect on health outcomes we observed in the individual level
analyses (Table 2) was due to selection processes related to confounding from genetic
factors or rearing environment. However, after co-twin control, we continued to observe
effects on our depression scores and on smoking. These differences are consistent with a
protective effect of marriage, although later selection effects cannot be excluded as the
dissolution of marriage for the divorced or widowed can be a stressful event that can have an
effect on behavior, such as smoking (4,12,13). We cannot exclude that the age of the cohort
may have influenced some of the findings. In many countries, smoking in women was less
accepted in the older cohorts and genetic effects may therefore possibly be more pronounced
in the women than in the men. However, in Denmark, smoking has been prevalent and
rather well accepted among women also back in 1950 to 1970 when the present cohort
initiated smoking. Thus, 40% of women were smokers in the first Danish survey on smoking
habits in 1953 and this percentage remained rather stable until the 1990s (14).
The married member of discordant male twin pairs performed better on the cognitive tests
than his divorced/ widowed co-twin. Cognitive ability is largely determined before
adulthood, when twins share a rearing environment and have the same (unmarried) marital
status. Thus, these findings suggest that the association of this outcome with marital status
likely reflects selection effects rather than an effect of marriage on cognitive functioning.
For example, poor health during childhood in one twin might influence school participation,
educational status, and subsequent cognitive abilities, and marital status. Alternatively,
cognitive function differences might be the result of social selection whereby the chance is
higher for cognitively well functioning men to get married. Differences between the two
members of male twin pairs never married/married for BMI and depression might also
reflect health selection. In discordant pairs from both sexes, the lower activity levels in
never married as compared with married twins might reflect that having a family is
associated with more activity, e.g., in the household. In general, we observed less difference
Osler et al.
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
between never married and married female twins than we observed in male twins, and this
might reflect a sex difference in factors that lead to getting married.
The twin design used here has some advantages as it makes it possible to control for both
genetic and early environmental factors. Further, the present study includes a random
sample of all middle-aged Danish twins. However, differences in social relations and health
between twins and singletons might influence the generalizability of findings from the
present study. The MADT interview included questions concerning the twins’ frequency of
contact with their co-twins and other family members. These data showed that 50% of the
twins had contact with their co-twin at least once a week, whereas 80% had contact with
children and other close family members. This frequency of contacts seems to be higher than
the 60% of the general population who report they had been in contact with close family
members within a week (15,16). We did a subanalysis on the 50% of the twins who did not
have contact with their co-twin at least once a week. Although the sample was small, the
results pointed in a similar direction as in the overall sample. Further, the prevalence of
marriage of around 86% in the present study was similar to the 90% found among middleaged Danes in 2000. Also, the prevalence of smoking was close to rates found in other
Danish surveys (15). Further, we found marital status differences in health in this twin
population (Table 2) that were comparable to those seen in other population surveys (15,16).
As a study limitation, we also need to emphasize the relative small number of discordant
twin pairs. For some of the estimates, the effects seemed to differ between MZ and DZ twin
pairs; however, the confidence intervals were wide and our data set might not have power to
detect all differences. But this, on the other hand, strengthens the discordant twin pair
findings on depression and smoking that were detected. We increased the sample size by
including the 617 opposite-sex pairs and reanalyzed all the individual level analyses. This
approach gave essentially the same results as those based on smaller same-sex sample.
However, it would complicate the co-twin analyses of differences between MZ and DZ
discordant pairs to include opposite sex pairs because all MZ are same-sex pairs.
Consequently, we restricted the co-twin analysis to samesex pairs only. Further, we compare
the results from the individual analysis with those from the co-twin analysis, and therefore
we present the results for the same-sex twin sample.
In conclusion, the present study suggests that, in Denmark, the associations of adult divorce
with depression and smoking are due to the stressful effects of marital dissolution, but that
marital differences in other health and behavioral outcomes are most consistent with
selection effects.
Acknowledgments
Kaare Christensen and Matt McGue received support by Grant P01-AG08761 from the National Institutes of Health
for the MADT. Kaare Christensen and Merete Osler received support from the Velux foundation.
body mass index
monozygotic
middle-aged Danish twins
Osler et al.
Psychosom Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript