Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
ONLINE COMMUNITY OF INQUIRY REVIEW:
SOCIAL, COGNITIVE, AND TEACHING
PRESENCE ISSUES
D. R. Garrison
University of Calgary
This paper explores four issues that have emerged from the research on social, cognitive and teaching
presence in an online community of inquiry. The early research in the area of online communities of
inquiry has raised several issues with regard to the creation and maintenance of social, cognitive and
teaching presence that require further research and analysis. The other overarching issue is the
methodological validity associated with the community of inquiry framework.
The first issue is about shifting social presence from socio-emotional support to a focus on group
cohesion (from personal to purposeful relationships). The second issue concerns the progressive
development of cognitive presence (inquiry) from exploration to resolution. That is, moving discussion
beyond the exploration phase. The third issue has to do with how we conceive of teaching presence
(design, facilitation, direct instruction). More specifically, is there an important distinction between
facilitation and direct instruction? Finally, the methodological issue concerns qualitative transcript
analysis and the validity of the coding protocol.
Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence, Community of Inquiry Framework, Methodological Validity,
Transcript Analysis
I. COMMUNITY OF INQUIRY
While we have been relatively successful in identifying the properties of asynchronous learning networks,
a more in-depth analysis of the educational and transactional issues requires a theoretical framework that
can provide order and parsimony to the complexities of online learning. A construct that has attracted
considerable attention in higher education that serves this purpose is that of a community of learners.
Higher education has consistently viewed community as essential to support collaborative learning and
discourse associated with higher levels of learning. Moreover, the asynchronous nature of online
communication and the potential for disconnectedness has focused attention on the issue of community.
In support of this perspective, there is evidence that a sense of community can be created online, although
this is not a trivial challenge . It has also been shown that sense of community is significantly
associated with perceived learning .
One of, if not the first, framework that identified both social and cognitive dimensions for studying online
learning was provided by Henri . This work inspired Garrison, Anderson and Archer to develop a
comprehensive framework as an online learning research tool (see Figure 1). The framework consisted of
three elements—social, teaching and cognitive presence—as well as categories and indicators to define
each of the presences and to guide the coding of transcripts (see Figure 2). It had its genesis in the work of
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
John Dewey and is consistent with constructivist approaches to learning in higher education. This
framework has provided significant insights and methodological solutions for studying online learning . The structure of the community of inquiry framework has also been confirmed through factor analysis
by Garrison, Cleveland-Innes and Fung and Arbaugh and Hwang .
Figure 1. Community of Inquiry Framework
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
Figure 2. Practical Inquiry Model
As we shall see, the quantity of research and our understanding of each of the presences have progressed
at very different rates. Each of the three key issues discussed here emerged from the online learning
research literature.
A. Social Presence
Social presence is described as the ability to project one’s self and establish personal and purposeful
relationships. The three main aspects of social presence, as defined here, are effective communication,
open communication and group cohesion (see Figure 2). Social presence attracted most of the initial
online learning research attention. While this may have been an appropriate and important place to begin
the study of online learning considering its asynchronous nature, much of this research was done
independently of cognitive and teaching presence. It is at the intersection of social and cognitive presence
where the primary issue of concern emerges. Students recognize that they are not there for purely social
reasons. A sense of community is based upon common purposes and inquiry. Moreover, social presence
is of less importance if the learning activities are information acquisition and there are no collaborative
assignments where students can benefit from the perspectives of others .
The issue addressed here concerns the nature of social presence and how it needs to shift as a course of
study evolves. As valuable as it is to establish effective communication and developing social bonds, it is
essential that the group feels secure to communicate openly and coalesces around a common goal or
purpose for a community to sustain itself . Social presence must move beyond simply establishing
socio-emotional presence and personal relationships. Cohesion requires intellectual focus (i.e., open and
purposeful communication) and respect. For example, Swan and Shih found that group cohesion is
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
significantly associated with social presence and perceived learning outcomes. It is argued here that social
presence in a community of inquiry must create personal but purposeful relationships. However,
developing personal relationships take time and it may be that we should be focusing on open
communication first. What is required is a clear understanding of how social presence shifts to support the
educational objective of the community.
It was Swan who first revealed the apparent shift of social presence over time in online course
discussions. She reports that effective and interactive (i.e., open communication) categories increased
while cohesive indicators decreased. The explanation was that it was “possible that the use of such
reference became less necessary as a clear classroom community was formed.” Another possible
explanation addresses the fact that the discussion was more exploratory than collaborative. Cohesion may
well have been a secondary issue under this circumstance. That is, collaborative tasks focused on practical
outcomes may well reduce the focus on the effective and emphasize cohesive comments to achieve a
successful outcome. Another consideration in interpreting these findings is the gender balance of the
sample. Two thirds were female. In this regard, Arbaugh has pointed to the possible differences in
how male and female students communicate. This, of course, would be confounded by other issues such
as community development and nature of the task. To address these issues, findings need to be interpreted
in the broader context of a community of inquiry that concurrently considers social, cognitive and
teaching presence issues and variables.
Contrary to the nature of the shift in social presence reported by Swan , Vaughan found that
the frequency of effective and open communication comments decreased, while group cohesion
comments increased. The interpretation was that effective and open communication was necessary to
establish a sense of community. It was only after the social relationships were established and the group
became more focused on purposeful activities did cohesive comments begin to take precedence. Not only
did the focus change but it is hypothesized that because a sense of community was established, there was
less need for social reinforcement. Social presence online becomes somewhat transparent as the focus
shifts to academic purposes and activities.
It is important to note that the context of the Vaughan study was a blended professional development
community. The participants were evenly split in terms of gender and were particularly task focused. In
addition, participants had the advantage to establish social presence in a face-to-face context. From a
research perspective, it is not clear how much influence the blended design had on the social presence
patterns reported here. Further study is required to understand exactly how social presence patterns
develop. Can social presence detract from cognitive presence? Do participants in a community of inquiry
naturally progress from socio-emotional connections, to establishing a climate of open communication,
and then naturally engage in purposeful activities (and cohesive comments)? Or is the progression from
open communication, to collaboration and cohesion, and then finally to personal relationships? Is the
online environment focused primarily on academic goals ? Is there a qualitative difference between
online and face-to-face social presence that we need to understand? Certainly, there is some evidence to
suggest that the face-to-face environment can more easily provide socio-emotional support .
Implications arising from this issue and related research questions have practical implications for
establishing and maintaining social presence in an online community of inquiry. Certainly care must be
taken to encourage social interaction and to provide structure and support early on. However, social
presence should not be measured simply in terms of the quantity of interaction it engenders. The purpose
of social presence in an educational context is to create the conditions for inquiry and quality interaction
(reflective and threaded discussions) in order to collaboratively achieve worthwhile educational goals.
While effective communication may be important, it is not sufficient for educational purposes. Personal
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
relationships and interaction must be defined in academic terms. Social presence for educational purposes
cannot be artificially separated from the purposeful nature of educational communication (i.e., cognitive
and teaching presence).
B. Cognitive Presence
Cognitive presence is defined as the exploration, construction, resolution and confirmation of
understanding through collaboration and reflection in a community of inquiry. The practical inquiry
model operationalizes cognitive presence and is ground in the work of Dewey on reflective thinking
(see Figure 3). Four phases are defined in the interests of parsimony, but in practice inquiry is not so
discretely defined nor is it immutable .
Categories
Indicators
Social Presence
Effective Expression
Open Communication
Risk-free Expression
Group Cohesion
Encourage Collaboration
Cognitive Presence
Triggering Event
Sense of Puzzlement
Exploration
Information Exchange
Integration
Connecting Ideas
Resolution
Apply New Ideas
Teaching Presence
Design & Organization
Setting Curriculum & Methods
Facilitating Discourse
Sharing Personal Meaning
Direct Instruction
Focusing Discussion
Table 1. Some Examples of Cognitive Presence
The primary issue worthy of further exploration in terms of cognitive presence relates to the progressive
development of inquiry in an online learning environment. Cognitive presence is defined in terms of a
cycle of practical inquiry where participants move deliberately from understanding the problem or issue
through to exploration, integration and application. The issue revealed consistently in the research
findings is that it appears that inquiry invariably has great difficulty moving beyond the exploration phase
 .
The question is why is it so difficult to move the process of inquiry through to resolution? Is this an
artifact of the inquiry model, the contrived nature of the educational context, the communication medium,
or perhaps it is the nature of the task and teaching presence (design, facilitation, and direction)? There is
evidence that this pervasive finding may have more to do with aspects of teaching presence, than it is to
the other possible factors. Meyer observes that integration and resolution is more demanding than
exploration and, as a result, increased time for reflection is required. More specifically, she states that,
“Faculty need to be more directive in their assignments … .” Similarly, Celentin concluded that
the reason discussions do not reach the highest levels of inquiry is “strictly related to the role of the tutor”.
Others have also speculated that the role of the instructor is a major factor .
In another study by Meyer, she noted that “the question initiating each of the online discussions
influenced the level of the responses from students” . There is evidence that the questions or tasks
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
“play an important role in the type of cognitive activity evident in the discussions” . When questions
specifically asked students to engage in practical applications, discussions did progress to the synthesis
and resolution phase. Interestingly, it was suggested that confirmation did not come from the group; the
individual confirmed or rejected their own solutions . If there are no shared goals requiring a
collaborative solution or artifact, the transcripts of online discourse will not reveal discourse that has
moved to the resolution phase. Individual reflection may take place and, if required, solutions may be
posted, but there will not be any discourse. Thus, in addition to teaching presence dimensions such as
facilitation and direction, as noted previously, well designed tasks are also important to see evidence of
resolution in a community of inquiry.
The importance of designing appropriate tasks to move students through to resolution is also reinforced in
a study specifically focused on online collaborative problem solving . Where learners were
specifically tasked to formulate and resolve a problem, responses were distributed throughout all of the
five problem solving processes (understanding the problem, building knowledge, identifying solutions,
evaluating solutions, acting on solutions). In fact, “participants engaged more in problem resolution than
in problem formulation” —the converse of previous cognitive presence (practical inquiry) studies.
This speaks strongly to the purpose and design of the learning activity. If the activity is problem or case
based, there are clear expectations, and appropriate teaching presence is provided—will participants in a
community of inquiry have difficulty moving to the resolution phase?
Progression requires direction. Vaughan found that design and facilitation comments decreased in
online transcripts, while direct instruction comments increased. It is very important to facilitate and yet
not dominate the discourse and, at the same time, be prepared to provide crucial input to ensure that the
community moves to resolution. As a subject matter expert, relevant information should be interjected
and diagnoses of misconceptions are crucial to productive discourse. This is a delicate and challenging
balance of which an experienced teacher would or should be very cognizant. Educational leadership
comes in more than one form. From an educational perspective, the distinction between facilitation and
direct instruction may be worth preserving.
A supporting explanation and reason why discussions may get stalled at the exploration phase is found in
the group dynamics literature. The group dynamics literature has shown that groups do not easily progress
to the “performing” stage. Participants need to connect to the group and collaborative decision making
proceeds along four hypothesized stages—forming, norming, storming, and performing . Groups need
clear goals and time to come together and function in a productive manner. The point is that groups do not
naturally coalesce and move to integration and resolution phases, particularly in situations where the task
and challenge is to make sense of complex and disparate information. Direction and facilitation is
required to establish cohesion and ensure messages are developmental (i.e., more than “serial
monologues” or personal declarations).
From the participants’ perspective, moving the discussion developmentally would be enhanced
considerably by enhancing the metacognitive awareness of the stages of inquiry and how this relates to
the particular task at hand. One suggestion is for participants to be metacognitively aware of their
contributions by requiring that they identify the level of the response. Pawan, Paulus, Yalcin, and Chang
 recommend that students self-code their postings. They go on to say:
The strategy would encourage students to keep track of and to think about how their responses
relate to the collaborative learning objectives set by their instructors. Self-coding their own roles
and responses may raise students’ awareness, for example, of the four cyclical categories of the
practical inquiry model.
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
Pawan et al. also suggest that the instructor should provide direct instruction and model self-coding.
In this regard, it may be helpful for the instructor to provide a metacognitive commentary as to what they
are doing and why. This is clearly a teaching presence issue and challenge.
C. Teaching Presence
The third issue worth exploring is a validation issue. To be sure, validation of the community of inquiry
and its constructs is an important issue. However, the focus here is the teaching presence construct and
whether it has three distinct categories—design, facilitation and direct instruction.
Before we address the validity of the construct, it may be useful to discuss the influence of teaching
presence on the success of an online learning experience. The body of evidence is growing rapidly,
attesting to the importance of teaching presence for successful online learning . The consensus is that teaching presence is a significant determinate of student satisfaction,
perceived learning, and sense of community.
Interaction and discourse plays a key role in higher-order learning but not without structure (design) and
leadership (facilitation and direction). For example, without explicit guidance, students will “engage
primarily in ‘serial monologues’” . Obversely, “faculty may need to be more directive in their
assignments for threaded discussions, charging the participants to resolve a particular problem, and
pressing the group to integrate their ideas…” . Murphy is clear “that in order for the highest-level
collaborative processes to occur within an OAD [online asynchronous discussion], there must be explicit
strategies or techniques aimed at promoting these processes” . Similarly, Gilbert and Dabbagh
concluded that “the number and type of facilitator postings also increased the level of interaction between
students” . They make it clear that structure and facilitation have a significant influence on discourse.
That said, it is important to understand the composition of teaching presence. Whether there are two or
three distinct categories is more than a theoretical issue. It has practical implications for a community of
inquiry and supporting social and cognitive presence. A recent study questioned whether there are three
categories corresponding to the hypothesized structure. Shea completed an extensive study of teaching
presence and online learning. After factor analyzing survey data of over 2000 students across multiple
institutions, it was concluded that a two factor solution was most interpretable. The two factors were
labeled design and “directed facilitation”. The latter apparently being the amalgamation of facilitation and
direct instruction. It should be noted as well that the directed facilitation factor contributed the most to
predicting a sense of community and learning.
The key point in this study is that this is the perspective of students. One interpretation is that students
may not distinguish between facilitation and direct instruction. This would not seem to be surprising. To
students this is a subtle distinction. Students do not come at this from an educational perspective and a
full consideration of the nature of critical discourse. From a teaching perspective, this is the difference
between dialogue and discourse . Facilitation supports dialogue with minimal shaping of the course of
the discussion. Discourse, on the other hand, is disciplined inquiry that requires a knowledgeable teacher
with the expectation that discourse progresses in a collaborative constructive manner and students gain an
awareness of the inquiry process.
On the other hand, a study of MBA students did validate the categories of teaching presence . This
survey of 191 students across multiple courses used an instrument based on the Shea, Fredericksen,
Pickett and Pelz instrument. Thus, using essentially the same instrument and using a confirmatory
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
factor analysis, Arbaugh and Hwang “validated the three components of teaching presence as posited in
the…Community of Inquiry model” . Beyond the fact that the teaching presence construct was
validated, the interesting question here is why this study confirmed the three components of teaching
presence construct, and the Shea et al. study found only two when both used virtually the same
instrument? One explanation may be the nature of the analysis. Another explanation may be related to the
fact that “all three components are distinct yet highly correlated with each other” . That is, the design
(curriculum, goals, method) may have a great influence on how the students perceive other components of
teaching presence. Similarly, social and cognitive presences will also influence teaching presence and
how it is perceived. As noted previously, another explanation to these divergent findings may be due to
student perspectives. That is, undergraduates may not be sophisticated enough to distinguish between
facilitation and direct instruction.
II. CODING AND VALIDITY
The community of inquiry framework has provided a useful tool and approach to studying online
learning. The methodology to date can best be described as an exploratory qualitative approach to provide
“insights for the purposes of constructing meaningful propositions to be explored in further research” .
This research begins with a credible framework and, therefore, is not inductive theory building. To date,
much of the research could be best described as interpretivist, in that there is an attempt to understand
interactions through text analysis . While issues of validity are relevant to qualitative transcript
… assigning frequencies to the classifications is an aid in understanding patterns, this does not
make it a quantitative, inferential statistical procedure. We are in the early stages of
understanding and explaining the complexities of online conferencing and educational discourse.
The goal is descriptive, not predictive .
That said, the question has been raised about moving the validity of the coding protocol to a quantitative
approach. Rourke and Anderson argue for a quantitative content analysis technique and question the rigor
of the research in this area. They frame the argument as description versus inference. Their point is that
much of the online transcript analysis is descriptive and at some point there needs to be a transition to
inference and “a richer definition of test validity” . Rourke and Anderson state that if researchers
wish to proceed to the inferential, it must be done mindfully and with understanding as to the steps
required to validate coding protocols.
For purposes of discussion we make a distinction between the broad theoretical framework and specific
coding schemes, notwithstanding that they are intimately related. With regard to the validity of the
theoretical framework, other constructs have been proposed that are not entirely dissimilar to
elements of the community of inquiry framework. It would seem, however, that the community of inquiry
framework offers a more comprehensive perspective capable of identifying interaction effects among
social, cognitive and teaching presence dynamics. There has been surprisingly little discussion about the
reasonableness and usefulness of the community of inquiry framework in studying online learning. A key
question is whether the three elements capture the core dynamics of a community of inquiry?
On the other hand, there is greater diversity of practice with regard to coding protocols . The issue here
is whether the elements have been well defined and the categories are valid (representative of the element).
Do the categories fully describe the elements (i.e., presences) of the community of inquiry? Should different
protocols be considered for certain research questions? Shifting our focus to the indicators, certainly the
indicators must reliably reflect the appropriate category. That is, do the indicators reflect the essence of the
categories? Are the indicators of sufficient detail and range to be useful in coding?
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
There is the question, however, as to why we would want to code at the indicator level? Coding at the
indicator level is difficult . Is it not a bit premature considering the early stage of this research and
testing of the framework? What research questions would coding at the indicator level answer? How does
being able to distinguish among the indicators add to the validity of the model? Are indicators too context
specific to expect a standard set of indicators across all online educational environments?
Other coding issues are what unit of analysis (e.g., sentence, paragraph, message, or theme) should be
employed? While there has been some discussion around this issue it remains a crucial but
challenging decision. Certainly the research question and context will influence this decision. The
importance of training for reliability is another important reliability and validity issue where more
attention would be beneficial. In summary, what is clear is that much work remains in addressing coding
schemes and validating the community of inquiry framework.
Finally, are we ready to emerge from the early exploratory and descriptive phase of researching online
communities of inquiry? The time may be right to transition to a phase that utilizes both qualitative and
quantitative approaches to studying online learning communities. The focus will likely shift to developing
and employing psychometrically sound instruments capable of studying larger inter-disciplinary and
inter-institutional samples over time. The foundation for this shift has been laid. Swan and Shih have
developed a sound social presence survey based on the work of Gunawardena and Zittle and
Richardson and Swan . Arbaugh and Hwang have validated a teaching presence survey
questionnaire based on the work of Shea et al. . Preliminary items reflecting the cognitive presence
construct have been offered by Garrison et al. . The theoretical framework and research to date would
support development of these instruments and their use to study online communities of inquiry. Both
qualitative and quantitative efforts will contribute to the refinement of the community of inquiry
framework and the categories and indicators of its elements/constructs .
III. CONCLUSION
The issues discussed previously are not just theoretical issues of interest to researchers. They have
important practical pedagogical implications. Understanding the role of social presence is essential in
creating a community of inquiry and in designing, facilitating, and directing higher-order learning. This is
not a simple one-off task. Balancing socio-emotional interaction, building group cohesion and facilitating
and modeling respectful critical discourse is essential for productive inquiry. As Baker discovered,
“instructor immediacy [i.e., teaching presence] was more predictive of effective and cognitive learning”
than “whether students felt close to each other” . Some cohorts are academically focused and do not
need or want to engage in a virtual social space . These cohorts usually have well defined practical
outcomes that are collaboratively based. As important as social presence may be, a community of inquiry
is associated with a sense of common purpose and cognitive presence.
A community of inquiry needs to have clear expectations as to the nature of critical discourse and their
postings. Participants need to be aware of the academic objectives, the phases of inquiry, and the level of
discourse. These educational challenges raise the importance and role of teaching presence. The
distinction between facilitation and direction must also be clear from a design perspective. Teaching
presence must consider the dual role of both moderating and shaping the direction of the discourse. Both
are essential for a successful community of inquiry.
The previous discussion raises many challenges with regard to social, cognitive and teaching presence as
well as coding and validity demands. While the community of inquiry framework has shown itself to be
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
useful in guiding research into online learning, the more we understand online learning the more we raise
other questions and issues (not unlike other areas of research). The goal here has been to begin
documenting the issues and challenges for others to address and build upon.
IV. ABOUT THE AUTHOR
D. Randy Garrison is currently the Director of the Teaching and Learning Centre and a professor in the
Faculty of Education at the University of Calgary. Dr. Garrison has published extensively on teaching and
learning in higher, adult and distance education contexts. Dr. Garrison’s most recent book (in press) is
titled Blended Learning in Higher Education.
V. REFERENCES
1. Rovai, A. P. Development of an instrument to measure classroom community. The Internet and
Higher Education 5(3): 197–211, 2002.
2. Thompson, T. L. and C. J. MacDonald. Community building, emergent design and expecting the
unexpected: Creating a quality eLearning experience. The Internet and Higher Education 8(3): 233–
249, 2005.
3. Rovai, A. P. Sense of community, perceived cognitive learning, and persistence in asynchronous
learning networks. The Internet and Higher Education 5(4): 319–332, 2002.
4. Shea, P. A study of students’ sense of learning community in online environments. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks 10(10): 2006. 
/v10n1_4shea_member.asp.
5. Henri, F. Computer conferencing and content analysis. In: A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative
learning through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 117–136,
6. Garrison, D. R., T. Anderson and W. Archer. Critical inquiry in a text-based environment:
Computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education 2(2–3): 87–105,
7. Garrison, D. R. and W. Archer. A Community of Inquiry Framework for Online Learning. In: M.
Moore (Ed.), Handbook of distance education. New York: Erlbaum, 2003.
8. Garrison, D. R., M. Cleveland-Innes, M. Koole and J. Kappelman. Revisting methodological
issues in the analysis of transcripts: Negotiated coding and reliability. The Internet and Higher
Education 9(1): 1–8, 2006.
9. Garrison, D. R., M. Cleveland-Innes and T. Fung. Student role adjustment in online communities
of inquiry: Model and instrument validation. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 8(2): 61–
74, 2004. Retrieved August 13, 2005 from 
/pdf/v8n2_garrison.pdf.
10. Arbaugh, J. B. and A. Hwang. Does “teaching presence” exist in online MBA courses? The
Internet and Higher Education 9(1): 9–21, 2006.
11. Picciano, A. G. Beyond student perceptions: Issues of interaction, presence, and performance in an
online course. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 6(1): 2002. Retrieved January, 6, 2006
from 
12. Swan, K. and L. F. Shih. On the nature and development of social presence in online course
discussions. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 9(3): October 2005. 
13. Swan, K. Developing social presence in online discussions. In: S. Naidu (Ed.), Learning and
teaching with technology: Principles and practices, 147–164. London: Kogan Page, 2003.
14. Arbaugh, J. B. Is there an optimal design for on-line MBA courses? Academy of Management
Learning & Education 4(2): 135–149, 2005.
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
15. Vaughan, N. D. Investigating how a blended learning approach can support an inquiry process
within a faculty learning community. Doctoral dissertation, University of Calgary, 2004.
16. Vaughan, N. and D. R. Garrison. How blended learning can support a faculty development
community of inquiry. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 10(4): December 2006.
17. Abrams, Z. Asynchronous CMC, Collaboration and the development of critical thinking in a
graduate seminar in applied linguistics. Canadian Journal of Learning Technology 31(2): 23–47,
18. Dewey, J. How we think (Rev. Ed.). Boston: D.C. Heath, 1933.
19. Garrison, D. R. and T. Anderson. E-Learning in the 21st century: A framework for research and
practice. London: Routledge/Falmer, 2003.
20. Celentin, P. (unpublished). Online training: Analysis of interaction and knowledge building
patterns among foreign language teachers.
21. Garrison, D. R., T. Anderson and W. Archer. Critical thinking and computer conferencing: A
model and tool to assess cognitive presence. American Journal of Distance Education 15(1): 7–23,
22. Kanuka, H. and T. Anderson. Online social interchange, discord, and knowledge construction.
Journal of Distance Education 13(1): 57–75, 1998.
23. Luebeck, J. L. and L. R. Bice. Online discussion as a mechanism of conceptual change among
mathematics and science teachers. Journal of Distance Education 20(2): 21–39, 2005.
24. McKlin, T., S. W. Harmon, W. Evans and M. G. Jones. Cognitive presence in web-based
learning: A content analysis of students’ online discussions. ITForum Paper #60, 2002. Retrieved
October 11, 2005 from 
25. Meyer, K. A. Face-to-face versus threaded discussions: The role of time and higher-order thinking.
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 7(3): 55–65, 2003.
26. Meyer, K. A. Evaluating online discussions: Four different frames of analysis. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks 8(2): 101–114, 2004.
27. Murphy, E. Recognizing and promoting collaboration in an online asynchronous discussion.
British Journal of Educational Technology 35(4): 421–431, 2004.
28. Newman, D. R., C. Johnson, C. Cochrane and B. Webb. An experiment in group learning
technology: Evaluating critical thinking in face-to-face and computer-supported seminars.
Interpersonal Computing and Technology 4(1): 57–74, 1996. Retrieved March 30, 2005 from
 
29. Vaughan, N. and D. R. Garrison. Creating cognitive presence in a blended faculty development
community. Internet and Higher Education 8: 1–12, 2005.
30. Arnold, N. and L. Ducate. Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive collaboration in
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology 10(1): 42–66, 2006. Retrieved January
14, 2006 from 
31. Murphy, E. Identifying and measuring ill-structured problem formulation and resolution in online
asynchronous discussions. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology 30(1): 5–20, 2004b.
32. Tuckman, B. W. and M. C. Jensen. Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited. Group and
Organization Studies 2: 419–427, 1977.
33. Pawan, F., T. M. Paulus, S. Yalcin and C. Chang. Online learning: Patterns of engagement and
interaction among in-service teachers. Language Learning & Technology 7(3): 119–140, 2003.
34. Garrison, D. R. and M. Cleveland-Innes. Facilitating cognitive presence in online learning:
Interaction is not enough. American Journal of Distance Education 19(3): 133–148, 2005.
35. Shea, P. J., A. M. Pickett and W. E. Pelz. Enhancing student satisfaction through faculty
development: The importance of teaching presence. In: J. Bourne & J. C. Moore (Eds.), Elements of
Quality Online Education: Into the Mainstream, Vol. 5, 39–59. Needham, MA: Sloan-C, 2004.
36. Varnhagen, S., D. Wilson, E. Krupa, S. Kasprzak and V. Hunting. Comparison of student
experiences with different online graduate courses in health promotion. Canadian Journal of
Learning and Technology 31(1): 99–117, 2005.
Online Community of Inquiry Review: Social, Cognitive, and Teaching Presence Issues
37. Wu, D. and S. R. Hiltz. Predicting learning from asynchronous online discussions. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks 8(2): 139–152, 2004.
38. Gilbert, P. K. and N. Dabbagh. How to structure online discussions for meaningful discourse: A
case study. British Journal of Educational Technology 36(1): 5–18, 2005.
39. Rourke, L. and H. Kanuka. (unpublished manuscript). Barriers to online critical discourse.
40. Shea, P. J., E. E. Fredericksen, A. M. Picket and W. E. Pelz. A preliminary investigation of
“teaching presence” in the SUNY learning network. In: J. Bourne and J. C. Moore (Eds.), Elements
of Quality Online Education: Practice and Direction, Vol. 4, 279–312. Needham, MA: Sloan-C,
41. Miles, M. B. and A. M. Huberman. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.
42. Rourke, L. and T. Anderson. Validity in Quantitative Content Analysis. Educational Technology
Research and Development 52(1): 5–18, 2004.
43. Gunawardena, C., C. Lowe and T. Anderson. Analysis of a global online debate and the
development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in
computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research 17(4): 379–431, 1997.
44. Marra, R. M., J. L. Moore and A. K. Klimczak. Educational Technology Research &
Development 52(2): 23–40, 2004.
45. Murphy, E. and J. Ciszewska-Carr. Sources of difference in reliability: Identifying sources of
difference in reliability in content analysis of online asynchronous discussions. International Review
of Research in Open and Distance Learning 6(2): 2005. Retrieved January 17, 2006 from
 
46. Fahy, P. J. Addressing some common problems in transcript analysis. International Review of
Research in Open and Distance Learning 1(2): 2001. Retrieved June 20, 2005 from
 
47. Rourke, L., T. Anderson, D. R. Garrison and W. Archer. Methodological Issues in the Content
Analysis of Computer Conference Transcripts. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education 12(1): 8–22, 2001.
48. Gunawardena, C. and F. Zittle. Social presence as a predictor of satisfaction within a computer
mediated conferencing environment. American Journal of Distance Education 11(3): 8–26, 1997.
49. Richardson, J. C. and K. Swan. Examining social presence in online courses in relation to
students' perceived learning and satisfaction. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 7(1): 68–
50. Garrison, D. R. and H. Kanuka. Blended Learning: Uncovering its Transformative Potential in
Higher Education. The Internet and Higher Education 7(2): 95–105, 2004.
51. Baker, J. Instructor immediacy increases student enjoyment, perception of learning. Online
Classroom, September 2003.
52. McPherson, M. and M. B. Munes. The failure of a virtual social space (VSS) designed to create a
learning community: Lessons learned. British Journal of Educational Technology 35(3): 305–321,