Deep Learning Global Glomerulosclerosis in Transplant Kidney
Frozen Sections
Jon N. Marsh [Member, IEEE],
Department of Pathology & Immunology and the Institute for Informatics at Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110 USA
Matthew K. Matlock,
Department of Pathology & Immunology at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO,
63110 USA.
Satoru Kudose,
Department of Pathology & Immunology at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO,
63110 USA.
Ta-Chiang Liu,
Department of Pathology & Immunology at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO,
63110 USA.
Thaddeus S. Stappenbeck,
Department of Pathology & Immunology at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO,
63110 USA.
Joseph P. Gaut, and
Department of Pathology & Immunology at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO,
63110 USA.
S. Joshua Swamidass
Department of Pathology & Immunology and the Institute for Informatics at Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110 USA, (see 
Transplantable kidneys are in very limited supply. Accurate viability assessment prior to
transplantation could minimize organ discard. Rapid and accurate evaluation of intraoperative
donor kidney biopsies is essential for determining which kidneys are eligible for transplantation.
The criteria for accepting or rejecting donor kidneys relies heavily on pathologist determination of
the percent of glomeruli (determined from a frozen section) that are normal and sclerotic. This
percentage is a critical measurement that correlates with transplant outcome. Inter- and intraobserver variability in donor biopsy evaluation is, however, significant. An automated method for
determination of percent global glomerulosclerosis could prove useful in decreasing evaluation
variability, increasing throughput, and easing the burden on pathologists. Here, we describe the
J. N. Marsh and M. K. Matlock are co-first authors.
Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained from the
IEEE by sending a request to .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2018 December ; 37(12): 2718–2728. doi:10.1109/TMI.2018.2851150.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
development of a deep learning model that identifies and classifies non-sclerosed and sclerosed
glomeruli in whole-slide images of donor kidney frozen section biopsies. This model extends a
convolutional neural network (CNN) pre-trained on a large database of digital images. The
extended model, when trained on just 48 whole slide images, exhibits slide-level evaluation
performance on par with expert renal pathologists. Encouragingly, the model’s performance is
robust to slide preparation artifacts associated with frozen section preparation. The model
substantially outperforms a model trained on image patches of isolated glomeruli, in terms of both
accuracy and speed. The methodology overcomes the technical challenge of applying a pretrained
CNN bottleneck model to whole-slide image classification. The traditional patch-based approach,
while exhibiting deceptively good performance classifying isolated patches, does not translate
successfully to whole-slide image segmentation in this setting. As the first model reported that
identifies and classifies normal and sclerotic glomeruli in frozen kidney sections, and thus the first
model reported in the literature relevant to kidney transplantation, it may become an essential part
of donor kidney biopsy evaluation in the clinical setting.
kidney; glomerulosclerosis; digital pathology; fully convolutional network; donor organ evaluation
I. Introduction
There is a global shortage of donor kidneys suitable for transplantation exacerbated by an
unacceptably high discard rate of recovered organs. Intra-operative examination of donor
kidney biopsy frozen sections is essential to assess organ viability prior to transplantation.
Many evaluation metrics are utilized, including percent global glomerulosclerosis, interstitial
fibrosis, arteriosclerosis, and arteriolar hyalinosis . The increased use of “expanded
criteria donors” who are older and/or have comorbidities renders accurate evaluation of these
pathologic findings increasingly important – . However, variability in biopsy evaluation
between observers and institutions is distressingly large , – , which may explain why
these histologic features do not consistently correlate with outcome , . Such variability
may be heightened in the time-sensitive context of daily practice, where biopsies (which
may require evaluation in a matter of minutes) are often read by non-specialist pathologists
at odd hours using frozen sections. Poor reproducibility amongst pathologists minimizes the
utility of intraoperative organ assessment and may contribute to unnecessary organ discard.
There is thus a need for new objective techniques to assist pathologists with rapid
intraoperative donor kidney biopsy interpretation.
Identification of non-sclerotic and sclerotic glomeruli is an essential task that is required to
compute percent global glomerulosclerosis, a critical feature correlated with graft outcome
 , – . While the degree of correlation between glomerulosclerosis and transplant
outcome has at times been debated – , it remains a standard metric: the United
Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) guidelines emphasize percent global
glomerulosclerosis as a key factor in determining organ acceptance. Although a variety of
approaches have been described for automatic identification of glomeruli, none to our
knowledge have addressed the challenges associated with intraoperative biopsy assessment
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
for organ transplant. Logistical and time constraints in this setting often necessitate the use
of frozen sections and their concomitant artifacts (e.g. cracking, holes), and H&E stains that
are not optimized for visual differentiation of glomeruli from interstitial tissue (e.g. Figure 1
and Figure 2). Previous work has shown that interobserver reproducibility in assessing
glomerulosclerosis is substantially decreased when using frozen H&E sections compared
to fixed sections with periodic acid-Schiff and Masson’s trichrome stains in addition to H&E
 . These difficulties are compounded by the sheer volume of data present in gigapixel
whole-slide images, which necessitate highly optimized algorithms to yield results in a
timely fashion.
The remarkable success of deep learning methodologies—and convolutional neural nets
(CNNs) in particular—in medical image segmentation and analysis suggests pathways to
solving this seemingly intractable problem – . CNNs’ primary advantage is that the
models automatically learn salient features from the data alone, rather than requiring a set of
handcrafted parameters and extensive input normalization. The increasingly widespread use
of CNNs has been facilitated by the concept of transfer learning, in which deep learning
models, previously trained to categorize or identify objects in images from one domain, are
repurposed for application in another. This is typically accomplished by freezing most, if not
all, of an image-recognition network’s learned weights (which presumably encode a large
number of generalized image features) below the classification layer, and then training the
remaining layers to recognize features specific to the new domain. This leverages the vast
amount of computational resources needed to train the model from scratch using randomly
initialized weights on millions of input images; furthermore, fewer training examples are
typically required for the repurposed model to converge on an optimized set of model
weights, and training time can be significantly shortened. Often, investigators have adapted
one of several CNNs trained on the ImageNet database as the basis for medical image
recognition algorithms. In the realm of histopathology, CNNs have been most commonly
applied to cancer detection and classification – . More recently, several studies have
employed CNNs for glomerulus identification in renal biopsies – .
However, none of these studies describes the use of frozen sections as input to detection
algorithms, nor are they capable of differentiating normal from sclerotic glomeruli after
detection without the use of special stains. These studies, consequently, fall short of
addressing the combination of issues associated with transplant evaluation.
In this study, we sought to evaluate the performance of CNN variants derived from a pretrained image recognition network applied to the problem of glomerular identification and
classification in renal preimplantation frozen section wedge biopsies. We compared a
conventional patch-based CNN model with a fully convolutional CNN model. We show that
the performance of the fully convolutional CNN model in terms of speed and accuracy is
superior and can be quickly trained on a relatively small dataset to yield results on par with
expert renal pathologist interpretation.
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
II. Related Work
Detection of glomeruli in digitized histological images has been approached using a variety
of methods. A summary of relevant details of recent work is shown in Table I.
The majority of studies incorporate domain-specific morphometric or texture-based
techniques to search for and define glomerular boundaries. Many of these have demonstrated
boundary detection for small image patches containing isolated glomeruli – , –
 . Translating detection techniques to whole-slide images (WSI) containing numerous
glomeruli is a necessary but more difficult undertaking. The task of detection over large
image regions can be facilitated using immunohistochemical stains such as nestin and
desmin , to highlight glomerular podocytes and enhance the utility of segmentation
algorithms. However, the immunohistological approach is less applicable for evaluation of
preimplantation biopsies. Other groups have used a variety of techniques for glomerulus
identification on routine stains , , , , , , typically through the use of
some combination of colorspace transformation, thresholding, and/or morphological
descriptors alone or as input to support vector machines or CNNs.
Most recently CNNs have been explored as primary tools for glomeruli detection. Proof-ofconcept classifiers adapted from both the AlexNet and GoogleNet models were
shown to be able to differentiate image patches containing isolated normal glomeruli from
non-glomerular structures . CNNs were also demonstrated to outperform HOG
classifiers in glomerulus detection accuracy when applied to random image patches from
kidney WSI . Additional promising results were demonstrated by cascading the output
of one CNN (optimized for glomerulus detection in downsampled WSI) to another (adapted
for precise segmentation at a higher resolution) . This combination outperformed single
CNNs in segmenting glomeruli; notably, the CNNs used a fully convolutional model based
on the U-Net architecture to yield pixel-mapped outputs, enabling “end-to-end” training
on image patches randomly sampled over WSI.
It should be noted that none of these studies describes the use of frozen sections as input to
detection algorithms. Likewise, in studies that characterized pathologic kidney samples ,
 – , , , only one method differentiated normal from pathologic glomeruli after
detection, and this required the use of specialized immunostaining that highlighted damaged
glomeruli . The remainder describe differences in descriptors of glomeruli from normal
and pathologic populations, rather than isolating and labeling different glomeruli within the
same wide image field. The current study demonstrates the novel use of CNNs applied to
frozen H&E sections to detect non-sclerotic and sclerotic glomeruli to assist pathologists in
intra-operative interpretation of percent global glomerulosclerosis.
III. Methods
WSIs were acquired from H&E-stained frozen wedge donor biopsies retrieved between
April 2015 and July 2017 using the Washington University Digital Pathology Exchange
(WUPAX) laboratory information system. WUPAX is a telepathology system used in
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
routine clinical practice to assess donor biopsies that is compliant with the College of
American Pathologists Laboratory Accreditation Program and which meets CLIA (Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments) U.S. regulatory requirements. Sections were
scanned at 20x using an Aperio Scanscope CS scanner and stored in SVS format, then
converted to TIFF format at full resolution (0.495 μm/pixel). 48 sample WSIs (ranging in
size from 187 megapixels to 482 megapixels) were acquired from the database and selected
so as to exhibit a wide range of values of percentage globally sclerosed glomeruli (1% to
72%). The WSIs were obtained from a total of 20 kidneys recovered from 17 donors. The
average total number of glomeruli was 81±31 per WSI. Annotations used for training and
testing the CNNs were initially created by a senior resident (SK) and subsequently amended
by a board-certified renal pathologist (JPG). Annotation was performed manually by
outlining and labeling all glomeruli (using elliptically shaped masks) in each WSI using an
in-house plugin written for Fiji , in order to generate pixel-wise label masks of
glomerulus regions at the same resolution as the parent WSI. All glomeruli were categorized
into globally sclerotic (defined as sclerosis involving the entire glomerular tuft) or nonsclerotic (defined as any glomeruli that did not show global sclerosis). The globally sclerotic
category included all types of global sclerosis: obsolescent, solidified and disappearing .
All non-glomerular areas (including tubules, vessels, inflammatory cells, interstitium, and
background) were grouped together and labeled as tubulointerstitium. A total of 870
sclerosed and 2997 non-sclerosed glomeruli were labeled. Model training and testing was
performed by grouping slides and their associated data into training and validation sets in a
6-fold cross-validation scheme. No image preprocessing was performed prior to training or
testing, other than that prescribed in the VGG16 schema, i.e., subtraction by a precomputed
fixed RGB value.
Two models and training methodologies were used for glomeruli detection in WSI (see
Figure 3):
1) Patch-Based Model: A patch-based CNN training approach was employed as a
proof-of-concept to first demonstrate glomerulus differentiation in frozen H&E sections, but
also to illustrate the pitfalls of applying this type of model to detect glomeruli in WSI. Image
patches (448×448 pixels) centered on each labeled sclerotic and non-sclerotic glomerulus
were cropped out of WSI for training. This input window provided an appropriately sized
“patch” to isolate glomeruli for training. An additional 1932 randomly selected regions
containing no glomeruli but at least a small fraction of non-whitespace were extracted for
training on tubulointerstitial areas. Interstitial areas included tubules, vessels, inflammatory
cells, and tubulointerstitium. The training set was augmented with random image flipping,
90° rotations, and small translations (0%—5% of image size). The pre-trained VGG16 CNN
model was adapted by removing the final fully-connected layers and replacing them
with two 32-node fully-connected layers (with ReLU activation) and a 3-node classification
layer with softmax activation; all weights in the lower convolutional layers were frozen and
unmodified during training. The model was trained by minimizing the categorical crossentropy loss using the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of 1e
−4. The CNN was constructed using the Keras framework in Python and trained and tested
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
using 6-fold cross-validation. Prior exploration using a test set indicated that stopping
training at 5 epochs prevented overfitting while yielding satisfactory categorical accuracy, so
this value was used in all cross-validation folds. The trained model from each fold was next
applied to each of the associated WSIs withheld from training by sampling image patches
from a window moved across the image in a raster pattern (448×448-pixels, 64-pixel stride),
yielding a set of categorical probability values associated with each respective image patch.
These values were assembled to yield a categorical probability map of the parent image
downsampled by a factor of 64. Although it would have been preferable to use a 32-pixel
stride in order to exactly match the output resolution of the fully convolutional model
described below, the time required to generate the probability maps was prohibitive.
2) Fully Convolutional Model: In addition to the patch-based model, we also trained a
fully convolutional model based on VGG16 to label WSIs at a higher resolution. Starting
with the pre-trained VGG16 CNN with weights frozen below the bottleneck, we replaced the
final fully-connected layers with two 1×1 convolutional layers (256 and 128 nodes,
respectively), followed by a 64-node 3×3 dilated convolution layer , (dilation
rate=4) and another 64-node 5×5 convolutional layer. All convolutional layers used ReLU
activation. Output was fed to a 3-node layer with softmax activation for classification into
tubulointerstitium, non-sclerosed glomerulus, and sclerosed glomerulus categories. Storing
the activations of a fully convolutional network over an entire WSI is not feasible due to
excessive memory requirements, therefore we adopted a sampling approach to training the
model. For each training image, 1024×1024-pixel partially-overlapping image patches
(stride=448) were extracted and presented to the model by weighted sampling. This window
size afforded a good compromise between training efficiency, batch size, and prediction
speed. Classes were weighted in a ratio of 10:5:1 for sclerosed:nonsclerosed:tubulointerstitial categories to approximately account for the relative incidence of
pixel area represented by each class. The task of the CNN was to assign labels to individual
pixels in the WSI to match the provided annotations. Because the model’s output was
downsampled by a factor of 32 relative to the original image, the CNN was trained against a
similarly downsampled annotation map (accomplished by nearest-neighbor sampling). The
fully convolutional CNN was trained by minimizing the categorical cross entropy loss using
the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 25 and learning rate of 1e−4 for 5 epochs. The
model was trained and tested in a 6-fold cross-validation scheme. Prior exploration using a
test set indicated that stopping training at 5 epochs prevented overfitting while yielding
satisfactory categorical accuracy, so this value was used in all cross-validation folds. For
each fold, the corresponding trained model was applied to the withheld set of WSIs by
sampling image patches in a raster pattern from a sliding window (1024×1024-pixels) with a
stride of 448 pixels, yielding a 32×32-pixel categorical probability map associated with each
respective image patch. These patches were stitched together to yield a categorical
probability map of the complete WSI, downsampled by a factor of 32.
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
IV. Results
A. Performance on Patches
The patch-based model’s performance in predicting image patch category was evaluated in
terms of precision, recall, and F1-score averages over cross-validation runs. Results are
shown in Table II. A normalized confusion matrix derived is shown in Table III. F1-score
(the harmonic mean of precision and recall) for the non-sclerosed category is somewhat
higher than for tubulointerstium and sclerosed. This may be anticipated, given the greater
variability in appearance associated with both the bulk tissue and the pathology (e.g., left
panel of Figure 2). Examples of correctly and incorrectly identified glomeruli are shown in
Figure 4. Note that the model correctly classifies non-sclerotic and sclerotic glomeruli even
in the presence of preparation artifacts, staining variations, indeterminate Bowman’s space,
and significant background whitespace within the image patch. While the patch-based model
performed well in this proof-of-concept scenario, it is ultimately more important to gauge
performance on WSI.
B. Performance on WSI: Pixelwise Results
Selected WSIs are shown with their associated annotations and predicted probability maps
for examples having large numbers of sclerosed glomeruli (Figure 5), small numbers of
sclerosed glomeruli along with visible section folding artifact (Figure 6), and large regions
of renal capsule (Figure 7), for both the patch-based and fully convolutional models.
Probability magnitude is indicated by the brightness of color associated with each label
(blue→non-sclerosed, red→sclerosed, tubulointerstitium not shown). The patch-based
model does not generalize well to the task of segmenting glomeruli in WSI, especially in
instances with small numbers of sclerosed glomeruli and prominent renal capsule. The fully
convolutional model predictions, however, appear faithful in position and shape to the
majority of annotated glomeruli. Additionally, the fully convolutional model’s glomerular
labeling is much more focal in nature, whereas the patch-based model is often characterized
by diffuse regions of positive labeling. It is also noteworthy that folding artifacts (see Figure
6a) have no apparent effect on the fully convolutional model’s performance.
To quantify agreement between model predictions and pathologist annotations on a pixel-bypixel basis, each pixel in the probability maps was assigned the categorical label associated
with the highest probability at that point. Percent area fraction (Table IV) and intersectionover-union (IOU) (Table V) metrics were computed from the predicted label maps for all
WSIs in each cross-validation fold. The IOU (also known as the Jaccard index) is computed
by comparing the number of pixels in each category in which the predicted and annotated
labels agree (intersection) divided by the total number of predicted and annotated pixels
assigned a label for that category (union). These quantities were computed in aggregate for
all pixels in the WSI predictions. Both models have high concurrence for tubulointerstitial
pixels (Tables IV and V). Non-sclerosed areas were more reliably labeled by the fully
convolutional compared to the patch-based model, as measured by area fraction. The fully
convolutional model’s score was higher than the pathologists’ assessment by 28%, whereas
the patch-based model overestimated by 58%. Model differences are most stark in the
sclerosed category. The patch-based model drastically overestimates the sclerosed area
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(6.0x), compared to 1.7x overprediction for the fully convolutional model. IOU scores are
even more telling, with the fully convolutional model having respectable scores of 0.59 and
0.36 for non-sclerosed and sclerosed areas, respectively, while the patch-based model returns
IOU values of only 0.20 and 0.07, respectively.
Kidney preimplantation biopsy evaluation requires the determination of the fraction of the
number of sclerosed glomeruli in a WSI (given by F = nS/(nS+nN)). An equivalent,
pixelbased surrogate measure was computed for comparison using the predicted label maps
given by each model. The sclerosed fraction was computed as Fpixel = nS,pixel/(nS,pixel +
nN,pixell), where nS,pixel and nN,pixel are the number of pixels labeled as sclerosed and nonsclerosed, respectively. To assess the models’ accuracy in estimating the sclerosed fraction,
we trained zero-intercept linear regression models. These linear models took Fpixel as input
to be fit to F, as determined by pathologist annotations. The models were evaluated by R2
and root mean square error (RMSE) on the cross-validation test set.
The fully convolutional model showed greater correlation with percent global
glomerulosclerosis (R2 = 0.828) compared with the patch-based model (R2 = −0.491). The
mean slope of regression (averaged over cross-validation folds) for the patch-based model
was 0.640, and 0.581 for the fully convolutional model. The resulting output is shown in
Figure 8A. Error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval, assuming the sclerosed
population fraction is characterized by a beta distribution. In practice, prior results have
indicated poorer clinical outcome for donor kidneys with greater than 20% global
glomerulosclerosis. Gray dotted lines are plotted at the 20% point on each axis, dividing the
plot into quadrants. In this way, the plot can be read as showing that the model agrees with
trained observers for samples lying in the lower left quadrant (organ more acceptable) and
upper right quadrant (organ less acceptable). It can be clearly seen that the fully
convolutional model output agrees with the pathologists’ assessments to a far greater degree
than the patch-based model in this regard.
C. Performance on WSI: Segmenting Glomeruli with Blob Detection Post-Processing
While the fully convolutional model’s pixelwise performance described above shows
significant promise for evaluating slides in a global sense, identification of individual
glomeruli is an important additional step for pathologists’ visual confirmation. In addition,
identifying individual glomeruli enables the model to generate position and shape
information for input to other glomerulus image characterization procedures. Only the fully
convolutional model was utilized in this procedure, because of its superior performance and
resolution relative to the patch-based model. A conventional Laplacian-of-Gaussian (LoG)
blob-detection algorithm was used to process the fully convolutional model’s
probability map predictions for identification of the locations of sclerosed and non-sclerosed
glomeruli. The LoG algorithm (implemented in the scikit-image Python library ) outputs
position and approximate radius of detected objects. Examples of output from blob detection
are shown in Figure 9 for the previously depicted WSIs in Figures 5–7. In the panels
showing glomerulus detections, solid circles indicate confirmed matches to annotations, X’s
mark incorrect glomerulus detections, and open rectangles indicate annotated glomeruli that
were overlooked by the model.
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Accuracy metrics for the predictions are given in Table VI. A detected blob was considered
positively identified if its center was located within the area of a region in the annotation
map, and if it had the same label as that annotated region. The blob-detection algorithm
threshold operating point of 0.25 is indicated in the free-response ROC curves in Figure 10,
which display detection sensitivity v as a function of average false positives per image. At
the selected operating point, the total number of detected sclerosed and non-sclerosed
glomeruli were modestly higher than the pathologists’ assessments, differing by 14.9% and
8.9%, respectively. Precision and recall were higher for non-sclerosed glomeruli than for
sclerosed, reflected in F1 scores of 0.8475 and 0.6492, respectively. Linear regression of the
sclerosed fraction Fblob = nS,blob/(nS,blob + nN,blob) (where nS,blob and nN,blob are number of
sclerosed and non-sclerosed glomeruli obtained from the blob-detected probability maps)
versus the pathologists’ assessment for each WSI in the training set was computed and used
to regress the blob-detected probability maps in the cross-validation test set (Figure 8C,
right). The mean coefficient of regression (averaged over cross-validation folds) was 0.978.
Both R2 and RMSE were improved versus the equivalent pixel-based metrics for this model
(R2: 0.863 vs. 0.828, RMSE: 0.061 vs. 0.079). Note that the fully convolutional model’s
RMSE value approached the intrinsic error of the pathologists assessment (0.043), computed
from the square root of the mean value of sclerosed fraction variance.
D. Misclassified Glomeruli
A list of misclassified glomeruli images from the test set were submitted to the pathologists
responsible for the ground truth annotations in order to determine the rate of actual
misclassified glomeruli, and also to gauge the incidence of glomeruli that may have escaped
initial inspection. Of the false positive predictions represented in Table VI, 34 glomeruli
were determined to have been overlooked in the annotation process, 7 were judged to be
misidentified by the pathologists, and 13 were correctly identified by the fully convolutional
model but positioned immediately adjacent to (rather than atop) the annotated glomeruli. Of
the false positive predictions that were not tubulointerstitium, 199 were areas of cyst or
tattered regions associated with frozen artifact, 83 were vessels, 6 were areas of thick or
folded tissue, 3 were instances of hyaline or atrophied tubules, 7 were borderline cases not
clearly normal or sclerosed, and 13 were areas of where the detected blob encompassed
multiple glomeruli.
V. Discussion
Several factors were key to the success of the fully convolutional model relative to the patchbased model. Because the fully convolutional network’s output maintained pixel-wise
fidelity to the downsampled annotation map, network training and prediction occurred at a
higher resolution than the patch-based approach. In particular, the fully convolutional model
was exposed to a far greater variety of tissue configurations, in which all areas of the input
image patches were able to inform the model during training.
The use of a dilated convolutional layer , also increased the receptive field of the
network. In order to illustrate the effect of the dilated convolution, we constructed and
trained a model that replicated the same structure as the fully convolutional model, but
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
replaced the dilated convolution layer with a normal convolution layer. Additionally, we
implemented linearized versions of both fully convolutional models with all weights set to
unity, biases set to zero, max pooling layers replaced with average pooling, and activations
set to the identity function. An “image” array initialized to zero, except for a single point set
to a constant nonzero RGB value, was used as input to the linearized models. The central
value of each linearized model’s output array was stored in a result array at the same
position as the nonzero point in the input array. Linearized model outputs were computed for
each realization of the input as the nonzero point was moved over every position in the array.
The extent of the receptive field was determined by the nonzero points in the result array.
The results are shown in Figure 8B, and can be interpreted as idealized “point spread
functions” that map the relative contribution of nearby input pixels to an individual output
point (ignoring learned weights in this illustration). Regression plots for sclerosed
glomerulus fraction using blob detection post-processing for both models show the
improvement in prediction agreement with pathologist assessments enabled by the dilated
convolution layer (Figure 8C). The two-tailed p-value for the difference between the
correlation coefficients of the two models was 0.056, approaching significance at the 95%
level. The difference in prediction between the models was most evident for samples with
large capsule areas, in which the model without the dilated convolution layer erroneously
inferred sclerosed glomeruli adjacent to fibrous regions. We speculate that the model
utilizing dilated convolution was better able to infer regional context because of its larger
receptive field.
Although the size of the final model’s receptive field was increased, we found that, for a
given input image patch, the central area of the model prediction output array typically
exhibited higher correlation with the corresponding annotation region than areas closer to
the output array’s perimeter. Thus, the stride used in selecting image patches for training and
prediction was chosen to be 448 pixels so as to enable sample overlap of 576 pixels (56%
overlap for 1024-pixel square arrays). Only the central, non-overlapping portions of the
prediction patches were used to assemble the final probability maps, which markedly
improved results when compared to the use of, for instance, an 896-pixel stride.
Apart from prediction performance, a key operational advantage of the fully convolutional
model relative to the patch-based model was the dramatic decrease in time required to
generate output probability maps. For the GPU utilized in this study (a single nVidia Tesla
K20m), the median time to process each 448×448 pixel image patch input to the patch-based
model was 0.056 sec, and the median time required to process each 1024×1024 pixel image
patch input to the fully convolutional model was 0.50 sec. Although the time required per
patch was larger for the fully convolutional model, there were far fewer patches required to
process an entire image than for the patch-based model at equivalent output resolution. For
the largest image used in this study (482 megapixels), the fully convolutional model required
20 minutes to process the corresponding 2415 input image patches, whereas the patch-based
model at equivalent output resolution would require a prohibitive 440 minutes to process the
corresponding 471 396 input image patches, a 22-fold increase. Note that the times cited are
for a 5-year old GPU; one may expect the processing times to decrease substantially for
state-of-the-art, multiplexed GPUs. Clinically, the time required of a pathologist to evaluate
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
a slide may be as short as 20 minutes; thus, the fully convolutional model should easily be
capable of operating within such constraints when running on modern hardware.
Of the glomeruli misidentified by the fully convolutional model that were not associated
with generic tubulointerstitium, by far the largest number occurred in areas centered on
cysts, vessels, or holes. Many of these regions included somewhat circular features similar in
scale to glomeruli, which may have led to the misclassification. It is possible that the
model’s performance could be further enhanced by labeling and training on WSIs annotated
with these categories. Very few instances of misclassification occurred because of tissue
folding, however, suggesting that the model was insensitive to this artifact.
Using blob detection to infer glomerulus presence from the pixel map incurs the same
potential drawbacks as those found in other morphological detection methods, namely the
need to determine appropriate input parameters based on domain knowledge. In this case,
parameters for minimum and maximum radius and minimum intensity threshold were fixed
at levels which yielded reasonable discrimination between closely spaced glomeruli, and
which excluded low-intensity regions or objects too small to be glomeruli. In making these
choices, however, it is possible that additional errors may arise that can obscure the quality
of the underlying data. Figure 11 highlights one type of error in which adjacent predicted
glomerular regions are not resolved by the LoG algorithm, leading to a false negative result
for one of the adjoining glomeruli in spite of qualitatively correct labeling displayed by the
fully convolutional model’s probability map. Nevertheless, this post-processing step allows
glomerulus-level estimation of the model’s fitness for slide evaluation through direct
comparison with the pathologists’ estimates of glomerulus populations. We anticipate that
future work will include means of accounting for and training to glomerulus population in
the network architecture.
In the long run, we aim to measure the extent to which this model reduces the inter-observer
variability of pathologist assessments, and the intrinsic error associated with assessing
percent globular sclerosis off of a single WSI. Though very preliminary, it appears that the
variability of the model’s output is lower across technical replicates (Table VII). Two of the
kidneys associated with this study had five or more associated WSIs, and were, therefore,
well-controlled technical replicates. In both series, the average value of the model prediction
was in close agreement with the pathologists’ determination; moreover, the standard
deviation of the model output was lower than for the pathologist assessment, suggesting that
the model may be able to decrease evaluation variability.
VI. Conclusion
Two deep-learning models were adapted from a pretrained CNN for the purpose of
glomerular segmentation and classification of glomeruli in frozen-section whole-slide
images. This task is critical for the time-sensitive evaluation of donor kidneys before
transplantation. The initial patch-based architecture was able to robustly categorize sclerosed
glomerular image patches from non-sclerosed after training with a relatively small set of
samples, showing the utility of transfer learning with a general-purpose image classification
CNN. Applied to whole-slide images, the patch-based model was outperformed by a fully
Marsh et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
convolutional model based on the same pretrained CNN. A blob detection post-processing
step was used to generate discrete maps of glomeruli and their associated class (sclerosed or
non-sclerosed). Percent global glomerulosclerosis, a key metric used in grading kidneys for
transplant suitability, indicated performance for the fully convolutional CNN nearly
equivalent to that of a board-certified clinical pathologist. We are optimistic that the
methodology described here has the potential to be an essential part of the workflow for
transplant evaluation in the clinical setting.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank the Institute for Informatics at Washington University in St. Louis, the Mid-
America Transplant Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health for their support of this work. Contributions:
J.N.M wrote the manuscript and, with M.K.M, developed the software used in the processing pipeline; M.K.M
developed final architecture of the fully convolutional model; S.K. and J.P.G. annotated all WSIs and assessed
model results; T.-C.L. and T.S.S provided additional guidance in clinical- and pathology-related matters; S.J.S.
directed the project and provided guidance for deep learning tasks; J.P.G., T.-C.L. and S.J.S. obtained funding.
This work was supported by Mid-America Transplant Foundation grant 012017 and by the National Institutes of
Health under award numbers R01LM012222 and R01LM012482.