Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 11–19,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics
Addressing the Rare Word Problem in
Neural Machine Translation
Minh-Thang Luong† ∗
 
Ilya Sutskever†
Quoc V. Le†
{ilyasu,qvl,vinyals}@google.com
Oriol Vinyals
Wojciech Zaremba∗
New York University
 
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is a
new approach to machine translation that
has shown promising results that are comparable to traditional approaches. A signiﬁcant weakness in conventional NMT
systems is their inability to correctly translate very rare words: end-to-end NMTs
tend to have relatively small vocabularies
with a single unk symbol that represents
every possible out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word. In this paper, we propose and implement an effective technique to address
this problem. We train an NMT system
on data that is augmented by the output
of a word alignment algorithm, allowing
the NMT system to emit, for each OOV
word in the target sentence, the position of
its corresponding word in the source sentence. This information is later utilized in
a post-processing step that translates every
OOV word using a dictionary. Our experiments on the WMT’14 English to French
translation task show that this method provides a substantial improvement of up to
2.8 BLEU points over an equivalent NMT
system that does not use this technique.
With 37.5 BLEU points, our NMT system is the ﬁrst to surpass the best result
achieved on a WMT’14 contest task.
Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is a novel approach to MT that has achieved promising results
 . An NMT system is a conceptually simple large neural network that reads the en-
∗Work done while the authors were in Google. † indicates
equal contribution.
tire source sentence and produces an output translation one word at a time. NMT systems are appealing because they use minimal domain knowledge which makes them well-suited to any problem that can be formulated as mapping an input
sequence to an output sequence . In addition, the natural ability of neural
networks to generalize implies that NMT systems
will also generalize to novel word phrases and sentences that do not occur in the training set. In addition, NMT systems potentially remove the need to
store explicit phrase tables and language models
which are used in conventional systems. Finally,
the decoder of an NMT system is easy to implement, unlike the highly intricate decoders used by
phrase-based systems .
Despite these advantages, conventional NMT
systems are incapable of translating rare words because they have a ﬁxed modest-sized vocabulary1
which forces them to use the unk symbol to represent the large number of out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Unsurprisingly, both Sutskever et al. and Bahdanau
et al. have observed that sentences with
many rare words tend to be translated much more
poorly than sentences containing mainly frequent
words. Standard phrase-based systems , on the other hand, do not suffer from the
rare word problem to the same extent because they
can support a much larger vocabulary, and because
their use of explicit alignments and phrase tables
allows them to memorize the translations of even
extremely rare words.
Motivated by the strengths of standard phrase-
1Due to the computationally intensive nature of the softmax, NMT systems often limit their vocabularies to be the
top 30K-80K most frequent words in each language. However, Jean et al. has very recently proposed an efﬁcient
approximation to the softmax that allows for training NTMs
with very large vocabularies. As discussed in Section 2, this
technique is complementary to ours.
en: The ecotax portico in Pont-de-Buis , . . . [truncated] . . . , was taken down on Thursday morning
fr: Le portique ´ecotaxe de Pont-de-Buis , . . . [truncated] . . . , a ´et´e d´emont´e jeudi matin
nn: Le unk de unk `a unk , . . . [truncated] . . . , a ´et´e pris le jeudi matin
Figure 1: Example of the rare word problem – An English source sentence (en), a human translation to
French (fr), and a translation produced by one of our neural network systems (nn) before handling OOV
words. We highlight words that are unknown to our model. The token unk indicates an OOV word. We
also show a few important alignments between the pair of sentences.
based system, we propose and implement a novel
approach to address the rare word problem of
NMTs. Our approach annotates the training corpus with explicit alignment information that enables the NMT system to emit, for each OOV
word, a “pointer” to its corresponding word in the
source sentence. This information is later utilized
in a post-processing step that translates the OOV
words using a dictionary or with the identity translation, if no translation is found.
Our experiments conﬁrm that this approach is
effective.
On the English to French WMT’14
translation task, this approach provides an improvement of up to 2.8 (if the vocabulary is relatively small) BLEU points over an equivalent
NMT system that does not use this technique.
Moreover, our system is the ﬁrst NMT that outperforms the winner of a WMT’14 task.
Neural Machine Translation
A neural machine translation system is any neural
network that maps a source sentence, s1, . . . , sn,
to a target sentence, t1, . . . , tm, where all sentences are assumed to terminate with a special
“end-of-sentence” token <eos>.
More concretely, an NMT system uses a neural network to
parameterize the conditional distributions
p(tj|t<j, s≤n)
for 1 ≤j ≤m. By doing so, it becomes possible to compute and therefore maximize the log
probability of the target sentence given the source
log p(t|s) =
log p (tj|t<j, s≤n)
There are many ways to parameterize these conditional distributions. For example, Kalchbrenner
and Blunsom used a combination of a convolutional neural network and a recurrent neural
network, Sutskever et al. used a deep Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model, Cho et al.
 used an architecture similar to the LSTM,
and Bahdanau et al. used a more elaborate neural network architecture that uses an attentional mechanism over the input sequence, similar
to Graves and Graves et al. .
In this work, we use the model of Sutskever et
al. , which uses a deep LSTM to encode the
input sequence and a separate deep LSTM to output the translation. The encoder reads the source
sentence, one word at a time, and produces a large
vector that represents the entire source sentence.
The decoder is initialized with this vector and generates a translation, one word at a time, until it
emits the end-of-sentence symbol <eos>.
None the early work in neural machine translation systems has addressed the rare word problem,
but the recent work of Jean et al. has tackled it with an efﬁcient approximation to the softmax to accommodate for a very large vocabulary
(500K words). However, even with a large vocabulary, the problem with rare words, e.g., names,
numbers, etc., still persists, and Jean et al. 
found that using techniques similar to ours are
beneﬁcial and complementary to their approach.
Rare Word Models
Despite the relatively large amount of work done
on pure neural machine translation systems, there
has been no work addressing the OOV problem in
NMT systems, with the notable exception of Jean
et al. ’s work mentioned earlier.
We propose to address the rare word problem
by training the NMT system to track the origins
of the unknown words in the target sentences. If
we knew the source word responsible for each un-
en: The unk1
portico in unk2
fr: Le unk∅unk1
Figure 2: Copyable Model – an annotated example with two types of unknown tokens: “copyable”
unkn and null unk∅.
known target word, we could introduce a postprocessing step that would replace each unk in
the system’s output with a translation of its source
word, using either a dictionary or the identity
translation.
For example, in Figure 1, if the
model knows that the second unknown token in
the NMT (line nn) originates from the source word
ecotax, it can perform a word dictionary lookup
to replace that unknown token by ´ecotaxe. Similarly, an identity translation of the source word
Pont-de-Buis can be applied to the third unknown token.
We present three annotation strategies that can
easily be applied to any NMT system . We treat the NMT system as
a black box and train it on a corpus annotated by
one of the models below. First, the alignments are
produced with an unsupervised aligner. Next, we
use the alignment links to construct a word dictionary that will be used for the word translations in
the post-processing step.2 If a word does not appear in our dictionary, then we apply the identity
translation.
The ﬁrst few words of the sentence pair in Figure 1 (lines en and fr) illustrate our models.
Copyable Model
In this approach, we introduce multiple tokens
to represent the various unknown words in the
source and in the target language, as opposed to
using only one unk token. We annotate the OOV
words in the source sentence with unk1, unk2,
unk3, in that order, while assigning repeating unknown words identical tokens.
The annotation
of the unknown words in the target language is
slightly more elaborate: (a) each unknown target
word that is aligned to an unknown source word
is assigned the same unknown token (hence, the
2When a source word has multiple translations, we use
the translation with the highest probability. These translation
probabilities are estimated from the unsupervised alignment
links. When constructing the dictionary from these alignment
links, we add a word pair to the dictionary only if its alignment count exceeds 100.
en: The unk portico in unk . . .
fr: Le p0 unk p−1 unk p1 de p∅unk p−1 . . .
Figure 3: Positional All Model – an example of
the PosAll model. Each word is followed by the
relative positional tokens pd or the null token p∅.
“copy” model) and (b) an unknown target word
that has no alignment or that is aligned with a
known word uses the special null token unk∅. See
Figure 2 for an example. This annotation enables
us to translate every non-null unknown token.
Positional All Model (PosAll)
The copyable model is limited by its inability to
translate unknown target words that are aligned
to known words in the source sentence, such as
the pair of words, “portico” and “portique”, in our
running example. The former word is known on
the source sentence; whereas latter is not, so it
is labelled with unk∅. This happens often since
the source vocabularies of our models tend to be
much larger than the target vocabulary since a
large source vocabulary is cheap.
This limitation motivated us to develop an annotation model
that includes the complete alignments between the
source and the target sentences, which is straightforward to obtain since the complete alignments
are available at training time.
Speciﬁcally, we return to using only a single
universal unk token.
However, on the target
side, we insert a positional token pd after every word.
Here, d indicates a relative position
(d = −7, . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , 7) to denote that a target word at position j is aligned to a source word
at position i = j −d. Aligned words that are too
far apart are considered unaligned, and unaligned
words rae annotated with a null token pn. Our annotation is illustrated in Figure 3.
Positional Unknown Model (PosUnk)
The main weakness of the PosAll model is that
it doubles the length of the target sentence. This
makes learning more difﬁcult and slows the speed
of parameter updates by a factor of two. However, given that our post-processing step is concerned only with the alignments of the unknown
words, so it is more sensible to only annotate the
unknown words. This motivates our positional unknown model which uses unkposd tokens (for d
in −7, . . . , 7 or ∅) to simultaneously denote (a)
the fact that a word is unknown and (b) its relative position d with respect to its aligned source
word. Like the PosAll model, we use the symbol
unkpos∅for unknown target words that do not
have an alignment. We use the universal unk for
all unknown tokens in the source language. See
Figure 4 for an annotated example.
en: The unk portico in unk . . .
fr: Le unkpos1 unkpos−1 de unkpos1 . . .
Figure 4: Positional Unknown Model – an example of the PosUnk model: only aligned unknown
words are annotated with the unkposd tokens.
It is possible that despite its slower speed, the
PosAll model will learn better alignments because
it is trained on many more examples of words and
their alignments. However, we show that this is
not the case (see §5.2).
Experiments
We evaluate the effectiveness of our OOV models on the WMT’14 English-to-French translation
Translation quality is measured with the
BLEU metric on the newstest2014 test set (which has 3003 sentences).
Training Data
To be comparable with the results reported by previous work on neural machine translation systems
 , we train our models on the same
training data of 12M parallel sentences (348M
French and 304M English words), obtained from
 . The 12M subset was selected
from the full WMT’14 parallel corpora using the
method proposed in Axelrod et al. .
Due to the computationally intensive nature of
the naive softmax, we limit the French vocabulary
(the target language) to the either the 40K or the
80K most frequent French words. On the source
side, we can afford a much larger vocabulary, so
we use the 200K most frequent English words.
The model treats all other words as unknowns.3
We annotate our training data using the three
schemes described in the previous section. The
alignment is computed with the Berkeley aligner
 using its default settings. We
3When the French vocabulary has 40K words, there are
on average 1.33 unknown words per sentence on the target
side of the test set.
discard sentence pairs in which the source or the
target sentence exceed 100 tokens.
Training Details
hyperparameter
choices are similar to those used by Sutskever et
al. . In more details, we train multi-layer
deep LSTMs, each of which has 1000 cells, with
1000 dimensional embeddings. Like Sutskever et
al. , we reverse the words in the source sentences which has been shown to improve LSTM
memory utilization and results in better translations of long sentences. Our hyperparameters can
be summarized as follows: (a) the parameters are
initialized uniformly in [-0.08, 0.08] for 4-layer
models and [-0.06, 0.06] for 6-layer models, (b)
SGD has a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.7, (c) we train
for 8 epochs (after 5 epochs, we begin to halve
the learning rate every 0.5 epoch), (d) the size
of the mini-batch is 128, and (e) we rescale the
normalized gradient to ensure that its norm does
not exceed 5 .
We also follow the GPU parallelization scheme
proposed in , allowing us
to reach a training speed of 5.4K words per second to train a depth-6 model with 200K source
and 80K target vocabularies ; whereas Sutskever
et al. achieved 6.3K words per second for
a depth-4 models with 80K source and target vocabularies. Training takes about 10-14 days on an
8-GPU machine.
A note on BLEU scores
We report BLEU scores based on both: (a) detokenized translations, i.e., WMT’14 style, to be comparable with results reported on the WMT website4 and (b) tokenized translations, so as to be
consistent with previous work .5
The existing WMT’14 state-of-the-art system
 achieves a detokenized
BLEU score of 35.8 on the newstest2014 test set
for English to French language pair (see Table 2).
In terms of the tokenized BLEU, its performance
is 37.0 points (see Table 1).
4 
tokenizer.perl
multi-bleu.pl
scripts are used to tokenize and score translations.
State of the art in WMT’14 
Standard MT + neural components
Schwenk – neural language model
Cho et al. – phrase table neural features
Sutskever et al. – 5 LSTMs, reranking 1000-best lists
Existing end-to-end NMT systems
Bahdanau et al. – single gated RNN with search
Sutskever et al. – 5 LSTMs
Jean et al. – 8 gated RNNs with search + UNK replacement
Our end-to-end NMT systems
Single LSTM with 4 layers
Single LSTM with 4 layers + PosUnk
31.8 (+2.3)
Single LSTM with 6 layers
Single LSTM with 6 layers + PosUnk
32.7 (+2.3)
Ensemble of 8 LSTMs
Ensemble of 8 LSTMs + PosUnk
36.9 (+2.8)
Single LSTM with 6 layers
Single LSTM with 6 layers + PosUnk
33.1 (+1.6)
Ensemble of 8 LSTMs
Ensemble of 8 LSTMs + PosUnk
37.5 (+1.9)
Table 1: Tokenized BLEU on newstest2014 – Translation results of various systems which differ in
terms of: (a) the architecture, (b) the size of the vocabulary used, and (c) the training corpus, either
using the full WMT’14 corpus of 36M sentence pairs or a subset of it with 12M pairs. We highlight
the performance of our best system in bolded text and state the improvements obtained by our technique
of handling rare words (namely, the PosUnk model). Notice that, for a given vocabulary size, the more
accurate systems achieve a greater improvement from the post-processing step. This is the case because
the more accurate models are able to pin-point the origin of an unknown word with greater accuracy,
making the post-processing more useful.
Existing SOTA 
Ensemble of 8 LSTMs + PosUnk
Table 2: Detokenized BLEU on newstest2014 –
translation results of the existing state-of-the-art
system and our best system.
Main Results
We compare our systems to others, including the
current state-of-the-art MT system , recent end-to-end neural systems, as
well as phrase-based baselines with neural components.
The results shown in Table 1 demonstrate that
our unknown word translation technique (in particular, the PosUnk model) signiﬁcantly improves
the translation quality for both the individual (nonensemble) LSTM models and the ensemble models.6 For 40K-word vocabularies, the performance
gains are in the range of 2.3-2.8 BLEU points.
With larger vocabularies (80K), the performance
gains are diminished, but our technique can still
provide a nontrivial gains of 1.6-1.9 BLEU points.
It is interesting to observe that our approach is
more useful for ensemble models as compared to
the individual ones. This is because the usefulness of the PosUnk model directly depends on the
ability of the NMT to correctly locate, for a given
OOV target word, its corresponding word in the
source sentence.
An ensemble of large models
identiﬁes these source words with greater accuracy. This is why for the same vocabulary size,
better models obtain a greater performance gain
6For the 40K-vocabulary ensemble, we combine 5 models with 4 layers and 3 models with 6 layers. For the 80Kvocabulary ensemble, we combine 3 models with 4 layers and
5 models with 6 layers. Two of the depth-6 models are regularized with dropout, similar to Zaremba et al. with
the dropout probability set to 0.2.
our post-processing step. e Except for the very recent work of Jean et al. that employs a similar unknown treatment strategy7 as ours, our best
result of 37.5 BLEU outperforms all other NMT
systems by a arge margin, and more importanly,
our system has established a new record on the
WMT’14 English to French translation.
We analyze and quantify the improvement obtained by our rare word translation approach and
provide a detailed comparison of the different
rare word techniques proposed in Section 3. We
also examine the effect of depth on the LSTM
architectures and demonstrate a strong correlation between perplexities and BLEU scores. We
also highlight a few translation examples where
our models succeed in correctly translating OOV
words, and present several failures.
Rare Word Analysis
To analyze the effect of rare words on translation
quality, we follow Sutskever et al. and sort sentences in newstest2014 by the
average inverse frequency of their words. We split
the test sentences into groups where the sentences
within each group have a comparable number of
rare words and evaluate each group independently.
We evaluate our systems before and after translating the OOV words and compare with the standard MT systems – we use the best system from
the WMT’14 contest , and
neural MT systems – we use the ensemble systems
described in and Section 4.
Rare word translation is challenging for neural
machine translation systems as shown in Figure 5.
Speciﬁcally, the translation quality of our model
before applying the postprocessing step is shown
by the green curve, and the current best NMT system is the purple curve.
While produces better
translations for sentences with frequent words (the
left part of the graph), they are worse than best
7Their unknown replacement method and ours both track
the locations of target unknown words and use a word dictionary to post-process the translation. However, the mechanism
used to achieve the “tracking” behavior is different. Jean et al.
 ’s uses the attentional mechanism to track the origins
of all target words, not just the unknown ones. In contrast,
we only focus on tracking unknown words using unsupervised alignments. Our method can be easily applied to any
sequence-to-sequence models since we treat any model as a
blackbox and manipulate only at the input and output levels.
SOTA Durrani et al. (37.0)
Sutskever et al. (34.8)
Ours (35.6)
Ours + PosUnk (37.5)
Figure 5: Rare word translation – On the x-axis,
we order newstest2014 sentences by their average frequency rank and divide the sentences into
groups of sentences with a comparable prevalence
of rare words. We compute the BLEU score of
each group independently.
system (red curve) on sentences with many rare
words (the right side of the graph). When applying
our unknown word translation technique (purple
curve), we signiﬁcantly improve the translation
quality of our NMT: for the last group of 500 sentences which have the greatest proportion of OOV
words in the test set, we increase the BLEU score
of our system by 4.8 BLEU points. Overall, our
rare word translation model interpolates between
the SOTA system and the system of Sutskever et
al. , which allows us to outperform the winning entry of WMT’14 on sentences that consist
predominantly of frequent words and approach its
performance on sentences with many OOV words.
Rare Word Models
We examine the effect of the different rare word
models presented in Section 3, namely: (a) Copyable – which aligns the unknown words on both
the input and the target side by learning to copy indices, (b) the Positional All (PosAll) – which predicts the aligned source positions for every target
word, and (c) the Positional Unknown (PosUnk)
– which predicts the aligned source positions for
only the unknown target words.8 It is also interest-
8In this section and in section 5.3, all models are trained
on the unreversed sentences, and we use the following hyperparameters: we initialize the parameters uniformly in [-0.1,
0.1], the learning rate is 1, the maximal gradient norm is 1,
with a source vocabulary of 90k words, and a target vocabulary of 40k (see Section 4.2 for more details). While these
LSTMs do not achieve the best possible performance, it is
still useful to analyze them.
NoAlign (5.31)
Copyable (5.38)
PosAll (5.30, 1.37)
PosUnk (5.32)
Figure 6: Rare word models – translation performance of 6-layer LSTMs: a model that uses no
alignment (NoAlign) and the other rare word models (Copyable, PosAll, PosUnk). For each model,
we show results before (left) and after (right) the
rare word translation as well as the perplexity (in
parentheses). For PosAll, we report the perplexities of predicting the words and the positions.
ing to measure the improvement obtained when no
alignment information is used during training. As
such, we include a baseline model with no alignment knowledge (NoAlign) in which we simply assume that the ith unknown word on the target sentence is aligned to the ith unknown word in the
source sentence.
From the results in Figure 6, a simple monotone alignment assumption for the NoAlign model
yields a modest gain of 0.8 BLEU points. If we
train the model to predict the alignment, then the
Copyable model offers a slightly better gain of 1.0
BLEU. Note, however, that English and French
have similar word order structure, so it would
be interesting to experiment with other language
pairs, such as English and Chinese, in which the
word order is not as monotonic. These harder language pairs potentially imply a smaller gain for the
NoAlign model and a larger gain for the Copyable
model. We leave it for future work.
The positional models (PosAll and PosUnk) improve translation performance by more than 2
BLEU points. This proves that the limitation of the
copyable model, which forces it to align each unknown output word with an unknown input word,
is considerable. In contrast, the positional models can align the unknown target words with any
source word, and as a result, post-processing has a
much stronger effect. The PosUnk model achieves
better translation results than the PosAll model
which suggests that it is easier to train the LSTM
Depth 3 (6.01)
Depth 4 (5.71)
Depth 6 (5.46)
Effect of depths – BLEU scores
achieved by PosUnk models of various depths (3,
4, and 6) before and after the rare word translation. Notice that the PosUnk model is more useful
on more accurate models.
on shorter sequences.
Other Effects
Deep LSTM architecture – We compare PosUnk
models trained with different number of layers (3,
4, and 6). We observe that the gain obtained by
the PosUnk model increases in tandem with the
overall accuracy of the model, which is consistent
with the idea that larger models can point to the appropriate source word more accurately. Additionally, we observe that on average, each extra LSTM
layer provides roughly 1.0 BLEU point improvement as demonstrated in Figure 7.
Perplexity
Figure 8: Perplexity vs. BLEU – we show the
correlation by evaluating an LSTM model with 4
layers at various stages of training.
Perplexity and BLEU – Lastly, we ﬁnd it interesting to observe a strong correlation between the
perplexity (our training objective) and the translation quality as measured by BLEU. Figure 8 shows
the performance of a 4-layer LSTM, in which we
compute both perplexity and BLEU scores at different points during training. We ﬁnd that on average, a reduction of 0.5 perplexity gives us roughly
1.0 BLEU point improvement.
An additional 2600 operations including orthopedic and cataract surgery will
help clear a backlog .
En outre , unkpos1 op´erations suppl´ementaires , dont la chirurgie unkpos5
et la unkpos6 , permettront de r´esorber l’ arri´er´e .
En outre , 2600 op´erations suppl´ementaires , dont la chirurgie orthop´ediques
et la cataracte , permettront de r´esorber l’ arri´er´e .
2600 op´erations suppl´ementaires , notamment dans le domaine de la chirurgie
orthop´edique et de la cataracte , aideront `a rattraper le retard .
This trader , Richard Usher , left RBS in 2010 and is understand to have be
given leave from his current position as European head of forex spot trading at
JPMorgan .
Ce unkpos0 , Richard unkpos0 , a quitt´e unkpos1 en 2010 et a compris qu’
il est autoris´e `a quitter son poste actuel en tant que leader europ´een du march´e
des points de vente au unkpos5 .
Ce n´egociateur , Richard Usher , a quitt´e RBS en 2010 et a compris qu’ il est
autoris´e `a quitter son poste actuel en tant que leader europ´een du march´e des
points de vente au JPMorgan .
Ce trader , Richard Usher , a quitt´e RBS en 2010 et aurait ´et´e mis suspendu
de son poste de responsable europ´een du trading au comptant pour les devises
chez JPMorgan
But concerns have grown after Mr Mazanga was quoted as saying Renamo was
abandoning the 1992 peace accord .
Mais les inqui´etudes se sont accrues apr`es que M. unkpos3 a d´eclar´e que la
unkpos3 unkpos3 l’ accord de paix de 1992 .
Mais les inqui´etudes se sont accrues apr`es que M. Mazanga a d´eclar´e que la
Renamo ´etait l’ accord de paix de 1992 .
Mais l’ inqui´etude a grandi apr`es que M. Mazanga a d´eclar´e que la Renamo
abandonnait l’ accord de paix de 1992 .
Table 3: Sample translations – the table shows the source (src) and the translations of our best model
before (trans) and after (+unk) unknown word translations. We also show the human translations (tgt)
and italicize words that are involved in the unknown word translation process.
Sample Translations
We present three sample translations of our best
system (with 37.5 BLEU) in Table 3.
ﬁrst example, the model translates all the unknown words correctly: 2600, orthop´ediques, and
cataracte.
It is interesting to observe that the
model can accurately predict an alignment of distances of 5 and 6 words.
The second example
highlights the fact that our model can translate
long sentences reasonably well and that it was able
to correctly translate the unknown word for JP-
Morgan at the very far end of the source sentence.
Lastly, our examples also reveal several penalties
incurred by our model: (a) incorrect entries in the
word dictionary, as with n´egociateur vs. trader in
the second example, and (b) incorrect alignment
prediction, such as when unkpos3 is incorrectly
aligned with the source word was and not with
abandoning, which resulted in an incorrect translation in the third sentence.
Conclusion
We have shown that a simple alignment-based
technique can mitigate and even overcome one
of the main weaknesses of current NMT systems,
which is their inability to translate words that are
not in their vocabulary. A key advantage of our
technique is the fact that it is applicable to any
NMT system and not only to the deep LSTM
model of Sutskever et al. . A technique like
ours is likely necessary if an NMT system is to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on machine
translation.
We have demonstrated empirically that on the
WMT’14 English-French translation task, our
technique yields a consistent and substantial improvement of up to 2.8 BLEU points over various
NMT systems of different architectures. Most importantly, with 37.5 BLEU points, we have established the ﬁrst NMT system that outperformed the
best MT system on a WMT’14 contest dataset.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Google Brain team
for thoughtful discussions and insights. The ﬁrst
author especially thanks Chris Manning and the
Stanford NLP group for helpful comments on the
early drafts of the paper. Lastly, we thank the annonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.