Data-Free Quantization
Through Weight Equalization and Bias Correction
Markus Nagel∗
Mart van Baalen∗
Tijmen Blankevoort
Max Welling
Qualcomm AI Research†
Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.
{markusn, mart, tijmen, mwelling}@qti.qualcomm.com
We introduce a data-free quantization method for deep
neural networks that does not require ﬁne-tuning or hyperparameter selection. It achieves near-original model performance on common computer vision architectures and
8-bit ﬁxed-point quantization is essential for efﬁcient inference on modern deep learning hardware. However, quantizing models to run in 8-bit is a non-trivial task,
frequently leading to either signiﬁcant performance reduction or engineering time spent on training a network to be
amenable to quantization. Our approach relies on equalizing the weight ranges in the network by making use of a
scale-equivariance property of activation functions. In addition the method corrects biases in the error that are introduced during quantization. This improves quantization
accuracy performance, and can be applied to many common computer vision architectures with a straight forward
API call. For common architectures, such as the MobileNet
family, we achieve state-of-the-art quantized model performance. We further show that the method also extends to
other computer vision architectures and tasks such as semantic segmentation and object detection.
1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning based computer vision
models have moved from research labs into the cloud and
onto edge devices. As a result, power consumption and
latency of deep learning inference have become an important concern. For this reason ﬁxed-point quantization is often employed to make inference more efﬁcient. By quantizing ﬂoating point values onto a regularly spaced grid,
the original ﬂoating point values can be approximated by
a set of integers, a scaling factor, and an optional zero point
∗Equal Contribution
†Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,
DFQ (ours)
Figure 1. Fixed point inference for MobileNetV2 on ImageNet.
The original model has signiﬁcant drop in performance at 12-bit
quantization whereas our model maintains close to FP32 performance even at 6-bit quantization.
offset .
This allows for the use of faster and more
power-efﬁcient integer operations in matrix multiplication
and convolution computations, at the expense of lower representational power. We refer the reader to for details
on commonly used, hardware-friendly quantization methods for deep learning models.
Quantization of 32-bit full precision (FP32) models into
8-bit ﬁxed point (INT8) introduces quantization noise on
the weights and activations, which often leads to reduced
model performance. This performance degradation ranges
from very minor to catastrophic. To minimize the quantization noise, a wide range of different methods have been
introduced in the literature (see Section 2). A major drawback of these quantization methods is their reliance on data
and ﬁne-tuning. As an example, consider real-world actors
that manage hardware for quantized models, such as cloudbased deep learning inference providers or cellphone manufacturers. To provide a general use quantization service they
would have to receive data from the customers to ﬁne-tune
the models, or rely on their customers to do the quantization. In either case, this can add a difﬁcult step to the process. For such stakeholders it would be preferable if FP32
models could be converted directly to INT8, without needing the know-how, data or compute necessary for running
traditional quantization methods. Even for model developarXiv:1906.04721v3 [cs.LG] 25 Nov 2019
ers that have the capability to quantize their own models,
automation would save signiﬁcant time.
In this paper, we introduce a quantization approach that
does not require data, ﬁne-tuning or hyperparameter tuning,
resulting in accuracy improvement with a simple API call.
Despite these restrictions we achieve near-original model
performance when quantizing FP32 models to INT8. This is
achieved by adapting the weight tensors of pre-trained models such that they are more amenable to quantization, and by
correcting for the bias of the error that is introduced when
quantizing models. We show signiﬁcant improvements in
quantization performance on a wide range of computer vision models previously thought to be difﬁcult to quantize
without ﬁne-tuning.
Levels of quantization solutions
In literature the practical application of proposed quantization methods is rarely
discussed. To distinguish between the differences in applicability of quantization methods, we introduce four levels
of quantization solutions, in decreasing order of practical
applicability. Our hope is that this will enable other authors
to explore solutions for each level, and makes the comparison between methods more fair. The axes for comparison
are whether or not a method requires data, whether or not
a method requires error backpropagation on the quantized
model, and whether or not a method is generally applicable for any architecture or requires signiﬁcant model reworking. We use the following deﬁnitions throughout the
Level 1 No data and no backpropagation required. Method
works for any model. As simple as an API call that
only looks at the model deﬁnition and weights.
Level 2 Requires data but no backpropagation. Works for
any model. The data is used e.g. to re-calibrate batch
normalization statistics or to compute layer-wise
loss functions to improve quantization performance.
However, no ﬁne-tuning pipeline is required.
Level 3 Requires data and backpropagation. Works for any
model. Models can be quantized but need ﬁne-tuning
to reach acceptable performance. Often requires hyperparameter tuning for optimal performance. These
methods require a full training pipeline (e.g. ).
Level 4 Requires data and backpropagation. Only works
for speciﬁc models. In this case, the network architecture needs non-trivial reworking, and/or the architecture needs to be trained from scratch with quantization in mind (e.g. ). Takes signiﬁcant extra
training-time and hyperparameter tuning to work.
2. Background and related work
There are several works that describe quantization and
improving networks for lower bit inference and deployment
 . These methods all rely on ﬁne-tuning, making them level 3 methods, whereas data-free quantization
improves performance similarly without that requirement.
Our method is complementary to these and can be applied
as a pre-processing before quantization aware ﬁne-tuning.
In a whitepaper, Krishnamoorthi , introduces a level
1 ‘per-channel’ quantization scheme, in which the weights
of a convolutional weight tensor are quantized per output
A major drawback of this method is that it is
not supported on all hardware, and that it creates unnecessary overhead in the computation due to the necessity of
scale and offset values for each channel individually. We
show that our method improves on per-channel quantization, while keeping a single set of scale and offset values
for the whole weight tensor instead.
Other methods to improve quantization need architecture
changes or training with quantization in mind from the start
 . These methods are even more involved
than doing quantization and ﬁne-tuning. They also incur
a relatively large overhead during training because of sampling and noisy optimization, and introduce extra hyperparameters to optimize. This makes them level 4 methods.
Methods that binarize or ternarize 
networks result in models with great inference efﬁciency
as expensive multiplications and additions are replaced by
bit-shift operations. However, quantizing models to binary
often leads to strong performance degradation. Generally
they need to be trained from scratch, making them level 4
Other approaches use low-bit ﬂoating point operations
instead of integer operations, or other custom quantization
implementations . We do not consider such
approaches as the hardware implementation is less efﬁcient.
In concurrent work, Meller et al. also exploits the
scale equivariance of the ReLU function to rescale weight
channels and notice the biased error introduced by weight
quantization , leading to a method that resembles our
data-free quantization approach. Stock et al. also use
the scale equivariance property of the ReLU function, but
use it for network optimization instead.
3. Motivation
While many trained FP32 models can be quantized to
INT8 without much loss in performance, some models exhibit a signiﬁcant drop in performance after quantization
( ). For example, when quantizing a trained MobileNetV2 model, Krishnamoorthi reports a drop
in top-1 accuracy from 70.9% to 0.1% on the ImageNet 
validation set. The author restores near original model performance by either applying per-channel quantization, ﬁnetuning or both.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132
Output channel index
Figure 2. Per (output) channel weight ranges of the ﬁrst depthwiseseparable layer in MobileNetV2. In the boxplot the min and max
value, the 2nd and 3rd quartile and the median are plotted for each
channel. This layer exhibits strong differences between channel
weight ranges.
3.1. Weight tensor channel ranges
The fact that per-channel quantization yields much better performance on MobileNetV2 than per-tensor quantization suggests that, in some layers, the weight distributions
differ so strongly between output channels that the same
set of quantization parameters cannot be used to quantize
the full weight tensor effectively. For example, in the case
where one channel has weights in the range [−128, 128] and
another channel has weights in the range (−0.5, 0.5), the
weights in the latter channel will all be quantized to 0 when
quantizing to 8-bits.
Figure 2 shows that large differences in output channel
weight ranges do indeed occur in a (trained) MobileNetV2
model. This ﬁgure shows the weight distribution of the output channel weights of the depthwise-separable layer in the
model’s ﬁrst inverted residual block. Due to the strong differences between channel weight ranges that this layer exhibits, it cannot be quantized with reasonable accuracy for
each channel. Several layers in the network suffer from this
problem, making the overall model difﬁcult to quantize.
We conjecture that performance of trained models after
quantization can be improved by adjusting the weights for
each output channel such that their ranges are more similar. We provide a level 1 method to achieve this without
changing the FP32 model output in section 4.1.
3.2. Biased quantization error
A common assumption in literature (e.g. ) is that
quantization error is unbiased and thus cancels out in a
layer’s output, ensuring that the mean of a layer’s output
does not change as a result of quantization. However, as
we will show in this section, the quantization error on the
weights might introduce biased error on the corresponding
outputs. This shifts the input distribution of the next layer,
which may cause unpredictable effects.
The biased error in a quantized layer’s output unit j can
Biased Output Error
Quantized + BiasCorr
Figure 3. Per-channel biased output error introduced by weight
quantization of the second depthwise-separable layer in MobileNetV2, before (blue) and after (orange) bias correction.
be computed empirically using N input data points as:
E[eyj −yj] ≈1
Wxn)j −(Wxn)j
where yj and eyj are the original outputs and the outputs
generated using the quantized weight matrix, respectively.
Figure 3 shows the biased error per channel of a
depthwise-separable convolution layer in a trained MobileNetV2 model. From this plot it is clear that for many
channels in the layer’s output, the error introduced by
weight quantization is biased, and inﬂuences the output
statistics. Depthwise-separable layers are especially susceptible to this biased error effect as each output channel
has only 9 corresponding weights.
Such a biased error on the outputs can be introduced in
many settings, e.g. when weights or activations are clipped
 , or in non-quantization approaches, such as weight tensor factorization or channel pruning .
In section 4.2 we introduce a method to correct for this
bias. Furthermore, we show that a model’s batch normalization parameters can be used to compute the expected biased
error on the output, yielding a level 1 method to ﬁx the biased error introduced by quantization.
Our proposed data-free quantization method (DFQ) consists of three steps, on top of the normal quantization. The
overall ﬂow of the algorithm is shown in Figure 4.
4.1. Cross-layer range equalization
Positive scaling equivariance
We observe that for a
ReLU activation function f(·) the following scaling
equivariance property holds:
f(sx) = sf(x)
for any non-negative real number s. This follows from the
deﬁnition of the ReLU:
Figure 4. Flow diagram of the proposed DFQ algorithm.
This equivariance also holds for the PreLU activation function. More generally, the positive scaling equivariance can be relaxed to f(sx) = s ˆf(x) for any piece-wise
linear activation functions:
if c1 < x ≤c2
if cn−1 < x
where ˆf(·) is parameterized as ˆai = ai, ˆbi = bi/s and
ˆci = ci/s. Note that contrary to equivariance deﬁned in eq.
2 we now also change the function f(·) into ˆf(·).
4.1.1. Scaling equivariance in neural networks
The positive scaling equivariance can be exploited in
consecutive layers in neural networks. Given two layers,
h = f(W(1)x + b(1)) and y = f(W(2)h + b(2)), through
scaling equivariance we have that:
y = f(W(2)f(W(1)x + b(1)) + b(2))
= f(W(2)S ˆf(S−1W(1)x + S−1b(1)) + b(2))
W(1)x + bb(1)) + b(2))
where S = diag(s) is a diagonal matrix with value Sii
denoting the scaling factor si for neuron i.
This allows
us to reparameterize our model with c
W(2) = W(2)S,
W(1) = S−1W(1) and bb(1) = S−1b(1). In case of CNNs
the scaling will be per channel and broadcast accordingly
over the spatial dimensions. The rescaling procedure is illustrated in Figure 5.
4.1.2. Equalizing ranges over multiple layers
We can exploit the rescaling and reparameterization of
the model to make the model more robust to quantization.
Ideally the ranges of each channel i are equal to the total
range of the weight tensor, meaning we use the best possible
representative power per channel. We deﬁne the precision
of a channel as:
Figure 5. Illustration of the rescaling for a single channel. If scaling factor si scales ci in layer 1; we can instead factor it out and
multiply di in layer 2.
where ˆr(1)
is the quantization range of channel i in c
and ˆR(1) is the total range of c
W(1). We want to ﬁnd S such
that the total precision per channel is maximized:
In the case of symmetric quantization we have ˆr(1)
2 · maxj |c
ij | and ˆR(1) = 2 · maxij |c
ij |. Solving eq.
9 (see appendix A) leads to the necessary condition:
meaning the limiting channel deﬁning the quantization
range is given by arg maxi r(1)
i . We can satisfy this
condition by setting S such that:
which results in ∀i : r(1)
i . Thus the channel’s ranges
between both tensors are matched as closely as possible.
When equalizing multiple layers at the same time, we
iterate this process for pairs of layers that are connected to
each other without input or output splits in between, until
convergence.
4.1.3. Absorbing high biases
In case si < 1 the equalization procedure increases bias
i . This could in turn increase the range of the activation
quantization. In order to avoid big differences between perchannel ranges in the activations we introduce a procedure
that absorbs high biases into the subsequent layer.
For a layer with ReLU function r, there is a non-negative
vector c such that r(Wx + b −c) = r(Wx + b) −c. The
trivial solution c = 0 holds for all x. However, depending
on the distribution of x and the values of W and b, there
can be some values ci > 0 for which this equality holds for
(almost) all x. Following the previous two layer example,
these ci can be absorbed from layer 1 into layer 2 as:
y = W(2)h + b(2)
= W(2)(r(W(1)x + b(1)) + c −c) + b(2)
= W(2)(r(W(1)x + ˆb(1)) + c) + b(2)
= W(2)ˆh + ˆb(2)
where ˆb(2) = W(2)c+b(2), ˆh = h−c, and ˆb(1) = b(1)−c.
To ﬁnd c without violating our data-free assumption
we assume that the pre-bias activations are distributed normally with the batch normalization shift and scale parameters β and γ as its mean and standard deviation.
set c = max(0, β −3γ). If c > 0, the equality introduced above will hold for the 99.865% of values of x (those
greater than c) under the Gaussian assumption. As we will
show in section 5.1.1, this approximation does not harm the
full precision performance signiﬁcantly but helps for activation quantization. Note that, in case data is available, the
pre-bias distribution of x can be found empirically and used
4.2. Quantization bias correction
As shown empirically in the motivation, quantization can
introduce a biased error in the activations. In this section we
show how to correct for the bias in the error on the layer’s
output, and how we can use the network’s batch normalization parameters to compute this bias without using data.
For a fully connected layer with weight tensor W, quantized weights f
W, and input activations x, we have ey = f
and therefore ey = y + ϵx, where we deﬁne the quantization error ϵ = f
W −W, y as the layer pre-activations of the
FP32 model, and ey that layer with quantization error added.
If the expectation of the error for output i, E[ϵx]i ̸= 0,
then the mean of the output i will change. This shift in distribution may lead to detrimental behavior in the following
layers. We can correct for this change by seeing that:
E[y] = E[y] + E[ϵx] −E[ϵx]
= E[ey] −E[ϵx].
Thus, subtracting the expected error on the output E [ϵx] =
ϵE [x] from the biased output ey ensures that the mean for
each output unit is preserved.
For implementation, the expected error can be subtracted
from the layer’s bias parameter, since the expected error
vector has the same shape as the layer’s output. This method
easily extends to convolutional layers as described in Appendix B.
4.2.1. Computing the expected input
To compute the expected error of the output of a layer,
the expected input to the layer E[x] is required. If a model
does not use batch normalization, or there are no data-usage
restrictions, E[ϵx] can be computed by comparing the activations before and after quantization. Appendix D explains
this procedure in more detail.
Clipped normal distribution
When the network includes
batch normalization before a layer, we can use it to calculate E[x] for that layer without using data. We assume the
pre-activation outputs of a layer are normally distributed,
that batch normalization is applied before the activation
function, and that the activation function is some form of
the class of clipped linear activation functions (e.g. ReLU,
ReLU6), which clips its input range to the range [a, b] where
a < b, and b can be ∞.
Due to the centralization and normalization applied by
batch normalization, the mean and standard deviation of the
pre-activations are known: these are the batch normalization scale and shift parameters (henceforth referred to as γ
and β respectively).
To compute E[x] from the previous layer’s batch normalization parameters, the mean and variance need to be
adjusted to account for the activation function that follows
the batch normalization layer. For this purpose we introduce the clipped normal distribution. A clipped-normally
distributed random variable X is a normally distributed random variable with mean µ and variance σ2, whose values
are clipped to the range [a, b] The mean and variance of the
clipped normal distribution can be computed in closed form
from µ, σ, a and b. We present the mean of the clipped normal distribution for the ReLU activation function, i.e. a = 0
and b = ∞in this section, and refer the reader to Appendix
C for the closed form solution for the general clipped normal distribution.
The expected value for channel c in x, E[xc], which is
the output of a layer with batch normalization parameters
βc and γc, followed by a ReLU activation function is:
E[xc] = E [ReLU (xpre
where xpre
is the pre-activation output for channel c, which
is assumed to be normally distributed with mean βc and
variance γ2
c , Φ(·) is the normal CDF, and the notation N(x)
is used to denote the normal N(x|0, 1) PDF.
5. Experiments
In this section we present two sets of experiments to validate the performance of data-free quantization (DFQ). We
ﬁrst show in section 5.1 the effect of the different aspects
of DFQ and how they solve the problems observed earlier.
Then we show in section 5.2 how DFQ generalizes to other
models and tasks, and sets a new state-of-the-art for level 1
quantization.
To allow comparison to previously published results, we
use both weights and activations are quantized using 8bit asymmetric, per-tensor quantization in all experiments.
Batch normalization is folded in the adjacent layer before
quantization. Weight quantization ranges are the min and
max of the weight tensor. Activation quantization ranges
are set without data, by using the learned batch normalization shift and scale parameter vectors β and γ as follows:
We compute the activation range for channel i as βi ±n·γi
(with n = 6), with the minimum clipped to 0 in case of
ReLU activation. We observed a wide range of n can be
used without signiﬁcant performance difference. All experiments are done in Pytorch . In appendix E we show
additional experiments using short-term ﬁne-tuning, symmetric quantization and per-channel quantization.
5.1. Ablation study
In this section we investigate the effect of our methods
on a pre-trained MobileNetV2 model1. We validate the
performance of the model on the ImageNet validation
set. We ﬁrst investigate the effects of different parts of our
approach through a set of ablation studies.
5.1.1. Cross-layer equalization
In this section we investigate the effects of cross-layer
equalization and high-bias folding.
We compare these
methods to two baselines: the original quantized model and
the less hardware friendly per-channel quantization scheme.
The models considered in this section employ residual
connections . For these networks we apply cross-layer
equalization only to the layers within each residual block.
MobileNetV2 uses ReLU6 activation functions, which clips
activation ranges to . To avoid ReLU6 requiring a different cut off per channel after applying the equalization
procedure, we replace ReLU6 with regular ReLU.
The results of the equalization experiments are shown
in Table 1.
Similar to , we observe that the model
performance is close to random when quantizing the original model to INT8. Further we note that replacing ReLU6
by ReLU does not signiﬁcantly degrade the model performance. Applying equalization brings us to within 2% of
FP32 performance, close to the performance of per-channel
quantization. We note that absorbing high biases results in
a small drop in FP32 performance, but it boosts quantized
performance by 1% due to more precise activation quantization. Combining both methods improves performance
over per-channel quantization, indicating the more efﬁcient
per-tensor quantization could be used instead.
1We use the Pytorch implementation of MobileNetV2 provided by
 
Original model
Replace ReLU6
+ equalization
+ absorbing bias
Per channel quantization
Table 1. Top1 ImageNet validation results for MobileNetV2, evaluated at full precision and 8-bit integer quantized. Per-channel
quantization is our own implementation of applied posttraining.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132
Output channel index
Figure 6. Per (output) channel weight ranges of the ﬁrst depthwiseseparable layer in MobileNetV2 after equalization. In the boxplot
the min and max value, the 2nd and 3rd quartile and the median
are plotted for each channel. Most channels in this layer are now
within similar ranges.
To illustrate the effect of cross-layer equalization, we
show the weight distributions per output channel of the
depthwise-separable layer in the models ﬁrst inverted residual block after applying the equalization in Figure 6. We
observe that most channels ranges are now similar and that
the strong outliers from Figure 2 have been equalized. Note,
there are still several channels which have all weight values
close to zero. These channels convey little information and
can be pruned from the network with hardly any loss in accuracy.
5.1.2. Bias correction
In this section we present results on bias correction for a
quantized MobileNetV2 model. We furthermore present results of bias correction in combination with a naive weightclipping baseline, and combined with the cross-layer equalization approach.
The weight-clipping baseline serves two functions: 1) as
a naive baseline to the cross-layer equalization approach,
and 2) to show that bias correction can be employed in
any setting where biased noise is introduced. Weight clipping solves the problem of large differences in ranges between channels by clipping large ranges to smaller ranges,
but it introduces a strongly biased error. Weight clipping
is applied by ﬁrst folding the batch normalization parameters into a layer’s weights, and then clipping all values to
Original Model
+ Bias Corr
Rescaling + Bias Absorption
+ Bias Corr
Table 2. Top1 ImageNet validation results for MobileNetV2, evaluated at full precision and 8-bit integer quantized. Bold results
show the best result for each column in each cell.
a certain range, in this case [−15, 15]. We tried multiple
symmetric ranges, all provided similar results. For residual
connections we calculate E[x] and Var[x] based on the sum
and variance of all input expectations, taking the input to be
zero mean and unit variance.
To illustrate the effect of bias correction, Figure 3 shows
the per output channel biased error introduced by weight
quantization. The per-channel biases are obtained as described in eq. 1. This ﬁgure shows that applying bias correction reduces the bias in the error on the output of a layer
to very close to 0 for most output channels.
Results for the experiments described above for MobileNet V2 on the ImageNet validation set are shown in Table 2. Applying bias correction improves quantized model
performance, indicating that a part of the problem of quantizing this model lies in the biased error that is introduced.
However, bias correction on its own does not achieve near-
ﬂoating point performance.
The reason for this is most
likely that the problem described in 3.1 is more severe for
this model. The experiments on weight-clipping show that
bias correction can mitigate performance degradation due to
biased error in non-quantized models as well as quantized
models. Clipping without correction in the FP32 model introduces a 4.66% loss in accuracy; bias correction reduces
that loss to a mere 0.57%. Furthermore, it shows that weight
clipping combined with bias correction is a fairly strong
baseline for quantizing MobileNet V2. Lastly, we show
that bias correction improves results when combined with
the cross-layer equalization and bias folding procedures.
The combination of all methods is our data-free quantization (DFQ) method. The full DFQ approach achieves near-
ﬂoating point performance with a reduction of 0.53% top 1
accuracy relative to the FP32 baseline.
5.2. Comparison to other methods and models
In this section we show how DFQ generalizes to other
popular computer vision tasks, namely semantic segmentation and object detection, and other model architectures
such as MobileNetV1 and Resnet18 . Afterwards
we compare DFQ to methods in the literature, including
Original model
DFQ (ours)
Per-channel quantization
Table 3. DeeplabV3+ (MobileNetV2 backend) on Pascal VOC
segmentation challenge. Mean intersection over union (mIOU)
evaluated at full precision and 8-bit integer quantized. Per-channel
quantization is our own implementation of applied posttraining.
Original model
DFQ (ours)
Per-channel quantization
Table 4. MobileNetV2 SSD-lite on Pascal VOC object detection
challange. Mean average precision (mAP) evaluated at full precision and 8-bit integer quantized. Per-channel quantization is our
own implementation of applied post-training.
more complex level 3 and 4 approaches. This set of models
was chosen as they are efﬁcient and likely to be used in mobile applications where 8-bit quantization is frequently used
for power efﬁciency.
5.2.1. Other tasks
Semantic segmentation
To demonstrate the generalization of our method to semantic segmentation we apply DFQ
for DeeplabV3+ with a MobileNetV2 backend , performance is evaluated on the Pascal VOC segmentation
challenge .
For our experiments we use the publicly
available Pytorch implementation2.
We show the results of this experiment in Table 3. As
observed earlier for classiﬁcation we notice a signiﬁcant
drop in performance when quantizing the original model
which makes it almost unusable in practice. Applying DFQ
recovers almost all performance degradation and achieves
less than 1% drop in mIOU compared to the full precision
model. DFQ also outperforms the less hardware friendly
per-channel quantization. To the best of our knowledge we
are the ﬁrst to publish quantization results on DeeplabV3+
as well as for semantic segmentation.
Object detection
To demonstrate the applicability of our
method to object detection we apply DFQ for MobileNetV2
SSDLite , evaluated on the Pascal VOC object detection challenge . In our experiments we use the publicly available Pytorch implementation of SSD3.
2 
pytorch-deeplab-xception
3 
MobileNetV2
MobileNetV1
DFQ (ours)
Per-layer 
Per-channel 
Table 5. Top1 ImageNet validation results for different models and quantization approaches. The top half compares level 1 approaches
(∼D: data free, ∼BP: backpropagation-free, ∼AC: Architecture change free) whereas in the second half we also compare to higher level
approaches in literature. Results with ∗indicates our own implementation since results are not provided, ˆ results provided by and †
results from table 2 in .
The results are listed in Table 4. Similar to semantic
segmentation we observe a signiﬁcant drop in performance
when quantizing the SSDLite model. Applying DFQ recovers almost all performance drop and achieves less than 1%
drop in mAP compared to the full precision model, again
outperforming per-channel quantization.
5.2.2. Comparison to other approaches
In this section we compare DFQ to other approaches
in literature.
We compare our results to two other level
1 approaches, direct per-layer quantization as well as perchannel quantization .
In addition we also compare
to multiple higher level approaches, namely quantization
aware training as well as stochastic rounding and dynamic ranges , which are both level 3 approaches.
We also compare to two level 4 approaches based on relaxed quantization , which involve training a model
from scratch and to quantization friendly separable convolutions that require a rework of the original MobileNet
architecture. The results are summarized in Table 5.
For both MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2 per-layer
quantization results in an unusable model whereas DFQ
stays close to full precision performance. DFQ also outperforms per-channel quantization as well as most level 3 and
4 approaches which require signiﬁcant ﬁne-tuning, training
or even architecture changes.
On Resnet18 we maintain full precision performance for
8-bit ﬁxed point quantization using DFQ. Some higher level
approaches report slightly higher results than our
baseline model, likely due to a better training procedure
than used in the standard Pytorch Resnet18 model. Since
8-bit quantization is lossless we also compare 6-bit results.
DFQ clearly outperforms traditional per-layer quantization
but stays slightly below per-channel quantization and higher
level approaches such as QT and RQ .
Overall DFQ sets a new state-of-the-art for 8-bit ﬁxed
point quantization on several models and computer vision
tasks. It is especially strong for mobile friendly architectures such as MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2 which were
previously hard to quantize. Even though DFQ is an easy
to use level 1 approach, we generally show competitive performance when comparing to more complex level 2-4 approaches.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced DFQ, a data-free quantization method that signiﬁcantly helps quantized model
performance without the need for data, ﬁne-tuning or
hyper-parameter optimization.
The method can be applied to many common computer vision architectures with a
straight-forward API call. This is crucial for many practical
applications where engineers want to deploy deep learning
models trained in FP32 to INT8 hardware without much effort. Results are presented for common computer vision
tasks like image classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation and
object detection. We show that our method compares favorably to per-channel quantization , meaning that instead
the more efﬁcient per-tensor quantization can be employed
in practice. DFQ achieves near original model accuracy
for almost every model we tested, and even competes with
more complicated training based methods.
Further we introduced a set of quantization levels to facilitate the discussion on the applicability of quantization
methods. There is a difference in how easy a method is to
use for generating a quantized model, which is a signiﬁcant
part of the impact potential of a quantization method in real
world applications. We hope that the quantization levels
and methods introduced in this paper will contribute to both
future research and practical deployment of quantized deep
learning models.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Christos Louizos, Harris Teague,
Jakub Tomczak, Mihir Jain and Pim de Haan for their helpful discussions and valuable feedback.