Machine Learning, 40, 243–263, 2000
c⃝2000 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Learning to Play Chess Using Temporal Differences
JONATHAN BAXTER
 
Department of Systems Engineering, Australian National University 0200, Australia
ANDREW TRIDGELL
 
LEX WEAVER
 
Department of Computer Science, Australian National University 0200, Australia
Editor: Sridhar Mahadevan
In this paper we present TDLEAF(λ), a variation on the TD(λ) algorithm that enables it to be used in
conjunction with game-tree search. We present some experiments in which our chess program “KnightCap” used
TDLEAF(λ) to learn its evaluation function while playing on Internet chess servers. The main success we report is
that KnightCap improved from a 1650 rating to a 2150 rating in just 308 games and 3 days of play. As a reference,
a rating of 1650 corresponds to about level B human play (on a scale from E (1000) to A (1800)), while 2150
is human master level. We discuss some of the reasons for this success, principle among them being the use of
on-line, rather than self-play. We also investigate whether TDLEAF(λ) can yield better results in the domain of
backgammon, where TD(λ) has previously yielded striking success.
temporal difference learning, neural network, TDLEAF, chess, backgammon
Introduction
Temporal Difference learning, ﬁrst introduced by Samuel and later extended
and formalized by Sutton in his TD(λ) algorithm, is an elegant technique
for approximating the expected long term future cost (or cost-to-go) of a stochastic dynamical system as a function of the current state. The mapping from states to future cost
is implemented by a parameterized function approximator such as a neural network. The
parameters are updated online after each state transition, or possibly in batch updates after
several state transitions. The goal of the algorithm is to improve the cost estimates as the
number of observed state transitions and associated costs increases.
Perhaps the most remarkable success of TD(λ) is Tesauro’s TD-Gammon, a neural network backgammon player that was trained from scratch using TD(λ) and simulated selfplay. TD-Gammon is competitive with the best human backgammon players . In TD-Gammon the neural network played a dual role, both as a predictor of the
expected cost-to-go of the position and as a means to select moves. In any position the next
move was chosen greedily by evaluating all positions reachable from the current state, and
then selecting the move leading to the position with smallest expected cost. The parameters
of the neural network were updated according to the TD(λ) algorithm after each game.
Although the results with backgammon are quite striking, there is lingering disappointment that despite several attempts, they have not been repeated for other board games such
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
as othello, Go and the “drosophila of AI”—chess .
Many authors have discussed the peculiarities of backgammon that make it particularly suitable for Temporal Difference learning with self-play . Principle among these are speed
of play: TD-Gammon learnt from several hundred thousand games of self-play, representation smoothness: the evaluation of a backgammon position is a reasonably smooth function
of the position (viewed, say, as a vector of piece counts), making it easier to ﬁnd a good
neural network approximation, and stochasticity: backgammon is a random game which
forces at least a minimal amount of exploration of search space.
As TD-Gammon in its original form only searched one-ply ahead, we feel this list should
be appended with: shallow search is good enough against humans. There are two possible
reasons for this; either one does not gain a lot by searching deeper in backgammon (questionable given that recent versions of TD-Gammon search to three-ply and this signiﬁcantly
improves their performance), or humans are simply incapable of searching deeply and so
TD-Gammon is only competing in a pool of shallow searchers. Although we know of no
psychological studies investigating the depth to which humans search in backgammon, it is
plausible that the combination of high branching factor and random move generation makes
it quite difﬁcult to search more than one or two-ply ahead. In particular, random move generation effectively prevents selective search or “forward pruning” because it enforces a lower
bound on the branching factor at each move.
In contrast, ﬁnding a representation for chess, othello or Go which allows a small neural
network to order moves at one-ply with near human performance is a far more difﬁcult task.
It seems that for these games, reliable tactical evaluation is difﬁcult to achieve without deep
lookahead. As deep lookahead invariably involves some kind of minimax search, which
in turn requires an exponential increase in the number of positions evaluated as the search
depth increases, the computational cost of the evaluation function has to be low, ruling
out the use of expensive evaluation functions such as neural networks. Consequently most
chess and othello programs use linear evaluation functions (the branching factor in Go
makes minimax search to any signiﬁcant depth nearly infeasible).
Our goal is to develop techniques for using TD(λ) in domains dominated by search. In
this paper we introduce TDLEAF(λ), a variation on the TD(λ) algorithm, that can be used
to learn an evaluation function for use in deep minimax search. TDLEAF(λ) differs from
TD(λ) in that instead of operating on positions that occur during the game, it operates on the
leaf nodes of the principal variation of a minimax search from each position (also known
as the principal leaves).
To test the effectiveness of TDLEAF(λ), we incorporated it into our own chess program—
KnightCap. KnightCap has a particularly rich board representation facilitating computation
of sophisticated positional features, although this is achieved at some cost in speed (Knight-
Cap is about 10 times slower than Crafty—the best public-domain chess program—and
6,000 times slower than Deep Blue). We trained KnightCap’s linear evaluation function using TDLEAF(λ) by playing it on the Free Internet Chess Server (FICS, fics.onenet.net)
and on the Internet Chess Club (ICC, chessclub.com). Internet play was used to avoid
the premature convergence difﬁculties associated with self-play. The main success story we
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
report is that starting from an evaluation function in which all coefﬁcients were set to zero
except the values of the pieces, KnightCap went from a 1650-rated player to a 2150-rated
player in just three days and 308 games. KnightCap is an ongoing project with new features
being added to its evaluation function all the time. We use TDLEAF(λ) and Internet play to
tune the coefﬁcients of these features.
Simultaneously with the work presented here, Beal and Smith 
reported positive results using essentially TDLEAF(λ) and self-play (with some random
move choice) when learning the parameters of an evaluation function that only computed
material balance in chess. However, they were not comparing performance against on-line
players, but were primarily investigating whether the weights would converge to “sensible”
values at least as good as the naive (1, 3, 3, 5, 9) values for (pawn, knight, bishop, rook,
queen) .
Sutton and Barto have outlined, but not implemented, a scheme
for combining TD-style backups with deep minimax search. Their method would calculate
all the one-step differences seen during the construction of the search tree.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the TD(λ)
algorithm as it applies to games. The TDLEAF(λ) algorithm is described in Section 3.
Experimental results for Internet-play with KnightCap are given in Section 4, while Section 5 looks at applying TDLEAF(λ) to backgammon where TD(λ) has had its greatest
success. Section 7 contains some discussion and concluding remarks.
The TD(λ) algorithm applied to games
In this section we describe the TD(λ) algorithm as it applies to playing board games. We
discuss the algorithm from the point of view of an agent playing the game.
Let S denote the set of all possible board positions in the game. Play proceeds in a series
of moves at discrete time steps t = 1, 2, . . . . At time t the agent ﬁnds itself in some position
xt ∈S, and has available a set of moves, or actions Axt (the legal moves in position xt).
The agent chooses an action a ∈Axt and makes a transition to state xt+1 with probability
p(xt, xt+1, a). Here xt+1 is the position of the board after the agent’s move and the opponent’s response. When the game is over, the agent receives a scalar reward, typically “1”
for a win, “0” for a draw and “−1” for a loss.
For ease of notation we will assume all games have a ﬁxed length of N (this is not
essential). Let r(xN) denote the reward received at the end of the game. If we assume that
the agent chooses its actions according to some function a(x) of the current state x (so that
a(x) ∈Ax), the expected reward from each state x ∈S is given by
J ∗(x) := ExN |xr(xN),
where the expectation is with respect to the transition probabilities p(xt, xt+1, a(xt)) and
possibly also with respect to the actions a(xt) if the agent chooses its actions stochastically.
For very large state spaces S it is not possible store the value of J ∗(x) for every x ∈S, so
instead we might try to approximate J ∗using a parameterized function class ˜J: S × Rk →
R, for example linear functions, splines, neural networks, etc. ˜J(·, w) is assumed to be a
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
differentiable function of its parameters w = (w1, . . . , wk). The aim is to ﬁnd a parameter
vector w ∈Rk that minimizes some measure of error between the approximation ˜J(·, w)
and J ∗(·). The TD(λ) algorithm, which we describe now, is designed to do exactly that.
Suppose x1, . . . , xN−1, xN is a sequence of states in one game. For a given parameter
vector w, deﬁne the temporal difference associated with the transition xt →xt+1 by
dt := ˜J(xt+1, w) −˜J(xt, w).
Note that dt measures the difference between the reward predicted by ˜J(·, w) at time t + 1,
and the reward predicted by ˜J(·, w) at time t. The true evaluation function J ∗has the
Ext+1|xt[J ∗(xt+1) −J ∗(xt)] = 0,
so if ˜J(·, w) is a good approximation to J ∗, Ext+1|xtdt should be close to zero. For ease of
notation we will assume that ˜J(xN, w) = r(xN) always, so that the ﬁnal temporal difference
dN−1 = ˜J(xN, w) −˜J(xN−1, w) = r(xN) −˜J(xN−1, w).
That is, dN−1 is the difference between the true outcome of the game and the prediction at
the penultimate move.
At the end of the game, the TD(λ) algorithm updates the parameter vector w according
to the formula
w := w + α
∇˜J(xt, w)
where ∇˜J(·, w) is the vector of partial derivatives of ˜J with respect to its parameters. The
positive parameter α controls the learning rate and would typically be “annealed” towards
zero during the course of a long series of games. The parameter λ ∈ controls the extent
to which temporal differences propagate backwards in time. To see this, compare Eq. (3)
for λ = 0:
w := w + α
∇˜J(xt, w)dt
∇˜J(xt, w)[ ˜J(xt+1, w) −˜J(xt, w)]
and λ = 1:
w := w + α
∇˜J(xt, w)[r(xN) −˜J(xt, w)].
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
Consider each term contributing to the sums in Eqs. (4) and (5). For λ = 0 the parameter
vector is being adjusted in such a way as to move ˜J(xt, w)—the predicted reward at time
t—closer to ˜J(xt+1, w)—the predicted reward at time t + 1. In contrast, TD(1) adjusts
the parameter vector in such away as to move the predicted reward at time step t closer
to the ﬁnal reward at time step N. Values of λ between zero and one interpolate between
these two behaviours. Note that (5) is equivalent to gradient descent on the error function
E(w) := PN−1
t=1 [r(xN) −˜J(xt, w)]2.
Successive parameter updates according to the TD(λ) algorithm should, over time, lead
to improved predictions of the expected reward ˜J(·, w). Provided the actions a(xt) are
independent of the parameter vector w, it can be shown that for linear ˜J(·, w), the TD(λ)
algorithm converges to a near-optimal parameter vector . Unfortunately, there is no such guarantee if ˜J(·, w) is non-linear , or if
a(xt) depends on w .
Minimax search and TD(λ)
For argument’s sake, assume any action a taken in state x leads to predetermined state
which we will denote by x′
a. Once an approximation ˜J(·, w) to J ∗has been found, we can
use it to choose actions in state x by picking the action a ∈Ax whose successor state x′
minimizes the opponent’s expected reward:1
a∗(x) := arg min
This was the strategy used in TD-Gammon. Unfortunately, for games like othello and chess
it is very difﬁcult to accurately evaluate a position by looking only one move or ply ahead.
Most programs for these games employ some form of minimax search. In minimax search,
one builds a tree from position x by examining all possible moves for the computer in
that position, then all possible moves for the opponent, and then all possible moves for the
computer and so on to some predetermined depth d. The leaf nodes of the tree are then
evaluated using a heuristic evaluation function (such as ˜J(·, w)), and the resulting scores
are propagated back up the tree by choosing at each stage the move which leads to the best
position for the player on the move. See ﬁgure 1 for an example game tree and its minimax
evaluation. With reference to the ﬁgure, note that the evaluation assigned to the root node
is the evaluation of the leaf node of the principal variation; the sequence of moves taken
from the root to the leaf if each side chooses the best available move.
In practice many engineering tricks are used to improve the performance of the minimax
algorithm, α −β search being the most famous.
Let ˜Jd(x, w) denote the evaluation obtained for state x by applying ˜J(·, w) to the leaf
nodes of a depth d minimax search from x. Our aim is to ﬁnd a parameter vector w such that
˜Jd(·, w) is a good approximation to the expected reward J ∗. One way to achieve this is to
apply the TD(λ) algorithm to ˜Jd(x, w). That is, for each sequence of positions x1, . . . , xN
in a game we deﬁne the temporal differences
dt := ˜Jd(xt+1, w) −˜Jd(xt, w)
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
Full breadth, 3-ply search tree illustrating the minimax rule for propagating values. Each of the leaf
nodes (H–O) is given a score by the evaluation function, ˜J(·, w). These scores are then propagated back up the
tree by assigning to each opponent’s internal node the minimum of its children’s values, and to each of our internal
nodes the maximum of its children’s values. The principle variation is then the sequence of best moves for either
side starting from the root node, and this is illustrated by a dashed line in the ﬁgure. Note that the score at the root
node A is the evaluation of the leaf node (L) of the principal variation. As there are no ties between any siblings,
the derivative of A’s score with respect to the parameters w is just ∇˜J(L, w).
as per Eq. (2), and then the TD(λ) algorithm (3) for updating the parameter vector w becomes
w := w + α
∇˜Jd(xt, w)
One problem with Eq. (8) is that for d > 1, ˜Jd(x, w) is not necessarily a differentiable
function of w for all values of w, even if ˜J(·, w) is everywhere differentiable. This is because
for some values of w there will be “ties” in the minimax search, i.e. there will be more than
one best move available in some of the positions along the principal variation, which means
that the principal variation will not be unique (see ﬁgure 2). Thus, the evaluation assigned
to the root node, ˜Jd(x, w), will be the evaluation of any one of a number of leaf nodes.
Fortunately, under some mild technical assumptions on the behaviour of ˜J(x, w), it can
be shown that for each state x, the set of w ∈Rk for which ˜Jd(x, w) is not differentiable
has Lebesgue measure zero. Thus for all states x and for “almost all” w ∈Rk, ˜Jd(x, w)
is a differentiable function of w. Note that ˜Jd(x, w) is also a continuous function of w
whenever ˜J(x, w) is a continuous function of w. This implies that even for the “bad” pairs
(x, w), ∇˜Jd(x, w) is only undeﬁned because it is multi-valued. Thus we can still arbitrarily
choose a particular value for ∇˜Jd(x, w) if w happens to land on one of the bad points. One
ﬁnal point to note is that as we search deeper, discontinuities in the gradient are likely to
become more dense and so most steps in parameter space are likely to step clear across
several discontinuities. However, this did not seem to hurt us in our experiments with chess,
probably because the gradient does not change all that radically between adjacent regions
in parameter space (of constant gradient).
Based on these observations we modiﬁed the TD(λ) algorithm to take account of minimax
search in an almost trivial way: instead of working with the root positions x1, . . . , xN, the
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
A search tree with a non-unique principal variation (PV). In this case the derivative of the root node A
with respect to the parameters of the leaf-node evaluation function is multi-valued, either ∇˜J(H, w) or ∇˜J(L, w).
Except for transpositions (in which case H and L are identical and the derivative is single-valued anyway), such
“collisions” are likely to be extremely rare, so in TDLEAF(λ) we ignore them by choosing a leaf node arbitrarily
from the available candidates.
TD(λ) algorithm is applied to the leaf positions found by minimax search from the root
positions. We call this algorithm TDLEAF(λ). Full details are given in ﬁgure 3.
TDLEAF(λ) and chess
In this section we describe the outcome of several experiments in which the TDLEAF(λ)
algorithm was used to train the weights of a linear evaluation function in our chess program
“KnightCap”. For details about the program itself, see Appendix A.
Experiments with KnightCap
In our main experiment we took KnightCap’s evaluation function and set all but the material
parameters to zero. The material parameters were initialized to the standard “computer”
values: 1 for a pawn, 4 for a knight, 4 for a bishop, 6 for a rook and 12 for a queen. With these
parameter settings KnightCap (under the pseudonym “WimpKnight”) was started on the
Free Internet Chess server (FICS, fics.onenet.net) against both human and computer
opponents. We played KnightCap for 25 games without modifying its evaluation function
so as to get a reasonable idea of its rating. After 25 games it had a blitz (fast time control)
rating of 1650 ± 50,2 which put it at about B-grade human performance (on a scale from
E (1000) to A (1800)), although of course the kind of game KnightCap plays with just
material parameters set is very different to human play of the same level (KnightCap makes
no short-term tactical errors but is positionally completely ignorant). We then turned on the
TDLEAF(λ) learning algorithm, with λ = 0.7 and the learning rate α = 1.0. The value of λ
was chosen heuristically, based on the typical delay in moves before an error takes effect,
while α was set high enough to ensure rapid modiﬁcation of the parameters. A couple of
minor modiﬁcations to the algorithm were made:
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
The TDLEAF(λ) algorithm.
– The raw (linear) leaf node evaluations ˜J(xl
i , w) were converted to a score between −1
and 1 by computing
This ensured small ﬂuctuations in the relative values of leaf nodes did not produce large
temporal differences (the values vl
i were used in place of ˜J(xl
i , w) in the TDLEAF(λ)
calculations). The outcome of the game r(xN) was set to 1 for a win, −1 for a loss and
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
0 for a draw. β was set to ensure that a value of tanh [β ˜J(xl
i , w)] = 0.25 was equivalent
to a material superiority of 1 pawn (initially).
– The temporal differences, dt = vl
t, were modiﬁed in the following way. Negative
values of dt were left unchanged as any decrease in the evaluation from one position
to the next can be viewed as mistake. However, positive values of dt can occur simply
because the opponent has made a blunder. To avoid KnightCap trying to learn to predict
its opponent’s blunders, we set all positive temporal differences to zero unless KnightCap
predicted the opponent’s move.3
– The value of a pawn was kept ﬁxed at its initial value so as to allow easy interpretation of
weight values as multiples of the pawn value (we actually experimented with not ﬁxing
the pawn value and found it made little difference: after 1764 games with an adjustable
pawn its value had fallen by less than 7 percent).
Within 300 games KnightCap’s rating had risen to 2150, an increase of 500 points in three
days, and to a level comparable with human masters. At this point KnightCap’s performance
began to plateau, primarily because it does not have an opening book and so will repeatedly
play into weak lines. We have since implemented an opening book learning algorithm and
with this KnightCap now plays at a rating of 2400–2500 (peak 2575) on the other major
Internet chess server: ICC, chessclub.com.4 It often beats International Masters at blitz.
Also, because KnightCap automatically learns its parameters we have been able to add a
large number of new features to its evaluation function: KnightCap currently operates with
5872 features (1468 features in four stages: opening, middle, ending and mating).5 With this
extra evaluation power KnightCap easily beats versions of Crafty restricted to search only
as deep as itself. However, a big caveat to all this optimistic assessment is that KnightCap
routinely gets crushed by faster programs searching more deeply. It is quite unlikely this can
be easily ﬁxed simply by modifying the evaluation function, since for this to work one has
to be able to predict tactics statically, something that seems very difﬁcult to do. If one could
ﬁnd an effective algorithm for “learning to search selectively” there would be potential for
far greater improvement.
Note that we have twice repeated the original learning experiment and found a similar
rate of improvement and ﬁnal performance level. The rating as a function of the number of
games from one of these repeat runs is shown in ﬁgure 4 (we did not record this information
in the ﬁrst experiment). Note that in this case KnightCap took nearly twice as long to
reach the 2150 mark, but this was partly because it was operating with limited memory
(8Mb) until game 500 at which point the memory was increased to 40Mb (KnightCap’s
search algorithm—MTD(f) —is a memory intensive variant of α–β and
when learning KnightCap must store the whole position in the hash table so small memory
signiﬁcantly impacts upon performance). Another reason may also have been that for a
portion of the run we were performing parameter updates after every four games rather than
every game.
We also repeated the experiment using another variant of TD(λ), in which the temporal
differences calculated were those between the positions actually occurring in the game, even
though these positions had been selected by a deep minimax search rather than the usual
one-ply search associated with TD(λ) . We have dubbed this variant “TD-DIRECTED(λ)”.
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
KnightCap’s rating as a function of games played (second experiment). Learning was turned on at
With it we observed a 200 point rating rise over 300 games. A signiﬁcant improvement,
but much slower than TDLEAF(λ) and a lower peak. Its performance on backgammon is
discussed in Section 5.
Plots of various parameters as a function of the number of games played are shown in
ﬁgure 5 (these plots are from the same experiment in ﬁgure 4). Each plot contains three
graphs corresponding to the three different stages of the evaluation function: opening,
middle and ending.6
Finally, we compared the performance of KnightCap with its learnt weights to Knight-
Cap’s performance with a set of hand-coded weights, again by playing the two versions
on ICC. The hand-coded weights were close in performance to the learnt weights (perhaps
50–100 rating points worse). We also tested the result of allowing KnightCap to learn starting from the hand-coded weights, and in this case it seems that KnightCap performs better
than when starting from just material values (peak performance was 2632 compared to
2575, but these ﬁgures are very noisy). We are conducting more tests to verify these results.
However, it should not be too surprising that learning from a good quality set of handcrafted parameters is better than just learning from material parameters. In particular, some
of the handcrafted parameters have very high values (the value of an “unstoppable pawn”,
for example) which can take a very long time to learn under normal playing conditions,
particularly if they are rarely active in the principal leaves. It is not yet clear whether given a
sufﬁcient number of games this dependence on the initial conditions can be made to vanish.
Discussion
There appear to be a number of reasons for the remarkable rate at which KnightCap
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
Evolution of two parameters (bonus for castling and penalty for a doubled pawn) as a function of the
number of games played. Note that each parameter appears three times: once for each of the three stages in the
evaluation function.
1. As all the non-material weights were initially zero, even small changes in these weights
could cause very large changes in the relative ordering of materially equal positions.
Hence even after a few games KnightCap was playing a substantially better game of
2. It seems to be important that KnightCap started out life with intelligent material parameters. This put it close in parameter space to many far superior parameter settings.
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
3. Most players on FICS prefer to play opponents of similar strength, and so KnightCap’s
opponents improved as it did. This may have had the effect of guiding KnightCap along
a path in weight space that led to a strong set of weights.
4. KnightCap was learning on-line, not by self-play. The advantage of on-line play is
that there is a great deal of information provided by the opponent’s moves. In particular,
against a stronger opponent KnightCap was being shown positions that 1) could be forced
(against KnightCap’s weak play) and 2) were mis-evaluated by its evaluation function.
Of course, in self-play KnightCap can also discover positions which are misevaluated,
but it will not ﬁnd the kinds of positions that are relevant to strong play against other
opponents. In this setting, one can view the information provided by the opponent’s
moves as partially solving the “exploration” part of the exploration/exploitation tradeoff.
To further investigate the importance of some of these reasons, we conducted several
more experiments.
Good initial conditions.
A second experiment was run in which KnightCap’s coefﬁcients
were all initialised to the value of a pawn. The value of a pawn needs to be positive in
KnightCap because it is used in many other places in the code: for example we deem the
MTD search to have converged if α < β + 0.07 ∗PAWN. Thus, to set all parameters equal
to the same value, that value had to be a pawn.
Playing with the initial weight settings KnightCap had a blitz rating of around 1250.
After more than 1000 games on FICS KnightCap’s rating has improved to about 1550, a
300 point gain. This is a much slower improvement than the original experiment.7 We do
not know whether the coefﬁcients would have eventually converged to good values, but it
is clear from this experiment that starting near to a good set of weights is important for
fast convergence. An interesting avenue for further exploration here is the effect of λ on
the learning rate. Because the initial evaluation function is completely wrong, there would
be some justiﬁcation in setting λ = 1 early on so that KnightCap only tries to predict the
outcome of the game and not the evaluations of later moves (which are extremely unreliable).
Self-play.
Learningbyself-playwasextremelyeffectiveforTD-Gammon,butasigniﬁcant
reason for this is the randomness of backgammon which ensures that with high probability
different games have substantially different sequences of moves, and also the speed of
play of TD-Gammon which ensured that learning could take place over several hundredthousand games. Unfortunately, chess programs are slow, and chess is a deterministic game,
so self-play by a deterministic algorithm tends to result in a large number of substantially
similar games. This is not a problem if the games seen in self-play are “representative”
of the games played in practice, however KnightCap’s self-play games with only non-zero
material weights are very different to the kind of games humans of the same level would
To demonstrate that learning by self-play for KnightCap is not as effective as learning
against real opponents, we ran another experiment in which all but the material parameters
were initialised to zero again, but this time KnightCap learnt by playing against itself. After
600 games (twice as many as in the original FICS experiment), we played the resulting
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
version against the good version that learnt on FICS for a further 100 games with the
weight values ﬁxed. The self-play version scored only 11% against the good FICS version.
Experiment with backgammon
For our backgammon experiment we were fortunate to have Mark Land (Computer Science
Department, University of California, San Diego) provide us with the source code for his
LGammon program which uses self-play and TD(λ) to train a backgammon playing neural
network. The code has served as both a base on which to implement TDLEAF(λ)-based
training, and as a benchmark for measuring the success of this training.
Land’s LGammon program has been implemented along the lines of Tesauro’s TD-Gammon
 . Like Tesauro, Land uses a raw board representation coupled with
some hand-coded features, and uses self-play based upon one-ply search to generate training
data. During each game, the positions encountered and their evaluations are recorded, with
error signals and consequent weight updates being calculated and applied after the game.
Along with the code for LGammon, Land also provided a set of weights for the neural
network. The weights are those which LGammon has used for most of the time it has been
playing on the First Internet Backgammon Server (FIBS, ﬁbs.com). With these weights
LGammon achieved a rating on FIBS which ranged from 1600 to 1680, signiﬁcantly above
the mean rating across all players of about 1500. For convenience, we refer to the weights
simply as the FIBS weights.
Experiment with LGammon
The stochasticity inherent in backgammon complicates the implementation of TD-
DIRECTED(λ) and TDLEAF(λ). Using minimax search to a depth of one-ply with backgammon is simple, because the set of legal moves is fully determined by the board position and
the dice roll. Searching to two-ply however, requires considering for each position reached
in one-ply, the twenty-one distinct dice rolls which could follow, and the subsequent moves
which the opponent may choose. Consequently, we have deﬁned the two-ply evaluation
of a position in the obvious manner, using the expected value across the dice rolls, of the
positions reachable from each one-ply position. Adapting the notation deﬁned in Section 3
such that x′
adb refers to board position x subject to action a, dice roll d, and action b, we
choose action a in accordance with
a∗(x) := arg min
ad|x′aarg min
where the expectation is with respect to the transition probabilities p(x′
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
TD-DIRECTED(λ) then stores and trains using the one-ply positions, even though these
are chosen by the two-ply search just described. Since the averaging across dice rolls for
depth two means there is not an explicit principal variation, TDLEAF(λ) approximates the
leaf node with the expectation term of Eq. (12) which corresponds to the branch of the game
tree selected.
Similarly for the derivative of a two-ply terminal position under TDLEAF(λ), we calculate
the expected value of the derivative with respect to these transition probabilities.
Limit of learning.
Our experiment sought to determine whether TDLEAF(λ) or TD-
DIRECTED(λ) could ﬁnd better weights than standard TD(λ). To test this, we took two
copies of the FIBS weights, the end product of a standard TD(λ) training run, and trained
one with each of our variants and self-play.
The networks were trained for 50000 games, and check-pointed every 5000 games. To
test the effectiveness of the training, the check-point networks were played against the
unmodiﬁed FIBS weights for 1600 games, with both sides searching to two-ply and the
match score being recorded.
The results ﬂuctuated around parity with the FIBS weights (the result of training with
standard TD(λ) for the duration of the training, with no consistent or statistically signiﬁcant
change in relative performance being observed.
If the optimal networks for two-ply and one-ply play are not the same, we would expect
our variants to achieve some improvement over the course of 50000 games of training. That
this didn’t happen, suggests that the solution found by standard TD(λ), which only searches
to one-ply in training, is either at or near the optimal for two-ply play.
Future work
TDLEAF(λ) is a general method for combining search and TD(λ). As such, it should be
applicable to domains where search is beneﬁcial and an evaluation function needs to be
learnt. This includes games such as othello, shogi, checkers, and Go. However, there are also
many non-game domains requiring deep search which may beneﬁt from on-line learning
of an evaluation function. These include agent planning, automated theorem proving, and
instruction scheduling in optimising compilers.
We also need note of the backgammon result of Section 5, which shows that deeper
searching TDLEAF(λ) and TD-DIRECTED(λ) don’t always improve on the solution of onestep look-ahead TD(λ). This begs the question of whether our variants will, in general,
converge to solutions of the same quality as TD(λ). Obviously domain speciﬁc characteristics can inﬂuence this,8 so empirically it is impossible to prove, but a theoretical result
would be useful.
For domains where both normal TD(λ) and TDLEAF(λ) are feasible, the important question of which converges faster remains open. Backgammon may be an unusual case, because
the branching factor, induced by the stochasticity at each turn, is quite large and makes
searching an additional ply expensive. Thus it is possible that TD(λ) converges faster in
terms of CPU time, though we suspect that TDLEAF(λ) may converge faster in terms of
games played.
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
Conclusion
We have introduced TDLEAF(λ), a variant of TD(λ) suitable for training an evaluation
function used in minimax search. The only extra requirement of the algorithm is that the
leaf-nodes of the principal variations be stored throughout the game.
We presented some experiments in which a chess evaluation function was trained from
B-grade to master level using TDLEAF(λ) by on-line play against a mixture of human and
computer opponents. The experiments show both the importance of “on-line” sampling (as
opposed to self-play) for a deterministic game such as chess, and the need to start near a
good solution for fast convergence, although just how near is still not clear.
We also demonstrated that in the domain of backgammon, TDLEAF(λ) and TD-
DIRECTED(λ) were unable to improve upon a good network trained by TD(λ). This suggests
that the optimal network to use in 1-ply search is close to the optimal network for 2-ply
KnightCap is freely available on the web from 
lsg/ knightcap.html.
Acknowledgments
Jonathan Baxter was supported by an Australian Postdoctoral Fellowship. Lex Weaver was
supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award.
Appendix A: KnightCap
KnightCap is a reasonably sophisticated computer chess program for Unix systems. It
has all the standard algorithmic features that modern chess programs tend to have as
well as a number of features that are much less common. This section is meant to give
the reader an overview of the type of algorithms that have been chosen for KnightCap.
Space limitations prevent a full explanation of all of the described features, an interested
reader should be able ﬁnd explanations in the widely available computer chess literature ) or by examining the source code:
 
Board representation
This is where KnightCap differs most from other chess programs. The principal board
representation used in KnightCap is the topieces array. This is an array of 32 bit words with
one word for each square on the board. Each bit in a word represents one of the 32 pieces
in the starting chess position (8 pieces + 8 pawns for each side). Bit i on square j is set if
piece i is attacking square j.
The topieces array has proved to be a very powerful representation and allows the easy
description of many evaluation features which are more difﬁcult or too costly with other
representations. The array is updated dynamically after each move in such a way that for
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
the vast majority of moves only a small proportion of the topieces array need be directly
examined and updated.
A simple example of how the topieces array is used in KnightCap is determining whether
the king is in check. Whereas an in check ( ) function is often quite expensive in chess
programs, in KnightCap it involves just one logical AND operation in the topieces array.
In a similar fashion the evaluation function can ﬁnd common features such as connected
rooks using just one or two instructions.
The topieces array is also used to drive the move generator and obviates the need for a
standard move generation function.
Search algorithm
ThebasisofthesearchalgorithmusedinKnightCapisMTD(f) .MTD(f)is
a logical extension of the minimal-window alpha-beta search that formalizes the placement
of the minimal search window to produce what is in effect a bisection search over the
evaluation space.
The variation of MTD(f) that KnightCap uses includes some convergence acceleration
heuristics that prevent the very slow convergence that can sometimes plague MTD(f) implementations. These heuristics are similar in concept to the momentum terms commonly
used in neural network training.
The MTD(f) search algorithm is applied within a standard iterative deepening framework.
The search begins with the depth obtained from the transposition table for the initial search
position and continues until a time limit is reached in the search. Search ordering at the root
node ensures that partial ply search results obtained when the timer expires can be used
quite safely.
Null moves
KnightCap uses a recursive null move forward pruning technique. Whereas most null move
using chess programs use a ﬁxed R value (the number of additional ply to prune when
trying a null move) KnightCap instead uses a variable R value in an asymmetric fashion.
The initial R value is 3 and the algorithm then tests the result of the null move search. If it
is the computers side of the search and the null move indicates that the position is “good”
for the computer then the R value is decreased to 2 and the null move is retried.
The effect of this null move system is that most of the speed of a R = 3 system is obtained,
while making no more null move defensive errors than an R = 2 system. It is essentially a
pessimistic system.
Search extensions
KnightCap uses a large number of search extensions to ensure that critical lines are searched
to sufﬁcient depth. Extensions are indicated through a combination of factors including
check, null-move mate threats, pawn moves to the last two ranks and recapture extensions. In addition KnightCap uses a single ply razoring system with a 0.9 pawn razoring
threshold.
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
Asymmetries
There are quite a number of asymmetric search and evaluation terms in KnightCap, with a
leaning towards pessimistic (i.e. careful) play. Apart from the asymmetric null move and
search extensions systems mentioned above, KnightCap also uses an asymmetric system to
decide what moves to try in the quiescence search and several asymmetric evaluation terms
in the evaluation function (such as king safety and trapped piece factors).
When combined with the TDLEAF(λ) algorithm KnightCap is able to learn appropriate
values for the asymmetric evaluation terms.
Transposition tables
KnightCap uses a standard two-deep transposition table with a 128 bit transposition table
entry. Each entry holds separate depth and evaluation information for the lower and upper
The ETTC (enhanced transposition table cutoff) technique is used both for move ordering
and to reduce the tree size. The transposition table is also used to feed the book learning
system and to initialize the depth for iterative deepening.
Move ordering
The move ordering system in KnightCap uses a combination of the commonly used history
 , killer, refutation and transposition table ordering techniques. With a
relatively expensive evaluation function KnightCap can afford to spend a considerable
amount of CPU time on move ordering heuristics in order to reduce the tree size.
Parallel search
KnightCap has been written to take advantage of parallel distributed memory multi-computers, using a parallelism strategy that is derived naturally from the MTD(f) search algorithm. Some details on the methodology used and parallelism results obtained are available
in Tridgell . The results given in this paper were obtained using a single CPU machine.
Evaluation function
The heart of any chess program is its evaluation function. KnightCap uses quite a slow
evaluation function that evaluates a number of computationally expensive features. The
evaluation function also has four distinct stages: Opening, Middle, Ending and Mating,
each with its own set of parameters (but the same features). We have listed the names of
all KnightCap’s features in Table A.1. Note that some of the features have more than one
parameter associated with them, for example there are 64 parameters associated with rook
position, one for each square. These features all begin with “I”. To summarize just a few
of the more obscure features: IOPENING KING ADVANCE is a bonus for the rank of
the king in the opening, it has 8 parameters, one for each rank. IMID KING ADVANCE
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
Table A.1.
KnightCap’s features and the number of parameters corresponding to each. Most of the features are
self-explanatory, see the text for a description of the more obscure ones. Note that KnightCap’s large number of
parameters is obtained by summing all the numbers in this table and then multiplying by the number of stages
BISHOP PAIR
CASTLE BONUS
KNIGHT OUTPOST
BISHOP OUTPOST
SUPPORTED KNIGHT OUTPOST
SUPPORTED BISHOP OUTPOST
CONNECTED ROOKS
SEVENTH RANK ROOKS
OPPOSITE BISHOPS
EARLY QUEEN MOVEMENT
IOPENING KING ADVANCE
IMID KING ADVANCE
IKING PROXIMITY
ITRAPPED STEP
BLOCKED KNIGHT
USELESS PIECE
DRAW VALUE
NEAR DRAW VALUE
NO MATERIAL
MATING POSITION
IBISHOP XRAY
IENDING KPOS
IKNIGHT POS
IPOS KINGSIDE
IPOS QUEENSIDE
IKNIGHT MOBILITY
IBISHOP MOBILITY
IROOK MOBILITY
IQUEEN MOBILITY
IKING MOBILITY
IKNIGHT SMOBILITY
IBISHOP SMOBILITY
IROOK SMOBILITY
IQUEEN SMOBILITY
IKING SMOBILITY
IPIECE VALUES
OPPONENTS THREAT
IOVERLOADED PENALTY
IQ KING ATTACK COMPUTER
IQ KING ATTACK OPPONENT
INOQ KING ATTACK COMPUTER
INOQ KING ATTACK OPPONENT
QUEEN FILE SAFETY
NOQUEEN FILE SAFETY
IPIECE TRADE BONUS
IATTACK VALUE
IPAWN TRADE BONUS
UNSUPPORTED PAWN
ADJACENT PAWN
IPASSED PAWN CONTROL
UNSTOPPABLE PAWN
DOUBLED PAWN
ODD BISHOPS PAWN POS
BLOCKED PASSED PAWN
KING PASSED PAWN SUPPORT
PASSED PAWN ROOK ATTACK
PASSED PAWN ROOK SUPPORT
BLOCKED DPAWN
BLOCKED EPAWN
IPAWN ADVANCE
IPAWN ADVANCE1
IPAWN ADVANCE2
KING PASSED PAWN DEFENCE
IPAWN DEFENCE
ISOLATED PAWN
MEGA WEAK PAWN
IWEAK PAWN ATTACK VALUE
LEARNING TO PLAY CHESS
is the same but applies in the middle game (the fact that we have separate features for
the opening and middle games is a hangover from KnightCap’s early days when it didn’t
have separate parameters for each stage). IKING PROXIMITY is the number of moves
between our king and the opponents king. It is very useful for forcing mates in the ending.
Again there is one parameter for each of the 8 possible values. IPOS BASE is the base
score for controlling each of the squares. IPOS KINGSIDE and IPOS QUEENSIDE are
modiﬁcations added to IPOS BASE according as KnightCap is castled on the king or
queen sides respectively. The MOBILITY scores are the number of moves available to a
piece, thresholding at 10. There is a separate score for each rank the piece is on, hence
the total number of parameters of 80. The SMOBILITY scores are the same, but now the
square the piece is moving to has to be safe (i.e. controlled by KnightCap). THREAT and
OPPONENTS THREAT are computed by doing a minimax search on the position in which
only captures are considered and each piece can move only once. Its not clear this helps
the evaluation much, but it certainly improves move ordering (the best capture is given a
high weight in the ordering). IOVERLOADED PENALTY is a penalty that is applied to
each piece for the number of otherwise hung pieces it is defending. There is a separate
penalty for each number, thresholding at 15 (this could be done better: we should have
a base score times by the number of pieces, and have KnightCap learn the base score
and a perturbation on the base score for each number). IQ KING ATTACK OPPONENT
and INOQ KING ATTACK OPPONENT are bonuses for the number of pieces KnightCap
has attacking the squares around the enemy king, both with and without queens on the
board. IQ KING ATTACK COMPUTER and INOQ KING ATTACK COMPUTER are
thesamethingfortheopponentattackingKnightCap’sking.Notethatthisasymmetryallows
KnightCap the freedom to learn to be cautious by assigning greater weight to opponent
pieces attacking its own king that it does to its own pieces attacking the opponent’s king.
It can of course also use this to be aggressive. For more information on the features, see
eval.c in KnightCap’s source code.
The most computationally expensive part of the evaluation function is the “board control”.
This function evaluates a control function for each square on the board to try to determine
who controls the square. Control of a square is essentially deﬁned by determining whether
a player can use the square as a ﬂight square for a piece, or if a player controls the square
with a pawn.
Despite the fact that the board control function is evaluated incrementally, with the control
of squares only being updated when a move affects the square, the function typically takes
around 30% of the total CPU time of the program. This high cost is considered worthwhile
because of the ﬂow-on effects that this calculation has on other aspects of the evaluation
and search. These ﬂow-on effects include the ability of KnightCap to evaluate reasonably
accurately the presence of hung, trapped and immobile pieces which is normally a severe
weakness in computer play. We have also noted that the more accurate evaluation function
tends to reduce the search tree size thus making up for the decreased node count.
Modiﬁcation for TDLEAF(λ)
The modiﬁcations made to KnightCap for TDLEAF(λ) affected a number of the program’s
subsystems. The largest modiﬁcations involved the parameterization of the evaluation
J. BAXTER, A. TRIDGELL, AND L. WEAVER
function so that all evaluation parameters became part of a single long weight vector.
All tunable evaluation knowledge could then be described in terms of the values in this
The next major modiﬁcation was the addition of the full board position in all data structures from which an evaluation value could be obtained. This involved the substitution of
a structure for the usual scalar evaluation type, with the evaluation function ﬁlling in the
evaluated position and other board state information during each evaluation call. Similar
additions were made to the transposition table entries so that the result of a search would
always have available to it the position associated with the leaf node in the principal variation. This signiﬁcantly enlarges the transposition table and means that to operate effectively
with the MTD(f) search algorithm (itself a memory-hungry α-β variant), KnightCap really
needs at least 30Mb of hash table when learning.
The only other signiﬁcant modiﬁcation that was required was an increase in the bit
resolution of the evaluation type so that a numerical partial derivative of the evaluation
function with respect to the evaluation coefﬁcient vector could be obtained with reasonable
1. If successor states are only determined stochastically by the choice of a, we would choose the action minimizing
the expected reward over the choice of successor states.
2. The standard deviation for all ratings reported in this section is about 50.
3. InalaterexperimentweonlysetpositivetemporaldifferencestozeroifKnightCapdidnotpredicttheopponent’s
move and the opponent was rated less than KnightCap. After all, predicting a stronger opponent’s blunders is
a useful skill, although whether this made any difference is not clear.
4. There appears to be a systematic difference of around 200–250 points between the two servers, so a peak rating
of 2575 on ICC roughly corresponds to a peak of 2350 on FICS. We transferred KnightCap to ICC because
there are more strong players playing there.
5. In reality there are not 1468 independent “concepts” per stage in KnightCap’s evaluation function as many
of the features come in groups of 64, one for each square on the board (like the value of placing a rook on a
particular square, for example).
6. KnightCap actually has a fourth and ﬁnal stage “mating” which kicks in when all the pawns are off, but this
stage only uses a few of the coefﬁcients (opponent’s king mobiliity and proximity of our king to the opponent’s
7. We ran this experiment three times, with the result reported being the best achieved. Since the main experiment
succeeded on all three occasions it was run, it is unlikely that the slower ratings improvement in this experiment
is due to vagaries in the training environment.
8. A chess program using only one-step look-ahead would lose most games against reasonable quality opponents
and would thus learn to value all positions as lost. This contrasts with KnightCap whose deep search makes
competing with better players possible.