Received 25 Nov 2013 | Accepted 29 Apr 2014 | Published 3 Jun 2014 | Updated 7 Aug 2014
Decoding tumour phenotype by noninvasive
imaging using a quantitative radiomics approach
Hugo J.W.L. Aerts1,2,3,4,*, Emmanuel Rios Velazquez1,2,*, Ralph T.H. Leijenaar1, Chintan Parmar1,2,
Patrick Grossmann2, Sara Carvalho1, Johan Bussink5, Rene´ Monshouwer5, Benjamin Haibe-Kains6,
Derek Rietveld7, Frank Hoebers1, Michelle M. Rietbergen8, C. Rene´ Leemans8, Andre Dekker1,
John Quackenbush4, Robert J. Gillies9 & Philippe Lambin1
Human cancers exhibit strong phenotypic differences that can be visualized noninvasively by
medical imaging. Radiomics refers to the comprehensive quantiﬁcation of tumour phenotypes
by applying a large number of quantitative image features. Here we present a radiomic
analysis of 440 features quantifying tumour image intensity, shape and texture, which are
extracted from computed tomography data of 1,019 patients with lung or head-and-neck
cancer. We ﬁnd that a large number of radiomic features have prognostic power
in independent data sets of lung and head-and-neck cancer patients, many of which were
not identiﬁed as signiﬁcant before. Radiogenomics analysis reveals that a prognostic
radiomic signature, capturing intratumour heterogeneity, is associated with underlying
gene-expression patterns. These data suggest that radiomics identiﬁes a general prognostic
phenotype existing in both lung and head-and-neck cancer. This may have a clinical impact as
imaging is routinely used in clinical practice, providing an unprecedented opportunity
to improve decision-support in cancer treatment at low cost.
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
1 Department of Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO), Research Institute GROW, Maastricht University, 6229ET Maastricht, The Netherlands. 2 Department
of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-5450, USA.
3 Department of Radiology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-5450,
USA. 4 Department of Biostatistics & Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-5450, USA. 5 Department of
Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen, PB 9101, 6500HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 6 Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
University Health Network and Medical Biophysics Department, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. 7 Department of Radiation
Oncology, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 8 Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University
Medical Center, 1081 HZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 9 Department of Cancer Imaging and Metabolism, H. Lee Mofﬁtt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA. * These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
H.A. (email: ).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
edical imaging is one of the major factors that have
informed medical science and treatment. By assessing
the characteristics of human tissue noninvasively,
imaging is often used in clinical practice for oncologic diagnosis
and treatment guidance1–3. A key goal of imaging is ‘personalized
medicine’, where treatment is increasingly tailored on the basis of
speciﬁc characteristics of the patient and their disease4.
Much of the discussion of personalized medicine has focused
on molecular characterization using genomic and proteomic
technologies. However, as tumours are spatially and temporally
heterogeneous,
techniques
biopsies or invasive surgeries to extract and analyse what are
generally small portions of tumour tissue, which do not allow for
a complete characterization of the tumour. Imaging has great
potential to guide therapy because it can provide a more
comprehensive view of the entire tumour and it can be used on
an ongoing basis to monitor the development and progression of
the disease or its response to therapy. Further, imaging is
noninvasive and is already often repeated during treatment in
routine practice, on the contrary of genomics or proteomics,
which are still challenging to implement into clinical routine.
The most widely used imaging modality in oncology is X-ray
computed tomography (CT), which assesses tissue density.
Indeed, CT images of lung cancer tumours exhibit strong
contrast reﬂecting differences in the intensity of a tumour on
the image, intratumour texture and tumour shape (Fig. 1a).
However, in clinical practice, tumour response to therapy is only
measured using one- or two-dimensional descriptors of tumour
size (RECIST and WHO, respectively)5. Although a change in
tumour size can indicate response to therapy, it often does not
predict overall or progression free survival6,7. Although some
investigations have characterized the appearance of a tumour
on CT images, these characteristics are typically described
subjectively and qualitatively (‘moderate heterogeneity’, ‘highly
spiculated’, ‘large necrotic core’). However, recent advances in
image acquisition, standardization and image analysis allow for
objective and precise quantitative imaging descriptors that could
potentially be used as noninvasive prognostic or predictive
biomarkers.
Radiomics is an emerging ﬁeld that converts imaging data into
a high dimensional mineable feature space using a large number
of automatically extracted data-characterization algorithms8,9.
We hypothesize that these imaging features capture distinct
phenotypic differences of tumours and may have prognostic
power and thus clinical signiﬁcance across different diseases. Here
we assess the clinical relevance of 440 radiomic features, many of
which currently have no known clinical signiﬁcance, in seven
independent cohorts consisting of 1,019 lung cancer and headand-neck cancer patients. Two data sets are used to assess
the stability of the features, four data sets to assess the prognostic
head-and-neck cancer patients, and one data set for association
Tumour intensity
Tumour shape
Tumour texture
Radiomic features
Clinical data
Gene expression
II) Feature extraction
I) CT imaging
III) Analysis
Figure 1 | Extracting radiomics data from images. (a) Tumours are different. Example computed tomography (CT) images of lung cancer patients. CT
images with tumour contours left, three-dimensional visualizations right. Please note strong phenotypic differences that can be captured with routine CT
imaging, such as intratumour heterogeneity and tumour shape. (b) Strategy for extracting radiomics data from images. (I) Experienced physicians
contour the tumour areas on all CT slices. (II) Features are extracted from within the deﬁned tumour contours on the CT images, quantifying tumour
intensity, shape, texture and wavelet texture. (III) For the analysis the radiomics features are compared with clinical data and gene-expression data.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
with gene-expression proﬁles of lung cancer patients (Fig. 2). Our
results reveal that radiomics data contain strong prognostic
information in both lung and head-and-neck cancer patients, and
are associated with the underlying gene-expression patterns.
These results suggest that radiomics decodes a general prognostic
phenotype existing in multiple cancer types. Radiomics can have
a large clinical impact, as imaging is used in routine practice
worldwide, providing a method that can quantify and monitor
phenotypic changes during treatment.
Association of radiomic data with clinical data. To assess the
value of radiomic features to capture phenotypic differences of
tumours, we performed an integrated analysis assessing prognostic performance and association with gene expression in lung
and head-and-neck cancer data sets. First, we deﬁned 440
quantitative image features describing tumour phenotype characteristics by: (I) tumour image intensity, (II) shape, (III) texture
and (IV) multiscale wavelet (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Methods).
To investigate radiomic expression patterns we extracted
radiomic features from the Lung1 data set, consisting of 422
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (Fig. 2). Unsupervised clustering revealed clusters of patients with similar radiomic
expression patterns (Fig. 3). We compared the three main
clusters of patients with clinical parameters (Fig. 3b), and found
signiﬁcant association with primary tumour stage (T-stage;
Po1  10  20,
and overall stage (P ¼ 3.4  10  3,
w2 test), wherein cluster I was associated with lower stages.
N-stage (lymph node) and M-stage (metastasis), however,
showed no correspondence with the radiomic expression patterns
(P ¼ 0.46 and P ¼ 0.73, respectively, w2 test).
Furthermore, a signiﬁcant association with histology (P ¼ 0.019,
w2 test) was observed, wherein squamous cell carcinoma showed a
higher presence in cluster II. Looking at the representation of the
feature groups (Fig. 3c), there was no correspondence between the
feature group and radiomic expression patterns.
Prognostic value of radiomic data. The possible association of
radiomic features with survival was then explored by Kaplan–
Meier survival analysis. For training we used the Lung1 data set,
and for validation the Lung2, H&N1, H&N2 data sets (Fig. 2).
The radiomic features were not normalized on any data set, and
only the raw values were used that were directly computed from
the DICOM images.
To ensure a completely independent validation, the median
value of each feature was computed on the training Lung1 data
set, and locked for use as a threshold in the validation data sets to
differences
retraining.
Supplementary Fig. 1 we show Kaplan–Meier survival curves
for four representative features. Features describing heterogeneity
in the primary tumour were associated with worse survival in all
four data sets. Also, patients with more compact/spherical
tumours had better survival probability.
Overall, the median threshold derived from Lung1 yielded a
signiﬁcant survival difference for 238 features (54% of total 440;
G-rho test, false discovery rate (FDR) 10%) in the Lung2
validation data set. Furthermore, there was a signiﬁcant survival
difference for 135 features (31%) in H&N1 and for 186 features in
H&N2 (42%). Sixty-six (15%) of the features derived from Lung1
were signiﬁcant for survival in all three validation data sets
(Lung2, H&N1 and H&N2).
Building prognostic radiomic signature. To build a prognostic
radiomic signature, the analysis was divided in training and validation phases (Fig. 2). For the training phase, we ﬁrst explored
feature stability determined in both test-retest and inter-observer
setting. Using the publicly available RIDER10 data set, consisting
of 31 sets of test-retest CT scans that were acquired approximately
15 min apart, we tested how consistent the radiomic features were
between the test and the retest scan. The multiple delineation data
set, where ﬁve oncologists delineated lesions on CT scans from 21
patients11, was used to test the stability of the radiomic features to
variation in manual delineations.
test/retest
delineation
VU Amsterdam
Validation
Stability rank
Stability rank
definition
Radiomics features
Radiomics features Radiomics features
Radiomics features
Radiomics signature
(containing four
Prognostic
validation
lung cancer cohort
Prognostic
validation
H&N cancer cohort
Feature selection based
on stability ranks and
performance
Radiomics features
gene-expression
Association
with gene-expression
Prognostic validation
H&N cancer cohort
Figure 2 | Analysis workﬂow. The deﬁned radiomic features algorithms were applied to seven different data sets. Two data sets were used to calculate the
feature stability ranks, RIDER test/retest and multiple delineation respectively (both orange). The Lung1 data set, containing data of 422 non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, was used as training data set. Lung2 (n ¼ 225), H&N1 (n ¼ 136) and H&N2 (n ¼ 95) were used as validation data sets.
The Lung3 data set (n ¼ 89) was used for association of the radiomic signature with gene expression proﬁles. For the multivariate analysis, only
one ﬁxed four-feature radiomic signature was tested in the validation data sets.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
For each feature, we compared the stability ranks for test-retest
and multiple delineation with prognosis in the Lung1 training
data set. Although the stability ranks did not use any information
about prognosis, in general, features with higher stability for testretest and delineation inaccuracies showed higher prognostic
performance (Supplementary Fig. 2). This is possibly due to
reduced amount of noise in the stable features and supports the
use of stability ranks for feature selection.
To test the multivariate performance of a radiomic signature,
we used the workﬂow depicted in Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3.
We focused our analysis on the 100 most stable features, which
were determined by averaging the stability ranks of RIDER data
set and multiple delineation data set. To remove redundancy
within the radiomic information, we selected the single best
performing radiomic feature from each of the four-feature groups,
and combined these top four features into a multivariate Cox
proportional hazards regression model for prediction of survival.
The resulting radiomic signature consisted of (I) ‘Statistics
Energy’ (Supplementary Methods Feature 1) describing the
overall density of the tumour volume, (II) ‘Shape Compactness’
(Feature 16) quantifying how compact the tumour shape is, (III)
Nonuniformity’
intratumour
heterogeneity
Nonuniformity
describing
intratumour heterogeneity after decomposing the image in midfrequencies. The weights of each of the features in the signature
were ﬁtted on the training data set Lung1.
Prognostic validation of radiomic signature. The performance
of the four-feature radiomic signature was validated in the data
sets Lung2, H&N1 and H&N2 (Fig. 2) using the concordance
index (CI), which is a generalization of the area under the ROC
curve12. The radiomic signature had good performance on the
Lung2 data (CI ¼ 0.65, P ¼ 2.91  10  09, Wilcoxon test), and a
performance
(CI ¼ 0.69,
P ¼ 7.99  10  07,
(CI ¼ 0.69,
P ¼ 3.53  10  06,
Wilcoxon test). In Fig. 4a the Kaplan–Meier curves are shown.
Although volume had a good performance in all data sets, the
radiomic signature performed signiﬁcantly better, suggesting that
radiomic features contain relevant, complementary information
for prognosis (Supplementary Table 1). Furthermore, combining
the radiomic signature with volume was signiﬁcantly better than
volume alone in all data sets.
Comparing the radiomic signature with the TNM staging13, we
see that the signature performance was better in both Lung2 and
Radiomics features
Overall stage
Squamous cell carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Large cell carcinoma
Not otherwise specified (nos)
IIIA IIIB IV
Figure 3 | Radiomics heat map. (a) Unsupervised clustering of lung cancer patients (Lung1 set, n ¼ 422) on the y axis and radiomic feature
expression (n ¼ 440) on the x axis, revealed clusters of patients with similar radiomic expression patterns. (b) Clinical patient parameters for showing
signiﬁcant association of the radiomic expression patterns with primary tumour stage (T-stage; Po1  10  20, w2 test), overall stage (P ¼ 3.4  10  3,
w2 test) and histology (P ¼ 0.019, w2 test). (c) Correspondence of radiomic feature groups with the clustered expression patterns.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
800 1,000 1,200 1,400
Survival probability
Lung1: Maastro
Lung2: RadBoud
Kaplan−Meier radiomics signature
H&N1: Maastro
Kaplan−Meier radiomics signature
Survival time (days)
Survival time (days)
Survival probability
Enrichment score
EXTRACELLULAR_REGION_PART
EXTRACELLULAR_SPACE
REGULATION_OF_MULTICELLULAR_ORGANISMAL_PROCESS
DNA_DEPENDENT_DNA_REPLICATION
REGULATION_OF_IMMUNE_SYSTEM_PROCESS
TISSUE_DEVELOPMENT
LEUKOCYTE_ACTIVATION
MITOTIC_CELL_CYCLE_CHECKPOINT
PROTEIN_AMINO_ACID_LIPIDATION
LYMPHOCYTE_ACTIVATION
EXTRACELLULAR_REGION
PROTEIN_COMPLEX_BINDING
ECTODERM_DEVELOPMENT
EPIDERMIS_DEVELOPMENT
DNA_REPAIR
CHROMOSOME
REGULATION_OF_DNA_METABOLIC_PROCESS
M_PHASE_OF_MITOTIC_CELL_CYCLE
CELL_CYCLE_PROCESS
CELL_CYCLE_PHASE
CELL_CYCLE_GO_0007049
MITOTIC_CELL_CYCLE
DNA_RECOMBINATION
Wavelet HLH
RLGL grey level nonuniformity
RLGL grey level nonuniformity
Shape compactness
Statistics total energy
Colour key
Figure 4 | Prognostic performance and gene-expression association of the radiomics signature. (a) Radiomic signature performance. Kaplan–Meier
curves demonstrating performance of the radiomic signature on the lung cancer data sets (left) and the head-and-neck cancer data sets (right). The
signature was built on the Lung1 data (n ¼ 422). The signature had a good performance in the Lung2 (CI ¼ 0.65, P ¼ 2.91  10  09, Wilcoxon test, n ¼ 225),
and a high performance in H&N1 (CI ¼ 0.69, P ¼ 7.99  10  07, Wilcoxon test, n ¼ 136) and H&N2 (CI ¼ 0.69, P ¼ 3.53  10  06, Wilcoxon test,
n ¼ 95) validation data sets. (b) Association of radiomic signature features and gene expression using gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) in the Lung3
data set (n ¼ 89). Gene sets that have been signiﬁcantly enriched (FDR ¼ 20%) for at least one of the four radiomic features are indicated with an
asterisk. The corresponding normalized enrichment scores (NES), GSEA’s primary statistic, for all radiomic signature features is displayed in a heat map,
where light blue means low and dark blue means high NES.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
H&N2 and comparable in H&N1 (Supplementary Table 1).
Importantly, combining the radiomic signature with TNM
staging showed a signiﬁcant improvement in all data sets,
compared with TNM staging alone. Furthermore, we assessed if
the radiomics signature preserved the signiﬁcant prognostic
performance compared with the treatment that the patients
received. We found that the signature preserved its prognostic
performance for all the treatment groups (radiation or concurrent
chemoradiation), for both Lung and H&N cancer patients
(Supplementary Table 2), demonstrating the complementary
value of radiomics for each treatment type.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is an important determinant in
head-and-neck cancer patients, especially those with oropharyngeal carcinoma for prognosis and may guide future treatment
selection. We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant association between
radiomic signature prediction and HPV status in a combined
analysis in the H&N1 and H&N2 data set (P ¼ 0.17, Wilcoxon
test, Supplementary Table 3). However, we found that the
signature preserved its prognostic performance in the HPVnegative group (CI ¼ 0.66), consisting of the majority of patients
(76%, n ¼ 130), demonstrating the complementary value of
radiomics to HPV screening.
To assess the association between the radiomic signature and
the underlying biology, we compared the radiomic signature
with gene-expression proﬁles (Lung3 data set, Fig. 2) using geneset
enrichment
(GSEA)1,14.
signiﬁcant
associations between the signature features and gene-expression
patterns (Fig. 4b). Further, the radiomic features are signiﬁcantly
associated with different biologic gene sets, demonstrating that
radiomic features probe different biologic mechanisms. It is
noteworthy that both intratumour heterogeneity features in the
signature (Feature III and IV) were strongly correlated with cell
cycling pathways, indicating an increased proliferation for more
heterogeneous tumours.
Discussion
Medical imaging is one of the major factors informing medical
science and treatment. Its potential resides in its ability to assess
the characteristics of human tissue noninvasively, and therefore is
routinely used in clinical practice for oncologic diagnosis and
treatment guidance and monitoring.
However, traditionally, medical imaging has been a subjective
or qualitative science. Recent advances in medical imaging
acquisition and analysis allow the high-throughput extraction of
informative imaging features to quantify the differences that
oncologic tissues exhibit in medical imaging.
Radiomics applies advanced computational methodologies to
medical imaging data to convert medical images into quantitative
descriptors of oncologic tissues8.
In this study, we analysed 440 radiomic features quantifying
tumour phenotypic differences based on its image intensity, shape
and texture. In a large data set of 1,019 lung and head-and-neck
cancer patients, of which we extracted radiomic features on
computed tomography images, we found that a large number of
radiomic features have prognostic power, many of which their
prognostic implication have not been described before. Furthermore, our integrated analysis showed that features selected on the
basis of their stability and reproducibility were also the most
informative features, which indicates the power of integrating
independent data sets for radiomic feature selection and model
We showed as well that a radiomic signature, capturing
intratumour heterogeneity, was strongly prognostic and validated
in three independent data sets of lung and head-and-neck cancer
patients, and was associated with gene-expression proﬁles. To
avoid any form of over-ﬁtting or bias, we performed a robust
statistical validation: only one radiomics signature (containing four
radiomic features) was validated in data of 545 patients in
independent validation data sets (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3).
The four features were selected on the basis of feature stability and
prognostic performance in the discovery data set only.
The top performing feature ‘Grey Level Nonuniformity’ (Feature
48) and the most dominant features in the radiomic signature
(Features III and IV), quantiﬁed intratumour heterogeneity. Indeed,
it is often hypothesized that intratumour heterogeneity is exhibited
on different spatial scales, for example at the radiological,
macroscopic, cellular and the molecular (genetics) level. Radiological tumour phenotype characteristics may thus be useful to
investigate the underlying evolving biology. It is known that
multiple subclonal populations coexist within tumours, reﬂecting
extensive intratumoral ‘somatic evolution’15,16. This heterogeneity is
a clear barrier to the goal of personalized therapy based on
molecular biopsy-based assays, as the identiﬁed mutations and
gene-expression does not always represent the entire population of
tumour cells17,18. Radiomics circumvents this by assessing the
comprehensive
three-dimensional
heterogeneity
demonstrates
corresponding
importance
Furthermore,
demonstrated
association
intratumour
heterogeneity with proliferation, a general hallmark of cancer.
Overall, the lung-derived radiomic signature had better
performance in head and neck compared with lung cancer. One
reason could be that head-and-neck images were acquired with
head immobilization, whereas lung images were acquired with
free breathing and are affected by patient movement or
respiration, resulting in relatively more image noise. Nonetheless,
our results show that the radiomic signature could be transferred
from lung to head-and-neck cancer, which suggests that the
signature identiﬁes a general prognostic tumour phenotype.
Our method provides a noninvasive (and therefore with no risk
of infection or complications that accompany tissue biopsies),
fast, low cost and repeatable way of investigating phenotypic
information,
potentially
development
personalized medicine. Furthermore, we show that the radiomic
signature is signiﬁcantly associated with the underlying geneexpression patterns, suggesting that inter-patient differences of
gene expression are larger than intra-patient differences.
The clinical impact of our results are illustrated by the fact that
it advances knowledge in the analysis and characterization of
tumours in medical images, previously not done, and provides
knowledge currently not used in the clinic. We showed the
complementary performance of radiomic features with TNM
staging for prediction of outcome, which illustrates the clinical
importance of our ﬁndings as TNM is routinely used in the clinic.
Currently, the TNM staging system is used for risk stratiﬁcation
and treatment decision making. However, the TNM staging
system is primarily based on resectability of the tumour, whereas
a larger number of NSCLC patients will receive primary
treatment with radiotherapy either alone or combined with
chemotherapy. Therefore, the TNM staging system is insufﬁcient
for risk stratiﬁcation of this group of patients, in particular to
make the decision between curative treatment (concomitant
radiochemotherapy) or palliative treatment especially in elderly
patients, a growing issue in western countries. Our results show
that the radiomics signature is performing better in independent
cohorts than the TNM classiﬁcation. In future clinical trials, this
inexpensive method can be used as well for pretreatment risk
stratiﬁcation (for example, high, low risk).
Furthermore, we have shown for the ﬁrst time the translational
capability of radiomics in two cancer types (lung and head-andneck cancer). These results indicate that radiomics quantiﬁes a
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
general prognostic cancer phenotype that likely can broadly be
applied to other cancer types. Similar observations have been
made in gene-expression studies where signatures are prognostic
across different diseases19.
Analysis of image features applied to medical imaging has been
a largely studied ﬁeld and extensive literature exists. However, the
majority of previous work describes the use of imaging features
focused in the detection of small nodules in, for example,
mammograms or chest CT/positron emission tomography (PET)
scans, or in the differential diagnosis of malignant versus benign
nodules (computed-aided diagnostics). However, applications
and methodologies are distinct from our study. Quantitative
imaging for personalized medicine is a recent ﬁeld, with a limited
number of publications12,20–27. The main clinical question of this
research is not the diagnosis, but how to extract more useful
information from the tumour phenotype that can be used for
personalized medicine. Therefore, we assessed the association of
radiomics with clinical factors, prognosis and gene-expression
levels, using large amounts of features and with external and
independent validation cohorts of patients. The most important
message in our study is that there is prognostic and biologic
information enclosed in routinely acquired CT imaging and was
evident in two cancer types.
It is known that variability in image acquisition exists across
hospitals and that this is a reality in clinical practice. However, in
our analysis we used data directly generated from the scanner and
the features were calculated from the RAW imaging data, without
any pre-processing or normalization. As there was no correction
by cohort or scanner type, this illustrates the translational
potential of our results and it is a strong argument in favour of a
multicentric application of radiomics. The radiomics signature
had strong prognostic power in these independent data sets
generated in daily clinical practice. Furthermore, we expect that
with better standardization and imaging protocols, the power of
quantitative imaging network of the National Institute of Health,
as well as the quantitative imaging biomarker alliance, investigates future directions by performing phantom studies and
discussing with vendor’s open and standardized protocols for
image acquisition2,3.
Due to the large availability of noninvasive imaging performed
routinely in a large number of cancer patients and the automated
feature algorithms, the results of this work could stimulate further
research of image-based quantitative features. Also, we presented
evidence that the deﬁned radiomic feature-metrics are platform
independent, though this should be studied further, and can
potentially be applied to other image modalities, such as magnetic
resonance imaging or PET. This approach can have a large
impact as imaging is routinely used in clinical practice, worldwide, in all stages of diagnoses and treatment, providing an
unprecedented opportunity to improve medical decision-support.
Radiomics features. We deﬁned 440 radiomic image features that describe tumour
characteristics and can be extracted in an automated way. The features can be
divided into four groups: (I) tumour intensity, (II) shape, (III) texture and (IV)
wavelet features. The ﬁrst group quantiﬁed tumour intensity characteristics using
ﬁrst-order statistics, calculated from the histogram of all tumour voxel intensity
values. Group 2 consists of features based on the shape of the tumour (for example,
sphericity or compactness of the tumour). Group 3 consists of textual features that
are able to quantify intratumour heterogeneity differences in the texture that is
observable within the tumour volume. These features are calculated in all threedimensional directions within the tumour volume, thereby taking the spatial location
of each voxel compared with the surrounding voxels into account. Group 4 calculates the intensity and textural features from wavelet decompositions of the original
image, thereby focusing the features on different frequency ranges within the tumour
volume (Supplementary Fig. 4). All feature algorithms were implemented in Matlab.
In the Supplementary Methods, the feature algorithms are described.
Data sets. We applied a radiomic analysis to seven image data sets. An overview
of the data sets is presented in Fig. 2. All research was carried out in accordance
with Dutch law. The Institutional Review Boards of each of the participating
centres approved the studies: Lung1, Lung3, H&N1 (Maastricht University Medical
Center (MUMC þ ), Maastricht, The Netherlands), Lung2 (Radboud University
Medical Center (RUMC), Nijmegen, The Netherlands) and H&N2 (VU University
Medical Center (VUMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The Multiple delineation
data set is publicly available (downloaded from: www.cancerdata.org). This study
was conducted according to national laws and guidelines and approved by the
appropriate local trial committee at Maastricht University Medical Center
(MUMC1), Maastricht, The Netherlands.
 The RIDER data set consists of 31 NSCLC patients with two CT scans acquired
approximately 15 min apart10. We used this data set to assess stability of the
features for test-retest.
 The multiple delineation data set consists of 21 NSCLC patients where the
tumour volume was delineated manually on CT/PET scans by ﬁve independent
oncologists11. We used this data set to assess stability of the features for
delineation inaccuracies.
 The Lung1 data set consists of 422 NSCLC patients that were treated at
MAASTRO Clinic, The Netherlands. For these patients, CT scans, manual
delineations, clinical and survival data were available. We used this data set to
assess the prognostic value of the radiomic features and to build a radiomic
signature.
 The Lung2 data set consists of 225 NSCLC patients that were treated at Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands. For these patients, CT
scans, manual delineations, clinical and survival data were available. We used
this data set to validate the prognostic value of the radiomic features and
signature in an independent NSCLC cohort.
 The H&N1 data set consists of 136 head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) patients treated at MAASTRO Clinic, The Netherlands. For these
patients, CT scans, manual delineations, clinical and survival data were available.
We used this data set to validate the prognostic value of the radiomic features
and signature in HNSCC patients.
 The H&N2 data set consists of 95 HNSCC patients treated at the VU University
Medical Center Amsterdam, The Netherlands. For these patients, CT scans,
manual delineations, clinical and survival data were available. We used this data
set to validate the prognostic value of the radiomic features and signature in a
second cohort of HNSCC patients.
 The Lung3 data set consists of 89 NSCLC patients that were treated at
MAASTRO Clinic, The Netherlands. For these patients pretreatment CT scans,
tumour delineations and gene expression proﬁles were available. We used this
data set to associate imaging features with gene-expression proﬁles.
In the Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Tables 4–7, further
descriptions of the data sets are presented. The discovery Lung1 data set, consisting
of CT images for 422 NSCLC patients, and the Lung3 data set consisting of CT
images and gene-expression proﬁling for 89 NSCLC patients, are publicly available
at The Cancer Imaging Archive, Lung1: 
display/Public/NSCLC-Radiomics and Lung3: 
net/display/Public/NSCLC-Radiomics-Genomics, as well as on www.cancerdata.org.
Sample size. To reduce any form of over-ﬁtting or bias in the multivariate analysis, we trained on data the Lung1 data sets (n ¼ 422), selecting the features and
ﬁxing the weights, and tested only one signature (containing four features) in data
of 545 patients in the independent validation data sets. There was no need for
randomization as the patients originated from distinct groups. Patients were
included in the analysis with the following criteria: conﬁrmed primary tumour,
patients underwent treatment with curative intent. Excluded from this analysis
were patients receiving no or palliative treatment and patients with previous lung
or head-and-neck cancer.
Data analysis. An overview of the analysis is shown in Fig. 2. The analysis was
divided in training and validation phases. For the training phase, we ﬁrst explored
feature stability determined in both test-retest and inter-observer setting. The
RIDER and multiple delineation data sets were used to assess stability of the
features to select the most informative features for further investigation. Using the
RIDER test-retest data set, we tested the stability of the radiomic features between
test and retest10. For each patient, we extracted the radiomic features from both
scans. A stability rank was calculated for each feature, using the intraclass
correlation coefﬁcient, where a higher intraclass correlation coefﬁcient rank
corresponds to a more stable feature.
We assessed the feature stability for delineation inaccuracies using a multiple
delineation data set11. All radiomic features were computed for ﬁve delineations
per patient, and a stability rank per feature was calculated using the Friedman test.
The Friedman test is a nonparametric repeated measurement test for a non-
Gaussian population. A rank of 1 indicated the most stable feature for delineation
inaccuracies and 440 the least stable feature. All 440 radiomic features were
extracted for the Lung1, Lung2, H&N1 and H&N2 data sets. The radiomic features
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4006 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5006 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
were not normalized on any data set, and only the raw values were used that were
directly computed from the DICOM image. To explore the association of the
radiomics features with survival, we used Kaplan–Meier analysis in a training and
validation phase. To ensure a completely independent validation, the median
threshold of each feature on the Lung1 data set was computed, and then this
threshold was used in the validation data sets (Lung2, H&N1 and H&N2) to split
the survival curves. We used the G-rho rank test for censored survival data to test
for signiﬁcant differences between the two survival curves. P-values were corrected
for multiple testing by controlling the FDR of 10%, the expected proportion of false
discoveries amongst the rejected hypotheses.
To assess the multivariate performance of radiomic features we built a signature.
We selected the 100 most stable features, determined by averaging the stability ranks
of RIDER data set and multiple delineation data set. Next, we computed the
performance in the Lung 1 data set of each of the selected 100 features using the
concordance index (CI)12. This measure is comparable with the area under the curve
but can also be used for Cox regression analysis. From each of the four-feature groups,
we selected the single best performing feature for prognosis in the Lung1 data set, and
combined these top four features into a multivariate Cox proportional hazards
regression model for prediction of survival. The weights of the model were ﬁtted on
the Lung1 data set. We applied the radiomic signature to the validation data sets
Lung2, H&N1 and H&N2, and the performance was assessed with the CI. To
calculate signiﬁcance between two models we used a bootstrap approach, for 100
times we calculated the CI of both models from 100 randomly selected samples. The
Wilcoxon test was used to assess signiﬁcance.
A similar approach was used to assess if the signature had signiﬁcant power,
compared with random (CI ¼ 0.5). We used a bootstrap approach, for 100 times we
calculated the CI of the radiomics signature based on 100 randomly selected
samples with correct outcome data, as well as on 100 randomly chosen samples
with random outcome data. The Wilcoxon test was used to assess signiﬁcance,
between the two distributions.
To assess the complementary effect of the signature with clinical parameters, we
built a new model with the prediction of the signature as one input and the clinical
parameter as the other input. The weight of the clinical parameter was ﬁtted on the
training data set Lung1.
To assess the association of the radiomic signature with gene expression, we
used the Lung3 data set. Gene expression of 89 patients was measured on
Affymetrix chips with the custom chipset HuRSTA_2a520709 for 21,766 genes.
Expression values were normalized with the RMA algorithm5 in the Affy package
in Bioconductor. For each of the four features in the radiomic signature, we
calculated the Spearman rank correlation to gene expression and used the
corresponding P-values to obtain a rank of genes representing high-to-low
agreement. Each of these gene ranks were used to perform a pre-ranked version of
GSEA14 on the C5 collection of MSigDB28, which contains gene sets associated
with speciﬁc GO terms. We only regarded gene sets of size 15 to 500. Local FDRs
were calculated on the normalized enrichment scores (NES), primary statistic of
GSEA and only gene sets enriched with an FDR of r20% were retained. Figure 4b
displays gene sets that have been signiﬁcantly enriched (FDR r20%) for at least
one of four radiomic features (indicated by an asterisk). The corresponding
absolute NES in all of the four features are given color-coded, where light blue
means low and dark blue means high NES.