Deep Convolutional Neural Network for
Inverse Problems in Imaging
Kyong Hwan Jin, Michael T. McCann, Member, IEEE, Emmanuel Froustey,
Michael Unser, Fellow, IEEE
In this paper, we propose a novel deep convolutional neural network (CNN)-based algorithm for
solving ill-posed inverse problems. Regularized iterative algorithms have emerged as the standard approach to ill-posed inverse problems in the past few decades. These methods produce excellent results,
but can be challenging to deploy in practice due to factors including the high computational cost of
the forward and adjoint operators and the difﬁculty of hyper parameter selection. The starting point
of our work is the observation that unrolled iterative methods have the form of a CNN (ﬁltering
followed by point-wise non-linearity) when the normal operator (H∗H, the adjoint of H times H)
of the forward model is a convolution. Based on this observation, we propose using direct inversion
followed by a CNN to solve normal-convolutional inverse problems. The direct inversion encapsulates
the physical model of the system, but leads to artifacts when the problem is ill-posed; the CNN combines
multiresolution decomposition and residual learning in order to learn to remove these artifacts while
preserving image structure. We demonstrate the performance of the proposed network in sparse-view
reconstruction (down to 50 views) on parallel beam X-ray computed tomography in synthetic phantoms
as well as in real experimental sinograms. The proposed network outperforms total variation-regularized
iterative reconstruction for the more realistic phantoms and requires less than a second to reconstruct a
512 × 512 image on the GPU.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, iterative reconstruction methods have become the dominant approach to solving
inverse problems in imaging including denoising – , deconvolution , , and interpolation ,
 . Thanks to robust regularizers such as total variation , , and sparsity , practical algorithms
have appeared with excellent image quality and reasonable computational complexity. These advances
K.H. Jin acknowledges the support from the “EPFL Fellows” fellowship program co-funded by Marie Curie from the European
Unions Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation under grant agreement 665667.
K.H. Jin is with the Biomedical Imaging Group, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: ).
Michael McCann is with the Center for Biomedical Imaging, Signal Processing Core and the Biomedical Imaging Group,
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: ).
E. Froustey is with Dassault Aviation, Saint-Cloud, France, previously with the Biomedical Imaging Group, EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (e-mail: ).
Michael Unser is with the Biomedical Imaging Group, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: ).
November 14, 2016
 
have been particularly inﬂuential in the ﬁeld of biomedical imaging, e.g., in magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) , and X-ray computed tomography (CT) , . These devices face an unfavorable
trade-off between noise and acquisition time. Short acquisitions lead to severe degradations of image
quality, while long acquisitions may cause motion artifacts, patient discomfort, or even patient harm
in the case of radiation-based modalities. Iterative reconstruction with regularization provides a way
to mitigate these problems in software, i.e. without developing new scanners. With the appearance of
compressed sensing , our theoretical understanding of these approaches evolved further, and, in some
applications, remarkable outcomes appeared with stable reproducibility , .
A more recent trend is deep learning , which has arisen as a promising framework providing
state-of-the-art performance for image classiﬁcation , and segmentation – . Moreover,
regression-type neural networks demonstrated impressive results on inverse problems with exact models
such as signal denoising , , deconvolution , and interpolation , . Central to this
resurgence of neural networks has been the convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture. Whereas
the classic multilayer perceptron consists of layers that can perform arbitrary matrix multiplications on
their input, the layers of a CNN are restricted to perform convolutions, greatly reducing the number of
parameters which must be learned.
Researchers have begun to investigate the link between conventional approaches and deep learning
networks – . Gregor and LeCun explored the similarity between the ISTA algorithm and
a shared layerwise neural network and demonstrated that several layer-wise neural networks act as a fast
approximated sparse coder. In , a nonlinear diffusion reaction process based on the Perona-Malik
process was proposed using deep convolutional learning; convolutional ﬁlters from diffusion terms were
trained instead of using well-chosen ﬁlters like kernels for diffusion gradients, while the reaction terms
were matched to the gradients of a data ﬁdelity term. In , the authors focused on the relationship
between l0 penalized-least-squares methods and deep neural networks. In the context of a clustered
dictionary model, they found that the non-shared layer-wise independent weights and activations of a
deep neural network provide more performance gain than the layer-wise ﬁxed parameters of an unfolded
l0 iterative hard thresholding method. The quantitative analysis relied on the restricted isometry property
(RIP) condition from compressed sensing . Others have investigated learning optimal shrinkage
operators for deep-layered neural networks , .
Despite these works, practical and theoretical questions remain regarding the link between iterative
reconstruction and CNNs. For example, in which problems can CNNs outperform traditional iterative
reconstructions, and why? Where does this performance come from, and can the same gains be realized
November 14, 2016
by learning aspects of the iterative process (e.g. the shrinkage)? Although began to address this
connection, they only assumed that the ﬁlters learned in the Perona-Malik scheme are modiﬁed gradient
kernels, with performance gains coming from the increased size of the ﬁlters.
In this paper, we explore the relationship between CNNs and iterative optimization methods for one
speciﬁc class of inverse problems: those where the normal operator associated with the forward model
(H∗H, where H is the forward operator and H∗is the adjoint operator) is a convolution. The class trivially
includes denoising and deconvolution, but also includes MRI , X-ray CT , , and diffraction
tomography (DT). Based on this connection, we propose a method for solving these inverse problems
by combining a fast, approximate solver with a CNN. We demonstrate the approach on low-view CT
reconstruction, using ﬁltered back projection (FBP) and a CNN that makes use of residual learning 
and multilevel learning . We use high-view FBP reconstructions for training, meaning that training is
possible from real data (without oracle knowledge). We compare to a state-of-the art regularized iterative
reconstruction and show promising results on both synthetic and real CT data. Especially, reconstructed
images from the proposed network represented well complex textures which are important to diagnosis.
II. INVERSE PROBLEMS WITH SHIFT-INVARIANT NORMAL OPERATORS
We begin our discussion by describing the class of inverse problems for which the normal operator is
a convolution. As we will show, solving problems of this form iteratively requires repeated convolutions
and point-wise nonlinearities, which suggests that CNNs may offer an alternative solution. The class is
broad, encompassing at least denoising, deconvolution, and reconstruction of MRI, CT, and diffraction
tomography images. The underlying convolutional structure is known for MRI and CT and has been
exploited in the past for the design of fast algorithms (e.g. ). Here, we aim to give a general and
concise deﬁnition to motivate our method. We go on to discuss the standard direct and iterative approaches
to solving these problems.
For the continuous case, let H : L2(Rd1) →L2(Ω) be a linear operator and H∗denote its adjoint,
where L2(Ω) = {f : Ω→C |
Ω|f(x)|2dx < +∞}. The range, Ω⊆Rd2, remains general to include
operators such as the X-ray transform, where the measurements are deﬁned on a circular/spherical domain.
The following deﬁnitions give the building blocks of a normal shift-invariant operator.
Deﬁnition 1 (Multiplication). A multiplication, Mm : L2(Ω) →L2(Ω), is a linear operator such that
Mm{f}(x) = m(x)f(x) with m ∈L2(Ω) for some continuous, bounded function, m : Ω→C.
November 14, 2016
Deﬁnition 2 (Convolution). A convolution, Hh : L2(Ω) →L2(Ω), is a linear operator such that Hhf =
F∗MˆhFf, where F is the Fourier transform, ˆh is the Fourier transform of h, and Mˆh is a multiplication.
Deﬁnition 3 (Reversible change of variables). A reversible change of variables, Φϕ : L2(Ω1) →L2(Ω2), is
a linear operator such that Φϕf = f(ϕ(·)) for some φ : Ω2 →Ω1 and such that its inverse, Φ−1
If Hh is a convolution, then H∗
hHh is as well (because F∗M∗
ˆhFF∗MˆhF = F∗M|ˆh|2F), but this is
true for a wider set of operators. Theorem 1 describes this set.
Theorem 1 (Normal-convolutional operators). If there exists an isometry, T, a multiplication, Mm,
and a change of variables, Φϕ, such that H = TMmΦ−1
ϕ F, then H∗H is a convolution with ˆh =
| det Jϕ|MΦϕ|m|2, where Jϕ is the Jacobian matrix of ϕ and MΦϕ|m|2 is a suitable multiplication.
Proof. Given an operator, H, that satisﬁes the conditions of Theorem 1,
H∗H = F∗(Φ−1
mT ∗TMmΦ−1
ϕ )∗M|m|2Φ−1
= F∗| det Jϕ|MΦϕ|m|2F
where (a) follows from the deﬁnitions of isometry and multiplication and (b) follows from the deﬁnition
of a reversible change of variables. Thus, H∗H is a convolution by Deﬁnition 2.
A version of Theorem 1 also holds in the discrete case; we sketch the result here. Starting with
a continuous-domain operator, Hc, that satisﬁes the conditions of Theorem 1, we form a discretedomain operator, Hd : l2(Zd0) →l2(Zd1), H = SHcQ, where S and Q are sampling and interpolation,
respectively. Then, assuming that HcQf is bandlimited, H∗
dHd is a convolution.
For example, consider the continuous 2D X-ray transform, R : L2(R2) →L2([0, π) × R), which
measures every line integral of a function of 2D space, indexed by the slope and intercept of the line.
Using the Fourier central slice theorem ,
where Φϕ changes from Cartesian to polar coordinates (i.e. ϕ−1(θ, r) = (r cos θ, r sin θ)) and T is the
inverse Fourier transform with respect to r (which is an isometry due to Parseval’s theorem). This maps
a function, f, of space, x, to its Fourier transform, ˆf, which is a function of frequency, ω. Then, it
November 14, 2016
performs a change of variables, giving ˆfpolar, which is a function of a polar frequency variables, (θ, r).
Finally, T inverts the Fourier transform along r, resulting in a sinogram that is a function of θ and a
polar space variable, y. Theorem 1 states that R∗R is a convolution with ˆh(ω) = | det Jϕ(ω)| = 1/∥ω∥,
where, again, ω is the frequency variable associated with the 2D Fourier transform, F.
B. Direct Inversion
Given a normal-convolutional operator, H, the inverse (or reconstruction) problem is to recover an
image f from its measurements g = Hf. The theory presented above suggests two methods of direct
solutions to this problem. The ﬁrst is to apply the inverse of the ﬁlter corresponding to H∗H to the back
projected measurements,
f = WhH∗g,
where Wh is a convolution operator with ˆh(ω) = 1/(|det Jϕ|Φϕ|m(ω)|2). This is exactly equivalent to
performing a deconvolution in the reconstruction space. The second is to invert the action of H in the
measurement domain before back projecting,
f = H∗TMhT ∗g,
where Mh is a multiplication operator with h(ω) = 1/(| det Jϕ||m(ω)|2). If T is a Fourier transform,
then this inverse is a ﬁltering operation followed by a back projection; if T is not, the operation remains
ﬁltering-like in the sense that it is diagonalizable in the transform domain associated with T. Note also
that if T is not a Fourier transform, then the variable ω no longer refers to frequency. Given the their
ﬁlter-like form, we refer to these direct inverses as ﬁltered back projection (FBP) , a term borrowed
from X-ray CT reconstruction.
Returning to the example of the continuous 2D X-ray transform, the ﬁrst method would be to back
project the measurements and then apply the ﬁlter with a 2D Fourier transform given by ∥ω∥. The second
approach would be to apply the ﬁlter with 1D Fourier transform given by ω to each angular measurement
and then back project the result. In the continuous case, the methods are equivalent, but, in practice, the
measurements are discrete and applying these involves some approximation. Then, which form is used
affects the accuracy of the reconstruction (along with the runtime). This type of error can be mitigated
by formulating the FBP to explicitly include the effects of sampling and interpolation (e.g., as in ).
The larger problem is that the ﬁlter greatly ampliﬁes noise, thus in practice some amount of smoothing
is also applied.
November 14, 2016
C. Iterative Inversion
In practice, inverse problems related with imaging are often ill-posed, which prohibits the use of direct
inversion because measurement noise causes serve perturbations in the solution. Adding regularization
(e.g., total variation or l1 sparsity as in LASSO ) overcomes this problem. We now adopt the
discrete, ﬁnite-support notation where the forward model is a matrix, H ∈RNy×Nx and the measurements
are a vector, y ∈RNy. The typical synthesis form of the inverse problem is then
2 + λ∥a∥1,
where a ∈RNa is the vector of transform coefﬁcients of the reconstruction such that x = Wa is the
desired reconstruction and where W ∈RNx×Na is a transform so that a is sparse. For example, if W is a
multichannel wavelet transform W =
 , , then the formulation promotes
the wavelet-domain sparsity of the solution. And, for many such transforms, W will be shift-invariant
(a set of convolutions).
This formulation does not admit a closed form solution, and, therefore, is typically solved iteratively.
For example, the popular ISTA , algorithm solves Eq. (5) with the iterate
ak+1 = prox
LW∗H∗y + (I −1
LW∗H∗HW)ak
where Sθ is the soft-thresholding operator by value θ and L ≤eig(W∗H∗HW) is the Lipschitz constant
of a normal operator. When the forward model is normal-convolutional and when W is a convolution,
the algorithm consists of iteratively ﬁltering by I −(1/L)W∗H∗HW, adding a bias, (1/L)W∗H∗y,
and applying a point-wise nonlinearity, Sθ. This is illustrated as a block diagram with unfolded iterates
in Fig. 1 (b). Many other iterate methods for solving Eq. (5), including ADMM , FISTA , and
SALSA , also rely on these basic building blocks.
III. PROPOSED METHOD: FBPCONVNET
The success of iterative methods consisting of ﬁltering plus pointwise nonlinearities on normalconvolutional inverse problems suggests that CNNs may be a good ﬁt for these problems as well. Based
on this insight, we propose a new approach to these problems, which we call the FBPConvNet. The
basic structure of the FBPConvNet algorithm is to apply the discretized FBP from Section II-B to the
measurements and then use this as the input of a CNN which is trained to regress the FBP result to
a suitable ground truth image. This approach applies in principle to all normal-convolutional inverse
problems, but we have focused in this work on CT reconstruction. We now describe the method in detail.
November 14, 2016
Fig. 1. Block diagrams about (a) unfolded version of iterative shrinkage method , (b) unfolded version of iterative shrinkage
method with sparsifying transform (W) and (c) convolutional network with the residual framework. L is the Lipschitz constant,
x0 is the initial estimates, bi is learned bias, wi is learned convolutional kernel. The broken line boxes in (c) indicate the
variables to be learned.
A. Filtered Back Projection
While it would be possible to train a CNN to regress directly from the measurement domain to the
reconstruction domain, performing the FBP ﬁrst greatly simpliﬁes the learning. The FBP encapsulates
our knowledge about the physics of the inverse problem and also provides a warm start to the CNN.
For example, in the case of CT reconstruction, if the sinogram is used as input, the CNN must encode
a change between polar and Cartesian coordinates, which is completely avoided when the FBP is used
as input. We stress again that, while the FBP is speciﬁc to CT, Section II-C shows that efﬁcient, direct
inversions are always available for normal-convolutional inverse problems.
B. Deep Convolutional Neural Network Design
While we were inspired by the general form of the proximal update, (6), to apply a CNN to inverse
problems of this form, our goal here is not to imitate iterative methods (e.g. by building a network that
corresponds to an unrolled version of some iterative method), but rather to explore a state-of-the-art
November 14, 2016
Fig. 2. Structure of the proposed deep convolutional network for deconvolution.
CNN architecture. To this end, we base our CNN on the U-net , which was originally designed for
segmentation. There are several properties of this architecture that recommend it for our purposes.
Multilevel decomposition. The U-net employs a dyadic scale decomposition based on max pooling,
so that the effective ﬁlter size in the middle layers is larger than that of the early and late layers. This
is critical for our application because the ﬁlters corresponding to H∗H (and its inverse) may have noncompact support, e.g. in CT. Thus, a CNN with a small, ﬁxed ﬁlter size may not be able to effectively
invert H∗H. This decomposition also has a nice analog to the use of multiresolution wavelets in iterative
approaches.
Multichannel ﬁltering. U-net employs multichannel ﬁlters, such that there are multiple feature maps
at each layer. This is the standard approach in CNNs to increase the expressive power of the network
 . The multiple channels also have an analog in iterative methods: In the ISTA formulation (6), we can
think of the wavelet coefﬁcient vector a as being partitioned into different channels, with each channel
corresponding to one wavelet subband , . Or, in ADMM , the split variables can be viewed as
channels. The CNN architecture greatly generalizes this by allowing ﬁlters to make arbitrary combinations
of ﬁlters.
November 14, 2016
Residual learning. As a reﬁnement of the original U-net, we add a skip connection between input
and output, which means that the network actually learns the difference between input and output. This
approach mitigates the vanishing gradient problem during training. This yields a noticeable increase
in performance compared to the same network without the skip connection.
Implementation details. We made two additional modiﬁcation to U-net. First, we use zero-padding
so that the image size does not decrease after each convolution. Second, we replaced the last layer with
a convolutional layer which reduces the 64 channels to a single output image. This is necessary because
the original U-net architecture results in two channgels: foreground and background.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We now describe our experimental setup and results. Though the FBPConvNet algorithm is general,
we focus here on sparse-view X-ray CT reconstruction. We compare FBPConvNet to FBP alone and
a state-of-the-art iterative reconstruction method . This method (which we will refer to as the TV
method for brevity) solves a version of Eq. (5) with the popular TV regularization via ADMM. It exploits
the convolutional structure of H∗H by using FFT-based ﬁltering in its iterates.
Our experiments proceed as follows: We begin with a full view sinogram (either synthetically generated
or from real data). We compute its FBP (standard high quality reconstruction) and take this as the ground
truth. We then compare the results of applying the TV method to the subsampled sinogram with the
results of applying the FBPConvNet to the same. This type of sparse-view reconstruction is of particular
interest for human imaging because, e.g., a twenty times reduction in the number of views corresponds
to a twenty times reduction in the radiation dose received by the patient.
A. Data Preparation
We used three datasets for evaluations of the proposed method. The ﬁrst two are synthetic in that the
sinograms are computed using a digital forward model, while the last comes from real experiments.
1) The ellipsoid dataset is a synthetic dataset that comprises 500 images of ellipses of random intensity,
size, and location. Sinograms for this data are 729 pixels by 1,000 views and are created using the
analytical expression for the X-ray transform of an ellipse. The Matlab function iradon is used
2) The biomedical dataset is a synthetic dataset that comprises 500 real in-vivo CT images from the
Low-dose Grand challenge competition from database made by the Mayo clinic. Sinograms for this
November 14, 2016
data are 729 pixels by 1,000 views and are created using the Matlab function radon. iradon is
again used for FBPs.
3) The experimental dataset is a real CT dataset that comprises 377 sinograms collected from an
experiment at the TOMCAT beam line of the Swiss Light Source at the Paul Scherrer Institute
in Villigen, Switzerland. Each sinogram is 1493 pixels by 721 views and comes from one zslice of a single rat brain. FBPs were computed using our own custom routine which closely
matches the behavior of iradon while accommodating different sampling steps in the sinogram
an reconstruction domains.
To make sparse-view FBP images in synthetic datasets, we uniformly subsampled the sinogram by
factors of 7 and 20 corresponding to 143 and 50 views, respectively. For the real data, we subsampled
by factors of 5 and 14 corresponding to 145 and 52 views.
B. Training Procedure
FBPConvNet. In case of synthetic data, the total number of training images is 475. The number of
test images is 25. In the case of the biomedical dataset, the test data is chosen from a different subject
than the training set. For the real data, the total number of training images is 327. The number of test
images is 25. The test data are obtained from the last z-slices with the gap of 25 slices left between
testing and training data. All images are scaled between 0 and 550.
The CNN part of the FBPConvNet is trained using pairs of low-view FBP images and full-view
FBP images as input and output, respectively. Note that this training strategy means that the method is
applicable to real CT reconstructions where we do not have access to an oracle reconstruction.
We use the MatConvNet toolbox (ver. 20) to implement the FBPConvNet training and evaluation,
with a slight modiﬁcation: We clip the computed gradients to a ﬁxed range to prevent the divergence of
the cost function , . We use a Titan Black GPU graphic processor (NVIDIA Corporation) for
training and evaluation. Total training time is about 15 hours for 101 iterations.
The hyper parameters for training are as follows: learning rate decreasing logarithmically from 0.01
to 0.001; batchsize equals 1; momentum equals 0.99; and the clipping value for gradient equals 10−2.
We use ﬂip-ﬂop data augmentation in both horizontal and vertical directions during the training phase to
reduce overﬁtting .
State-of-the-art TV reconstruction. For completeness, we comment on how the iterative method
used the training and testing data. Though it may be a fairer comparison to require the TV method to
select its parameters from the training data (as the FBPConvNet does), we instead simply select the
November 14, 2016
parameters that optimize performance on the training set (via a golden-section search). We do this with
the understanding that the parameter is usually tuned by hand in practice and because the correct way
to learn these parameters from data remains an open question.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We use SNR as a quantitative metric. If x is the oracle and ˆx is the reconstructed image, SNR is given
a,b∈R 20 log
∥x −aˆx + b∥2
where a higher SNR value corresponds to a better reconstruction.
A. Ellipsoidal Dataset
Fig. 3. Reconstructed images of ellipsoidal dataset from 143 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and
the FBPConvNet. The ﬁrst row shows the ROI with full region of image, and the second row shows magniﬁed ROI for the
appearance of differences. All subsequent ﬁgures keep the same manner.
Figures 3 and 4 and Table I show the results for the ellisoidal dataset. In the seven times downsampling
case, Figure 3, the full-view FBP (ground truth) shows nearly artifact-free ellipsoids, while the sparseview FBP shows signiﬁcant line artifacts (most visible in the background). Both the TV and FBPConvNet
November 14, 2016
Fig. 4. Reconstructed images of ellipsoidal dataset from 50 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and the
FBPConvNet.
methods signiﬁcantly reduce these artifacts, giving visually indistinguishable results. When the downsampling is increased to twenty times, Figure 4, the line artifacts in the sparse-view FBP reconstruction are
even more pronounced. Both the TV and FBPConvNet reduce these artifacts, though the FBPConvNet
retains some of the artifacts. The average SNR on the testing set for the TV method is higher than that
of the the FBPConvNet. This is a reasonable results given that the phantom is piecewise constant and
thus the TV regularization should be optimal , .
COMPARISON OF SNR BETWEEN DIFFERENT RECONSTRUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR NUMERICAL ELLIPSOIDAL DATASET.
avg. SNR (dB)
143 views (x7)
50 views (x20)
November 14, 2016
B. Biomedical Dataset
Figures 5 and 6 and Table II show the results for the biomedical dataset. In Figure 5, again, the
sparse-view FBP contains line artifacts. Both TV and the proposed method remove streaking artifacts
satisfactorily; however, the TV reconstruction shows the cartoon-like artifacts that are typical of TV
reconstructions. This trend is also observed in severe case (x20) in Fig. 6. Quantitatively, the proposed
method outperforms the TV method.
Fig. 5. Reconstructed images of biomedical dataset from 143 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and
the FBPConvNet.
COMPARISON OF SNR BETWEEN DIFFERENT RECONSTRUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR BIOMEDICAL DATASET.
avg. SNR (dB)
143 views (x7)
50 views (x20)
November 14, 2016
Fig. 6. Reconstructed images of biomedical dataset from 50 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and
the FBPConvNet.
Fig. 7. Reconstructed images of experimental dataset from 145 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and
the FBPConvNet.
November 14, 2016
Fig. 8. Reconstructed images of experimental dataset from 52 views using FBP, TV regularized convex optimization , and
the FBPConvNet.
COMPARISON OF SNR BETWEEN DIFFERENT RECONSTRUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR EXPERIMENTAL DATASET.
avg. SNR (dB)
145 views (x5)
51 views (x14)
C. Experimental Dataset
Figures 7 and 8 and Table III show the results for the experimental dataset. The SNRs of all methods
are signiﬁcantly lower here because of the relatively low contrast of the sinogram. In Fig. 7, we observe
the same trend as for the biomedical dataset, where the TV method oversmooths and the FBPConvNet
better preserves ﬁne structures. These trends also appears in twenty times downsampling case (x20) in
Fig. 8. The FBPConvNet had a higher SNR than the TV method in both settings.
November 14, 2016
VI. DISCUSSION
The experiments provide strong evidence for the feasibility of the FBPConvNet for sparse-view CT reconstruction. The conventional iterative algorithm with TV regularization outperformed the FBPConvNet
in the ellipsoidal dataset, while the reverse was true for the biomedical and experimental datasets. In
these more-realistic datasets, the SNR improvement of the FBPConvNet came from its ability to preserve
ﬁne details in the images. This points to one advantage of the proposed method over iterative methods:
the iterative methods must explicitly impose regularization, while the FBPConvNet effectively learns a
regularizer from the data.
The computation time for the FBPConvNet was about 200 ms for the FBP and 200∼300 ms in GPU
for the CNN for a 512 × 512 image. This is much faster than the iterative reconstruction, which, in our
case, requires around 7 minutes even after the regularization parameters have been selected.
A major limitation of the proposed method is lack of transfer between datasets. For instance, when we
put FBP images from a twenty-times subsampled sinogram into the network trained on the seven-times
subsampled sinogram, the results retain many artifacts. Handling datasets of different dimensions or subsampling factors requires retraining the network. Future work could address strategies for heterogeneous
Our theory suggests that the methodology proposed here is applicable to all problems where the normal
operator is shift-invariant; however, we have focused here on X-ray CT reconstruction. We expect that
adapting the method to, e.g., MRI reconstruction will be non-trivial experimentally, because it will require
large sets of training data (either from a high-quality forward model or real data) and a high-quality
iterative reconstruction algorithm for comparison. Furthermore, because MRI and DT involve complex
values (both in the measurement and reconstruction domains), we need a CNN architecture that correctly
handles complex values. Therefore, we leave experimentation on other modalities to future work.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a deep convolutional network for inverse problems with a focus on
biomedical imaging. The proposed method, which we call the FBPConvNet combines FBP with a
multiresolution CNN. The structure of the CNN is based on U-net, with the addition of residual learning.
This approach was motivated by the convolutional structure of several biomedical inverse problems,
including CT, MRI, and DT. Speciﬁcally, we showed conditions on a linear operator that ensure that
its normal operator is a convolution. This results suggests that CNNs are well-suited to this subclass of
inverse problems.
November 14, 2016
The proposed method demonstrated compelling results on synthetic and real data. It compared favorably
to state-of-the-art iterative reconstruction on the two more realistic datasets. Furthermore, after training,
the computation time of the proposed network per one image is under a second.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Cynthia McCollough, the Mayo Clinic, the American Association
of Physicists in Medicine, and grants EB017095 and EB017185 from the National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering for giving opportunities to use real-invivo CT DICOM images (Fig. 5-6).
The authors also thank thank Dr. Marco Stampanoni, Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen,
Switzerland, for providing real CT sinograms (Fig. 7-8).
November 14, 2016