From Captions to Visual Concepts and Back
Saurabh Gupta∗
Forrest Iandola∗
Rupesh K. Srivastava∗
Piotr Doll´ar†
Jianfeng Gao
Xiaodong He
Margaret Mitchell
John C. Platt‡
C. Lawrence Zitnick
Geoffrey Zweig
Microsoft Research
This paper presents a novel approach for automatically
generating image descriptions: visual detectors, language
models, and multimodal similarity models learnt directly
from a dataset of image captions. We use multiple instance
learning to train visual detectors for words that commonly
occur in captions, including many different parts of speech
such as nouns, verbs, and adjectives. The word detector
outputs serve as conditional inputs to a maximum-entropy
language model. The language model learns from a set of
over 400,000 image descriptions to capture the statistics
of word usage. We capture global semantics by re-ranking
caption candidates using sentence-level features and a deep
multimodal similarity model. Our system is state-of-the-art
on the ofﬁcial Microsoft COCO benchmark, producing a
BLEU-4 score of 29.1%. When human judges compare the
system captions to ones written by other people on our heldout test set, the system captions have equal or better quality
34% of the time.
1. Introduction
When does a machine “understand” an image? One definition is when it can generate a novel caption that summarizes the salient content within an image. This content may
include objects that are present, their attributes, or their relations with each other. Determining the salient content requires not only knowing the contents of an image, but also
deducing which aspects of the scene may be interesting or
novel through commonsense knowledge .
This paper describes a novel approach for generating image captions from samples. We train our caption generator
∗H. Fang, S. Gupta, F. Iandola and R. K. Srivastava contributed equally
to this work while doing internships at Microsoft Research. Current af-
ﬁliations are H. Fang: University of Washington; S. Gupta and F. Iandola:
University of California at Berkeley; R. K. Srivastava: IDSIA, USI-SUPSI.
†P. Doll´ar is currently at Facebook AI Research.
‡J. Platt is currently at Google.
Figure 1. An illustrative example of our pipeline.
from a dataset of images and corresponding image descriptions. Previous approaches to generating image captions relied on object, attribute, and relation detectors learned from
separate hand-labeled training data .
The direct use of captions in training has three distinct
advantages. First, captions only contain information that is
inherently salient. For example, a dog detector trained from
images with captions containing the word dog will be biased towards detecting dogs that are salient and not those
that are in the background. Image descriptions also contain
variety of word types, including nouns, verbs, and adjectives. As a result, we can learn detectors for a wide variety of concepts. While some concepts, such as riding or
beautiful, may be difﬁcult to learn in the abstract, these
 
terms may be highly correlated to speciﬁc visual patterns
(such as a person on a horse or mountains at sunset).
Second, training a language model (LM) on image captions captures commonsense knowledge about a scene. A
language model can learn that a person is more likely to
sit on a chair than to stand on it. This information disambiguates noisy visual detections.
Third, by learning a joint multimodal representation on
images and their captions, we are able to measure the global
similarity between images and text, and select the most suitable description for the image.
An overview of our approach is shown in Figure 1. First,
we use weakly-supervised learning to create detectors for
a set of words commonly found in image captions. Learning directly from image captions is difﬁcult, because the
system does not have access to supervisory signals, such
as object bounding boxes, that are found in other data sets
 . Many words, e.g., crowded or inside, do not
even have well-deﬁned bounding boxes. To overcome this
difﬁculty, we use three ideas. First, the system reasons with
image sub-regions rather than with the full image. Next,
we featurize each of these regions using rich convolutional
neural network (CNN) features, ﬁne-tuned on our training
data . Finally, we map the features of each region
to words likely to be contained in the caption. We train this
map using multiple instance learning (MIL) which
learns discriminative visual signature for each word.
Generating novel image descriptions from a bag of likely
words requires an effective LM. In this paper, we view caption generation as an optimization problem. In this view,
the core task is to take the set of word detection scores, and
ﬁnd the highest likelihood sentence that covers each word
exactly once. We train a maximum entropy (ME) LM from
a set of training image descriptions . This training
captures commonsense knowledge about the world through
language statistics . An explicit search over word sequences is effective at ﬁnding high-likelihood sentences.
The ﬁnal stage of the system (Figure 1) re-ranks a set of
high-likelihood sentences by a linear weighting of sentence
features. These weights are learned using Minimum Error
Rate Training (MERT) . In addition to several common
sentence features, we introduce a new feature based on a
Deep Multimodal Similarity Model (DMSM). The DMSM
learns two neural networks that map images and text fragments to a common vector representation in which the similarity between sentences and images can be easily measured. As we demonstrate, the use of the DMSM signiﬁcantly improves the selection of quality sentences.
To evaluate the quality of our automatic captions, we
use three easily computable metrics and better/worse/equal
comparisons by human subjects on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (AMT). The evaluation was performed on the challenging Microsoft COCO dataset containing complex images with multiple objects. Each of the 82,783 training images has 5 human annotated captions. For measuring
the quality of our sentences we use the popular BLEU ,
METEOR and perplexity (PPLX) metrics. Surprisingly,
we ﬁnd our generated captions outperform humans based on
the BLEU metric; and this effect holds when evaluated on
unseen test data from the COCO dataset evaluation server,
reaching 29.1% BLEU-4 vs. 21.7% for humans. Human
evaluation on our held-out test set has our captions judged
to be of the same quality or better than humans 34% of the
time. We also compare to previous work on the PASCAL
sentence dataset , and show marked improvements over
previous work. Our results demonstrate the utility of training both visual detectors and LMs directly on image captions, as well as using a global multimodal semantic model
for re-ranking the caption candidates.
2. Related Work
There are two well-studied approaches to automatic image captioning: retrieval of existing human-written captions, and generation of novel captions. Recent retrievalbased approaches have used neural networks to map images
and text into a common vector representation . Other
retrieval based methods use similarity metrics that take predeﬁned image features . Farhadi et al. represent
both images and text as linguistically-motivated semantic
triples, and compute similarity in that space. A similar ﬁnegrained analysis of sentences and images has been done for
retrieval in the context of neural networks .
Retrieval-based methods always return well-formed
human-written captions, but these captions may not be able
to describe new combinations of objects or novel scenes.
This limitation has motivated a large body of work on generative approaches, where the image is ﬁrst analyzed and
objects are detected, and then a novel caption is generated.
Previous work utilizes syntactic and semantic constraints in
the generation process , and we compare against prior state of the art in this line of work. We
focus on the Midge system , which combines syntactic
structures using maximum likelihood estimation to generate novel sentences; and compare qualitatively against the
Baby Talk system , which generates descriptions by ﬁlling sentence template slots with words selected from a conditional random ﬁeld that predicts the most likely image labeling. Both of these previous systems use the same set of
test sentences, making direct comparison possible.
Recently, researchers explored purely statistical approaches to guiding language models using images. Kiros
et al. use a log-bilinear model with bias features derived from the image to model text conditioned on the
image. Also related are several contemporaneous papers
 . Among these, a common theme
 has been to utilize a recurrent neural network
Figure 2. Multiple Instance Learning detections for cat, red,
flying and two (left to right, top to bottom). View in color.
for generating images captions by conditioning its output on
image features extracted by a convolutional neural network.
More recently, Donahue et al. also applied a similar
model to video description. Lebret et al. have investigated the use of a phrase-based model for generating captions, while Xu et al. have proposed a model based on
visual attention.
Unlike these approaches, in this work we detect words by
applying a CNN to image regions and integrating the
information with MIL . We minimize a priori assumptions about how sentences should be structured by training directly from captions. Finally, in contrast to ,
we formulate the problem of generation as an optimization
problem and search for the most likely sentence .
3. Word Detection
The ﬁrst step in our caption generation pipeline detects
a set of words that are likely to be part of the image’s description. These words may belong to any part of speech,
including nouns, verbs, and adjectives. We determine our
vocabulary V using the 1000 most common words in the
training captions, which cover over 92% of the word occurrences in the training data (available on project webpage 1).
3.1. Training Word Detectors
Given a vocabulary of words, our next goal is to detect
the words from images.
We cannot use standard supervised learning techniques for learning detectors, since we
do not know the image bounding boxes corresponding to
the words. In fact, many words relate to concepts for which
1 
bounding boxes may not be easily deﬁned, such as open or
beautiful. One possible approach is to use image classi-
ﬁers that take as input the entire image. As we show in Section 6, this leads to worse performance since many words
or concepts only apply to image sub-regions. Instead, we
learn our detectors using the weakly-supervised approach
of Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) .
For each word w ∈V, MIL takes as input sets of “positive” and “negative” bags of bounding boxes, where each
bag corresponds to one image i. A bag bi is said to be
positive if word w is in image i’s description, and negative
otherwise. Intuitively, MIL performs training by iteratively
selecting instances within the positive bags, followed by retraining the detector using the updated positive labels.
We use a noisy-OR version of MIL , where the probability of bag bi containing word w is calculated from the
probabilities of individual instances in the bag:
ij is the probability that a given image region j in
image i corresponds to word w. We compute pw
ij using a
multi-layered architecture 2, by computing a logistic
function on top of the fc7 layer (this can be expressed as a
fully connected fc8 layer followed by a sigmoid layer):
1 + exp (−(vtwφ(bij) + uw)),
where φ(bij) is the fc7 representation for image region j
in image i, and vw, uw are the weights and bias associated
with word w.
We express the fully connected layers (fc6, fc7, fc8)
of these networks as convolutions to obtain a fully convolutional network. When this fully convolutional network
is run over the image, we obtain a coarse spatial response
map. Each location in this response map corresponds to the
response obtained by applying the original CNN to overlapping shifted regions of the input image (thereby effectively
scanning different locations in the image for possible objects). We up-sample the image to make the longer side
to be 565 pixels which gives us a 12 × 12 response map at
fc8 for both and corresponds to sliding a 224×224
bounding box in the up-sampled image with a stride of 32.
The noisy-OR version of MIL is then implemented on top
of this response map to generate a single probability pw
each word for each image. We use a cross entropy loss and
optimize the CNN end-to-end for this task with stochastic
gradient descent. We use one image in each batch and train
for 3 epochs. For initialization, we use the network pretrained on ImageNet .
2We denote the CNN from as AlexNet and the 16-layer CNN from
 as VGG for subsequent discussion. We use the code base and models
available from the Caffe Model Zoo 
caffe/wiki/Model-Zoo .
3.2. Generating Word Scores for a Test Image
Given a novel test image i, we up-sample and forward
propagate the image through the CNN to obtain pw
i as described above. We do this for all words w in the vocabulary
V. Note that all the word detectors have been trained independently and hence their outputs need to be calibrated.
To calibrate the output of different detectors, we use the image level likelihood pw
i to compute precision on a held-out
subset of the training data . We threshold this precision value at a global threshold τ, and output all words ˜V
with a precision of τ or higher along with the image level
probability pw
i , and raw score maxj pw
Figure 2 shows some sample MIL detections. For each
image, we visualize the spatial response map pw
ij. Note that
the method has not used any bounding box annotations for
training, but is still able to reliably localize objects and also
associate image regions with more abstract concepts.
4. Language Generation
We cast the generation process as a search for the likeliest sentence conditioned on the set of visually detected
words. The language model is at the heart of this process
because it deﬁnes the probability distribution over word sequences. Note that despite being a statistical model, the LM
can encode very meaningful information, for instance that
running is more likely to follow horse than talking.
This information can help identify false word detections and
encodes a form of commonsense knowledge.
4.1. Statistical Model
To generate candidate captions for an image, we use a
maximum entropy (ME) LM conditioned on the set of visually detected words. The ME LM estimates the probability of a word wl conditioned on the preceding words
w1, w2, · · · , wl−1, as well as the set of words with high
likelihood detections ˜Vl ⊂˜V that have yet to be mentioned
in the sentence. The motivation of conditioning on the unused words is to encourage all the words to be used, while
avoiding repetitions. The top 15 most frequent closed-class
words3 are removed from the set ˜V since they are detected in
nearly every image (and are trivially generated by the LM).
It should be noted that the detected words are usually somewhat noisy. Thus, when the end of sentence token is being
predicted, the set of remaining words may still contain some
words with a high conﬁdence of detection.
Following the deﬁnition of an ME LM , the word
probability conditioned on preceding words and remaining
objects can be written as:
3The top 15 frequent closed-class words are a, on, of, the, in,
with, and, is, to, an, at, are, next, that and it.
wl−1, · · · , ¯
w1, <s>, ˜Vl−1) =
k=1 λkfk( ¯
wl−1, · · · , ¯
w1, <s>, ˜Vl−1)
v∈V∪</s> exp
k=1 λkfk(v, ¯
wl−1, · · · , ¯
w1, <s>, ˜Vl−1)
where <s> denotes the start-of-sentence token, ¯wj ∈V ∪
</s>, and fk(wl, · · · , w1, ˜Vl−1) and λk respectively denote
the k-th max-entropy feature and its weight. The basic discrete ME features we use are summarized in Table 1. These
features form our “baseline” system. It has proven effective to extend this with a “score” feature, which evaluates
to the log-likelihood of a word according to the corresponding visual detector. We have also experimented with distant
bigram features and continuous space log-bilinear features , but while these improved PPLX signiﬁcantly,
they did not improve BLEU, METEOR or human preference, and space restrictions preclude further discussion.
To train the ME LM, the objective function is the loglikelihood of the captions conditioned on the corresponding
set of detected objects, i.e.:
log Pr( ¯w(s)
l−1, · · · , ¯w(s)
1 , <s>, ˜V(s)
where the superscript (s) denotes the index of sentences in
the training data, and #(s) denotes the length of the sentence. The noise contrastive estimation (NCE) technique is
used to accelerate the training by avoiding the calculation
of the exact denominator in (3) . In the generation process, we use the unnormalized NCE likelihood estimates,
which are far more efﬁcient than the exact likelihoods, and
produce very similar outputs. However, all PPLX numbers
we report are computed with exhaustive normalization. The
ME features are implemented in a hash table as in . In
our experiments, we use N-gram features up to 4-gram and
15 contrastive samples in NCE training.
4.2. Generation Process
During generation, we perform a left-to-right beam
search similar to the one used in . This maintains a stack
of length l partial hypotheses. At each step in the search, every path on the stack is extended with a set of likely words,
and the resulting length l + 1 paths are stored. The top k
length l + 1 paths are retained and the others pruned away.
We deﬁne the possible extensions to be the end of sentence token </s>, the 100 most frequent words, the set of attribute words that remain to be mentioned, and all the words
in the training data that have been observed to follow the last
word in the hypothesis. Pruning is based on the likelihood
of the partial path. When </s> is generated, the full path to
</s> is removed from the stack and set aside as a completed
sentence. The process continues until a maximum sentence
length L is reached.
Table 1. Features used in the maximum entropy language model.
Description
¯wl ∈˜Vl−1
Predicted word is in the attribute set, i.e. has been visually detected and not yet used.
¯wl−N+1, · · · , ¯wl = κ and ¯wl ∈˜Vl−1
N-gram ending in predicted word is κ and the predicted word is in the attribute set.
¯wl−N+1, · · · , ¯wl = κ and ¯wl /∈˜Vl−1
N-gram ending in predicted word is κ and the predicted word is not in the attribute set.
¯wl = κ and ˜Vl−1 = ∅
The predicted word is κ and all attributes have been mentioned.
score( ¯wl) when ¯wl ∈˜Vl−1
The log-probability of the predicted word when it is in the attribute set.
Table 2. Features used by MERT.
1. The log-likelihood of the sequence.
2. The length of the sequence.
3. The log-probability per word of the sequence.
4. The logarithm of the sequence’s rank in the log-likelihood.
5. 11 binary features indicating whether the number
of mentioned objects is x (x = 0, . . . , 10).
6. The DMSM score between the sequence and the image.
After obtaining the set of completed sentences C, we
form an M-best list as follows. Given a target number of
T image attributes to be mentioned, the sequences in C covering at least T objects are added to the M-best list, sorted
in descending order by the log-likelihood. If there are less
than M sequences covering at least T objects found in C,
we reduce T by 1 until M sequences are found.
5. Sentence Re-Ranking
Our LM produces an M-best set of sentences. Our ﬁnal
stage uses MERT to re-rank the M sentences. MERT
uses a linear combination of features computed over an entire sentence, shown in Table 2. The MERT model is trained
on the M-best lists for the validation set using the BLEU
metric, and applied to the M-best lists for the test set. Finally, the best sequence after the re-ranking is selected as
the caption of the image. Along with standard MERT features, we introduce a new multimodal semantic similarity
model, discussed below.
5.1. Deep Multimodal Similarity Model
To model global similarity between images and text, we
develop a Deep Multimodal Similarity Model (DMSM).
The DMSM learns two neural networks that map images
and text fragments to a common vector representation. We
measure similarity between images and text by measuring
cosine similarity between their corresponding vectors. This
cosine similarity score is used by MERT to re-rank the
sentences. The DMSM is closely related to the unimodal
Deep Structured Semantic Model (DSSM) , but extends it to the multimodal setting. The DSSM was initially
proposed to model the semantic relevance between textual
search queries and documents, and is extended in this work
to replace the query vector in the original DSSM by the image vector computed from the deep convolutional network.
The DMSM consists of a pair of neural networks, one for
mapping each input modality to a common semantic space,
which are trained jointly. In training, the data consists of
a set of image/caption pairs. The loss function minimized
during training represents the negative log posterior probability of the caption given the corresponding image.
Image model: We map images to semantic vectors using the same CNN (AlexNet / VGG) as used for detecting
words in Section 3. We ﬁrst ﬁnetune the networks on the
COCO dataset for the full image classiﬁcation task of predicting the words occurring in the image caption. We then
extract out the fc7 representation from the ﬁnetuned network and stack three additional fully connected layers with
tanh non-linearities on top of this representation to obtain
a ﬁnal representation of the same size as the last layer of
the text model. We learn the parameters in these additional
fully connected layers during DMSM training.
Text model: The text part of the DMSM maps text fragments to semantic vectors, in the same manner as in the
original DSSM. In general, the text fragments can be a full
caption. Following we convert each word in the caption
to a letter-trigram count vector, which uses the count distribution of context-dependent letters to represent a word.
This representation has the advantage of reducing the size
of the input layer while generalizing well to infrequent, unseen and incorrectly spelled words. Then following ,
this representation is forward propagated through a deep
convolutional neural network to produce the semantic vector at the last layer.
Objective and training: We deﬁne the relevance R as
the cosine similarity between an image or query (Q) and a
text fragment or document (D) based on their representations yQ and yD obtained using the image and text models:
R(Q, D) = cosine(yQ, yD) = (yQ
T yD)/∥yQ∥∥yD∥. For a
given image-text pair, we can compute the posterior probability of the text being relevant to the image via:
exp(γR(Q, D))
ΣD′∈D exp(γR(Q, D′))
Here γ is a smoothing factor determined using the validation set, which is 10 in our experiments. D denotes the
set of all candidate documents (captions) which should be
compared to the query (image). We found that restricting
D to one matching document D+ and a ﬁxed number N
of randomly selected non-matching documents D−worked
reasonably well, although using noise-contrastive estimation could further improve results. Thus, for each image we
select one relevant text fragment and N non-relevant fragments to compute the posterior probability. N is set to 50
in our experiments. During training, we adjust the model
parameters Λ to minimize the negative log posterior probability that the relevant captions are matched to the images:
L(Λ) = −log
6. Experimental Results
We next describe the datasets used for testing, followed
by an evaluation of our approach for word detection and
experimental results on sentence generation.
6.1. Datasets
Most of our results are reported on the Microsoft COCO
dataset . The dataset contains 82,783 training images and 40,504 validation images. The images create a
challenging testbed for image captioning since most images
contain multiple objects and signiﬁcant contextual information. The COCO dataset provides 5 human-annotated captions per image. The test annotations are not available, so
we split the validation set into validation and test sets4.
For experimental comparison with prior papers, we also
report results on the PASCAL sentence dataset , which
contains 1000 images from the 2008 VOC Challenge ,
with 5 human captions each.
6.2. Word Detection
To gain insight into our weakly-supervised approach for
word detection using MIL, we measure its accuracy on the
word classiﬁcation task: If a word is used in at least one
ground truth caption, it is included as a positive instance.
Note that this is a challenging task, since conceptually similar words are classiﬁed separately; for example, the words
cat/cats/kitten, or run/ran/running all correspond to different classes. Attempts at adding further supervision, e.g., in
the form of lemmas, did not result in signiﬁcant gains.
Average Precision (AP) and Precision at Human Recall
(PHR) results for different parts of speech are shown
in Table 3. We report two baselines. The ﬁrst (Chance)
is the result of randomly classifying each word. The second (Classiﬁcation) is the result of a whole image classiﬁer
which uses features from AlexNet or VGG CNN .
These features were ﬁne-tuned for this word classiﬁcation
task using a logistic regression loss.
As shown in Table 3, the MIL NOR approach improves
over both baselines for all parts of speech, demonstrating
that better localization can help predict words. In fact, we
observe the largest improvement for nouns and adjectives,
4We split the COCO train/val set ito 82,729 train/20243 val/20244 test.
Unless otherwise noted, test results are reported on the 20444 images from
the validation set.
Figure 4. Qualitative results for images on the PASCAL sentence
dataset. Captions using our approach (black), Midge (blue)
and Baby Talk (red) are shown.
which often correspond to concrete objects in an image subregion. Results for both classiﬁcation and MIL NOR are
lower for parts of speech that may be less visually informative and difﬁcult to detect, such as adjectives (e.g., few,
which has an AP of 2.5), pronouns (e.g., himself, with
an AP of 5.7), and prepositions (e.g., before, with an
AP of 1.0). In comparison words with high AP scores are
typically either visually informative (red: AP 66.4, her:
AP 45.6) or associated with speciﬁc objects (polar: AP
94.6, stuffed: AP 74.2). Qualitative results demonstrating word localization are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
6.3. Caption Generation
We next describe our caption generation results, beginning with a short discussion of evaluation metrics.
Metrics: The sentence generation process is measured
using both automatic metrics and human studies. We use
three different automatic metrics: PPLX, BLEU , and
METEOR . PPLX (perplexity) measures the uncertainty
of the language model, corresponding to how many bits on
average would be needed to encode each word given the
language model. A lower PPLX indicates a better score.
BLEU is widely used in machine translation and measures the fraction of N-grams (up to 4-gram) that are in
common between a hypothesis and a reference or set of references; here we compare against 4 randomly selected references. METEOR measures unigram precision and recall, extending exact word matches to include similar words
based on WordNet synonyms and stemmed tokens. We additionally report performance on the metrics made available
from the MSCOCO captioning challenge,5 which includes
scores for BLEU-1 through BLEU-4, METEOR, CIDEr
 , and ROUGE-L .
All of these automatic metrics are known to only roughly
correlate with human judgment . We therefore include
human evaluation to further explore the quality of our models. Each task presents a human (Mechanical Turk worker)
with an image and two captions: one is automatically generated, and the other is a human caption. The human is
asked to select which caption better describes the image,
or to choose a “same” option when they are of equal quality. In each experiment, 250 humans were asked to compare
5 
Table 3. Average precision (AP) and Precision at Human Recall (PHR) for words with different parts of speech (NN: Nouns, VB: Verbs,
JJ: Adjectives, DT: Determiners, PRP: Pronouns, IN: Prepositions). Results are shown using a chance classiﬁer, full image classiﬁcation,
and Noisy OR multiple instance learning with AlexNet and VGG CNNs.
Average Precision
Precision at Human Recall
Classiﬁcation (AlexNet)
Classiﬁcation (VGG)
MIL (AlexNet)
Human Agreement
Figure 3. Qualitative results for several randomly chosen images on the Microsoft COCO dataset, with our generated caption (black) and a
human caption (blue) for each image. In the bottom two rows we show localizations for the words used in the sentences. More examples
can be found on the project website1.
20 caption pairs each, and 5 humans judged each caption
pair. We used Crowdﬂower, which automatically ﬁlters out
spammers. The ordering of the captions was randomized
to avoid bias, and we included four check-cases where the
answer was known and obvious; workers who missed any
of these were excluded. The ﬁnal judgment is the majority
vote of the judgment of the 5 humans. In ties, one-half of a
count is distributed to the two best answers. We also compute errors bars on the human results by taking 1000 bootstrap resamples of the majority vote outcome (with ties),
then reporting the difference between the mean and the 5th
or 95th percentile (whichever is farther from the mean).
Generation results: Table 4 summarizes our results on
the Microsoft COCO dataset.
We provide several baselines for experimental comparison, including two baselines that measure the complexity of the dataset: Unconditioned, which generates sentences by sampling an Ngram LM without knowledge of the visual word detectors; and Shufﬂed Human, which randomly picks another
human generated caption from another image.
BLEU and METEOR scores are very low for these approaches, demonstrating the variation and complexity of the
Microsoft COCO dataset.
We provide results on seven variants of our endto-end approach:
Baseline is based on visual features
from AlexNet and uses the ME LM with all the discrete features as described in Table 1.
Baseline+Score
adds the feature for the word detector score into the
ME LM. Both of these versions use the same set of
sentence features (excluding the DMSM score) described
in Section 5 when re-ranking the captions using MERT.
Baseline+Score+DMSM uses the same ME LM as Baseline+Score, but adds the DMSM score as a feature for
re-ranking.
Baseline+Score+DMSM+ft adds ﬁnetuning.
VGG+Score+ft and VGG+Score+DMSM+ft are analogous
to Baseline+Score and Baseline+Score+DMSM but use
Table 4. Caption generation performance for seven variants of our system on the Microsoft COCO dataset. We report performance on
our held out test set (half of the validation set). We report Perplexity (PPLX), BLEU and METEOR, using 4 randomly selected caption
references. Results from human studies of subjective performance are also shown, with error bars in parentheses. Our ﬁnal System
“VGG+Score+DMSM+ft” is “same or better” than human 34% of the time.
1. Unconditioned
2. Shufﬂed Human
3. Baseline
9.9% (±1.5%)
2.4% (±0.8%)
12.3% (±1.6%)
4. Baseline+Score
16.9% (±2.0%)
3.9% (±1.0%)
20.8% (±2.2%)
5. Baseline+Score+DMSM
18.7% (±2.1%)
4.6% (±1.1%)
23.3% (±2.3%)
6. Baseline+Score+DMSM+ft
7. VGG+Score+ft
8. VGG+Score+DMSM+ft
26.2% (±2.1%)
7.8% (±1.3%)
34.0% (±2.5%)
Human-written captions
Table 5. Ofﬁcial COCO evaluation server results on test set
(40,775 images). First row show results using 5 reference captions,
second row, 40 references. Human results reported in parentheses.
.912 (.854)
.291 (.217)
.695 (.663)
.519 (.484)
.247 (.252)
.925 (.910)
.567 (.471)
.880 (.880)
.662 (.626)
.331 (.335)
ﬁnetuned VGG features. Note: the AlexNet baselines without ﬁnetuning are from an early version of our system which
used object proposals from instead of dense scanning.
As shown in Table 4, the PPLX of the ME LM with and
without the word detector score feature is roughly the same.
But, BLEU and METEOR improve with addition of the
word detector scores in the ME LM. Performance improves
further with addition of the DMSM scores in re-ranking.
Surprisingly, the BLEU scores are actually above those produced by human generated captions (25.69% vs. 19.32%).
Improvements in performance using the DMSM scores with
the VGG model are statistically signiﬁcant as measured
by 4-gram overlap and METEOR per-image (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, p < .001).
We also evaluated an approach (not shown) with wholeimage classiﬁcation rather than MIL. We found this approach to under-perform relative to MIL in the same setting (for example, using the VGG+Score+DMSM+ft setting, PPLX=18.9, BLEU=21.9%, METEOR=21.4%). This
suggests that integrating information about words associated to image regions with MIL leads to improved performance over image classiﬁcation alone.
The VGG+Score+DMSM approach produces captions
that are judged to be of the same or better quality than
human-written descriptions 34% of the time, which is a signiﬁcant improvement over the Baseline results. Qualitative
results are shown in Figure 3, and many more are available
on the project website.
COCO evaluation server results: We further generated the captions for the images in the actual COCO test
set consisting of 40,775 images (human captions for these
images are not available publicly), and evaluated them on
the COCO evaluation server. These results are summarized
in Table 5. Our system gives a BLEU-4 score of 29.1%,
and equals or surpasses human performance on 12 of the 14
metrics reported – the only system to do so. These results
are also state-of-the-art on all 14 reported metrics among
the four other results available publicly at the time of writing this paper. In particular, our system is the only one exceeding human CIDEr scores, which has been speciﬁcally
proposed for evaluating image captioning systems .
To enable direct comparison with previous work on automatic captioning, we also test on the PASCAL sentence
dataset , using the 847 images tested for both the Midge
 and Baby Talk systems. We show signiﬁcantly
improved results over the Midge system, as measured
by both BLEU and METEOR (2.0% vs. 17.6% BLEU and
9.2% vs. 19.2% METEOR).6 To give a basic sense of the
progress quickly being made in this ﬁeld, Figure 4 shows
output from the system on the same images.7
7. Conclusion
This paper presents a new system for generating novel
captions from images. The system trains on images and corresponding captions, and learns to extract nouns, verbs, and
adjectives from regions in the image. These detected words
then guide a language model to generate text that reads well
and includes the detected words. Finally, we use a global
deep multimodal similarity model introduced in this paper
to re-rank candidate captions
At the time of writing, our system is state-of-the-art on
all 14 ofﬁcial metrics of the COCO image captioning task,
and equal to or exceeding human performance on 12 out of
the 14 ofﬁcial metrics. Our generated captions have been
judged by humans (Mechanical Turk workers) to be equal
to or better than human-written captions 34% of the time.
6Baby Talk generates long, multi-sentence captions, making comparison by BLEU/METEOR difﬁcult; we thus exclude evaluation here.
7Images were selected visually, without viewing system captions.