EDITOR LETTER
Translating Principles into Practices of Digital Ethics:
Five Risks of Being Unethical
Luciano Floridi1,2
Published online: 23 May 2019
# Springer Nature B.V. 2019
1 Introduction
It has taken a very long time,1 but today, the debate on the ethical impact and
implications of digital technologies has reached the front pages of newspapers. This
is understandable: digital technologies—from web-based services to Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions—increasingly affect the daily lives of billions of people, so there
are many hopes but also concerns about their design, development, and deployment
 .
After more than half a century of academic research,2 the recent public reaction has
been a flourishing of initiatives to establish what principles, guidelines, codes, or
frameworks can ethically guide digital innovation, particularly in AI, to benefit humanity and the whole environment. This is a positive development that shows awareness of the importance of the topic and interest in tackling it systematically. Yet, it is
time that debate evolves from the what to the how: not just what ethics is needed but
also how ethics can be effectively and successfully applied and implemented in order to
make a positive difference. For example, the European Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI3 establish a benchmark for what may or may not qualify as ethically good AI in
the EU. Their publication is currently being followed by practical efforts of testing,
application, and implementation.
The move from a first, more theoretical what chapter, to a second, more practical
how chapter, so to speak, is reasonable and commendable. However, in translating
principles into practices, even the best efforts may be undermined by some unethical
Philosophy & Technology 32:185–193
 
1See for references.
2In the ethics of AI, see for example .
3See , published by the High-Level Expert Group (HLEG) on Artificial
Intelligence (AI) appointed by the European Commission (disclosure: I am a member of the HLEG).
* Luciano Floridi
 
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles, Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK
risks. In this article, I wish to highlight five of them. We shall see that they are more
clusters than individual risks, and there may be other clusters as well, but these five are
the ones already encountered or foreseeable in the international debate about digital
ethics.4 Here is the list: (1) ethics shopping; (2) ethics bluewashing; (3) ethics lobbying;
(4) ethics dumping; and (5) ethics shirking. They are the five Bethics gerunds^, to
borrow Josh Cowls’ apt label, who also suggested to consider the first three more
Bdistractive^ and the last two more Bdestructive^ problems. Let us consider each of
them in some detail.
2 Ethics Shopping
A very large number of ethical principles, codes, guidelines, or frameworks have been
proposed over the past few years. There are currently more than 70 recommendations,
 
Winfield 18 April Winfield 2019). This mushrooming of documents is generating
inconsistency and confusion among stakeholders regarding which one may be preferable. It also puts pressure on private and public actors—that design, develop, or deploy
digital solutions—to produce their own declarations for fear of appearing to be left
behind, thus further contributing to the redundancy of information. In this case, the
main, unethical risk is that all this hyperactivity creates a Bmarket of principles and
values^, where private and public actors may shop for the kind of ethics that is best
retrofitted to justify their current behaviours, rather than revising their behaviours to
make them consistent with a socially accepted ethical framework . Here is a more compact
definition:
Digital ethics shopping = def. the malpractice of choosing, adapting, or revising
(Bmixing and matching^) ethical principles, guidelines, codes, frameworks, or other
similar standards (especially but not only in the ethics of AI), from a variety of available
offers, in order to retrofit some pre-existing behaviours (choices, processes, strategies,
etc.), and hence justify them a posteriori, instead of implementing or improving new
behaviours by benchmarking them against public, ethical standards.
Admittedly, in a recent meta-analysis, we showed that much of the diversity Bin the
ethics market^ is apparent and more due to wording and vocabulary rather than actual
content . However, the potential
risk of Bmixing and matching^ the list of ethical principles one prefers remains real,
because semantic looseness and redundancy enable interpretative relativism. Ethics
shopping then causes incompatibility of standards (it is hard to understand whether two
companies follow the same ethical principles in developing AI solutions, for example),
and with that a lower chance of comparison, competition, and accountability.
4 See for example the debates about (a) the BHuman Rights Impact Assessment of Facebook in Myanmar^
published by the Business for Social Responsibility, (b) the closure of Google’s Advanced Technology External
Advisory Council and (c) the Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI, published by the High-Level Expert Group
of the European Commission (disclosure: I was a member of the former, and still am a member of the latter).
F. Luciano
The strategy to deal with digital ethics shopping is to establish clear, shared, and
publicly accepted ethical standards. This is why I recently argued that the
publication of the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI is a significant improvement,
given that it is the closest thing available in the European Union (EU) to a comprehensive, authoritative, and public standard of what may count as socially good AI.5
Now that the Guidelines are available, the malpractice of digital ethics shopping should
be at least more obvious if not more difficult to indulge in, because anyone in the EU
may simply subscribe to them, rather than shop for (or even cook) their own Bethics^.
3 Ethics Bluewashing
In environmental ethics, greenwashing is the malpractice
of a private or public actor seeking to appear greener, more sustainable, or ecologically
friendlier than it actually is. By Bethics bluewashing^, I mean to refer to the digital
version of greenwashing. As there is no specific colour associated with ethically good
practices in digital technologies, Bblue^ may serve to remind one that we are not talking
about ecological sustainability but mere digital ethics cosmetics:6
Ethics bluewashing = def. the malpractice of making unsubstantiated or misleading
claims about, or implementing superficial measures in favour of, the ethical values and
benefits of digital processes, products, services, or other solutions in order to appear
more digitally ethical than one is.
Ethics greenwashing and bluewashing are forms of misinformation, often achieved
by spending a fraction of the resources that would be needed to tackle the ethical
problems they pretend to address. They concentrate on mere marketing, advertising, or
other public relations activities (e.g. sponsoring), including the setting up of advisory
groups that may be powerless or insufficiently critical. Both malpractices are tempting
because, in each case, the goals are many and all compatible:
Distract the receiver of the message—usually the public, but any shareholders or
stakeholders may be the target—from anything that is going wrong, could go
better, or is not happening but should;
Mask and leave unchanged any behaviour that ought to be improved;
Achieve economic savings; and
Gain some advantage, e.g. competitive or social, for example in terms of Bgood
However, contrary to what happens with greenwashing, bluewashing can more
easily be combined with digital ethics shopping: a private or public actor shops
for the principles that best fit its current practices, publicises them as widely as
possible and then proceeds to bluewash its technological innovation without any
real improvement, much lower costs, and some potential social benefits. These
5 See also (Mazzini forthcoming).
6 This is not to be confused with the term bluewashing B[…] used to criticize the corporate partnerships
formed under the United Nations Global Compact initiative (some say this association with the UN helps to
improve the corporations’ reputations) and to disparage dubious sustainable water-use projects^ .
Translating Principles into Practices of Digital Ethics: Five Risks...
days, ethics bluewashing is especially tempting in the context of AI, where the
ethical issues are many, the costs of doing the right thing may be high, and
normative uncertainity or sometimes confusion are widespread.
The best strategy against bluewashing is the same already adopted against greenwashing: transparency and education. Public, accountable, and evidence-based transparency about good practices and ethical claims should be a priority on the side of the
actors wishing to avoid the appearance of engaging in any bluewashing malpractice.
Public and factual education, on the side of any target of bluewashing—not just the
general public but also members of executive boards and advisory councils, for
example—about whether and what effective ethical practices are actually implemented
means that actors may be less likely to (be tempted to) distract public attention away
from the ethical challenges they are facing.
As we recommended in Floridi et al. , the development of metrics for the
trustworthiness of AI products and services (and of digital solutions in general)
would enable the user-driven benchmarking of all marketed offerings and facilitate
the detection of mere bluewashing, improving public understanding, and engendering competitiveness around the development of safer, more socially and environmentally beneficial products and services. In the longer term, a system of certification for digital products and services could achieve what other similar solutions
have achieved in environmental ethics: make bluewashing as visible and shameful
as greenwashing.
4 Ethics Lobbying
Sometimes, private actors (are at least suspected to) try to use self-regulation about the
ethics of AI in order to lobby against the introduction of legal norms, or in favour of
their watering down or weakening their enforcement, or in order to provide an excuse
for limited compliance. This specific malpractice affects many sectors, but it seems
more likely in the digital one , where ethics may be exploited as if it
were an alternative to legislation, and in the name of technological innovation and its
positive impact on economic growth, a line of reasoning that cannot be easily supported
in environmental or biomedical contexts. Here is a more general definition:
Digital ethics lobbying = def. the malpractice of exploiting digital ethics to delay,
revise, replace, or avoid good and necessary legislation (or its enforcement) about the
design, development, and deployment of digital processes, products, services, or other
solutions.
One may argue that digital ethics lobbying is a poor strategy, likely to fail in the
long run because it is at best short-sighted: sooner or later legislation tends to
catch up. Whether this argument is convincing or not, digital ethics lobbying as a
short-term tactic may still cause much damage, by delaying the introduction of
necessary legislation, by helping manoeuvre around or by-pass more demanding
interpretations of current legislation, thus making compliance easier but also
misaligned with the spirit of the law, or by influencing law-makers to pass
legislation that is more favourable to the lobbyist than would otherwise be
expected. Furthermore, and very importantly, the malpractice, or the suspicion
of it, risks undermining the value of any digital ethical self-regulation tout court.
F. Luciano
This collateral damage is deeply regrettable because self-regulation is one of the
main valuable tools available for policy-making. In itself, it cannot replace the
law, but if properly implemented, it can be crucially complementary , when:
Legislation is unavailable (for example, in experimentations about augmented
reality products) or
Legislation is available, but also in need of an ethical interpretation (for example, in
terms of understanding a right to explanation in the GDPR) or
Legislation is available, but also in need of some ethical counterbalancing:
If it is better not to do something, even if it is not (yet) illegal to do it (for example,
to automate entirely and fully some medical procedure without any human supervision) or
If it is better to do something, even if it is not (yet) legally required (for example, to
implement better labour market conditions in the Gig Economy).
The strategy against digital ethics lobbying is twofold. On the one hand, it must be
counteracted by good legislation and effective enforcement. This is easier if the
lobbying actor (private or public) is less influential on law-makers or whenever
public opinion can exercise the right level of ethical pressure. On the other hand,
digital ethics lobbying must be exposed whenever it occurs and be clearly
distinguished from genuine forms of self-regulation. This may happen more
credibly if the process is also in itself part of a self-regulatory code of conduct
of a whole industrial sector, in our case the digital tech industry, which has a more
general interest in maintaining a healthy context where genuine self-regulation is
both socially welcome and efficacious and ethics lobbying is exposed as
unacceptable.
5 Ethics Dumping
BEthics dumping^ is an expression coined in 2013 by the European Commission to
describe the export of unethical research practices to countries where there are weaker
(or laxer, or perhaps just different, in the case of digital ethics) legal and ethical
frameworks and enforcing mechanisms. It applies to any kind of research—including
research in computer science, data science, machine learning, robotics, and other kinds
of AI—but it is most serious in health-related and biological contexts. Fortunately,
biomedical and environmental ethics may be considered universal and global; there are
international agreements and frameworks and international institutions monitoring their
application or enforcement, so Bethics dumping^ may be fought more effectively and
coherently when research involves biomedical and ecological contexts. However, in
digital contexts, the variety (or indeed the lack of) of legal regimes and ethical
frameworks facilitates the export of (what are considered within the original context
where the Bdumper^ operates) unethical (or even illegal) practices, and the import of
the outcomes of such practices. In other words, the problem is twofold, about research
ethics and consumption ethics. So, here is a definition:
Translating Principles into Practices of Digital Ethics: Five Risks...
Digital ethics dumping = def. the malpractice of (a) exporting research activities about
digital processes, products, services, or other solutions, in other contexts or places (e.g.
by European organisations outside the EU) in ways that would be ethically unacceptable in the context or place of origin and (b) importing the outcomes of such unethical
research activities.
Both (a) and (b) are important. To offer a concrete, if distant, example, it is not unusual
for countries to ban the cultivation of genetically modified organisms, but allow their
import. This asymmetry of ethical (and legal) treatment between a practice (unethical and/
or illegal research) and its output (ethically and legally acceptable consumption of the
output of the unethical research) means that ethics dumping may affect digital ethics not
only in terms of unethical export of research activities but also in terms of unethical import
of the outcomes of such activities. For example, a company may export its research and
then design, develop, and train algorithms, e.g. for face recognition, on local personal data
in a non-EU country with a different or weaker ethical and legal framework for personal
data protection, which would be unethical and illegal in the EU because of the GDPR.
Once trained, the algorithms may then be imported to the EU and deployed without
incurring any penalty or even be frowned upon. Whereas the first step (a) may be more
easily blocked, at least in terms of research ethics ; the second step (b),
involving the consumption of unethical research results, is fuzzier, less visibly problematic, and hence more difficult to monitor and curtail.
Unfortunately, it is likely that, in the near future, the problem of digital ethics
dumping will become increasingly serious, due to the profound impact of digital
technologies on health and social care as well as defence, policing and security, the
ease of their global portability, the complexity of the productions processes (some
stages of which may involve ethical dumping), and the immense economic interests at
play. For example, especially in AI, where the EU is a net importer of solutions from
the USA and China, private and public actors risk not just exporting unethical practises
but also (and independently) importing solutions that may have been developed in
ways that would not have been ethically acceptable within the EU.
In this case too, the strategy is twofold. One must concentrate on research ethics and
the ethics of consumption. If one wishes to be coherent, both need to receive equal
attention.
In terms of research ethics, it is slightly easier to exercise control at the
source, through the ethical management of public funding for research. In this,
the EU is in a leading position. However, there remains the significant problem
that much R&D about digital solutions is done by the private sector, where
funding may be less constrained by geographical borders (a private actor can
more easily relocate its R&D to an ethically less demanding place, a geographical variation of the ethics shopping seen in Section 2) and is not ethically
scrutinised in the same way as publicly funded research.
In terms of consumption ethics, especially of digital products and services, much can
be done both by the establishment of a system of certification for products and services
that could inform procurement, as well as public and private use. As in the case of
bluewashing, the reliable and ethically acceptable provenance of digital systems and
solutions will have to play an increasing role in the following years if one wishes to
avoid the hypocrisy of being careful about research ethics in digital contexts and yet
relaxed about the unethical use of its outcomes.
F. Luciano
6 Ethics Shirking
Ethicists are well acquainted with the old malpractice of applying double standards in
moral evaluations. By applying a lenient and a strict approach, one can evaluate and
treat agents (or their actions, or the consequences of their actions) differently than
similar agents (actions or consequences), when in fact they should all be treated equally.
Usually, a risk of double standards is based, even inadvertently, on bias, unfairness, or
selfish interest. The risk I wish to highlight here belongs to the same family, but it has a
different genesis. To highlight its specificity, I shall borrow the expression Bethics
shirking^ from the financial sector7 and define it thus:
Ethics shirking = def. the malpractice of doing increasingly less Bethical work^ (such
as fulfilling duties, respecting rights, and honouring commitments) in a given context
the lower the return of such ethical work in that context is mistakenly perceived to be.
Ethics shirking, like ethics dumping, has historical roots and often follows geopolitical
outlines. Actors are more likely to engage in ethics dumping and shirking in contexts
where disadvantage populations, weaker institutions, legal uncertainties, corrupted regimes, unfair power distributions, and other economic, legal, political, or social ills prevail.
It is not unusual to map, correctly, both malpractices along the divide between Global
North and Global South, or to see both as affecting above all Low- and Middle-Income
Countries. The colonial past still exerts a disgraceful role. It is also important to recall that,
in digital contexts, these malpractices can affect segments of a population within the
Global North. The Gig Economy may be seen as a case of ethics shirking within
developed countries. And the development of self-driving cars may be interpreted as an
instance of research dumping in some states of the USA. In this case, the 1968 Vienna
Convention on Road Traffic, which establishes international principles to govern traffic
laws, requires that a driver is always fully in control and responsible for the behaviour of a
vehicle in traffic. However, the USA is not a signatory country and the requirement does
not apply, meaning state vehicle codes do not prohibit automated vehicles, and several
states have enacted laws for automated vehicles. This is also why research on self-driving
cars happens mostly in the USA—as well as the related incidents and human suffering.
The strategy against ethics shirking consists in tackling its origin, which is a lack of
clear allocation of responsibility. Agents may be more tempted to shirk their ethical work
in a given context the more they (think they) can relocate responsibilities elsewhere. This
happens more likely and easily in BD contexts^, where one’s own responsibility may be
perceived (mistakenly) to be lower because it is distant, diminished, delegated, or
distributed . Thus, ethics shirking is an agency unethical cost of
deresponsabilisation. It is this genesis that makes it a special case of the ethical problem
of double standards. This is why more fairness and less bias are necessary—insofar as
ethics shirking is a special case of the problem of double standards—but they are also
insufficient to remove the incentive to engage in ethics shirking. To uproot such a
malpractice, one also needs an ethics of distributed responsibility that
relocates responsibilities—and hence praise and blame, reward and punishment, and
ultimately causal accountability and legal liability—where they rightly belong.
7 I owe the suggestion to include Bethics shirking^ as a
significnt risk in digital ethics and to use the expression itself to capture it to (Cowls, Png, and Au
unpublished).
Translating Principles into Practices of Digital Ethics: Five Risks...
7 Conclusion
I hope this short article may work as a map for those who wish to avoid or minimise
some of the most obvious and significant ethical risks, when navigating from principles
to practices in digital ethics. From a Socratic perspective, a malpractice is often the
result of a misjudged solution or a mistaken opportunity. Understanding as early as
possible that shortcuts, postponements, or quick fixes do not lead to better ethical
solutions but to more serious problems, which become increasingly difficult to solve
the later one deals with them, does not guarantee that the five malpractices analysed in
this article will disappear, but it does mean that they will be reduced insofar as they are
genuinely based on misunderstanding and misjudgements. Not knowing better is the
source of a lot of evil.8 So, the solution is often more and better information for all.