Searching for the Causal Structure
Vector Autoregression
Selva Demiralp
Division of Monetary Affairs
Monetary and Reserve Analysis
Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Washington, D.C. 20551
Tel. (202) 452-6483
E-mail 
Kevin D. Hoover
Department of Economics
University of California
1 Shields Avenue
Davis, California 95616-8578
Tel. (530) 752-2129
Fax (530) 752-9382
E-mail 
First Draft, 16 October 2002
Revision, 6 March 2003
We thank Marcus Cuda for his help with programming and computational design and
Derek Stimel for able research assistance, Oscar Jorda and the participants in the
European Community Econometrics Conference (EC)2, University of Bologna, Italy, 13-
14 December 2002, for comments.
The views expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System.
Abstract of
Searching for the Causal Structure of a Vector Autoregression
Vector autoregressions (VARs) are economically interpretable only when identified by
being transformed into a structural form (the SVAR) in which the contemporaneous
variables stand in a well-defined causal order. These identifying transformations are not
unique. It is widely believed that practitioners must choose among them using a priori
theory or other criteria not rooted in the data under analysis. We show how to apply
graph-theoretic methods of searching for causal structure based on relations of conditional
independence to select among the possible causal orders – or at least to reduce the
admissible causal orders to a narrow equivalence class. The graph-theoretic approaches
were developed by computer scientists and philosophers (Pearl, Glymour, Spirtes among
others) and applied to cross-sectional data. We provide an accessible introduction to this
work. Then building on the work of Swanson and Granger , we show how to apply
it to searching for the causal order of an SVAR. We present simulation results to show
how the efficacy of the search method algorithm varies with signal strength for realistic
sample lengths. Our findings suggest that graph-theoretic methods may prove to be a
useful tool in the analysis of SVARs.
Keywords: search, causality, structural vector autoregression, graph theory, common
cause, causal Markov condition, Wold causal order, identification; PC algorithm
JEL Classification: C15, C32, C49, C51
Searching for the Causal Structure of a Vector Autoregression
1. The Problem of Causal Order
Drawing on recent work on the graph-theoretic analysis of causality, we propose and
evaluate a statistical procedure for identifying the contemporaneous causal order of a
structural vector autoregression.
Since the publication of Christopher Sims’s “Macroeconomics and Reality”
 , the vector autoregression (VAR) has become the dominant tool of empirical
macroeconomics in the United States – if somewhat less so in Europe. Dissatisfied with
the “incredible identifying restrictions” imposed on structural macroeconometric models,
Sims proposed the use of the VAR – an unrestricted reduced form.
A VAR can be written as
where t indexes time; Yt is an n × 1 column vector of the contemporaneous values of the
variables Yit, i = 1, 2, . . n; B is a conformable square matrix whose terms are polynomials
in the lag operator – e.g., Bij(L); and Ut is a column vector of structural residuals with
elements uit.
Although the VAR is easily estimated, difficulties begin when we turn to policy
analysis. A typical problem would be to work out the effects of a shock to one of the
variables on all the other variables of the system. Let ui = [ui1, ui2, . . . uiT] be the time series
for uit and U without a time subscript be the n× T matrix whose elements are the ui. The
contemporaneous covariance matrix is Σ = E(UU′), where E is the expectations operator.
In general, Σ is not diagonal. The non-zero off-diagonal elements imply that one variable,
say Y1t, cannot be shocked through its corresponding random error term, u1t, without
having simultaneously to deliver correlated shocks to other variables. Without
independence it makes little sense to think of shocks, say, to the money supply or to
employment.
Sims advocated orthogonalizing the shocks using a Choleski
decomposition. There is a unique lower triangular matrix C, such that CC′ = Σ.
Premultiplying both sides of (1) by C-1 yields
C-1BYt = C-1Ut.
The covariance matrix of (2) is E(C-1U(C-1U)′) = I . Unit shocks
can be delivered to any of the variables of the system, and their effects traced out. The
Choleski decomposition imposes a Wold causal order on the variables so that the shock to
Y1 feeds contemporaneously into Y2, Y3, . . ., Yn, while the shock to Y2 feeds
contemporaneously into Y3, Y4, . . ., Yn, but into Y1 only with a lag, and so on. While the
Choleski decomposition is unique, it differs under differing orderings of the Yi in the Y
vector, and these orderings are arbitrary.1 What is more, orthogonalizing transformations
are not restricted to Choleski decompositions, but may involve non-triangular matrices P,
such that E(P-1U) = I, providing that at least n(n – 1)/2 restrictions are imposed for
identification.2 A VAR identified through restrictions on contemporaneous variables is
known as a structural vector autoregression (SVAR).
It is widely believed that there is no empirical or statistical basis for the choice of
the contemporaneous causal orderings (that is, orthogonalizing transformations), so that
the economist must appeal to a priori knowledge. Since there are transformations that
impose every possible order, there is a family of SVARs for which the original VAR
(equation (1)) is the common reduced form. Each member of the family has the same
reduced form and, therefore, the same likelihood function. Practitioners typically regard
the members of the family as observationally equivalent. Only outside knowledge would
allow the researcher to choose among them.
But where is such knowledge to come from? Only rarely does economic theory
imply particular contemporaneous causal orderings. Generally, practitioners of SVAR
1 Sims initially underplayed the interpretive ambiguity implied by the different orderings. Under
criticism from Cooley and LeRoy , Leamer and others, Sims conceded that useful
interpretation of VARs required choosing among the possible orthogonalizing transformations.
2 Identification may be achieved in other ways, although in this paper we shall be concerned only with zero
restrictions on the contemporaneous coefficient matrix.
methods appeal to plausible stories about which variables could or could not affect which
other variables in the course of a month or quarter, depending on the periodicity of the
data. The problem with this approach is that sometimes equally plausible stories can be
told for competing causal orderings. Not only does such story-telling not inspire much
confidence, it is ironic that a method that originated as a way of getting away from
incredible identifying restrictions relies so heavily on hardly more credible stories to
identify contemporaneous causal ordering.
Contrary to the widespread belief, all the SVARs derivable from a VAR are not
observationally equivalent. The underlying premise of SVAR analysis is that some SVAR
corresponds to the data-generating process. Let the data-generating process be
where Et = [εijt] is a column vector of error terms at time t, and the covariance matrix Ω =
E(EE′) is diagonal. (Omitting time subscripts indicates the matrix whose columns are the
Et, and analogously in other cases.) The error terms of this SVAR are not merely
uncorrelated; they are, in fact, independent. The diagonal covariance matrix, which
indicates the independence of the error terms from each other, marks the VAR structural.
Each equation in such an SVAR can be shocked independently of the others. Let
A0 be the matrix of the zeroth-order terms of the matrix A – i.e., the typical element of A0
is Aij(0). The reduced form of (3), then is
Equating terms with (1), we see that A0 connects the reduced-form errors from the
ordinary VAR (uit) with the structural errors (εit), so that
The independence of the εij and the structure of the SVAR embodied in A0 implies
the relationships of interdependence, independence, and conditional independence among
the uij, the elements of U. These are robust relationships in the sense that they are
invariant to different values of the αij0, the elements of A0.3
The transformation that converts VAR (1) into SVAR (3) is a privileged one in
that it is the only one that recovers the independent errors, the εij. The well known fact
that statistical independence implies an absence of correlation, but that an absence of
correlation does not imply statistical independence comes into play here. The reduced
form (4) may be transformed into (pseudo) structural VARs – each appearing to possess a
contemporaneous causal order different from the data-generating process. But
appearances are deceiving. The error terms of the pseudo SVARs are mutually
uncorrelated but not independent. Each pseudo structure carries with it the constraints
implied by A0. And unlike the causal order of the true structure (3), which is robust to
alternative values for the non-zero elements of A0, the causal orders of the transformed
structures are well-defined only for a particular set of values implied by A0. If the αij0
change, the error terms of the pseudo SVAR will no longer appear to be orthogonal.
Since one transformation is privileged, the central question then becomes whether
starting from the VAR (1), empirical evidence can help us select the transformation that
corresponds to the true SVAR (3)? In principle, the answer is yes.
Over the past twenty years, a group of philosophers and computer scientists have
developed a graph-theoretic analysis of causal structure and demonstrated the relationship
between particular causal orders and relationships of conditional independence embedded
in the likelihood function. Pearl and Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 
provide detailed accounts of this approach, as well as search algorithms for implementing
it. These methods have been used in a variety of social sciences other than economics, but
are virtually unknown to economists.4
3 Hoover provides a detailed discussion of the role of independence and invariance under
parameter change as hallmarks of the true causal structure.
4 Some earlier applications to economics include Swanson and Granger , Sheffrin and Triest ,
Akleman, Bessler, and Burton , Demiralp , and Bessler and Lee . Hoover gives a critical description of these methods, and LeRoy has recently discussed them in a
review of Pearl .
Most of this research on graph-theoretic methods assumes that the causally ordered
data are cross-sectional, and many of the main theoretical results do not apply directly to
time series. We follow Swanson and Granger’s suggestion of how to adapt graphtheoretic methods to the problem of finding the causal order of the SVAR. (The method is
described more fully in Section 3 below.) Unlike Swanson and Granger, who restrict the
admissible structures to the class of Choleski orderings, we allow every possible ordering.
We use the PC algorithm embedded in Spirtes et al.’s Tetrad 3 software.
Implementation is straightforward, but the nagging question that macroeconometricians
are entitled to ask is: just how well does this method work in practice? In this paper we
contribute two things. First, we provide an accessible account of the underlying rationale
for the graph-theoretic approach to causal order in general. Second, using a simulation
study, we address the efficacy of the most common algorithm for implementing this
approach to selecting the causal order of SVARs.
2. The Graph-theoretic Analysis of Causal Structure
Start with a structure defined by equation (3) with the added stipulation that the matrix A
= A0 – that is, there are only contemporaneous variables. Each row of A represents the
equation for the corresponding element of Y, and the non-zero off-diagonal elements
determine which are the explanatory variables of the equation represented by each row. A
causal structure can be represented by a graph in which arrows run from causes to the
caused variable, and the graph corresponds to the pattern of non-zero elements of A. For
example, if
, where the α
ij designate non-zero elements,
then the causal structure can be represented by Figure 1, where the arrows represent oneway causal influence.
It is helpful to define some terms used in graph theory. Causal connections
between variables are indicated by lines (known as edges or links) that may or may not
have arrowheads indicating the direction of causation. The map of a set of variables
showing the causal connections and their directions is a graph such as that depicted in
Figure 1. The map showing just the variables and their connections but ignoring the
directions is the skeleton of the graph. A path is a chain of causal connections between
two variables. For example, in Figure 1, ABC is a path from A to B. A directed path
follows the direction of causation (the direction of the arrowheads). For example, in the
graph A → B → C, ABC is a directed path from A to C, but in Figure 1, there is no
directed path from A to B. If a variable A is connected to another variable B by an arrow
originating at A and running into B, then A is the parent of B, and B is the child of A. If
there is a directed path between A and B, then A is an ancestor of B, and B is a descendant
of A. If there are no directed paths from a descendant to its own ancestor, then the graph
is acyclic. If each cause of every variable in a graph is also a variable in that graph, then
the graph is causally sufficient.
Errors terms in each equation could be treated as causes of deterministic variables.
When error terms are independent and, therefore, affect one variable each, it is
conventional to omit them from a graph and to treat the variables as stochastic. When
they are not independent, it is conventional to show them explicitly as latent, unobservable
variables or to indicate bidirectional causal linkages between the variables. Graphs with
latent variables are not causally sufficient. Because the graph-theoretic account is best
developed for acylical graphs, we restrict our simulations to causally sufficient, acylical
Returning to the initial model, since the εi are independent random shocks, the
matrix A and its corresponding graph (Figure 1), represent a causal structure that defines
the patterns of dependence or independence among the variables. In this case, it is easy to
see that A and B are not independent because both depend on C. C is said to be their
common cause. It is also intuitive that A is independent of B conditional on C.
Causal search algorithms are based on patterns of conditional independence,
invoking Reichenbach’s principle of the common cause: if any two
variables, A and B, are truly correlated, then either A causes B (A → B) or B causes A or
(A ← B) or they have a common cause (as in Figure 1). The common cause, C, may be a
complex of parent variables.
The principle of the common cause can be generalized as the Causal Markov
Condition:
Definition. Let G be a causal graph relating a set of variables V with a probability
distribution P. Let W be a subset of V. G and P satisfy the causal Markov condition
if, and only if, for every W in V, W is independent of every set of variables that does
not contain its descendants, conditional on its parents. .5
Essentially, the causal Markov condition holds when a graph corresponds to the
conditional independence relationships in the associated probability distribution. A graph
is said to be faithful if, and only if, there is a one-to-one mapping between the
relationships of conditional independence relation implied by the causal Markov condition
applied to G and those found in P .
A few further examples illustrate how to apply these ideas. Consider the two
causal graphs in Figure 2. In each case, A and B are dependent, but are independent
conditional on C. C is said to screen-off A from B.
Causal structure can induce conditional dependence as well as eliminate
unconditional dependence. Consider the graph in Figure 3. A and B are unconditionally
uncorrelated. They are however correlated conditional on C. The classic example is A =
the car’s battery being charged; B = the car’s starter switch being on; and C = the car’s
starting. A and B may be completely independent. Yet, if we know that the car does not
start, then knowing that switch is on raises the probability that the battery is dead. The
configuration in Figure 3 is called an unshielded collider on the path ACB (or BCA). It is
a “collider” because the arrowheads come together at C, and is “unshielded” because there
is no direct causal connection between A and B. The graph in Figure 4 is a shielded
collider. Because they are directly causally connected in Figure 4, A and B are correlated
even without conditioning on the common effect.
Causal search algorithms start with the empirical probability distribution of a set of
variables represented by the covariance matrix or its normalized form, the unconditional
correlation matrix. Tests of conditional independence are implemented using conditional
correlations. The unconditional correlation coefficient between A and B is denoted rAB .
5 The graph-theoretic account uses a dauntingly complex and unfamiliar terminology. Here, as elsewhere,
we follow closely the version of Sprites et al. , but translate it into a more accessible language.
The correlation of A and B conditional on C is then defined as
The statistical significance of the conditional correlation can be computed using Fisher’s
z-statistic.6
Each causal graph implies a set of independence relationships in the associated
probability distribution. Unfortunately, different graphs may imply the same set, so that a
probability distribution defines a class of observationally equivalent causal structures.
This class may have only one element or it may have many. An important theorem says
that any probability distribution that can be faithfully represented in a causally sufficient,
acyclical graph can equally well be represented by any other acyclical graph that has the
same skeleton and the same unshielded colliders . As a result, there may be observationally equivalent causal structures in
which some causal links are reversed but all unshielded colliders preserved. In those
cases, the algorithm yields only partial causal orderings.
It should be recognized that the equivalence class in this case has a different
membership condition than that of the class of SVARs the observational equivalence of
which we rejected in Section 1.
There are several search algorithms available. In this paper we use the PC
algorithm of Spirtes et al. . An illustration shows how search algorithms work.
Consider the true causal graph given in Figure 5, panel (i). (Notice that there are two
unshielded colliders: C on the path ACE and D on the path BDF. B is a shielded collider
on ABC.) Starting from the correlation matrix, how would the PC algorithm proceed? It
begins with a graph (panel (ii)) in which every variable is connected to every other, but
the links are not oriented. It then eliminates connections between any variables that are
not unconditionally correlated (panel (iii)). Next it tests for the correlation of each pair of
variables conditional on a third variable. It eliminates the link between any pair that is
conditionally uncorrelated (panel (iv)). Continuing in the same vein, it tests for absence
6 As we observed in Section 1, independence implies an absence of correlation, but not the converse. There
may be highly specific parameter values for which correlations vanish, even though the variables are not
independent. These correspond to the non-robust transformations of the true SVAR mentioned in Section 1.
Hoover discusses cases in which these vanishing correlations
arise from economically meaningful optimal control.
of correlation conditional on pairs of variables and eliminates links whenever there is no
conditional correlation (panel (v)). In principle, it would test for a lack of correlation
conditional on triples, sets of four, five, and more variables. In this case, however, it has
exhausted the possibilities at pairs. It then considers every pair of variables that is
conditionally uncorrelated and causally connected along an undirected path through a
third variable. If conditioning on the third variable renders them conditionally correlated,
then there is an unshielded collider and the arrows are oriented accordingly (panel (vi)).
Finally, some unoriented links may be oriented based on screening relationships. We
know from panel (v) that C screens the correlation between B and E. Usually, this would
mean either that B → C → E or that E → C → B. Since we already know that E → C,
only E → C → B is consistent as shown in panel (vii). Notice that the link between A and
B remains unoriented. This is because the graph in panel (viii) has the same skeleton and
unshielded colliders as the true structure in panel (i), even though it reverses the link
between A and B. The two graphs are observationally equivalent, and the search
algorithm cannot choose between them. A precise description of the PC algorithm is
given in Appendix.
3. The Effectiveness of the Causal Search Algorithm
3.1 THE SIMULATION METHODOLOGY
The PC algorithm can be implemented with Tetrad 3 .
Spirtes et al. , Spirtes et al. , and Cooper
 present some simulation evidence of its effectiveness. However, no
previous studies have investigated its effectiveness in the context of ordering the
contemporaneous variables in an SVAR. We proceed in the following steps:
1. Each SVAR takes the form of equation (3). We can write A = A0 + A , where the
elements of A are
. Each equation in
the SVAR has an identical lag structure – i.e., for each j = 1, 2, . . . , N and each k = 1,
2, . . . , K, and for all i = 1, 2, . . . , N and h = 1, 2, . . . , N: αijk = αhjk.7 For
concreteness K = 4. Models to be evaluated differ in the number of variables and the
causal structure of the contemporaneous terms defined by the placement of nonzero
terms in A0. Given the causal structure and a particular choice of values for the
nonzero aij0, the data are generated recursively drawing the error terms from a randomnumber generator. The εijt ~ N(0, 1). To eliminate problems with initial values, 1500
realizations are generated and only the last 500 retained for analysis.
2. In order to evaluate a range of signal-to-noise ratios, we generate 50,000 realizations for
each model with the nonzero aij0 chosen at each realization using a random number
generator with the range calibrated to generate Fisher’s z-statistics for these parameters
in the maximum likelihood estimates of the SVAR covering a range of roughly 0 to 9.
The distribution is weighted to oversample the 0 to 2 range.
3. A VAR of the form of equation (1) with a lag length of four (K = 4) is estimated for
each realization. The estimated residuals
are retained as the filtered Y
sample covariance of the filtered Y is
and serves as input to Tetrad 3 from
which it calculates all the needed conditional correlations.
4. Tetrad 3 is run for each realization using the PC algorithm and assuming causal
sufficiency. To evaluate the success of the algorithm, the graph of the model selected
by Tetrad (the selected graph) is compared to a reference graph (the PC-true graph).
The PC-true graph is not the graph of the model that generated the data (i.e., it is not
the true graph). It is, instead, the graph that the PC algorithm would select under the
best circumstances (i.e., with an infinite amount of data). This is the graph that has the
same skeleton as the true graph, but leaves undirected links wherever a link can be
reversed without altering the identities of the unshielded colliders.
Every possible link is evaluated. The possible outcomes are:
7 The vector of values for all own lags (i = j) is [aijk] = [0.0403, 0.162409, 0.065450827, 0.026376683281]
and the vector of values for all cross lags (i ≠ j) is [aijk] = [0.054, 0.002916, 0.000157464, 0.000008503056].
(i) Correct: the link is present and oriented the same way in both graphs or it is
absent in both graphs;
(ii) Committed: the link is absent in the reference graph but present in the selected
(iii) Omitted: the link is present in the reference graph but absent in the selected graph.
(iv) Reversed: the link is present in both graphs, but points in opposite directions.
(v) Unresolved: the link is oriented in the reference graph and, although present,
cannot be oriented in the selected graph.
(vi) Overdetermined: the link cannot be oriented in the reference graph, but is oriented
in the selected graph.
Errors fall into two groups. Errors of commission: outcome (ii) can occur only if
a link is missing in the true (and, therefore, reference) graph. Link errors: outcomes (iii)
through (vi) can occur only if a link is present in the reference graph.
3.2 FOUR MODELS
The strategy of causal identification used in the PC algorithm makes use of the whole
structure. It is likely to work best when there are a relatively large number of unshielded
colliders and a relatively low density of causally connected variables. We begin with two
very simple models. Although these should be difficult for Tetrad to identify, they are
easily grasped by the analyst and can be used to identify some salient issues. We then
consider two more complex models.
The graph of Model 1 is depicted in Figure 6. Corresponding to the graph is
where αij0 ≠ 0. Model 1 is symmetrical around B (that is, switching the positions of A, C,
and D produces isomorphic graphs). The variable B is an unshielded collider on three
separate paths: ABC, ABD, and CBD. In principle, the PC algorithm can identify Model 1
(i.e., there is only one graph in the equivalence class), so the true graph and the PC-true
graph are identical. There cannot, therefore, be any errors of overdetermination.
We address two questions: First, how does the effectiveness of the PC algorithm
depend on the nominal size of the z-statistics that Tetrad 3 uses to assess conditional
correlations? Second, how does the effectiveness of the PC algorithm vary with the
signal-to-noise ratios of the causal links?
To answer these questions, we classify signal-to-noise ratios into categories
according to the expected value of the z-statistic (
)for the coefficient in A
that corresponds to the link (e.g., α210 for link 1).8 : 0 < z* < 2 is classified as L (low);
2 < z* < 5 as M (medium); and 5 < z* < 9 as H (high). There are in principle 33 = 27
different combinations of signal strengths for Model 1 using these classifications. Since
Model 1 is fully symmetrical, combinations with the same number of links in a particular
category should yield nearly the same results. For instance, if we label a particular draw
by the order of its links as numbered in Figure 6, then HMH should have very similar
results to HHM and MHH. We, therefore, record only the ten nonredundant patterns.
Figure 7 compares three nominal sizes for the test statistics in Tetrad 3: 5, 10, and
20 percent. For each size it shows the omitted and committed outcomes. Each is
expressed as a proportion of the number of times it might have occurred. A link can be
omitted only if it is actually included in Model 1. A link can be committed only if it is
actually excluded in Model 1. While the statistics reported here are not classic test
statistics, the proportion of outcomes committed is analogous to the size of a classical test
statistic (i.e., type I error), while the proportion omitted is analogous to the complement of
the power (i.e., type II error). But there are degrees of errors of omission. The worst
would be to omit a link altogether, but even if a link is included it may not be correctly
directed. A third summary statistic – the total correct links irrespective of direction – is
8 Expected values
are determined using predicted values from the regression
also reported. This statistic counts a success any time a true link is identified even if its
direction is reversed or unresolved. It shows the success of the algorithm at identifying
the skeleton of the model.
The different combinations of signal strength are indicated along the horizontal
axis of Figure 7. The number associated with each combination in the labels on the x-axis
is the mean population value of z*-statistic for that combination. The data are ordered in
descending order of the proportion of omissions at the 10-percent test size. The figure
clearly shows the usual tradeoff between size and power. As we move from nominal sizes
of 5 percent to 10 and 20 percent, the proportion of commissions rises and the proportion
of omissions falls.
The PC algorithm is able to recover the skeleton of the graph at a high rate, even
when the signal strengths are low. Its ability to do so hardly varies with the different
nominal test sizes. It turns out that the pattern of differences among different test sizes is
robust across all the models we examine. We therefore shall report only the results for 10
percent size in the rest of the paper as it represents an intermediate case with a good
balance between errors of omission and commission.
The usual criticism of specification searches involving repeated testing is that the
true size rises substantially above the nominal size of the test statistic. Although the PC
algorithm tests repeatedly, only tests involved in orienting links (as opposed to tests
establishing the existence of a link) involve conditional decisions, which are the usual
targets of opponents of data mining. The cost of search appears low in this case: the
proportion of commissions for LLL 1.00 is very close to the nominal size of the z-statistics
and for HHH 7.00 is about half the nominal size.9 The multiple testing used in the PC
algorithm appears to be well-behaved on that front. In this simple, symmetrical model,
the ability of the algorithm depends on the relative number of weak links. It is least
effective when there are three low-strength lengths and most effective when there are
three high strength links with the remaining combinations ordered lexicographically
between these extremes.
9 These results are consistent with finds of well-behaved size in non-causal search algorithms , Hendry and Krolzig , Krolzig and Hendry . For a general defense of wellregulated search as a respectable econometric practice, see Hoover and Hoover and Perez .
Figure 8 reports the various ways in which the PC algorithm fails to correctly
identify a true link in Model 1. The data are ordered by the proportion of total link errors,
which again turns out to be lexicographically from LLL to HHH. Omissions are high if
two or more links have low strength. When it does omit a link, the other errors (reversed
or unresolved links) cannot occur. Typically, as the proportion omitted falls rapidly as
signal strength rises, the proportion unresolved rises rapidly to fill the gap. Failures to
resolve peak when all links have a medium signal strength (MMM 3.50) and falls as the
number of high signal strengths increases. Irrespective of the average signal strength,
even a single low-strength link noticeably increases the omission rate (compare, for
example, omissions for MMM 3.50 and HHL 5.00).
There is a clear hierarchy of error: omissions yield to failures to resolve yield to
reversals. Reversals occur only when signal strengths are high. They peak at about 15
percent. The total error rate for true links bottoms out at 29 percent. This understates the
success of the algorithm, first because once signal strengths are even moderately high it
almost always never omits a link and because its error rate on true omitted links is very
small. It almost always identifies the skeleton of the graph.
The graph of Model 2 is depicted in Figure 9. Corresponding to the graph is
where αij0 ≠ 0. Model 2 has the same skeleton as Model 1. The BD link is reversed.
Model 2 has only one unshielded collider: B on the path ABC.
Model 2 is symmetrical only with respect to links 1 and 2. There are, therefore,
more distinct combinations of signal strengths than was the case with Model 1 (18 in all).
The rate of errors of commission is similar to that for Model 1: with a 10 percent nominal
size, a maximum of 9.5 percent at LLM 1.83 and a minimum of 5.5 percent at HHM 5.83.
Because of the asymmetry of Model 2 we investigate link errors for links 1 and 2
as a pair in Figure 10 and link 3 separately in Figure 11. Figure 10 is arranged in
descending order of total link errors. There are three clearly defined sets. First, if link 3
or both links 1 and 2 have a low signal strength, then total link errors (for links 1 and 2)
are nearly 100 percent with reversals and omissions accounting for about half each.
Second, if link 3 has a medium or high signal strength and at most one of links 1 and 2 has
a low signal strength, then the total error rate falls to around 80 percent. Omissions
account for about 10 percentage points of the total, and unresolved links for most of the
rest. Third, if link 3 and at least one of links 1 and 2 have a high signal strength, then the
total error rate falls to 50 percent. Omissions fall to almost zero, and unresolved links
account for almost all of the total. Reversals remain very low for all combinations.
Link errors for link 3 are decomposed in Figure 11, which is arranged in
descending order of the total link error rate. The total error rate is high if any of the three
links has a low signal. Omission are about 80 percent if either link 1 or 2 has low signal
strength. If both links have medium or high strength, then omissions stand at 11 to 13
percent, whatever value link 3 takes. If both are high, then omissions fall to zero. Failure
to resolve are inversely related to omission rates and fall only when the total error rate
itself falls when all signal strengths are medium or high. The maximum reversal rate is
just over 10 percent.
Figure 12 provides an overall summary of the success of the algorithm at
recovering the structure of Model 2. Data are ordered by increasing success at recovering
the skeleton of the graph (that is, they are ordered so that the upper line, “correct
irrespective of direction,” is monotonically increasing). At any reasonable signal strength,
the algorithm performs well at recovering the skeleton. The lower line indicates its
unqualified success both at recovering the skeleton and properly orienting the causal
arrows. The difference between the two lines is a measure of the total number of link
errors reported in Figures 10 and 11. The algorithm performs well at recovering the
skeleton, so long as no more than one link has a low signal. The PC algorithm is less
good at recovering either the skeleton or the true graph of Model 2 than it was of Model 1.
This is not surprising, since Model 1 has only one unshielded collider, whereas Model 2
has three; it is the presence of unshielded colliders that makes orientation of links
Models 3 and 4 can be seen as elaborations of Models 1 and 2. The graph of Model 3 is
depicted in Figure 13. The core graph is the same as Model 1. The link added between A
and C acts as a shield, so that B on path ABC is no longer an unshielded collider. The
additional link 5 adds another unshielded collider, while the additional link 6 does not.
Model 3 has three unshielded colliders: B on paths ABD and CBD; and C on ACE.
Since link 6 can be reversed to run D → F without changing the skeleton or the
number of unshielded colliders, Model 3 is one member of a two-member equivalence
class. The PC-algorithm cannot recover the true graph in principle. The best that it can
do, the PC-true graph is shown in Figure 14. The simulated data is generated using the
true graph, while the scoring uses the PC-true graph.
Recall that success at recovering particular links depends not only on those links
directly, but on all of the links in the graph. Even the simple Model 2 presented some
complexity. If we restrict ourselves to three levels of signal strength as before, there are
729 (= 36) combinations to be considered for each of the six links, yielding 4,374
evaluations. This is too complex to grasp easily, so some simplifications are necessary.
In Figure 15 we simplify by reporting results for the average signal strengths across all six
lengths. (It is important to recall in reading the graph that proportions are expressed as the
number of times links are classified in a particular category as a fraction of the number of
times that they could have been truly in that category. There are nine possibilities per
realization to make an error of commission, six to make an error of omission, five to make
reversals or to fail to resolve direction, and only one to overdetermine the direction. The
last error was not possible for Models 1 and 2, which unlike the PC-true graph of Model 3
did not possess undirected links.)
Figure 15 shows that the PC-algorithm performs quite similarly with the more
complex model as it did with Models 1 and 2. Errors of commission are approximately 10
percent when average signal strengths are below z* = 1, and fall monotonically as average
signal strength rises. Errors of omission start very high and fall rapidly as signal strength
rises. As omissions fall, unresolved links rise peaking at the moderate average signal
strength of 3 < z* < 4, and falling thereafter. Reversals and overdeterminations appear
only at higher signal strengths when failures to resolve direction at all become fewer.
(Reversals and overdetermination occur more frequently at low average signal strengths
because the omission of some links also interferes with the correct identification of
unshielded colliders, which are essential to the correct orientation of the remaining links.)
Overall success as measured by the recovery of the skeleton rises rapidly with signal
strength and tops out at about 96 percent, while unqualified success at recovering the
correct graph rises in parallel, toping out at just over 82 percent.
Model 4 bears the same relationship to Model 2 as Model 3 does to Model 1. The true
graph of Model 4 is depicted in Figure 16. It has two unshielded colliders: C on the path
ACE and D on the path BDF. Since link 2 can be reversed without altering the skeleton or
the unshielded colliders, the PC algorithm cannot direct it. The PC-true graph for Model 4
is depicted in Figure 17:10
The success of the PC algorithm in recovering Model 4 is shown in Figure 18. It
is clearly similar both qualitatively and quantitatively to Figure 15, which refers to Model
3. Comparison of the uppermost increasing lines in each figure shows that the algorithm
is equally good at recovering the skeleton of Model 4 as of Model 3. The difference is
that it is slightly better at identifying the true links – direction as well as connection – for
Model 3. Total link errors and unresolved links are higher for Model 4 at every average
signal strength. This is consistent with the fact that Model 4 has fewer unshielded
colliders than Model 3. Unshielded colliders are needed to discover the direction of
causation but not the fact that variables are causally connected irrespective of direction.
The zig-zag pattern of omissions and failures to resolve direction seen in Model 2 (Figure
11) are not recapitulated in the related Model 4, partly because grouping by average signal
10 Except for layout on the page it is the same graph as Figure 5 (vii).
strength mixes a variety of patterns of signal strengths in the same cell and partly because
the additional unshielded collider increases the ability of the algorithm to orient links.
4. Preliminary Conclusions
Although the current paper reports work in progress, we believe that we are in a position
to draw some preliminary conclusions from our simulation studies.
1. Causal search using graph-theoretic methods sometimes allows us to choose
contemporaneous causal orders for SVARs based on relations of conditional
independence in the data without appealing to a priori theory or other
nonstatistical criteria. Even when these methods cannot select a unique causal
order, they can narrow the equivalence class.
2. Contrary to the fears often expressed in relation to search methodologies, the PC
algorithm appears to have well behaved statistical properties. In particular, the
rate of falsely identifying a causal link when none exists in the true model occurs
in the worst cases at a rate approximately equal to the size of the test statistic used
to assess conditional independence and, in the best cases, at about half that rate.
There is a clear tradeoff between increasing the rate of commission (type II error)
and decreasing the rate of omission (type I error).
3. Error in causal ordering is more subtle than a type I/type II classification would
suggest. A causal link can be omitted, but it can also be included but reversed,
overdetermined or unresolved. In general errors of omission fall rapidly with
signal strength. Other types of error can occur only if errors of omission do not.
Reversals and overdetermination are generally relatively low, but increase with
average signal strength, while failures to resolve the direction of links peaks in the
mid-range of signal strengths and then falls.
4. All types of link errors are sensitive to the fine details of the causal structure.
These can be well understood in very simple systems, but are hard to characterize
as complexity grows even moderately.
5. In the systems examined, the PC algorithm was completely successful in
identifying the correct causal structures with reasonable reliability only when
signal strengths were relatively high. It was, however, substantially better at
identifying the skeletons of causal structures, even when it failed to resolve the
directions of causal influence. Extra-statistical information may suggest the
direction of particular causal links and when combined with knowledge of the
skeleton may provide a firmer basis for a complete causal ordering than either the
PC algorithm or the extra-statistical information could provide separately.
Appendix. The PC Algorithm
Descriptions of the PC algorithm are found in Spirtes et al. , pp. 84 and 85 and
Pearl , pp. 49-51. This description is based on Cooper .
1. Start with a graph C in which each variable is connected by an edge to every other
2. Set n = 0. Test for nth-order conditional correlation between every pair of
variables conditioning on every subset of variables size n. (For n = 0, the
conditioning set is the null set, so that conditional correlation is equivalent to
unconditional correlation). If a pair of variables is conditionally uncorrelated,
eliminate the edge between them.
3. Set n = n + 1 and repeat step 2 until all possible conditionings have been
exhausted. Call the resulting graph F.
4. Consider each pair of variables (X and Y) in F that are unconnected by a direct
edge but are connected through an undirected path through a third variable (Z).
Orient X  Z  Y as X → Z ← Y if, and only if, X and Y are dependent when
conditioned on every subset of variables, excluding X and Y, that includes Z. Call
the resulting graph F′.
5. Repeat until no more edges in F′ can be oriented:
a. If X → Z and Z  Y and X and Y are not directly connected, then orient Z  Y
b. If there is a directed path between X and Y (i.e., a path in which all edges have a
consistent orientation with the arrowhead of the initial edge at X and all
intermediate edges pointing to the tail of the next edge along the path until
reaching Y) and if there is an undirected edge between X and Y, orient X  Y as