AN INCREMENTAL CONSTRUCTION OF DEEP NEURO FUZZY
SYSTEM FOR CONTINUAL LEARNING OF NON-STATIONARY
DATA STREAMS ∗
A PREPRINT
Mahardhika Pratama
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
 
Witold Pedrycz
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Alberta
 
Geoffrey I. Webb
Information Technology Faculty
Monash University
 
December 10, 2019
Existing fuzzy neural networks (FNNs) are mostly developed under a shallow network conﬁguration
having lower generalization power than those of deep structures. This paper proposes a novel selforganizing deep fuzzy neural network, namely deep evolving fuzzy neural networks (DEVFNN).
Fuzzy rules can be automatically extracted from data streams or removed if they play limited
role during their lifespan. The structure of the network can be deepened on demand by stacking
additional layers using a drift detection method which not only detects the covariate drift, variations
of input space, but also accurately identiﬁes the real drift, dynamic changes of both feature space
and target space. DEVFNN is developed under the stacked generalization principle via the feature
augmentation concept where a recently developed algorithm, namely Generic Classiﬁer (gClass),
drives the hidden layer. It is equipped by an automatic feature selection method which controls
activation and deactivation of input attributes to induce varying subsets of input features. A deep
network simpliﬁcation procedure is put forward using the concept of hidden layer merging to prevent
uncontrollable growth of dimensionality of input space due to the nature of feature augmentation
approach in building a deep network structure. DEVFNN works in the sample-wise fashion and is
compatible for data stream applications. The efﬁcacy of DEVFNN has been thoroughly evaluated
using seven datasets with non-stationary properties under the prequential test-then-train protocol. It
has been compared with four popular continual learning algorithms and its shallow counterpart where
DEVFNN demonstrates improvement of classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, it is also shown that the
concept drift detection method is an effective tool to control the depth of network structure while the
hidden layer merging scenario is capable of simplifying the network complexity of a deep network
with negligible compromise of generalization performance.
Keywords Deep Neural Networks · Data Streams · Online Learning · Fuzzy Neural Network
∗This paper has been published in IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems.
 
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) has gained tremendous success in many real-world problems because its deep network
structure enables to learn complex feature representations . Its structure is constructed by stacking multiple hidden
layers or classiﬁers to produce a high level abstraction of input features which brings improvement of model’s
generalization. There exists a certain point where introduction of extra hidden nodes or models in a wide conﬁguration
has negligible effect toward enhancement of generalization power. The power of depth has been theoretically proven
 with examples that there are simple functions in d-dimensional feature space that can be modelled with ease by a
simple three-layer feedforward neural network but cannot be approximated by a two-layer feedforward neural network
up to a certain accuracy level unless the number of hidden nodes is exponential in the dimension. Despite of these
aforementioned working advantages, the success of DNN relies on its static network structure blindly selected by
trial-error approaches or search methods . Although a very deep network architecture is capable of delivering
satisfactory predictive accuracy, this approach incurs excessive computational cost. An over-complex DNN is also
prone to the so-called vanishing gradients and diminishing feature reuse . In addition, it calls for a high number
of training samples to ensure convergence of all network parameters.
To address the issue of a ﬁxed and static model, model selection of DNN has attracted growing research interest. It aims
to develop DNN with elastic structure featuring stochastic depth which can be adjusted to suit the complexity of given
problems . In addition, a ﬂexible structure paradigm also eases gradient computation and addresses the well-known
issues: diminishing feature reuse and vanishing gradient. This approach starts from an over-complex network structure
followed by complexity reduction scenario via dropout, bypass, highway , hedging , merging , regularizer
 , etc. Another approach utilizes the idea of knowledge transfer or distillation . That is, the training process is
carried out using a very deep network structure while deploying a shallow network structure during the testing phase.
Nonetheless, this approach is not scalable for data stream applications because most of which are built upon iterative
training process. Notwithstanding that characterizes an online working principle, it starts its training process with
a very deep network architecture and utilizes the hedging concept which opens direct link between hidden layer and
output layer. The ﬁnal output is determined from aggregation of each layer output. This strategy has strong relationship
to the weighted voting concept.
The concept of DNN is introduced into fuzzy system in making use of the stacked generalization principle
 . Two different architectures, namely random shift and feature augmentation , are adopted to create
deep neuro fuzzy structure. It is also claimed that fuzzy rule interpretability is not compromised under these two
structures because intermediate features still have the same physical meaning as original input attributes. Similar work
is done in but the difference exists in the parameter learning aspect adopting the online learning procedure instead
of the batch learning module. These works, however, rely on a ﬁxed and static network conﬁguration which calls for
prior domain knowledge to determine its network architecture. In , a deep fuzzy rule-based system is proposed for
image classiﬁcation. It is built upon a four-layered network structure where the ﬁrst three layer consists of normalization
layer, scaling layer and feature descriptor layer while the ﬁnal layer is a fuzzy rule layer. Unlike , this
algorithm is capable of self-organizing its fuzzy rules in the fuzzy rule layer but the network structure still has a ﬁxed
depth (4 layer). Although the area of deep learning has grown at a high pace, the issue of data stream processing or
continual learning remains an open issue in the existing deep learning literature.
A novel incremental DNN, namely Deep Evolving Fuzzy Neural Network (DEVFNN), is proposed in this paper.
DEVFNN features a fully elastic structure where not only its fuzzy rule can be autonomously evolved but also the
depth of network structure can be adapted in the fully automatic manner . This property is capable of handling
dynamic variations of data streams but also delivering continuous improvement of predictive performance. The deep
structure of DEVFNN is built upon the stacked generalization principle via the augmented feature space where each
layer consists of a local learner and is inter-connected through augmentation of feature space . That is, the
output of previous layer is fed as new input information to the next layer. A meta-cognitive Scaffolding learner, namely
Generic Classiﬁer (gCLass), is deployed as a local learner, the main driving force of hidden layer, because it not
only has an open structure and works in the single-pass fashion but also answers two key issues: what-to-learn and
when-to-learn . The what-to-learn module is driven by an active learning scenario which estimates contribution
of data points and selects important samples for model updates while the when-to-learn module controls when the
rule premise of multivariate Gaussian rule is updated. gClass is structured under a generalized Takagi Sugeno Kang
(TSK) fuzzy system which incorporates the multivariate Gaussian function as the rule premise and the concept of
functional link neural network (FLANN) as the rule consequent. The multivariate Gaussian function generates non
axis-parallel ellipsoidal clusters while the FLANN expands the degree of freedom (DoF) of the rule consequent via the
up to second order Chebyshev series rectifying the mapping capability .
The major contribution of this paper is elaborated as follows:
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
• Elastic Deep Neural Network Structure: DEVFNN is structured by a deep stacked network architecture
inspired by the stacked generalization principle. Unlike the original stacked generalization principle having
two layers, DEVFNN’s network structure is capable of being very deep with the use of feature augmentation
concept. This approach adopts the stacked deep fuzzy neural network concept in where the feature
space of the bottom layer to the top one is growing incorporating the outputs of previous layers as extra
input information. DEVFNN differs itself from where it characterizes a fully ﬂexible network
structure targeted to address the requirement of continual learning . This property is capable of expanding
the depth of the DNN whenever the drift is identiﬁed to adapt to rapidly changing environments. The use
of drift detection method for the layer growing mechanism generates different concepts across each layer
supposed to induce continuous reﬁnement of generalization power. The elastic characteristic of DEVFNN
is borne out with the introduction of a hidden layer merging mechanism as a deep structure simpliﬁcation
approach which shrinks the depth of network structure on the ﬂy. This mechanism focuses on redundant layers
having high mutual information to be coalesced with minor cost of predictive accuracy.
• Dynamic Feature Space Paradigm: an online feature selection scenario is integrated in the DEVFNN learning
procedure and enables the use of different input combinations for each sample. This scenario enables ﬂexible
activation and deactivation of input attributes across different layers which prevents exponential increase of
input dimension due to the main drawback of feature augmentation approach. As with , the feature
selection process is carried out with binary weights (0 or 1) determined from the relevance of input features to
the target concept. Such feature selection method opens likelihood of previously deactivated features to be
active again whenever its relevance is substantiated with current data trend. Moreover, the dynamic feature
space paradigm is realized using the concept of hidden layer merging method which functions as a complexity
reduction approach. The use of hidden layer merging approach has minor compression loss because one layer
can be completely represented by another hidden layer.
• An Evolving Base Building Unit: DEVFNN is constructed from a collection of Generic Classiﬁer (gClass) 
hierarchically connected in tandem. gClass functions as the underlying component of DEVFNN and operates
in every layer of DEVFNN. gClass features an evolving and adaptive trait where its structural construction
process is fully automated. That is, its fuzzy rules can be automatically generated and pruned on the ﬂy.
This property handles local drift better than a non-evolving base building unit because its network structure
can expand on the ﬂy. The prominent trait of gClass lies in the use of online active learning scenario as the
what-to-learn part of metacognitive learner which supports reduction of training samples and labeling cost.
This strategy differs from since the sample selection process is undertaken in a decentralized manner and
not in the main training process of DEVFNN. Moreover, the how-to-learn scenario is designed in accordance
with the three learning pillars of Scaffolding theory : fading, problematizing and complexity reduction
which processes data streams more efﬁciently than conventional self-evolving FNNs due to additional learning
modules: local forgetting mechanism, rule pruning and recall mechanism, etc.
• Real Drift Detection Approach: a concept drift detection method is adopted to control the depth of network
structure. This idea is conﬁrmed by the fact that the hidden layer should produce intermediate representation
which reveals hidden structure of data samples through multiple linear mapping. Based on the recent study
 , it is outlined from the hyperplane perspective that the number of response region has a direct correlation
to model′s generalization power and DNN is more expressive than a shallow network simply because it has
much higher number of response region. In realm of deep stacked network, we interpret response region as
the amount of unique information a base building unit carries. In other words, the drift detection method
paves a way to come up with a diverse collection of hidden layers or building units. Our drift detection
method is a derivation of the Hoeffding bound based drift detection method in but differs from the fact
that the accuracy matrix which corresponds to prequential error is used in lieu of sample statistics . This
modiﬁcation targets detection of real drift which moves the shape of decision boundary. Another salient
aspect of DEVFNN′s drift detector exists in the conﬁdence level of Hoeffding′s bound which takes into
account sample′s availability via an exponentially decreasing conﬁdence level. The exponentially decreasing
conﬁdence parameter links the depth of network structure and sample’s availability. This strategy reﬂects the
fact that the depth of DNN should be adjusted to the number of training samples as well-known from the deep
learning literature. A shallow network is generally preferred for small datasets because it ensures fast model
convergence whereas a deep structure is well-suited for large datasets.
• Adaptation of Voting Weight: the dynamic weighting scenario is implemented in the adaptive voting mechanism
of DEVFNN and generates unique decaying factors of every hidden layer. Our innovation in DEVFNN lies in
the use of dynamic penalty and reward factor which enables the voting weight to rise and decline with different
rates. It is inspired by the fact that the voting weight of a relevant building unit should decrease slowly when
making misclassiﬁcation whereas that of a poor building unit should increase slowly when returning correct
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
prediction. This scenario improves a static decreasing factor as actualized in pENsemble , pENsemble+
 , DWM which imposes too violent ﬂuctuations of voting weights.
The novelty of this paper is summed up in ﬁve facets: 1) contributes methodology in building the structure of DNNs
which to the best of our knowledge remains a challenging and open issue; 2) offers a DNN variant which can be applied
for data stream processing; 3) puts forward online complexity reduction mechanism of DNNs based on the hidden
layer merging strategy and the online feature selection method; 4) introduces a dynamic weighting strategy with the
dynamic decaying factor. The efﬁcacy of DEVFNN has been numerically validated using seven synthetic and real-world
datasets possessing non-stationary characteristics under the prequential test-then-train approach - a standard evaluation
procedure of data stream algorithms. DEVFNN has been also compared by its static version and other online learning
algorithms where DEVFNN delivers more encouraging performance in term of accuracy and sample consumption than
its counterparts while imposing comparable computational and memory burden. This paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 outlines the network architecture of DEVFNN and its hidden layer, gClass; Section 3 elaborates the learning
policy of DEVFNN encompassing the hidden layer growing strategy, the hidden layer merging strategy and the online
feature selection strategy; Section 4 offers brief summary of gClass learning policy; Section 5 describes numerical study
and comparison of DEVFNN; some concluding remarks are drawn in the last section of this paper.
Problem Formulation
DEVFNN is deployed in the continual learning environment to handle data streams Ct = [C1, C2, ..., CT ] which
continuously arrives in a form of data batch in the T time stamps. In practise, the number of time stamps is unknown
and is possible to be inﬁnite. The size of data batch is Ct = [X1, X2, ..., XP ] ∈ℜP ×n and is set to be equal-sized in
every time stamp. Note that the size of data batches may vary as well across different time stamps. n stands for the
number of input attributes. In realm of online learning environments, it is impractical to assume the direct access to
the true class label vector Yt = [y1, y2, ..., yP ] ∈ℜP ×m and labelling process often draws some costs subject to the
existence of ground truth or expert knowledge. m here stands for the number of target classes. This fact conﬁrms the
suitability of prequential test-then-train scenario as evaluation procedure of the continual learning. The 1 −0 encoding
scenario is applied to form a multi-output target matrix. For instance, if a data samples lies in a class 1 and there exists
in total three classes, the 1 −0 encoding scheme produces a target vector , while a class 2 leads to . The
issue of labelling cost is tackled with the use of metacognitive learner as a driving force of hidden layer having the
online active learning scenario as a part of the what-to-learn phase.
Data stream is inherent to the problem of concept drift where data batches do not follow static and predictable data
distributions P(Y |X)t ̸= P(Y |X)t−1 well-known to be in two typical types: real and covariate. The real drift is
generally more challenging to handle than the covariate drift because variations of input data induce the shape of
decision boundary usually resulting in classiﬁcation error. This problem cannot be solved by inspecting the statistic of
input data as proposed in . One approach to capture the presence of concept drift is by constructing accuracy metric
which summarizes predictive performance of a classiﬁer. A decreasing trend of classiﬁer′s accuracy is a strong indicator
of concept drift . This issue is resolved here by the use of accuracy matrix which advances the idea of accuracy
matrix in with an adaptive windowing scheme based on the cutting point concept. The presence of concept drift
also calls for innovation in the construction of deep network structure because every layer is supposed to represent
different concepts rather than different levels of data abstraction. DEVFNN handles this issue with direct connection
of hidden layer to output layer under the deep stacked network structure with the feature augmentation approach in
which it allows every layer to contribute toward the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. Speciﬁcally, the weighting voting
scheme is implemented where the voting weight is derived from the reward and punishment approach with dynamic
decaying rates. The dynamic decaying rate sets unique reward and penalty factors giving added ﬂexibility according
to relevance of every hidden layer. On the other hand, the feature augmentation method in building deep network
structure risks on the curse of dimensionality due to the expansion of input dimension as the network depth. The
network simpliﬁcation procedure is realized with the hidden layer merging procedure and the online feature selection
scenario. Fig. 1 delineates the working principle of DEVFNN.
Network Architecture of DEVFNN
This section elaborates on the network architecture of DEVFNN including both the deep network structure and the
hidden layer structure.
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Figure 1: Learning Architecture of DEVFNN
Architecture of Hidden Layer
The hidden layer of DEVFNN is constructed by Generic Classiﬁer (gClass) working cooperatively in tandem to
produce the ﬁnal output. gClass realizes the generalized TSK fuzzy inference system procedure where the multivariate
Gaussian function with non diagonal covariance matrix is used in the rule layer while the consequent layer adopts the
concept of expansion block of the FLANN via a nonlinear mapping of the up-to second order Chebyshev series .
The multivariate Gaussian rule generates better input space partition than those classical rules using the dot product
t-norm operator because it enables rotation of ellipsoidal cluster . This trait allows a reduction of fuzzy rule demand
especially when data samples are not spanned in the main axes. The use of FLANN idea in the consequent layer 
aims to improve the approximation power because it has a higher DoF than the ﬁrst order TSK rule consequent. Several
nonlinear mapping functions such as polynomial power function, trigonometric function, etc. can be applied as the
expansion block but the up-to second order Chebyshev function is utilized here because it incurs less free parameters
than trigonometric function but exhibits better approximation power than other polynomial functions of the same order
The fuzzy rule of gClass is formally expressed as follows:
ℜi: IF Xk is Ni(Xk; Ci, A−1
i ) Then ˜yi = ΦWi = W0,iT0 + W1,iT1(x1) + W2,iT2(x2) + ... + W2n−1,iT1(xn) +
W2n,iT2(xn)
where Xk ∈ℜ1×n denotes the input vector at the k −th time instant and Ni(Xk; Ci, A−1
i ) stands for the multivariate
Gaussian function which corresponds to the rule premise of i −th fuzzy rule. ˜yi labels the rule consequent of the i −th
rule constructed by the up to second order Chebyshev polynomial expansion where T0(.), T1(.), T2(.) refer to the zero,
ﬁrst and second order Chebyshev polynomial expansion respectively. The multivariate Gaussian function generates the
ﬁring strength of i −th fuzzy rule which reveals its degree of compatibility as follows:
φi = exp(X −Ci)A−1
i (X −Ci);
where Ci ∈ℜ1×n denotes the center of multivariate Gaussian function while A−1
∈ℜn×n stands for the non-diagonal
inverse covariance matrix while R, n are respectively the number of fuzzy rules and input features. The non-diagonal
covariance matrix makes possible to describe inter-relations among input variables which vanishes in the case of
diagonal covariance matrix and steers the orientation of ellipsoidal cluster. On the other hand, the rule consequent of
gClass is built upon the non-linear mapping of the up-to second order Chebyshev series deﬁned as ˜yi = ΦWi where
Φ ∈ℜ1×(2n+1) is the output of functional expansion block while Wi ∈ℜ(2n+1)×1 is the weight vector of the i −th
rule. Φ is produced by the up-to second order Chebyshev function expressed as follows:
Tn+1(xj) = 2xjTn(xj) −Tn−1(xj)
Since the Chebyshev series is expanded up to the second order, T0(xj) = 1, T1(xj) = xj, T2(xj) = 2x2
j −1. Suppose
that a predictive task is navigated by two input attributes, the functional expansion block Φ is crafted as follows:
Φ = [T0(xj), T1(x1), T2(xj), T1(x2), T2(x2)]
Φ = [1, x1, 2x2
1 −1, x2, 2x2
The concept of FLANN in the framework of TSK fuzzy system improves approximation capability of zero or ﬁrst order
TSK rule consequent because it enhances the degree of freedom of rule consequent, although it does draw around extra
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Figure 2: Deep Stacked Network Structure with Feature Augmentation
n network parameters. Under the MIMO structure, the rule consequent incurs (2n + 1) × R × m parameters while the
rule premise of gClass imposes (n × n) × R + (n × R).
The output of gClass is inferred using the weighted average operation of the rule ﬁring strength and the output of
functional expansion block as follows
i exp(X −Ci)A−1
i (X −Ci)T ˜yi
i exp(X −Ci)A−1
i (X −Ci)T
gClass is formed in the MIMO architecture possessing the class-speciﬁc rule consequent addressing the issue of
class overlapping better than the popular one-versus-rest architecture because each class is handled separately. Because
gClass generates multiple output, the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision is obtained by applying the maximum operation to
ﬁnd the most conﬁdent prediction as follows:
where m is the number of target classes. The MIMO structure is also more stable than the direct regression approach
hampered by the class shifting issue . This problem is caused by the smooth transition of the TSK fuzzy system
which cannot cope with a dramatic class change.
Deep Stacked Network
DEVFNN is realized in the deep stacked network structure where each hidden layer is connected in series. Hidden layers
except the ﬁrst layer accept predictive outputs of previous layers as input attributes plus original input patterns .
This trait retains the physical meaning of original input variables which often loses in conventional DNN architectures
due to multiple nonlinear mappings. This aspect also implies three exists a growth of input space across each layer. That
is, the deeper the hidden layer position the higher the input dimension is, since it is supposed to receive all predictive
outputs of preceding layers as extra input features. This structure is inspired by where the concept of feature
augmentation is introduced in building a DNN architecture. Our approach extends this approach with the introduction
of structural learning process which fully automates the construction of deep stacked network via online analysis of
dynamic data streams. Moreover, this approach is equipped by the online feature selection and hidden layer merging
scenarios which dynamically compress the input space of each layer. This mechanism replaces the random feature
selection of the original work in . Our approach also operates in the one-pass learning scenario being compatible
with online learning setting whereas still applies an ofﬂine working scenario. The network architecture of
DEVFNN is shown in Fig. 2.
DEVFNN works in the chunk-by-chunk basis where each chunk is discarded once learned and the chunk size may
vary in different time stamps. Suppose that a data chunk with the size of P Ct = (Xk, Yk)k=1,...,P is received at the
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
k −th time stamp while DEVFNN is composed of D hidden layers built upon gClass, the ﬁrst hidden layer receives
the original input representation with no feature augmentation while the 2 −nd hidden layer is presented with the
following input attributes:
k = [Xk, bY 1
k ∈ℜP ×(n+m) consists of the input feature vector and the predictive output of the ﬁrst layer. Additional
m input attributes are incurred because gClass is structured under the MIMO architecture deploying a class-speciﬁc
rule consequent. For d −th hidden layer, its input features are expressed as b
k = [Xk, bY 1
k , ..., bY d−1
]k=1,...,P ∈
ℜP ×(n+(m×(d−1))). This situation also implies that dimensionality of input space linearly increases as the depth of
network structure. This issue is coped with the self-organizing property of DEVFNN featuring a controlled growth of
network depth by means of the drift detection method which assures the right network complexity of a given problem.
In addition, the hidden layer merging and online feature selection mechanisms further contribute to compression of
input dimension to handle possible curse of dimensionality.
The deep stacked network through feature augmentation is consistent to the stacked generalization principle which
is capable of achieving an improved generalization performance since the manifold structure of the original feature
space is constantly opened. In addition, each hidden layer functions as a discriminative layer producing predicted class
label. The predicted class label delivers an effective avenue to open the manifold structure of the original input space to
the next hidden layer supposed to improve generalization power.
The end output of DEVFNN is produced by the weighted voting scheme where the voting weight of hidden layer
increases and decreases dynamically in respect to their predictive accuracy. This strategy reﬂects the fact that each
hidden layer is constructed with different concepts navigated by the drift detection scenario. That is, a hidden layer is
rewarded when returning correct prediction by enhancing its voting weight while being punished by lowering its voting
weight when incurring misclassiﬁcation. It reduces the inﬂuence of irrelevant classiﬁer where it is supposed to carry low
voting power due to the penalty as a result of misclassiﬁcation . It is worth noting that the predictive performance
of hidden layers is examined against the prequential error when true class labels are gathered. The prequential testthen-train scenario is simulated in our numerical study. It enables creation of real data stream environment where data
streams are predicted ﬁrst and used for model updates once the true class label becomes available. This scenario is more
plausible to capture real data stream environments in practise in which true class labels often cannot be immediately fed
by the operator. Furthermore, DEVFNN is composed of independent building blocks interconnected with the feature
augmentation approach meaning that each hidden layer is trained independently with the same cost function and outputs
the same target variables. The ﬁnal output of DEVFNN is formalized as follows:
Classfinal = max
where σo denotes the accumulated weight of a target class resulted from predicted class label of hidden layers
σo = χclass
d stands for the voting weight of d −th hidden layer predicting o −th class label. This procedure
aims to extract the most relevant subsets of hidden layer to the Ct data batch. That is, each hidden layer is set to carry
different concepts and is triggered when the closest concept comes into the picture. In addition, the tuning phase is
restricted to the win hidden layer in order to induce a stable concept for every hidden layer. That is, irrelevant hidden
layers are frozen from the tuning phase when they represent different concepts. The win hidden layer can be determined
from its voting weight where a high voting weight indicates strong relevance of a hidden layer to the current concept.
Learning Policy of DEVFNN
This section elaborates the learning policy of DEVFNN in the deep structure level. An overview of DEVFNN learning
procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. DEVFNN initiates its learning process with the adaptation of voting weight
with dynamic decaying factors. The tuning of voting weight results in a unique voting weight of each hidden layer
with respect to their relevance to the current concept measured from their prequential error. This method can be also
interpreted as a soft structural simpliﬁcation method since it is capable of ruling out hidden layers in the training process
by suppressing their voting weights to a small value. The training procedure continues with the online feature selection
procedure which aims to cope with the curse of dimensionality due to the growing feature space bottleneck of the deep
stacked network structure. The feature selection is performed based on the idea of feature relevance examining the
sensitivity of input variables in respect to the target classes. The hidden layer merging mechanism is put forward to
capture redundant hidden layers and reduces the depth of network structure by coalescing highly correlated layers.
Furthermore, the drift detection mechanism is applied to deepen the deep stacked network if changing system dynamics
are observed in data streams. The drift detection module is designed using the concept of Hoeffding bound 
which determines a conﬂict level to ﬂag a drift. There exist three conditions resulted from the drift detector: stable,
warning and drift. The drift phase leads to addition of a hidden layer, while the warning phase accumulates data samples
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
into a buffer later used to create a new hidden layer if a drift is detected. The stable phase simply updates the winning
hidden layer determined from its voting weight. In what follows, we elaborate on the working principle of DEVFNN:
Adaptation of Voting Weight
The voting weight is dynamically adjusted by a unique decaying factor for each layer ρd ∈ which plays a major
role to adapt to the concept drift. A low value of ρd leads to slow adaptation to rapidly changing conditions but works
very well in the presence of gradual or incremental drift where the drift is not too obvious initially. A high value of ρd
adapts to sudden drift more timely than the low value but compromises the stability in the gradual drift where data
samples are drawn from the mixture between two distributions during the transition period. Considering this issue, ρd is
not kept ﬁxed rather it continuously adjusted to reﬂect the learning performance of a hidden layer. The decaying factor
ρd is tuned using a step size, π, as follows:
ρd = ρd ± π;
This mechanism underpins a ﬂexible voting scenario where the decaying factor mirrors hidden layer compatibility
to existing data streams. In other words, the voting weight of hidden layers augments and diminishes with different
intensities. It is also evident that the voting weight of a strong hidden layer should be conﬁrmed whereas the inﬂuence
of poor building units should be minimized in the voting phase. That is, ρd = ρd + π occurs if a hidden layer returns a
correct prequential prediction whereas ρd = ρd −π takes place if a sample leads to a prequential error. The step size π
sets the rate of change where the higher the value increases its sensitivity to the hidden layer performance.
The penalty and reward scenario is undertaken by increasing and decreasing the voting weight of a hidden layer. A
penalty is imposed if a wrong prediction is produced by hidden layer as follows:
χd = χd ∗ρd;
On the other hand, the reward scenario is performed if correct prediction is returned as follows:
χd = min(χd(1 + ρd), 1)
the reward scenario also functions to handle the cyclic drift because it reactivates inactive hidden layer with a minor
voting weight. Because it is also observed from (11) and the range of the decaying factor ρd is , the voting
weight is bounded in the range of . Compared to similar approaches in , this penalty and reward scenario
emphasizes rewards to a strong hidden layer while discouraging a penalty to such layers whereas a poor hidden layer
should be penalized with a high intensity while receiving little reward when returning correct prediction. This strategy
is done since every hidden layer has direct connection to output layer outputting its own predicted class label. The
ﬁnal predicted class label should take into account relevance of each hidden layer reﬂected from its prequential error.
Furthermore, this mechanism also aligns with the use of drift detection method as an avenue to deepen the depth of
network structure since the drift detection method evolves different concepts of each hidden layer.
Online Feature Weighting Mechanism
DEVFNN implements the feature weighting strategy based on the concept of feature relevance. That is, a relevant
feature is deﬁned as that showing high sensitivity to the target concept whereas low sensitivity feature signiﬁes poor
input attributes which should be assigned a low weight to reduce its inﬂuence to the ﬁnal predictive outcomes .
There exist several avenues to check the sensitivity of input attributes in respect to the target concept: Fisher Separability
Criterion , statistical contribution , etc. The correlation measure is considered as the most plausible strategy
here because it reveals the mutual information of input and target features which signals the presence of changing
system dynamics. The correlation between two variables, x1, x2, can be estimated using the Pearson correlation index
(PCI) as follows:
ζ(x1, x2) =
cov(x1, x2)
var(x1, x2)
where cov(x1, x2), var(x1, x2) respectively stand for covariance and variance of x1, x2 which can be calculated
in recursive manners. Although the PCI can be directly integrated into the feature weighting scope without any
transformation because the highest correlation is attained when it returns either −1 or 1, the PCI method is sensitive to
the rotation and translation of data samples . The mutual information compression index (MICI) method is
applied to achieve trade-off between accuracy of correlation measure and computational simplicity. The MICI method
works by estimating the amount of information loss if one of the two variables is discarded. It is expressed as follows:
γ(x1, x2) = 1
2(vr1 + vr2−
2 −4vr1vr2(1 −ζ(x1, x2)2))
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
where ζ(x1, x2) denotes the Pearson correlation index of two variables and vr1, vr2 represent var(x1), var(x2),
respectively. Unlike the PCI method where -1 and 1 signify the maximum correlation, the maximum similarity is
attained at γ(x1, x2) = 0. This method is also insensitive to rotation and translation of data points . Once the
correlation of the j −th input variable and all m target classes are calculated, the score of the j −th input feature is
deﬁned by its relevance to all m −th target classes. This aspect is realized by taking average correlation across m
target classes as follows:
Scorej = meano=1,..,mγ(xj, yo)
where γ(xj, yo) denotes the maximum information compression index between the j −th input feature and the o −th
target class. The use of average operator is to assign equal importance of each target class and to embrace the fact that
an input feature is highly needed to only identify one target class. This strategy adapts to the characteristic of gClass
formed in the MIMO architecture .
The feature selection mechanism is carried out by assigning binary weights λj, either 0 or 1, which changes on demand
in every time stamp. This strategy is applied to induce ﬂexible activation and deactivation of input variables during
the whole course of training process which avoids loss of information due to complete forgetting of particular input
information. An input feature is switched off by assigning 0 weight if its score falls above a given threshold δ1 meaning
that it shows low relationship to any target classes as follows:
Scorej >= δ1
where δ1 ∈ stands for the predeﬁned threshold. The higher the value of this threshold the less aggressive the
hidden layer merging is performed and vice versa. The feature selection process is carried out by setting the input
weight to zero with likelihood being set to one again in the future whenever the input attribute becomes relevant again.
Moreover, the input weighting strategy is committed in the centralized manner where the similarity of all input attributes
are analyzed at once. That is, all input attributes are put together. The online feature weighting scenario only analyses
the n dimensional original feature space rather than the n + m × (D −1) dimensional augmented feature space. Extra
input feature is subject to the hidden layer merging mechanism which studies the redundancy level of D hidden layers.
Hidden Layer Merging Mechanism
DEVFNN implements the hidden layer merging mechanism to cope with the redundancy across different base building
units. This scenario is realized by analyzing the correlation of the outputs of different layers . From manifold
learning viewpoint, a redundant layer containing similar concept is expected not to inform salient structure of the given
problem because it does not open manifold of learning problem to unique representation - at least already covered
by previous layers. Suppose that the MICI method is applied to explore the correlation of two hidden layers and
γ(yi, yj), i ̸= j, the hidden layer merging condition is formulated as follows:
γ(yi, yj) < δ2
where δ2 ∈ is a user-deﬁned threshold. This threshold is linearly proportional to the maximum correlation index
where the lower the value the less merging process is undertaken. The merging procedure is carried out by setting its
voting weight as zero, thus it is considered as a "don′t care" input attribute of the next layers. This strategy expedites
the model updates because redundant layers can be bypassed without being revisited for both inference and training
procedures. The hard pruning mechanism is not implemented in the merging process because it causes a reduction of
input dimension which undermines the stability of next layers unless a retraining mechanism from scratch is carried out.
It causes dimensional reduction of the output covariance matrix of next layers. This strategy is deemed similar to the
dropout scenario in the deep learning literature but the weight setting is analyzed from the similarity analysis rather
than purely probabilistic approach. The dominance of two hidden layers is simply determined from its voting weight.
The voting weight is deemed a proper indicator of hidden layer dominance because it is derived from a dynamic penalty
and reward scenario with unique and adaptive decaying factors. The redundancy-based approach such as merging
scenario is more stable than relevance-based approach because information of one layer can be perfectly represented by
another layer. In addition, parameters of two hidden layers are not fused because similarity of two hidden layers is
observed in the output level rather than fuzzy rule level.
Hidden Layer Growing Mechanism
DEVFNN realizes an evolving deep stacked network structure which is capable of introducing new hidden layers
on demand. This strategy aims to embrace changing training patterns of data streams and to enhance generalization
performance by increasing the level of abstraction of training data. This is done by utilizing a drift detection module
which vets the status of data streams whether the concept change is present. Notwithstanding that the idea of adding
a new component to handle concept drift is well-established in the literature as presented in the ensemble learning
literature, each ensemble member has no interaction at all to their neighbors.
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
The drift detection scenario makes use of the Hoeffding′s bound drift detection mechanism proposed in where
the evaluation window is determined from the switching point rather than a ﬁxed window size. Nevertheless, the
original method is developed based on the increase of population mean which ignores the change of data distribution in
the target space. In other words, it is only capable of detecting covariate drift. Instead of looking at the increase of
population mean, the error index is applied. This modiﬁcation is based on the fact that the change of feature space does
necessarily induce the concept drift in the target domain P(Y |X)k ̸= P(Y |X)k−1. This concept is implemented by
constructing a binary accuracy vector where 0 elements presents correct prediction while 1 elements are inserted for
false predictions. This scenario is inspired by the fast Hoeffding drift detection method (FDDM) but our approach
differs from in which the window size is set fully adaptive according to the switching point. Moreover, each data
sample is treated with equal importance with the absence of any weights which detects sudden drift rapidly although
it is rather inaccurate to pick up gradual drift . The advantage of the Hoeffding′s method is free of normal data
distribution assumption - too restrictive in many applications. Moreover, it is statistically sound because a Hoeffding
bound corresponds to a particular conﬁdence level.
Assuming that P denotes the chunk size, the data chunk is partitioned into three groups F ∈ℜP ×(n+m), G ∈
ℜcut×(m+n), H ∈ℜ(P −cut)×(m+n) where cut is the switching point. F, G, H records the error index instead of the
original data points in which only two values, namely 0 or 1, is present - 0 for true prediction, 1 for false prediction.
Note that cut is elicited by evaluating data samples - the ﬁrst sample up to the switching sample. Each data partition
F, G, H is assigned with the error bounds ϵF , ϵG, ϵH calculated as follows:
ϵF,G,H = (b −a)
2(size ∗cut) ln( 1
where size denotes the size of data partition and α labels the signiﬁcance level of Hoeffding’s bound. a, b denote the
maximum and minimum values in the data partition. The signiﬁcance level has a clear statistical interpretation because
it corresponds to the conﬁdence level of Hoeffding’s bound 1 −α. In realm of DNN, the model′s complexity must
consider the availability of training samples to ensure parameter convergence especially in the context of continual
learning situation where a retraining process over a number of epochs is prohibited. A shallow model is generally
preferred over a deep model to handle a small dataset. Considering the aspect of sample′s availability, a dynamic
signiﬁcance level is put forward where the signiﬁcance level exponentially rises as the number of time stamps with a
limit. A limit is required here to avoid loss of detection accuracy because the signiﬁcance level is inversely proportional
to the conﬁdence level:
αD = min(1 −e
min), αW = min(1 −e
where k, T respectively denote the number of time stamps seen thus far and the total number of time stamps while
min stand for the minimum signiﬁcance level of the drift and warning phases. The minimum signiﬁcance level
has to be capped at 0.1 to induce above 90% conﬁdence level.
Once the conﬁdence level is calculated, the next step is to ﬁnd the switching point, cut, indicating the horizon of the
drift detection problem or the time window in which a drift is likely to be present. The switching point is found if the
following condition is met as follows:
ˆF + ϵF ≤ˆG + ϵG
where ˆF, ˆG, ˆH denote the statistics of the three data partitions. It is observed that the switching point targets a transition
point between two concepts where the statistic of G is larger than H. The switching point portrays a time index where a
drift starts to come into picture. It is worth noting that the statistics of the data partition ˆG is expected to be constant or
to reduce during the stable phase. The drift phase, therefore, refers to the opposite case where the empirical mean of
the accuracy vector ˆG increases. The condition (19) aims to ﬁnd the cutting point cut where the accuracy vector is no
longer in the decreasing trend. Once cut is located, the three error index vectors, F, G, H, can be formed.
Our drift detector returns two conditions: warning and drift tailored from the two signiﬁcance levels αwarning, αdrift.
The two signiﬁcance levels αwarning, αdrift can be set to the conﬁdence level of the drift detection. The smaller the
value of the signiﬁcance level implies the more accurate the drift detection method delivers. The warning and drift
conditions are signaled if two following situations are come across as follows:
| ˆH −ˆG| > αdrift
| ˆH −ˆG| > αwarning
These two conditions present a case where the null hypothesis H0 : E[G] ≤E[H] is rejected. The warning condition is
meant to capture the gradual drift. It pinpoints a situation where a drift is not obvious enough to be declared or next
instances are called for to conﬁrm a drift. No action is taken during the warning phase, only data samples of the warning
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
condition are accumulated in the data matrix φ = [Xwarning, Ywarning]. Once the drift condition is satisﬁed, the
structure of deep network is deepened by appending a new hidden layer stacked at the top level. The new hidden layer
is created using the incoming data chunk and the accumulated data samples in the warning phase Φ = [Xnew, Ynew; φ].
The opposite case or the normal case portrays the alternative H1 : E[G] > E[H]. That is, the stable phase only
activates an adjustment of the winning hidden layer to improve the generalization power of DEVFNN. The winning
hidden layer is selected for the adaptation scenario instead of all hidden layers to expedite the model update. Moreover,
DEVFNN adopts the concept of different-depth network structure which opens the room for each layer to produce the
end-output of DEVFNN because each layer is trained to solve the same optimization problem. Because the dynamic
voting mechanism is implemented, the winning hidden layer is simply selected based on its voting weight.
gClass learning procedure
This section provides brief recap of gClass working principle constructed under three learning pillars of metacognitive learning: what-to-learn, how-to-learn and when-to-learn. The what-to-learn component functions as the
sample selection module implemented under the online active learning scenario, while the when-to-learn component sets
the sample update condition. The how-to-learn module realizes a self-adaptive learning principle developed under the
framework of Scaffolding theory : problematizing, fading and complexity reduction. This procedure encompasses
rule generation, pruning, forgetting and tuning mechanisms. A ﬂowchart of gClass learning policy is placed in the
supplemental document.
• What-To-Learn Phase - Online Active Learning Scenario: The online active learning scenario of gClass
is driven by the extension of extended conﬂict ignorance (ECI) principle which relies on two sample
contribution measures. The ﬁrst concept is developed from the idea of extended recursive density estimation
(ERDE) applied as the rule growing scenario in . Our approach distinguishes itself from in which
the RDE concept is modiﬁed for the multivariate Gaussian rule and integrates the sample weighting concept
overcoming the outlier′s bottleneck. Unlike the rule growing concept ﬁnding salient samples as those having
maximum and minimum densities, the sample of interest for deletion purpose is redundant samples deﬁned as
those violating the maximum and minimum conditions. The second approach is designed using the distanceto-boundary concept. A classiﬁer is said to be conﬁdent if it safely classiﬁes a sample to one of classes or is
far from decision boundary. The sample-to-boundary concept is set as a ratio of the ﬁrst and second dominant
classes examined by the classiﬁer′s outputs. An uncertain sample is indicated if the ratio returns a value around
0.5 whereas a high ratio signiﬁes a conﬁdent case.
• How-To-Learn - Sample Learning Strategy: Once a sample is accepted by the online active learning scenario,
it is passed to the how-to-learn scenario evolving parameter and structure of gClass. The problematizing
part concerns on the issue of concept drift handling and the complexity reduction part relieves the problem′s
complexity while the fading part is devised for reduction of model′s complexity. The three components are
integrated in a single dedicated learning process and executed in the one-pass learning scenario.
The problematizing phase consists of two learning modules: the rule growing and forgetting scenarios. The
rule growing phase of gClass adopts the same criteria of pClass in which the three rule growing conditions,
namely data quality (DQ), datum signiﬁcance (DS), volume check, are consolidated to pinpoint an ideal
observation to expand the rule base size. The data quality method is a derivation of the RDE method in 
involving the sample weighting concept. Moreover, it is tailored to accommodate the multivariate Gaussian
rule. The DS concept estimates the statistical contribution of a data sample whether it deserves to be a candidate
of new rule , while the volume check is integrated to prevent the over-sized rule which undermines model′s
generalization. The DS concept extends the concept of neuron signiﬁcance to be compatible with the
non axis-parallel ellipsoidal rule while the volume check examines the volume of winning rule and a new
rule is introduced given that its volume exceeds a pre-speciﬁed limit. Once the three rule growing conditions
are satisﬁed, a new fuzzy rule is initialized using the class overlapping situation. The class overlapping
method arranges the three initialization strategies in respect to spatial proximity of a data sample to inter-class
and intra-class data samples. This strategy is carried our using the quality per class method which studies
relationship of current sample to target classes. The rule forgetting scenario is carried out in the local mode
which deploys unique forgetting levels of each rule . It is derived using the local DQ (LDQ) method
performing recursive local density estimation. The gradient of LDQ method for each rule is calculated and
used to deﬁne the forgetting level in the rule premise and consequent. Moreover, the rule consequent tuning
scenario is driven by the fuzzily weighted generalized recursive least square (FWGRLS) method inspired by
the work of generalized recursive least square method (GRLS) method putting forward the weight decay
term in the cost function of RLS method. This method can be also perceived as a derivation of FWRLS method
in in which it improves the tuning scenario with the weight decay term to improve model′s generalization.
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Algorithm 1 Learning Policy of DEVFNN
1: Input: (Xn, Yn) ∈ℜP ×(n+m), π, δ1, δ2, V ig and kprune
2: Output: Classfinal ﬁnal predicted Class
3: Testing phase:
4: Predict: The class label of the current data batch.
5: Training phase:
6: Step 1: Tuning of χ:
7: for k = 1 to P do
for d = 1 to D do
k ̸= yk) then
Execute: ρd = ρd −π and chid = χd ∗ρd
Update: the accuracy matrix Acc(k) = 1
Execute: ρd = ρd + π, χd = min(χd(1 + ρd), 1)
Update: the accuracy matrix Acc(k) = 0
17: end for
18: Step 2: Online Feature Selection Mechanism:
19: for j = 1 to n do
for o = 1 to m do
Calculate: the input target correlation (12)
if (score > δ1) then
Set: the input weight to λj = 0
26: end for
27: Step 3: Hidden Layer Merging Mechanism :
28: for d1 = 1 to D do
for d2 = 1 to D do
Calculate: the correlation coefﬁcient (14)
if (γ(yd1, yd2) < δ1, ∀d1 ̸= d2) then
Set: the voting weight of weaker layer to 0
35: end for
36: Step 4: Drift Detection Mechanism:
37: for k = 1 to P do
Construct: F = Acc, G = Acc(1 : k)
Calculate: ϵF , ϵG, ˆG, ˆH (15)
if ( ˆG + ϵG ≥ˆF + ϵF ) then
Set: cut = k
Construct: H = Acc(P −cut + 1 : cut) and ˆH
44: end for
45: Calculate: the drift and warning level ϵdrift, ϵwarning
46: if (| ˆG −ˆF| ≥ϵdrift) then
Deepen: the network structure using (Xn, Yn) ∈ℜP ×(n+m) and φ
48: else if (| ˆG −ˆF| ̸= ϵdriftand| ˆG −ˆF| ≥ϵwarning) then
Update: The winning layer using (Xn, Yn) ∈ℜP ×(n+m)
52: end if
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
The fading phase lowers structural complexity of gClass to avoid the overﬁtting problem and to expedite the
runtime. The fading phase of gClass is crafted under the same strategy as pClass where two rule pruning
strategy, namely extended rule signiﬁcance (ERS) and potential+ (P+) methods, are put forward. The ERS
method shares the same principle as the DS method where it approximates the statistical contribution of fuzzy
rules. This approach can be also seen as an estimator of expected outputs of gClass under uniform distribution.
The P+ method adopts the concept of rule potential but converts this method to perform the rule pruning
task. Unlike the ERS method capturing superﬂuous rules playing little role during their lifespan, the P+ method
discovers obsolete rule, no longer relevant to represent the current data distribution. By extension, the P+
method is also applied in the rule recall scenario to cope with the cyclic drift. That is, obsolete rules are only
deactivated with possibility to be reactivated again in the future if it becomes relevant again.
gClass implements the online feature weighting mechanism based on the ﬁsher seperability criteria (FSC) in
the empirical feature space using the kernel concept as adopted in pClass as a part of complexity reduction
method. Nevertheless, the online feature weighting scenario of gClass is switched into a sleep mode because
DEVFNN is already equipped by an online feature selection and layer merging module in the top level.
• When-To-Learn - Sample Reserved Strategy: The when-to-learn strategy of gClass is built upon the standard
sample reserved strategy of the meta-cognitive learner . Our approach, however, differs from that 
where the sample learning condition is designed under different criteria. The sample reserved strategy
incorporates a condition for the tuning scenario of rule premise and data samples violating the rule growing
and tuning procedures are accumulated in a data buffer reserved for the future training process. Our approach
simply exempts those samples and exploit them merely for the rule consequent adaptation scenario because
such sample quickly become outdated in rapidly changing environments. In addition, This procedure is
designated to reduce the computational cost. A ﬂowchart of DEVFNN learning policy is attached in the
supplemental document.
Numerical Study
This section discusses experimental study of DEVFNN in seven popular real-world and synthetic data stream problems:
electricity-pricing, weather, SEA, hyperplane, SUSY, kddCUP and indoor RFID localization problem from our own
project. DEVFNN is compared against prominent continual learning algorithms in the literature: PNN , HAT
 , DEN , DSSCN , staticDEVFNN. PNN, HAT and DEN are popular continual learning algorithms in the
deep learning literature also designed to prevent the catastrophic forgetting problems. They feature self-evolution of
hidden nodes but still adopt the static network depth. DSSCN represents a deep algorithm having stochastic depth. The
key difference with our approach lies in the concept of random shift to form deep stacked network structure rather
than the feature augmentation approach. Comparison with staticDEVFNN is important to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
ﬂexible structure. That is, the hidden layer expansion and merging modules are switched off in the static DEVFNN.
The MATLAB codes of DEVFNN are made publicly available in 2. Because of the page limit, only SEA problem is
discussed in the paper while the remainder of numerical study is outlined in the supplemental document. Nonetheless,
Table 1 displays numerical results of all problems. Our numerical study follows the prequential test-then-train protocol.
That is, a dataset is divided into a number of equal-sized data batches. Each data batch is streamed to DEVFNN in
which it is used to ﬁrst test DEVFNN’s generalization performance before being used for the training process. This
scenario aims to simulate real data stream environment where numerical evaluation is independently performed per
data batch. The numerical results in Table 1 are reported as the average of numerical results across all data batches.
Five evaluation criteria are used here: Classiﬁcation Rate (CR), Fuzzy Rule (FR), Precision (P), Recall (R), Hidden
Layer (HL).
SEA Problem
The SEA problem is one of the most prominent problems in the data stream area where the underlying goal is to
categorize data samples into two classes based on the summation of two input attributes . That is, a class 1 is
returned if the condition f1 + f2 < θ while the opposite case f1 + f2 > θ indicates a class 2. The concept drift is
induced by shifting the class threshold three times θ = 4 →7 →4 →7. This shift results in the abrupt drift and
furthermore the cyclic drift because the class boundary is changed in the recurring fashion. The SEA problem is built
upon three input attributes where the third input attribute is merely a noise. We make use of the modiﬁed SEA problem
in which incorporates 5 to 25% minority class proportion. Data points are generated from the range of 
and the concept drift takes place in the target domain due to the drifting class boundary. The trace of classiﬁcation
2https : //bit.ly/2ZfnN5y
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Table 1: Numerical results of consolidated algorithms
4.36± 1.08
91.1± 6.05
91.5± 4.09
10.29± 4.09
74.6± 10.1
Hyperplane
91.57± 1.76
4.73± 1.36
55.52± 14.2
91.25± 1.79
5.47± 3.23
85.55± 5.83
91.14± 3.86
76.18± 7.82
10.62± 3.88
68.7± 1.18
68.46± 5.16
67.36± 8.27
Electricity Pricing
4.24± 2.25
4.24± 2.25
3.58± 1.45
3.58± 1.45
30.72± 11.2
10.18± 5.2
44.2± 10.8
KDD Cup 10%
CR: classiﬁcation rate, FR: fuzzy rule, P: precission, R: recall, HL: number of hidden layer, SDEVFNN:
Static-DEVFNN
rate, hidden layer and training sample are depicted in Fig. 4(a)-(d) of supplemental documents. Numerical results are
reported in Table 1 along with numerical results of other problems.
The advantage of DEVFNN is reported in Table 1 where it outperforms other algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation
rates, precision and recall. This result highlights the efﬁcacy of a deep stacked network structure compared to the static
depth network in improving the generalization power. The use of a deep stacked network structure allows continuous
reﬁnement of predictive power where the output of preceding layer is fed as extra input information of current layer
supposed to guide the predictive error toward zeros. The main bottleneck of the deep stacked network architecture
through the feature augmentation approach lies in the linear increase of input dimensionality as the number of hidden
layer. Notwithstanding that the hidden layer merging mechanism is integrated in DEVFNN and is supposed to lower
the input dimension due to reduction of extra input attributes, the soft dimensionality reduction is applied by zeroing
the voting weight of a hidden layer and the hidden layer is excluded from any training and inference processes. This
strategy is to prevent instability issue due to the discontinuity of the training process which imposes a retraining process
from scratch. Another complexity reduction method is implemented in terms of a dynamic voting weight scenario
which overrides the inﬂuence of hidden layers in the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. This scenario generates unique reward
and penalty weights giving heavy reward to a good hidden layer whereas strong penalty is imposed to that of poor
hidden layers.
A PREPRINT - DECEMBER 10, 2019
Because of the page limit, our numerical results of other datasets are presented in the supplemental document. A
brief summary of our numerical results is as follows: 1) the decentralized online active learning strategy in the
layer level is less efﬁcient than the centralistic variant because it is classiﬁer-dependent; 2) the proposal of real drift
detection scenario is more timely than the covariate drift detection scenario because it reacts when the classiﬁer′s
performance is compromised; 3) the dynamic voting scenario with dynamic decaying factors lead to more stable voting
scenario because the effect of penalty and reward can be controlled in respect to the classiﬁer′s performance; 4) The
application self-evolving depth enhances learning performance of the static depth because it grows the network on
demand considering variation and availability of data samples.
Conclusions
A novel deep fuzzy neural network, namely dynamic evolving fuzzy neural network (DEVFNN), is proposed for mining
evolving and dynamic data streams in the lifelong fashion. DEVFNN is constructed with a deep stacked network
structure via the feature space augmentation concept where a hidden layer receives original input features plus the
output of preceding layers as input features. This strategy generates continuous reﬁnement of predictive power across a
number of hidden layers. DEVFNN features an autonomous working principle where its structure and parameters are
self-conﬁgured on the ﬂy from data streams. A drift detection method is developed based on the principle of FDDM but
it integrates an adaptive windowing scheme using the idea of cutting point. The drift detection mechanism is not only
designed to monitor the dynamic of input space, covariate drift, but also to identify the nature of output space, real drift.
Furthermore, DEVFNN is equipped by a hidden layer merging mechanism which measures correlation between two
hidden layers and combines two redundant hidden layer. This module plays a key role in the deep stacked network
structure via the feature augmentation concept to address uncontrollable increase of input dimension in rapidly changing
conditions. DEVFNN also incorporates the online feature weighting method which assigns a crisp weight to input
features in respect to their relevance to the target concept. The dynmic voting concept is introduced with the underlying
notion "unique penalty and reward intensity" examined by the relevance of hidden layers.
DEVFNN is created with a local learner as a hidden layer, termed gClass, interconnected in tandem. gClass characterizes
the meta-cognitive learning approach having three learning phases: what-to-learn, how-to-learn, when-to-learn. The
what-to-learn and when-to-learn schemes provide added ﬂexibility to gClass putting forward the online active learning
scenario and the sample reserved strategy while the how-to-learn scheme is devised according to the Scaffolding theory.
The online active learning method selects relevant samples to be labeled and to train a model which increases learning
efﬁciency and mitigates the overﬁtting risk. The sample reserved strategy sets conditions for rule premise update while
the scaffolding theory is followed to enhance the learning performance with several learning modules tailored according
to the problematizing, fading and complexity reduction concepts of the Scaffolding theory.
The efﬁcacy of DEVFNN has been numerically validated using seven prominent data stream problems in the literature
where it produces more accurate classiﬁcation rates, precision and recall than other benchmarked algorithms while
incurring minor increase of computational and memory demand. It is found that the depth of network structure possesses
a linear correlation with a generalization power given that every hidden layer is properly initialized and trained while
the stochastic depth property improves learning performance compared to the static depth. Moreover, the dynamic
adjustment of voting weights makes possible to adapt the voting weight with the dynamic adjustment factor which
dynamically augments and shrinks according to its prequential error. It is perceived that the merging scenario dampens
the network complexity without compromising classiﬁcation accuracy. The concept drift detection method is applied to
grow the hidden layer of network structure which sets ﬂexibility for direct access of hidden layer to output layer. This
implies that the ﬁnal output is inferred by a combination of every layer output. In other words, DEVFNN actualizes a
different-depth network paradigm where each level puts forward unique aspects of data streams. Our future work will
investigate different approaches for self-generating the hidden layer of deep fuzzy neural network because it is admitted
that the use of a concept drift detection method replaces the multiple nonlinear mapping of one concept generating a
high level feature description with diverse concepts per layer.