Received 20 May 2014 | Accepted 29 Jul 2014 | Published 17 Sep 2014
Rational design of all organic polymer dielectrics
Vinit Sharma1,2, Chenchen Wang1,2, Robert G. Lorenzini2,3, Rui Ma2,3, Qiang Zhu4, Daniel W. Sinkovits5,
Ghanshyam Pilania6, Artem R. Oganov4,7,8, Sanat Kumar5, Gregory A. Sotzing2,3, Steven A. Boggs2
& Rampi Ramprasad1,2
To date, trial and error strategies guided by intuition have dominated the identiﬁcation of
materials suitable for a speciﬁc application. We are entering a data-rich, modelling-driven era
where such Edisonian approaches are gradually being replaced by rational strategies, which
couple predictions from advanced computational screening with targeted experimental
synthesis and validation. Here, consistent with this emerging paradigm, we propose a
strategy of hierarchical modelling with successive downselection stages to accelerate the
identiﬁcation of polymer dielectrics that have the potential to surpass ‘standard’ materials for
a given application. Successful synthesis and testing of some of the most promising identiﬁed
polymers and the measured attractive dielectric properties (which are in quantitative
agreement with predictions) strongly supports the proposed approach to material selection.
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA. 2 Institute of Materials Science, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA. 3 Department of Chemistry, Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut
06226, USA. 4 Department of Geosciences and Center for Materials by Design, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA. 5 Department of
Chemical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA. 6 Materials Science and Technology Division (MST-8), Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA. 7 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 9 Institutskiy lane, Moscow 141700, Russia.
8 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.R. (email:
 ).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
olymeric dielectric materials are pervasive in modern
electronics
electrical
applications in the areas of capacitive energy storage1–6,
transistors7–9,
photovoltaic
devices10–12
electrical
insulation13,14. The selection and design of a polymer depends
on the requirements speciﬁc to the application, which, in the case
of dielectric applications, can be stated in terms of a subset of the
following properties: dielectric constant, band gap, dielectric
breakdown ﬁeld, dielectric loss, morphology, glass transition
temperature, mechanical strength, cost and so on. Although the
property requirements can be speciﬁed with reasonable precision,
trial and error strategies (aided by chemical intuition or
serendipity) have dominated the identiﬁcation or discovery of
candidates
requirements.
successful, these strategies suffer from the fact that they are not
generalizable, and discoveries (and, equally importantly, the lack
of such prospects) cannot be rigorously assessed. The community
is thus gradually migrating towards systematic computationdriven materials (down) selection paradigms15,16.
Consider, for instance, the case of polymers for capacitive
energy storage applications. The on-going electriﬁcation of
land17,18 and sea19 transportation, as well as other military and
civilian systems19,20 has increased the demand for high energy
density capacitors. The choice of polymers (over ceramics) in
capacitive energy storage applications is motivated by the need
for ‘graceful failure’ of the dielectric at high ﬁelds. Metallized
polymers offer the only scalable capacitor technology that meets
this need. The energy stored in a capacitor is proportional to the
dielectric constant and the square of the electric ﬁeld. Thus,
materials of interest should display a high dielectric constant and
high electrical breakdown ﬁeld. In addition, low dielectric loss
and resistance to high ﬁeld degradation of the polymer itself are
important requirements as well. The present state-of-the-art in
high energy density metalized ﬁlm capacitors employ biaxially
oriented polypropylene (BOPP), which has a small area (B1 cm2)
breakdown ﬁeld of about 750 MV m  1 and a dielectric constant
of about 2.2. Various attempts to replace BOPP have been based
on poly(vinyledene ﬂuoride) (PVDF) and its copolymers1,21,22,
polymer nanocomposites23–25 and so on. All such potential
replacements have suffered from either high loss (PVDF and its
copolymers) or low breakdown ﬁeld (nanoﬁlled polymers).
A strategy is needed to identify promising new polymers.
In this contribution, we present a rational design strategy of
hierarchical modelling with successive downselection stages to
efﬁciently screen and identify advanced polymer dielectrics for
capacitive energy storage applications. Speciﬁcally, quantum
mechanics-based combinatorial searches of chemical space are
used to identify polymer repeat units that could lead to desirable
dielectric properties, followed by conﬁgurational space searches
using evolutionary and classical molecular dynamics schemes to
determine the three-dimensional (3D) arrangement of polymers
(and their properties) built from the desirable repeat units.
Successful synthesis and testing of some of the most promising
attractive
dielectric
properties supports the proposed approach to material selection.
Overview. In essence, we show that a systematic combinatorial
search of the polymer chemical and conﬁgurational spaces can
lead to new polymers with attractive combinations of properties.
By chemical space, we refer to the various building blocks
(‘monomers’)
conﬁgurational
encompasses the connectivity sequences possible with these
building blocks, the manner in which the resulting chains pack
together, and the larger scale morphology. In a ﬁrst line of
screening attempted in this work, we identify attractive polymers
based on their dielectric constant and band gap values, both of
which can be computed with reasonable accuracy using quantum
mechanical computations. As noted earlier, dielectrics for high
energy density capacitor applications need to satisfy additional
requirements, including low dielectric loss and high dielectric
breakdown strength (thus making the presently adopted screening criteria necessary but not sufﬁcient conditions). Since the
current state-of-the-art does not allow us to determine these
attributes quantitatively in a high-throughput framework, we use
the band gap as a proxy. Recent work suggests that large values of
the intrinsic breakdown strength of a variety of insulators are
correlated with large band gap values26,27. Besides, the band gap
and dielectric constant, in and of themselves, are important
properties in a variety of applications.
Our step-by-step computational search strategy to arrive at
promising polymeric dielectrics is depicted schematically in Fig. 1.
This strategy includes the following successive (and to some extent,
iterative) steps: (1) Combinatorial chemical space exploration using
1D polymer chains with four independent blocks per repeat unit;
(2) Promising repeat unit (that is, sequence of blocks) identiﬁcation
based on band gap and dielectric constant estimates; (3) 3D
structure/morphology predictions of polymers composed of the
downselected repeat units; (4) Property predictions of the 3D
systems; and (5) Synthesis of the identiﬁed polymers, followed by
testing and validation. Steps 3–5 are time-intensive. Hence,
candidates identiﬁed in Step 2, which are amenable to synthesis,
are favored in Steps 3–5. Application of this strategy to the design of
organic polymeric dielectrics for high energy density applications
has identiﬁed several polymers, some of which (especially those
with prior evidence of synthesis success) are listed in Table 1. The
top three members of Table 1 have also been synthesized by us, and
Step 1: Combinatorial chemical space exploration
Polymer block options:
-CH2-, -C6H4-, -C4H2S-,
-CO-, -NH-, -O-, -CS-
High-throughput density functional theory (DFT),
Effective medium theory
Solvent casting of polymer films,
infrared and x-ray spectra, dielectic spectroscopy
Dielectric tensor (using perturbation theory), band structure
(using hybrid functional), infrared and x-ray spectra
Evolutionary structure search (based on DFT),
Melt-and-quench based search (based on force fields)
Step 2: Promising repeat unit identification
Step 3: Structure/morphology predictions
Step4 : Property predictions
Step 5 : Synthesis, Testing & Validation
Guidance based on
amenability to synthesis
Figure 1 | A schematic illustration of our rational polymer dielectric
design strategy. The strategy involves ﬁve consecutive steps:
(1) Combinatorial chemical space exploration, using 1D polymer chains
containing four independent blocks with periodic boundary conditions along
the chain axis, (2) Promising repeat unit identiﬁcation, by screening based
on band gap and dielectric constant, (3) 3D structure/morphology
predictions of polymers composed of the downselected repeat units,
(4) Property predictions of the 3D systems. Finally, (5) Synthesis testing
and validation.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
appear attractive based on the measured dielectric properties. In
what follows, we describe the details of our search strategy in a stepby-step manner.
Combinatorial chemical space exploration. The ﬁrst level of
screening involves the 1D catenation of repeat units into a
polymer chain. In the present search, repeat units were constructed using four building blocks in the repeat unit with each
block drawn from the following pool of possibilities: -CH2-,
-C6H4-, -C4H2S-, -NH-, -CO-, -O-, -CS-, as depicted in Fig. 1.
These blocks were chosen because they are common in polymer
backbones, including polyethylene, polyesters, polyamides, polyethers and polyureas. After the elimination of obviously unstable
combinations of these building blocks (such as systems containing contiguous -CO- or -O- blocks) and accounting for translational and inversion symmetry, we were left with 267 unique
repeat units (c.f. Supplementary Table 1). Density functional
theory (DFT) computations were performed to determine the
optimal 1D structure of each of these systems, followed by
the estimation of the electronic and ionic contributions to the
dielectric constant by a combination of density functional
perturbation theory (DFPT) and effective medium theory28,29.
The latter approach is critical as it allows us to estimate the
dielectric constant of a macroscopic polymer based just on its 1D
structure, as explained previously28,29.
Promising repeat unit identiﬁcation. Figure 2 portrays the
relationship between the dielectric constant (electronic, ionic and
total) and the band gap for the 267 polymers, including the
prototypical system, polyethylene (when all four blocks are set to
-CH2-), which has the largest band gap and the smallest dielectric
constant of all systems studied. As can be seen from Fig. 2a, the
upper bound of the electronic part of the dielectric constant
versus the band gap data displays a near perfect inverse
dependence. This imposes a theoretical limit on the achievable
electronic part of the dielectric constant, a limit that can be
understood by regarding this property as related to a sum over
electronic transitions from occupied to unoccupied states30. On
the other hand, the ionic part of the dielectric constant, which is
determined by the infrared (IR)-active zone centre phonon modes
time-varying
moment)31,32, is not correlated with the band gap, as seen from
Fig. 2b. The ionic dielectric constant can thus be exploited to
increase the total dielectric constant without compromising the
Figure 2c, which shows the variation of the total dielectric
constant with the band gap, is a ‘map’ of the achievable
combination of these properties within the chemical space
Capacitive
electronics
applications, for example, gate insulations, could draw from the
large dielectric constant and moderate band gap region of this
plot. As illustrated in Fig. 2c, downselection, starting from the set
of 267 polymers with four-block repeat units, proceeded by
considering the polymers with total dielectric constant 4B4 eV
and band gap 4B3 eV. Polymers that survive this initial
screening step are predominantly composed of at least one of
the polar units, namely -NH-, -CO- and -O-, and at least one of
the aromatic rings, namely -C6H4- and -C6H2S-. -NH-, -CO- and
-O- tend to enhance the ionic part of the dielectric constant, while
the aromatic groups boost the electronic part. A selected
assortment of these promising polymers (especially those with
prior evidence of synthesis success) are listed in Table 1 in
decreasing order of total dielectric constant. Interestingly, none of
these speciﬁc polymers have been considered in the past for
dielectric applications, although a few other polymers in the
general classes listed in Table 1 (for example, polythiourea6) have
been shown to hold promise for dielectric applications.
Structure/morphology prediction. We now consider only the
top three downselected cases of Table 1, namely, [-NH-CO-NH-
[-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n
[-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n.
The 3D structure of these three polymers was determined
using two complementary approaches: (1) a version of the
Predictor:
Evolutionary
Xtallography
(USPEX) method33–37 specially modiﬁed to handle repeat units
rather than atoms as the building blocks, and (2) a classical
Table 1 | Promising polymer repeat units identiﬁed at Step 2
of the screening process.
System repeat unit
Polymer class
NH-CO-NH-C6H456
CO-NH-CO-C6H4
NH-CS-NH-C6H456
Polythiourea
NH-C6H4-C6H4-C6H4
CO-C6H4-CO-O
Polyester, polyanhydride
C6H4-C6H4-C6H4-O
CH2-C6H4-C6H4-O
CH2-CO-C6H4-O57
Polyether, polyketone
CH2-C6H6-CO-O
CH2-NH-CO-NH56
CH2-NH-CS-NH56
Polythiourea
CH2-C6H4-CH2-O
The screening was based on the estimated dielectric properties of the polymers and their
amenability to synthesis (past synthesis efforts, when available, are cited). The top three
polymers were taken all the way to Step 5 (synthesis and testing).
Polyethylene
Band gap (eV)
Band gap (eV)
Band gap (eV)
Electronic
Dielectric constant
Dielectric constant
Dielectric constant
Figure 2 | The dielectric constant versus band gap relationship of 1D polymers. Computed (a) electronic, (b) ionic and (c) total dielectric constant
(along the polymer chain axis) as a function of the band gap. The associated errors in the dielectric constant computed using density functional
perturbation theory for single chains, and subsequently estimated using effective medium theory for a bulk environment are also shown. The highlighted
region corresponds to the most ‘promising repeat units’ composed of at least one of -NH-, -CO- and -O-, and at least one of -C6H4- and –C6H2S- blocks.
Band gap was computed using the HSE06 electronic exchange-correlation functional.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
melt-and-quench
The former used DFT energetics (here used with 4 repeat units
per unit cell) and hence provide ground state (0 K) results, while
the latter used a newly generated force ﬁeld and hence could treat
much larger systems containing thousands of repeat units per
unit cell at nonzero temperatures. Both the modiﬁed USPEX36,37
and the melt-and-quench schemes lead to several low energy
conﬁgurations, which were equivalent within the expected
uncertainties of the force-ﬁeld and DFT energy predictions.
This is reassuring as it indicates that the ground state structures
predicted by DFT are expected to be stable at higher temperatures
as well. Figure 3 shows the energetic ordering of a few low energy
structures for each of the three polymers considered at this stage.
Simulated X-ray diffraction (XRD) and infrared (IR) spectra
based on the predicted low energy structures for all three
polymers are presented in Figs 4–6, and discussed and compared
with measurements below.
Property predictions. The computed band gap values of all the
identiﬁed low energy structures are listed in Fig. 3. As can be seen,
except in the case of [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n, the band gap (Eg)
values are over 3.5 eV for all identiﬁed structures. Computed
electronic band structure and density of states are shown in
Supplementary Information (c.f. Supplementary Figure 1). The
dielectric constants were determined using DFPT, with results for
the orientational average ranging from 4 to 6, double that of
polyethylene or polypropylene. The electronic part of the
dielectric constant for all polymers ranges from 3 to 4, placing
these with polymers that display the highest known refractive
indices38. Assuming that the predicted ground state structures
temperatures
temperatures (a reasonable assumption based on the discussion
above), the predicted band gaps and dielectric constants are
expected to be valid at those elevated temperatures as well. In
situations when amorphous polymeric phases are expected in
reality (aided by competing energetics or favourable kinetics),
some deviations in the dielectric constant with respect to those
predicted here is to be expected. Nevertheless, as dielectric
behaviour is generally dominated by local chemistry and bonding,
the deviations are expected to be small (see discussion below
pertaining to the [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n and [-NH-CS-NH-
C6H4-]n polymers). The predicted values of the total (Et) and
electronic (Ee) parts of dielectric constants for all three polymers
considered are listed in Fig. 3. As can be seen, the ﬁdelity of the
predictions of Step 2 persist at Step 4 of our process (insofar as
the band gap and dielectric constant values are concerned).
Validation through synthesis and testing. Synthesis of the
[-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n, [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n and [-NH-CS-
NH-C6H4-]n polymers proceeded via adaptation of previous
Biherringbone
Herringbone-diagonal
Alternating-diagonal
Alternating-diagonal
Alternating-parallel
Parallel-diagonal
Parallel-diagonal
Eg = 3.5 eV, t = 5.7, e = 4.0
Eg = 3.5 eV, t = 5.2, e = 4.1
Eg = 3.7 eV, t = 5.2, e = 4.1
Eg = 4.0 eV, t = 5.7, e = 4.0
Eg = 4.2 ev, t = 4.5, e = 3.1
Eg = 4.1 eV, t = 4.3, e = 3.2
Eg = 2.9 eV, t = 5.3, e = 4.3
Eg = 3.0 eV, t = 6.0, e = 4.2
Energy (meV per atom)
Figure 3 | Predicted properties and structures of the identiﬁed promising polymers. The repeat units of the three identiﬁed polymers are
(a) [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-] (b) [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-] and (c) [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]. The crystal structures of [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-] are predicted by
evolutionary structure search (using DFT) and melt-and-quench (using force-ﬁeld (FF)) schemes, while in other two polymers only evolutionary structure
search (using DFT) method has been used. The zero of the energy scale corresponds to the most stable structures. For each predicted structure, the
calculated values of the band gap (Eg), total (Et) and electronic (Ee) part of dielectric constants are also listed.
Biherringbone
Biherringbone
Biherringbone
Herringbone-diagonal
Herringbone
Herringbone-diagonal
Alternating-diagonal
Alternating
Alternating-diagonal
Intensity (a.u.)
Transmittance
Dielectric constant
Loss (tan )
Parallel-diagonal
Paralleldiagonal
Parallel-diagonal
2 (degree)
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Frequency (Hz)
1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
Figure 4 | Experimental and predicted data for the polymer with repeat unit [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]. (a) X-ray diffraction data (b) IR spectra,
and (c) dielectric spectra (top panel) and loss factor (bottom panel). Expt, experimental.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
efforts39. Measurements were performed on pressed pellets of the
synthesized polymers. The measured band gap values of the three
polymers are 3.9 eV, 4.0 eV and 3.1 eV, respectively, in good
agreement with the predictions listed in Fig. 3.
Considering [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n ﬁrst (Fig. 4a), a characteristic double peak in the XRD spectra at 2yE20 can be seen for
all the predicted structures except the ‘biherringbone’ case, in line
with the measurements, with the agreement being best for the
‘parallel-diagonal’
correspondence
measured IR spectrum (Fig. 4b) and that of the four predicted
structures is uniformly good. This is not surprising as the IR
peaks are dominated by intra-chain ‘bonded’ interactions. Such
interactions are roughly the same for all four predicted structures,
which differ largely only in the manner in which the individual
chains are packed. Based on these ﬁndings, we conclude that the
[-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n polymer is dominated by regions of
‘parallel-diagonal’ structure, although smaller portions of the
other three structures cannot be ruled out at or close to room
temperatures.
Figure 4c portrays the dielectric spectrum for the synthesized
[-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n polyurea system. Across a wide frequency
range, the dielectric constant is in the 5.4–5.8 range, and the
dielectric loss at 1 kHz is in the range of 1%, an acceptable value
for some applications. Figure 4c also shows the computed average
(over all directions) total dielectric constant values for all four
predicted [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n crystal structures. Once again,
the agreement between measurement and predictions is excellent.
The predicted XRD spectra of the [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n, and
[-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n polymers (Figs 5a and 6a) do not match
well with the measured spectra, which display broad peaks. This
indicates that the synthesized and cast [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n
and [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n polymers are in semicrystalline or
amorphous form. On the other hand, the measured and
calculated IR spectra (Figs 5b and 6b) are in good agreement
for both [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n and [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n for
the same reasons identiﬁed above in the discussion of the
[-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n polymer. The measured dielectric constant of [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]n is in the range of 4.2–4.8 and that
of [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]n is in the 5.7–6.7 range, both in good
agreement with predictions (shown in Figs 5c and 6c, and in
Fig. 3), despite the fact that the predictions are made for the
crystalline varieties of these polymers. Both polymers display
dielectric loss larger than that of the [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n.
Discussion
We have outlined a rational procedure for systematically
exploring polymer chemical spaces and identifying potentially
Alternating-diagonal
Alternatingdiagonal
Alternating-diagonal
Intensity (a.u.)
Parallel-diagonal
Paralleldiagonal
Parallel-diagonal
Transmittance
Dielectric constant
Loss (tan )
2 (degree)
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Frequency (Hz)
1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
Figure 5 | Experimental and predicted data for the polymer with repeat unit [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-]. (a) X-ray diffraction data (b) IR spectra,
and (c) dielectric spectra (top panel) and loss factor (bottom panel). Expt, experimental.
Intensity (a.u.)
Transmittance
Dielectric constant
Loss (tan )
2 (degree)
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Frequency (Hz)
2,000 2,500
Alternating-parallel
Alternatingparallel
Alternating-parallel
Figure 6 | Experimental and predicted data for the polymer with repeat unit [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]. (a) X-ray diffraction data (b) IR spectra,
and (c) dielectric spectra (top panel) and loss factor (bottom panel). Expt, experimental.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
useful dielectrics based on the dielectric constant and band
gap as initial screening criteria. This procedure is computationally
driven (with ample guidance from chemical intuition and
synthesis considerations) and uses a combination of quantum
mechanical calculations, force-ﬁeld simulations and structure
and property prediction schemes in a hierarchical manner.
A class of organic polymers involving seven distinct building
blocks was screened using this approach and several promising
polymers were identiﬁed. A common feature of these downselected polymers is the occurrence of at least one of the polar
units, -NH-, -CO- and -O-, and at least one of the aromatic
rings, -C6H4- and -C6H2S-. Three of the most promising cases
synthesized
favourable
between the measured and predicted (structural, electronic and
dielectric) properties
of all three polymers,
dielectric loss of one of these (namely, [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n)
provides validation and hope for such a rational computationally
driven approach for materials discovery. Indeed, processable
variants of the polymers identiﬁed here are presently being
further evaluated.
While the present development is certainly a signiﬁcant
advance over empiricism, consistent with the emerging paradigm
of computation-driven materials (down)selection15,16, it is only
an initial attempt that should be extended by including other
critical properties in the screening process. Such properties
include dielectric loss, dielectric breakdown strength, mechanical
behaviour, glass transition temperature and charge carrier
mobility. The current state-of-the-art limits our ability to
predict these properties rapidly and with high ﬁdelity. It is
hoped that recent advances in data-driven and ﬁrst-principles
methodologies will allow us overcome these limitations with
time16,40. While the present effort has focussed primarily on
high energy density capacitor dielectrics, polymers for other
applications (for example, organic semiconductors or organic
photovoltaics) can be identiﬁed in a systematic manner using an
extended version of the present strategy by considering other
relevant screening criteria and many types of blocks.
First-principles computations. The quantum mechanical computations were
performed using DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio software
package41,42. The generalized gradient approximation functional, parametrized by
Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE)43 to treat the electronic exchange-correlation
interaction, the projector augmented wave44 potentials and plane-wave basis
functions up to a kinetic energy cutoff of 500 eV, were employed. The supercells
were relaxed using a conjugate gradient algorithm until the forces on all atoms
were o0.02 eV Å  1. As the PBE functional is known to underestimate band gaps
of insulators, the Heyd  Scuseria  Ernzerhof HSE06 functional45 was used to
obtain corrected band gap values for all systems considered.
The 1D systems considered in Step 1 were composed of all-trans inﬁnitely
long isolated chains containing four independent building units in a supercell
geometry (with periodic boundary conditions along the axial direction). In a
combinatorial and exhaustive manner, each block in the polymer backbone was
allowed to be one of the following units: -CH2-, -NH-, -C( ¼ O)-, -C6H4-
(benzene), -C4H2S- (thiophene), -C( ¼ S)- or -O-, which are commonly seen in
polymer backbones29,46,47. The scheme results in 267 symmetry unique cases.
A Monkhorst–Pack k-point mesh of 1  1  k (with kc 450) was used to
produce converged results for a supercell of length c (Å) along the chain
direction (that is, the z direction). The stress component along the z direction was
required to be o1.0  10  2 GPa. The dielectric permittivity of the isolated
polymer chains placed in a large supercell was ﬁrst computed within the DFPT48,49
formalism, which includes contributions from the polymer as well as from the
surrounding vacuum region of the supercell. Next, treating the supercell as a
vacuum-polymer composite, effective medium theory50 was used to estimate the
dielectric constant of just the polymer chains using methods described
recently28,29.
In the case of polymer crystals (discussed below), van der Waals interactions
were taken into account using the vdW-TS functional51. Phonon dispersion curves
were calculated using the supercell approach with the ﬁnite displacement method
as implemented in the PHONOPY code52, while FullProf suite53 was used to
simulate the XRD patterns.
Structure prediction using evolutionary algorithm. A speciﬁcally designed
constrained evolutionary algorithm36,37, embodied in the USPEX code33–35,37 was
used to predict polymeric crystal structures starting from the single polymeric
chains discussed above (using ﬁrst-principles quantum mechanical computations
for the total ground state energy of the crystals). This newly developed method
uses a speciﬁcation of well-deﬁned molecular repeat units rather than individual
atoms as the starting point36. The diversity of the population of structures is
enhanced by using space-group symmetry combined with random cell parameters,
and random positions and orientations of the molecular units36,37. During the
evolutionary optimization, structures with different sequence and packing of these
repeat units are generated and relaxed. We performed multiple runs of
evolutionary search with two and four repeat units. The total energies were
obtained with the PBE exchange-correlation functionals using the dispersion
correction prescribed by the vdW-TS approach51. In all cases considered here, the
energetic orderings are invariant with respect to the choice of different exchangecorrelation functionals.
Structure prediction using the melt-and-quench scheme. The simulations
were performed using the LAMMPS molecular dynamics package54 and the
OPLS-2005 force ﬁeld55. The polymer [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-]n requires a torsion
potential for N-C-N-CA (where CA is an aromatic carbon) which is not present in
the force ﬁeld. This potential was calculated using the molecule CO-(NH-C6H4)2
via ﬁtting to the difference in energy, between using the force ﬁeld and using
Hartree–Fock 6-31G*, minimized under constraint of the two torsions of this type
in a series of calculations to sweep out the full range of motion. To make the
torsion potential ﬁt all conﬁgurations satisfactorily, it was necessary to modify
the atomic partial charges. These were set to match Mulliken charges scaled down
by a factor of 1.86, and the charges of H and CA bonded to N were adjusted to
ensure a good ﬁt.
Two kinds of simulations were performed, which differed in whether the
polymers were terminated with an end group within the periodic cell or whether
they were covalently bonded to the other end of the polymer via the periodic
wrapping. The ﬁrst set consisted of 18mer chains terminating in phenyl rings.
A single chain was quenched into a straight conformation corresponding to the
minimization of all bonds, angles and torsions. The single chain was replicated in a
6  6 rectangular array. The system was heated at 1 K ps  1, and the structure was
observed to change between 800 and 860 K. The 860 K conﬁguration was selected
for cooling at various rates. At the cooling rate of  10 K ps  1, a ‘parallel’ crystal
was produced with a ‘herringbone’ defect, but cooling at  1 ps  1 produced a
perfect ‘parallel’ crystal. After further study, this melt-and-quench process was
repeated starting with a perfect ‘parallel-diagonal’ crystal. During heating at
1 K ps  1, this crystal underwent two transitions between 710 and 810 K before
showing signs of melting at 850 K. The 820 K conﬁguration cooled at either  1 or
 0.1 K ps  1 yielded a ‘biherringbone’ crystal.
The second set of simulations consisted of a 4  4 array of 4mer chains
connected to themselves through the periodic boundary, making them effectively
inﬁnite. Owing to the periodic restriction, nematic order remains at very high
temperatures (1,000 K). Crystals were obtained by cooling from this hightemperature state. The initial conﬁguration of the crystals before heating is thus
immaterial. Usually, the ‘herringbone’ conﬁguration was obtained, in both fast
(  10 K ps  1) and slow quenches (  0.05 K ps  1), but two cases resulted in
‘biherringbone’ conﬁgurations (  10 K ps  1,  0.2 K ps  1). ‘Parallel’ crystals
were never obtained after cooling if the system had been heated 4900 K.
Synthesis and characterization details. For the synthesis of the ﬁrst two polymers, namely, [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-] and [-CO-NH-CO-C6H4-], a ﬂame-dried,
argon-ﬂushed 125 ml round bottom ﬂask equipped with a reﬂux condenser,
gas inlet, magnetic stirbarand 50-ml dry dimethylsulphoxide were used. In the
polyurea case [-NH-CO-NH-C6H4-], equimolar amounts of p-phenylene diisocyanate and p-phenylenediamine were used, while for the polyimide [-CO-NH-
CO-C6H4-], equimolar amounts of terephthalamide and terephthaloyl chloride
were used (35 mmol). The mixtures were heated at 350 K for 8 h under pre-puriﬁed
argon, after which they were poured into dry tetrahydrofuran. The white solid
precipitates were ﬁltered and washed copiously in fresh tetrahydrofuran, followed
by drying in vacuo. The yields for the polyurea and polyimide were nearly
quantitative.
The following synthesis route was adopted for the [-NH-CS-NH-C6H4-]
polymer. To a dry 100 ml three-neck ﬂask, 0.9614 g (5 mmol) of p-phenylene
diisothiocyanate and 10 ml dry dimethylsulfoxide were added under nitrogen with
stirring, followed by the addition of 0.5407 g (10 mmol) of p-phenylenediamine.
The reaction was carried out at room temperature. After 6 h, a white powder
crashed out of the solution. The mixture was poured into 150 ml of methanol,
ﬁltered and washed with methanol several times, and dried in vacuo. A white solid
was obtained at 89% yield (1.337 g).
XRD patterns were obtained on a Bruker D5005 X-ray diffractometer equipped
with a 2.2 kW copper X-ray tube. The dielectric spectra were obtained on an
IMASS time domain dielectric spectrometer. Measurements were taken by
sandwiching a pressed pellet of material between silicone rubber guarded
electrodes. Pellets were prepared in a hydraulic press with a 1 inch circular pellet
mould. IR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet Magna-IR 560 spectrometer using
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4845 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5845 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
KBr pellets, and the bandgaps were determined using optical data obtained on a
Varian Cary 5000 UV/Visible spectrometer.