© Nature Publishing Group
August 30, 1958
LETTERS TO THE EDITORS
The Editors do not hold themselves responsible
for opinions expressed by their correspondents.
No notice is taken of anonymous communications.
Cancer and Smoking
THE curious associations with lung cancer found in
relation to smoking habits do not, in the minds of
some of us, lend themselves easily to the simple
conclusion that the products of combustion reaching
the surface of the bronchus induce, though after a
long interval, the development of a cancer. If, for
example, it were possible to infer that smoking cigarettes is a cause of this disease, it would equally be
possible to infer on exactly similar grounds that
inhaling cigarette smoke was a practice of considerable prophylactic value in preventing the disease, for
the practice of inhaling is rarer among patients with
cancer of the lung than with others.
Such results suggest that an error has been made,
of an old kind, in arguing from correlation to causation, and that the possibility should be explored that
the different smoking classes, non-smokers, cigarette
smokers, cigar smokers, pipe smokers, etc., have
adopted their habits partly by reason of their personal
temperaments and dispositions, and are not lightly
to be assumed to be equivalent in their genotypic
composition.
Such differences in genetic make-up
between these classes would naturally be associated
with differences of disease incidence without the
disease being causally connected with smoking. It
would then seem not so paradoxical that the stronger
fumes of pipes or cigars should be so much less
associated with cancer than those of cigarettes, or
that the practice of drawing cigarette smoke in bulk
into the lung should have apparently a protective
.A letter of mine in Nature 1 included a brief first
report of some data on the smoking habits of twins
in Germany kindly supplied by Prof. v. Verschuer.
What was evident in these data, which concerned
only males, was that the smoking habits of monozygotic, or one-egg, twins were clearly more alike than
those of twins derived from two eggs.
The monozygotic twins are identical in genotype and the clear
difference in these data gave positive prima jacie
evidence that among the many causes which may
influence the smoking habit, the genotype is not
unimportant.
Unfortunately, considerable propaganda is now
being developed to convince the public that cigarette
smoking is dangerous, and it is perhaps natural that
efforts should be made to discredit evidence which
suggests a different view. Assumptions are put forward which, if true, would show my inference from
von Verschuer's data not indeed to be false bui; at
least to be inconclusive. I may refer to an anonymous
writer "Geminus" in the New Scientist•, who supports
in this way "what is rapidly becoming an accepted
truth-that smoking can cause lung cancer".
If it could be assumed as known facts (a) that
twins greatly influence each other's smoking habits
and (b) that this influence is much stronger between
monozygotic than between dizygotic twins, then an
alternative explanation would be afforded for the
result I have emphasized. The assumptions can be
supported by eloquence, but they should, for scientific
pi::u-po8e8, be supported by verifiable observations.
Since my letter was written, however, I have
received from Dr. Eliot Slater, of the Maudsley
Hospital (London, S.E.5), some further data, the
greater part of which concern girl twins, and in this
way supply a valuable supplement to Verschuer's
data, and in which, moreover, a considerable number
of pairs were separated at or shortly after birth.
For the resemblance in smoking habit, these
female pairs give :
Monozygotic
So far, there is only a clear confirmation of the
conclusion from the German data that the monozygotics are much more alike than the dizygotics in
their smoking habits.
The peculiar value of these
data, however, lies in the subdivision of the monozygotic pairs into those separated at birth and those
brought up together.
These are:
~ot separated
Of the nine cases of unlike smoking habit, only
four occur among the twenty-seven separated at
It would appear that the small proportion
unlike among these 53 monozygotic pairs is not to
be ascribed to mutual influence.
There is nothing to stop those who greatly desire
it from believing that lung cancer is caused by
smoking cigarettes.
They should also believe that
inhaling cigarette smoke is a protection. To believe
either is, however, to run the risk of failing to
recognize, and therefore failing to prevent, other and
more genuine causes.
RONALD A. FISHER
Department of Genetics,
Cambridge.
1 Fisher, R. A., Nature, 182, 108 .
2 "Gemlnus", New Scientist, 4, 440 .
Density of Acetylene
THE literature values for the density of gaseous
acetylene are markedly discordant.
The principal
data, in order of publication, are summarized in
Table l; the values given are at g = 980·665 cm. /
sec.• unless otherwise indicated.
I Density I
Corrected to
standard g
Maass and Russell
Howarth and Burt
Deduced from
compressibility
Probably at
standard g
Holemann and Hasselm:mn
In addition, International Critical Tables give a
value of l · 17 3 gm. /I. and other authorities choose
one or more of the values that have been quoted. A
critical survey of the literature suggested that the
true value wa.<i in the neighbourhood of l · 171 gm./!.,
but in view of the industrial importance of acetylene
it was decided to re-determine the standard density,
among other properties, by the indirect method of
measuring the gas imperfection with high accuracy.
Gaseous acetylene was obtained from the National
Chemical Laboratory, Teddington, the eo-opera-