Neural Correlates of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive
Impairment: A Systematic and Quantitative Meta-Analysis
involving 1,351 Patients
Matthias L. Schroetera,b, Timo Steinc,d, Nina Maslowskia, and Jane Neumanna
aMax-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Stephanstr. 1A
bDay Clinic of Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Liebigstr. 22A, 04103 Leipzig
cDepartment of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 München,
dDepartment of Psychology, Princeton University, Green Hall, Princeton, 08540 New Jersey; USA
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. Its prodromal stage amnestic mild
cognitive impairment is characterized by deficits of anterograde episodic memory. The development
of standardized imaging inclusion criteria has to be regarded as a prerequisite for future diagnostic
systems. Moreover, successful treatment requires isolating imaging markers predicting the disease.
Accordingly, we conducted a systematic and quantitative meta-analysis to reveal the prototypical
neural correlates of Alzheimer's disease and its prodromal stage. To prevent any a priori assumptions
and enable a data-driven approach only studies applying quantitative automated whole brain analysis
were included. Finally, 40 studies were identified involving 1,351 patients and 1,097 healthy control
subjects reporting either atrophy or decreases in glucose utilization and perfusion. The currently most
sophisticated and best-validated of coordinate-based voxel-wise meta-analyses was applied
(anatomical likelihood estimates). The meta-analysis reveals that early Alzheimer's disease affects
structurally the (trans-)entorhinal and hippocampal region, functionally the inferior parietal lobules
and precuneus. Results further may suggest that atrophy in the (trans-)entorhinal area/hippocampus
and hypometabolism/hypoperfusion in the inferior parietal lobules predict most reliably the
progression from amnestic mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease, whereas changes in
the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus are unspecific. Fully developed Alzheimer's disease
involved additionally a frontomedian-thalamic network. In conclusion, the meta-analysis
characterizes the prototypical neural substrates of Alzheimer's disease and its prodromal stage
amnestic mild cognitive impairment. By isolating predictive markers it enables successful treatment
strategies in the future and contributes to standardized imaging inclusion criteria for Alzheimer's
disease as suggested for future diagnostic systems.
Corresponding author: Matthias L. Schroeter, MD, PhD, MA, Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Stephanstr.
1A, 04103 Leipzig, Germany, email: , phone: ++49-341-9724962, fax: ++49-341-9724989.
Supplementary Information: Tables S1-S3 describe the characteristics and Figures S1-S3 show the maxima of the several studies, which
were included in the meta-analysis.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
 
Neuroimage. 2009 October 1; 47(4): 1196–1206. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.037.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia . Its prevalence is below 1% in individuals aged 60-64 years, but shows an
almost exponential increase with age, so that in people aged 85 years or older the prevalence
is between 24% and 33% in the Western world. In 2001, more than 24 million people had
dementia, a number that is expected to double every 20 years up to 81 million in 2040.
Accordingly, AD is a major public health problem. The majority of patients suffer from
sporadic AD, whereas familial AD is a very rare autosomal dominant disease with early onset
before 48 years of age and prevalence below 0.1% . AD is a slowly progressive
disorder, with insidious onset and early impairment of episodic memory; other signs include
impaired judgment, decision-making, orientation, aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia . Histopathological changes consist of amyloid
β aggregation and deposition in senile or neuritic plaques, and of tau hyperphosphorylation
with formation of neurofibrillary tangles in medial temporal and other cortical regions, starting
already 20-30 years before clinical onset and finally injuring neurons and synapses .
The preclinical phase is designated amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) . It is defined as memory
complaints and deficits, which are greater than expected for an individual's age and education
level but do not interfere notably with activities of daily life such as in dementia. Some people
with MCI remain stable or return to normal over time, but more than half progress to dementia
within 5 years. Because the identification of MCI as a risk state for AD might enable disease
modifying treatment strategies in the future, one of the most important challenges for
neuroimaging is discriminating MCI patients progressing later to AD from patients who will
not . These criteria have now
fallen behind the unprecedented growth of scientific knowledge regarding biomarkers for AD/
MCI, namely structural and functional neuroimaging. It was proposed to incorporate these
biomarkers into revised diagnostic criteria in the future .
Accordingly, one aim of the present meta-analysis was to characterize the prototypical neural
substrates of AD and its prodromal stage amnestic MCI. We applied the systematic and
quantitative meta-analytic approach as suggested by Turkeltaub et al. , which is
considered the most sophisticated and best-validated of coordinate-based voxel-wise metaanalyses . This method can extract the prototypical neural networks for AD
and MCI, because it considers only peak coordinates for each region, whether small or large.
We included morphometric studies investigating brain atrophy with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and imaging studies measuring reduction in glucose utilization or in perfusion
with positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) during rest. Moreover, we wanted to isolate neural markers predicting conversion
from amnestic MCI to AD. Because AD progressively impairs episodic memory , we hypothesized alterations in the medial temporal lobes, medial
diencephalon, parietal cortex and prefrontal regions . Furthermore,
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
we postulated that alterations of these brain regions may predict conversion from amnestic
MCI to AD.
Materials and Methods
Data Sources & Study Selection
MedLine and Current Contents search engines were used to identify studies on morphometry,
glucose utilization and perfusion in AD and MCI (search strategy: [Alzheimer or [mild and
cognitive and impairment]] and [MRI or MRT or PET or SPECT]) published until February
2007. Primary authors were contacted to obtain additional information if necessary. Studies
were examined to fulfill the following inclusion criteria: peer-reviewed, original studies,
patients diagnosed according to internationally recognized diagnostic criteria , patients compared to age-matched healthy controls, quantitative automated whole brain
analysis method, results normalized to a stereotactic space such as the Talairach or the Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) reference system, and respective co-ordinates are available.
When maxima were reported in the MNI reference system, they were transformed to the
Talairach space according to a formula proposed by Matthew Brett (published in the internet:
 Amnestic MCI was
defined by criteria developed by Petersen et al. or by memory
complaint, objective impairment in memory or in one other area of cognitive function in two
perfusion studies , and one MRI study . Studies had to fulfill the following exclusion criteria: no solely region-of-interest
analysis to prevent any a priori assumptions with regard to the involved neural networks and
to enable a data-driven approach, no case studies, no familial and visual variant AD (posterior
cortical atrophy) as they may constitute other types of AD compared to sporadic, non-familial
AD, and no studies investigating substantially overlapping patient populations. Moreover, we
excluded generally functional imaging studies investigating brain activation during cognitive
stimulation, because they apply diverse psychological paradigms hampering quantitative metaanalytic techniques. Although medication might influence brain metabolism and perfusion, we
could not include this issue in the exclusion criteria, because only a few studies (24%) contained
respective information.
Data Abstraction & Study Characteristics
Literature search, selection of studies according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria and
compilation of coordinates for the several contrasts were performed independently by two
investigators (T.S. and N.M.) and any disagreements were resolved by consensus. We focused
on the differences between patients with AD or MCI and healthy controls. Additionally, we
involved studies examining patients with MCI, of whom some progressed later to AD
(converter) and some not (non-converter). Contrasts between patients and healthy volunteers
were included reporting either atrophy (MRI), decreases in glucose utilization (18Ffluorodeoxyglucose-[FDG]-PET) or perfusion (H215O-PET, 99mTchexamethylpropyleneamine oxime-[HMPAO]-SPECT, 99mTc-ethylcysteinate dimmer-
[ECD]-SPECT). Only three studies reported brain regions of either relatively increased glucose
utilization or perfusion in the patient groups if compared with control subjects. Because the other numerous
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
studies did not show such alterations, its influence on the meta-analysis may be regarded as
negligible.
Quantitative Data Synthesis
We applied the anatomical likelihood estimate meta-analysis method . The idea behind
this method is to determine brain regions that exhibit a higher density of peak coordinates
reported across studies than would arise by chance. As the accuracy of peak coordinates
reported in different imaging studies is limited, for example, by anatomical intersubject
variability, data smoothing, or the use of different brain templates , peak coordinates should not be viewed as single points but rather as
localization probability distributions centered at these coordinates. Thus, peaks of atrophy,
hypometabolism or hypoperfusion were modeled using a 3D Gaussian probability distribution
where σ is the standard deviation for the Gaussian and d is the Euclidean distance of a voxel
to the peak. For a particular voxel and a given peak with distance d, p can be viewed as an
estimate for the likelihood that the given peak lies within this voxel .
After calculating this anatomical likelihood estimate (ALE) for each voxel and each peak, an
ALE map can be created, representing for each voxel the likelihood that at least one of the
reported peaks is located there . Specifically, given two likelihood
estimates pa and pb, representing the likelihood that peak a and peak b lie within a particular
voxel x, respectively, the ALE representing the likelihood that at least one of the two peaks
lies within this voxel x can be calculated as
For more than two peaks, the equation can be applied iteratively.
We wanted to examine the neural correlates of AD and amnestic MCI, and to explore the subtle
distinction between patients with amnestic MCI converting later to AD (converter) and those
who maintain the diagnosis MCI (non-converter). Hence, we created separate ALE maps for
the coordinates from studies involving subjects with AD, subjects with amnestic MCI, and
subjects that convert from amnestic MCI to AD. Because it is controversial whether functional
alterations and atrophy coincide anatomically in dementia , the ALE maps were calculated separately for the three imaging methods controlling for
confounding effects. Only for the contrast converters vs. non-converters (from amnestic MCI
to AD) MRI, FDG-PET and perfusion studies had to be pooled to include a sufficient number
of studies. ALE values were determined on a grid of isotropic 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxels. We used
a standard deviation of 5 mm resulting in a full-width half-maximum of 11.8 mm. This
distribution width was chosen to approximately match filter sizes commonly used in anatomical
MRI, FDG-PET and perfusion studies, and to match the potential bias of the MNI-Talairach
space transformation by Matthew Brett .
In a second step, empirical ALE maps from the different groups were compared to ALE maps
for randomly distributed maxima. The same number of maxima as included in the empirical
ALE map was uniformly distributed 1,000 times over a brain volume mask. Histograms of the
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
thousand sets of randomly distributed maxima were averaged to obtain a histogram
representing the noise distribution of ALE values. This histogram served as a null hypothesis
against which the significance of the empirical ALE values was tested. As in the study by
Turkeltaub et al. , a conservative ALE threshold corresponding to a level of 0.01%
(p<0.0001) was chosen to reduce the probability of type I errors and to identify only the most
consistent regions of atrophy, hypometabolism and -perfusion. The null hypothesis of random
distribution was rejected for those voxels that exceeded this threshold.
Trial Flow & Study Characteristics
Figure 1 shows the meta-analysis flow. The initial search yielded for MCI/AD 311/1703
studies. Finally, 14/26 studies met inclusion and exclusion criteria and were included into the
meta-analysis (Tables S1 to S3 in the supplementary information). Table 1 illustrates the
number of studies, the number of subjects and clinical characteristics for the several groups.
In sum, 1,351 patients (826 with AD, 525 with amnestic MCI) and 1,097 healthy control
subjects were involved in the meta-analysis. We conducted an ANOVA analysis with two
factors, diagnosis (AD vs. MCI) and method (MRI vs. FDG-PET vs. perfusion) to test
differences in scores of the Mini Mental State Examination. As expected, patients with
amnestic MCI showed higher mean scores than patients with AD (df=1, F=64.5, p<0.001) for
each of the imaging methods (1-tailed post hoc Student's t-tests, p<0.001, respectively). There
was no influence of the main factor method and no significant diagnosis × method interaction
(df=2, 2; F=0.4, 1.1; p=0.68, 0.34). The various studies did not consistently report other clinical
characteristics.
Quantitative Data Synthesis
Figures S1-S3 (in the supplementary information) show the maxima of the several studies,
which were included in the meta-analysis. For each study all maxima were taken into account
to avoid any a priori assumptions. Four of the altogether 454 coordinates (0.9%) were excluded
from the analysis, because they were located more than 10 mm outside the brain. The
quantitative meta-analyses identified numerous clusters above the respective ALE thresholds
that are summarized in Table 2 and Table 3. Figures 2-4 display above-threshold voxels on an
individual brain in Talairach space for the different patient groups. Firstly, we want to report
results for the contrast amnestic MCI vs. control subjects (Figure 2, Table 2). Glucose
utilization and perfusion were diminished in the inferior parietal lobules (BA 39/40), and the
posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus (BA 23/31). Moreover, hypometabolism was detected
in the left anterior superior insula (BA 15). Atrophy involved the left temporal pole/anterior
superior temporal sulcus (BA 21/38), right amygdala, and gyrus rectus bilaterally (BA 11).
Results for the comparison AD vs. control subjects are illustrated in Figure 3 and Table 2.
Reductions in glucose utilization and perfusion coincided in the inferior parietal lobules (BA
39/40), posterior superior temporal sulcus (BA 21/22), precuneus (BA 7/31), and posterior
cingulate cortex . Glucose utilization was diminished
additionally in the anterior medial frontal cortex, pregenual anterior cingulate gyrus (BA
9/10/32), and right inferior temporal sulcus (BA 20/21), whereas perfusion was reduced in the
right frontal pol (BA 10), left posterior middle frontal gyrus (BA 8/9), and left hippocampal
head. Atrophy as measured by MRI showed a different pattern. It involved a network consisting
of both amygdalae, both anterior hippocampal formations, unci and (trans-)entorhinal areas
(BA 28/34). On the right also the hippocampal body and tail were affected. Furthermore, the
meta-analysis revealed atrophy in the left medial thalamus, posterior insula (BA 13), and left
middle temporal gyrus/superior temporal sulcus (BA 21/22).
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The last analysis characterized the amnestic MCI patients in more detail. Namely it examined
the prognostic and (potentially) therapeutically important question if one can judge from brain
scans during the state of MCI whether the patient progresses/converts to AD (Figure 4, Table
2). The follow up period had on average a length of approximately two years (23.3±8.0 months;
range 12-36 months). As a smaller number of studies was available, the three methods (FDG-
PET, perfusion, MRI) were not considered separately, rather pooled. Patients with MCI later
progressing to AD (converter) showed seven significant above-threshold clusters if compared
with control subjects, namely bilaterally in the vicinity of the parahippocampal gyrus/(trans-)
entorhinal area, and hippocampal body (BA 28/34-36), in the angular and supramarginal gyrus
(BA 39/40), the posterior cingulate gyrus and inferior precuneus (BA 23/31). For patients with
stable MCI (non-converter) we detected a neural network consisting of the dorsal posterior
cingulate cortex/inferior precuneus (BA 23/32) and the right gyrus rectus extending into the
medial orbital gyrus (BA 11/13/14) in comparison with control subjects. Analyzing maxima
from studies contrasting MCI converters vs. non-converters revealed a cluster mainly in the
left inferior parietal lobule and precuneus (BA 7/31/39/40).
Because not all single studies investigating MCI converters and non-converters compared both
groups directly, we applied another method to compare the ALE map of converters vs. control
subjects with the ALE map of non-converters vs. control subjects. Recently, such a technique
for making statistical comparisons between ALE meta-analysis maps was suggested to assess
the difference between two ALE maps under the null hypothesis that differences between both
sets of coordinates are uniformly distributed . Specifically, ALE maps from two sets of
coordinates are subtracted from each other to yield an empirical difference map. The
corresponding histogram is then tested against the histogram obtained from 1,000 randomly
generated difference maps, thereby again applying a very conservative threshold to reduce type
I errors. Results are illustrated in Figure 4 and Table 3. Patients with amnestic MCI later
progressing to AD (converters) showed specific deficits bilaterally in the vicinity of the
parahippocampal gyrus/(trans-)entorhinal area, and hippocampal body (BA 28/34-36), in the
angular and supramarginal gyrus (BA 39/40), and right gyrus rectus/medial orbital gyrus (BA
11/13/14).
Discussion
We applied a systematic and quantitative meta-analytic approach to characterize the
prototypical neural substrates of AD/amnestic MCI and to isolate neural markers predicting
the conversion from amnestic MCI to AD. It revealed specifically for each imaging method
the impaired neural networks for AD and MCI. Results for AD agree with a previous
comprehensive meta-analysis that calculated effect sizes for various predefined anatomical
regions . Because more relevant studies were now available, we could
improve the meta-analytic approach decisively by including additionally MCI patients,
investigating each imaging method separately, and applying a new meta-analytic method for
imaging data enabling a data-driven approach .
Because we included only those studies that used quantitative automated whole brain analysis
and normalized results to a stereotactic space, presumptions for anatomical regions such as in
region-of-interest studies could not confound results.
Our results together with previous imaging and histopathological studies show that AD affects
limbic structures in the early and midcourse that are relatively spared in normal aging . Neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil
threads occur initially in the transentorhinal cortex (transentorhinal stages I-II according to
Braak), and subsequently spread into the entorhinal region/hippocampal formation proper
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(limbic stages III-IV) followed by destruction of virtually all isocortical association areas
(isocortical stages V-VI) . Interestingly, these neurofibrillary tangles are tightly related to neuropsychological
impairments and dementia severity in contrast to amyloid deposits . A recent study has shown that MCI is
associated mainly with Braak stages II and III, between the transentorhinal and limbic stages,
whereas the transition to AD occurs when neurofibrillary abnormalities spread beyond the
medial temporal lobes (stages IV+) . Our meta-analysis may support
alterations in the (trans-)entorhinal area/hippocampal body specifically in converters,
predicting progression from MCI to AD. These alterations are related to atrophy as suggested
by the results for amnestic MCI/AD vs. control subjects. Furthermore, our meta-analysis
indicates that the inferior parietal lobules and precuneus are functionally affected in amnestic
MCI converters, because results for parietal areas are most probably based on perfusion and
glucose utilization studies (see again results for MCI/AD vs. control subjects). Parietal
impairments might be caused by regional amyloid deposits as indicated by histopathological
and imaging studies , and by disconnection from the hippocampus through disruption of
the cingulum bundle (so called diaschisis hypothesis) .
As discussed above one of the most important questions for imaging is the specific
discrimination between converters, later progressing to AD, and non-converters, particularly
for treatment purposes . This analysis isolated differences in the vicinity of the
parahippocampal, (trans-)entorhinal, and hippocampal areas, and in parietal regions (inferior
parietal lobules and precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex). Because we pooled data across
different imaging methods for this analysis to include a sufficient number of studies and enable
high statistical power, we cannot relate these changes to one imaging method specifically.
However, if one takes into account the results of the first method specific analysis (amnestic
MCI/AD vs. healthy controls) one might assume that parahippocampal, (trans-)entorhinal, and
hippocampal effects are related mainly to atrophy, whereas parietal alterations represent
reductions in perfusion and glucose metabolism. Reliable imaging indicators for conversion
from MCI to AD have to comply with the following two conditions: (i) Brain regions have to
be significantly affected in the contrast converters vs. non-converters. (ii) Brain regions must
not be affected in non-converters in comparison with control subjects warranting specificity
by excluding false positive predictions. Accordingly, our comprehensive meta-analysis may
support the notion that atrophy in the (trans-)entorhinal area and hippocampus can predict
which MCI patients will develop AD . Previous
studies reported specific reductions of perfusion and glucose utilization in the posterior
cingulate cortex and in the temporoparietal region in MCI converters . Our data
suggest that alterations in the inferior parietal lobules are the most reliable functional indicators
for conversion to AD, whereas changes in the posterior cingulate cortex/inferior precuneus
may have to be regarded as unspecific as they were also observed in non-converters if compared
with control subjects.
If one considers the neural correlates of fully developed AD, our data indicate a substantial
coincidence with those of amnestic MCI patients later converting to AD. Hence, our data
support current concepts regarding MCI/AD as a continuous process .
Although AD involves, additionally to MCI, a frontomedian-thalamic network, such alterations
are also observed in other types of dementia i. e. frontotemporal dementia, reducing their
diagnostic specificity . The same holds true
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
for alterations in the amygdalae, which also occur in semantic dementia . Although, besides AD, semantic dementia and progressive non-fluent aphasia affect
also the temporal lobes, alterations are located in the pole area in these diseases. According to
present clinical criteria AD is mainly a diagnosis of exclusion and a definite diagnosis can only
be made by neuropathology . By defining its structural
and functional neuroimaging markers, our meta-analysis may contribute to defining
standardized (imaging) inclusion criteria for AD as suggested for future diagnostic systems
such as the DSM-V .
Finally, we want to place neural alterations in a framework of cognitive neuropsychiatry by
relating neural networks to cognitive dysfunctions . AD is
characterized in its earliest stage, MCI, by severe deficits in anterograde episodic memory with
poor encoding and rapid forgetting of new material . Encoding and consolidation of episodic and
semantic memory, that might also be hampered, have been related to several ‘bottleneck
structures’, namely the medial temporal lobes, the medial diencephalon, the basal forebrain
and prefrontal regions . It was proposed that two limbic circuits,
the Papez circuit and amygdaloid or basolateral circuit, enable encoding and consolidation.
Whereas the former circuit transfers information from short- to longterm memory, the latter
one seems to be predominantly engaged in emotional processing and in encoding the emotional
valence of experiences. Our meta-analysis indicates that its two most important parts are
affected, namely the hippocampal-entorhinal complex in amnestic MCI, and later in AD the
limbic thalamus in agreement with histopathological reports . Moreover, MCI and AD involve
the amygdala, another memory relevant structure . Comparing
patients with early-onset AD to control subjects the ALE analysis revealed additionally one
cluster in the fornix, another relevant part of the Papez circuit (maximum at Talairach
coordinates 1, 6, 0; cluster size 54 mm3, ALE value 0.005593).
Episodic memory retrieval is associated with the reciprocally interconnected posterior
cingulate cortex and precuneus as well as lateral posterior parietal cortex beside prefrontal
cortices . The
meta-analysis shows hypometabolism/hypoperfusion in these structures in amnestic MCI and
AD, again in correspondence with histopathological data . Episodic memory has per se autobiographical reference, since it entails the
recollection of information that is linked to an individual's personal experience . Accordingly, our meta-analysis revealed alterations in the anterior medial
prefrontal cortex that is involved in self-monitoring/self-referential processing and in the
amygdala . AD
patients are early impaired in tests of autobiographical memory in relation with
hypometabolism in the precuneus, posterior cingulate and inferior parietal lobules . The anterior medial frontal cortex (BA 9/32) has also been discussed as the key
region for theory of mind or ‘mentalizing’, where mental states have to be attributed to self
and other people, and which enables social cognition, together with the temporoparietal
junction area . AD patients are impaired in
such tasks . Deficits in their facial emotion processing
 might be related to a disturbed extended neural system
for face perception, namely the amygdalae . Furthermore, our metaanalysis shows that the left temporal pole is affected, which has been discussed as part of the
semantic memory network .
By the time most patients are diagnosed with AD, deficits in attention and executive abilities
are usually apparent . These capabilities
are related to the anterior cingulate cortex and the inferior frontal junction area . Our meta-analysis identified alterations in these brain regions
in AD, namely hypometabolism in the anterior cingulate cortex and hypoperfusion in the left
posterior middle frontal gyrus near the inferior frontal junction area. We did not find these
networks in amnestic MCI in correspondence with histopathological studies and the
observation that, although subjects later progressing to dementia have attentional/executive
deficits if appropriate experimental tasks are administered, these deficits are overshadowed by
amnesia . Visuo-spatial and perceptual symptoms usually
follow in the wake of episodic memory and attentional deficits . Our meta-analysis revealed alterations in the inferior parietal
lobules extending to the intraparietal sulcus and in the precuneus, regions processing visuospatial information and enabling spatially guided behavior .
Additionally, the hippocampus/parahippocampal cortex have been discussed in the context of
spatial processing . In agreement with preserved proper
language functions in the early course of AD the meta-analysis did not reveal alterations in the
respective network . Recently, it has been suggested that
episodic memory, theory of mind, navigation, and prospection rely on the same mesiotemporalfrontoparietal core network and are subcomponents of the more general abilities of ‘selfprojection’ or ‘scene construction’ . Obviously, AD affects this core network and disturbs its cognitive subcomponents
 .
In agreement with the most prominent behavioral symptom, apathy, the meta-analysis and
histopathological studies demonstrate frontomedian alterations in AD . Our results suggest intact function in this area in
amnestic MCI agreeing with the finding that prevalence of apathy increases with severity of
dementia . Although insight is preserved early in the disease, it
diminishes with its progression to AD leading to unawareness of cognitive deficits
(anosognosia) . This deficit may be related to the anterior medial frontal cortex/pregenual anterior
cingulate together with the posterior cingulate cortex and temporoparietal junction area
 . In contrast, AD
patients note their emotional/behavioral difficulties 
leading presumably to a high rate of depression . Our results further confirm
the assumption that decreased motivational-affective components of pain in AD may be related
to the degeneration of the medial pain system .
Finally, we want to discuss the meta-analytic approach critically. Firstly, ALE is based on the
assumption that the spatial uncertainty of peak coordinates is identical across the x-, y- and zdirection of the coordinate system as well as across all voxels in the brain. This is a simplifying
assumption. However, as discussed by Eickhoff et al. , modeling a variable spatial
uncertainty along different directions and across different brain regions would require
empirical uncertainty estimates for every region or voxel in the brain. To date, such data are
not available. In line with Eickhoff et al. , we would thus argue that in the absence of
voxel-wise empirical data on spatial uncertainty, the most parsimonious model based on the
most general assumption of Gaussianity should be applied. Secondly, results of any metaanalysis depend on the quality of the included data. Imaging meta-analyses are likely to be
biased toward particular cortical areas, a problem referred to previously as ‘literature or
Schroeter et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 October 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
publication bias.’ We tried to avoid this problem by including only studies that used quantitative
automated whole brain analysis, whereas region-of-interest studies were generally excluded.
Because our meta-analysis included maxima and not cluster sizes of the various studies, it
extracted the prototypical, most characteristic neural networks for amnestic MCI/AD
representing the brain regions that are consistently involved. Accordingly, single studies might
have shown that the disorder may affect other brain structures and may be more diffuse than
the present meta-analysis suggests. The other aforementioned limitations of our meta-analysis,
specifically pooling across different imaging methods for the converters' analysis and potential
medication effects onto perfusion and metabolism, should be addressed in future studies.
Conclusion
The meta-analysis characterizes the prototypical neural substrates of Alzheimer's disease and
its prodromal stage amnestic mild cognitive impairment with a systematic and quantitative
meta-analysis. It places Alzheimer's disease in cognitive neuropsychiatry by explaining clinical
characteristics in terms of deficits to normal cognitive mechanisms and linking them to affected
neural structures. By isolating predictive markers it contributes to standardized imaging
inclusion criteria for Alzheimer's disease as suggested for future diagnostic systems.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Jane Neumann is supported by the NIH (Grant Number: R01 MH74457; PI: Peter Fox). The authors would like to
thank Stefan Frisch for helpful suggestions during the preparation of the manuscript and Stefan Liebig for help in
preparing the figures.