ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 May 2019
doi: 10.3389/frai.2019.00003
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Edited by:
Ronald Hochreiter,
Vienna University of Economics and
Business, Austria
Reviewed by:
Simone Righi,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Francesco Caravelli,
Los Alamos National Laboratory
(DOE), United States
*Correspondence:
Paolo Giudici
 
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Finance,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Received: 27 February 2019
Accepted: 23 April 2019
Published: 24 May 2019
Giudici P, Hadji-Misheva B and
Spelta A Network Based
Scoring Models to Improve Credit Risk
Management in Peer to Peer Lending
Platforms. Front. Artif. Intell. 2:3.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2019.00003
Network Based Scoring Models to
Improve Credit Risk Management in
Peer to Peer Lending Platforms
Paolo Giudici 1*, Branka Hadji-Misheva 2 and Alessandro Spelta 1
1 Department of Economics and Management, Fintech Laboratory, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2 School of Engineering,
Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW), Winterthur, Switzerland
Financial intermediation has changed extensively over the course of the last two decades.
One of the most signiﬁcant change has been the emergence of FinTech. In the context of
credit services, ﬁntech peer to peer lenders have introduced many opportunities, among
which improved speed, better customer experience, and reduced costs. However,
peer-to-peer lending platforms lead to higher risks, among which higher credit risk:
not owned by the lenders, and systemic risks: due to the high interconnectedness
among borrowers generated by the platform. This calls for new and more accurate
credit risk models to protect consumers and preserve ﬁnancial stability. In this paper
we propose to enhance credit risk accuracy of peer-to-peer platforms by leveraging
topological information embedded into similarity networks, derived from borrowers’
ﬁnancial information. Topological coefﬁcients describing borrowers’ importance and
community structures are employed as additional explanatory variables, leading to an
improved predictive performance of credit scoring models.
Keywords: contagion, credit risk, credit scoring, network models, peer to peer lending
1. INTRODUCTION
Financial intermediation has changed extensively over the course of the last two decades mostly
due to technological advancement. One of the most signiﬁcant change has been the emergence
of FinTech that is nowadays altering many ﬁnancial products, services, production processes, and
organizational structure. In the context of commercial credit, FinTech solutions have introduced
many opportunities for both lenders and borrowers thus redeﬁning the role of traditional
intermediaries. Peer-to-peer lending platforms, often abbreviated P2P lending, allow private
individuals to directly run small and, in most cases, unsecured loans to private borrowers or small
and medium enterprises (SME). The recent advances in information technology have enabled these
online platforms to provide an alternative to traditional ﬁnancial intermediaries, by delivering
more cost eﬃcient, consumer friendly and transparent lending services, improving the overall
value for customers .
The literature identiﬁes many factors which explain the increasing role of P2P lending platforms
in the global world of ﬁnance . For instance,
P2P platforms are not required to respect bank capital requirements nor to pay fees associated
with state deposit insurance practices, and this allows them to operate with lower costs. Thus,
borrowers beneﬁt because they are able to receive credits at lower interest rates, and in some
cases with little or no collateral, whereas lenders can receive higher rates of return on investment,
due to reduced transaction costs . Second, advancements in information
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
technology have also been a key force driving the exponential
growth of P2P platforms . In this
context, many P2P platforms rely not only on "hard" but also on
"soft" i.e., social network activity information for the purpose of
evaluating a candidate’s creditworthiness, a practice not typically
employed by traditional banks. The third factor explaining the
rapid growth of P2P platforms is related with regulatory aspects.
With the new revised Payment Service Directive (PSD2), that
came in eﬀect in 2018, the monopoly which banks have on
their clients account information and payment transactions
becomes weaker as this information can be disclosed through
application payment interfaces.
From a diﬀerent viewpoint,
the rapid growth of the importance of P2P lending platforms
can pose signiﬁcant risks to ﬁnancial stability. This because P2P
lenders typically produce inadequate measures of credit risk.
In comparison with traditional banks, P2P platforms are less
able to eliminate asymmetric information, thus increasing the
risk of bad debt accumulation because they have no access to
detailed information on borrowers past ﬁnancial transaction.
Moreover, P2P lending activity is built on the basis of a
"many-to-many" approach, in which the ﬁnancial intermediary
empowers each lender to decide to whom borrower to lend and
for what amount. This leads to a strong interdependence between
the borrowers and the lenders, which may generate high levels of
contagion and systemic risk.
Even more importantly, P2P lenders allow for direct matching
between borrowers and lenders, without the loans being held
on the intermediary’s balance-sheet; in other words, in a P2P
platform, the risk is fully born by the lender. From a risk-return
perspective, while in classical banking a ﬁnancial institution
chooses its optimal trade-oﬀbetween risks and returns (subject to
regulation constraints), in P2P lending, the platform maximizes
its returns without taking care of the risks which are borne by
the lenders.
misaligned
incentives,
asymmetric
information,
diﬀerences in the business model and in the risk ownership
may lead to the platform not being able to correctly distinguish
between diﬀerent risk classes which in turn can impact the
overall stability of the ﬁnancial system. In this paper we propose
to exploit topological information embedded into similarity
networks to increase the predictive performance of some credit
scoring models.
Understanding the structure of a similarity network is indeed instrumental for
understand the origin of companies failures and to inform
policymakers on how to prepare for, and recover from,
adverse shocks hitting the network. Similarity patterns between
companies’ features can be extracted from a distance matrix and
they can reveal how credit risk is related to the topology of the
network. To account for such topological information we rely on
centrality measures and community structure detection . We show that the inclusion of these variables
into credit scoring models does improve their predictive utility.
Results conﬁrm the validity of this approach in discriminating
between defaulted and sound institutions, thus, the proposed
methodology can constitute a new instrument in both policymakers an practitioners toolboxes. We remark that our work is
related to two main other recent research streams. First, some
authors have carried out investigations on the accuracy of credit
scoring models of P2P platforms .
We improve these contributions by extending the methodology
to also account for the interconnections that emerge between
economic agents. Second, our network approach relates to a
recent and fast expanding line of research which focuses on
the application of network analysis tools, for the purpose of
understanding ﬂows in ﬁnancial markets, as in the papers of
Allen and Gale , Leitner , and Giudici and Spelta
 . We improve these contributions, extending them to
the P2P context and linking network models, that are often
merely descriptive, with statistical and machine learning models,
thus providing a predictive framework. The rest of the paper
is organized as follows: section 2 introduces the data set we
employ in the analysis together with the description of the
credit scoring models and of the performance measures. In this
section we also present the metric used for extracting distances
between the borrowing companies and the methods employed for
building the networks and for extracting topological information.
Section 3 is devoted to show the results of the analysis
and the comparison between the performances of the credit
scoring models with and without the topological information.
Section 4 concludes.
2. DATA AND METHODOLOGY
In this section we ﬁrst describe the data set employed in our
analysis and the necessary pre-processing stage. Subsequently we
introduce the families of credit scoring models and the nonparametric measures used for testing the performance of such
models. Then we focus on showing how one can extract relevant
patterns of similarities to build up meaningful networks from
balance-sheet features of borrowing companies.
We consider data supplied by the European External Credit
Assessment Institution (ECAI) that specializes in credit scoring
for P2P platforms focused on SME commercial lending.
Speciﬁcally, the analysis relies on a data set, that is composed
of oﬃcial ﬁnancial information (ﬁnancial ratios constructed on
the basis balance sheet and income statement information) on
4514 Italian SMEs which represent the target of P2P lending
platforms. Appendix A provides a table encompassing formulas
to compute such ratios. Table 2, instead, provides the summary
statistics of the variables included in this data set and information
concerning their mean value aggregated by the status of the
companies (active and defaulted). It is important to note that
none of the variables included in data set contains missing values
and the proportion of defaulted companies is 11%.
What is noticeable from Table 1, is that, as in most real-world
data sets (and particularly those reﬂecting the operations of startups and small and medium enterprises), for most variables, there
is a noticeable presence of unusually large or small values when
compared to the mean. The literature recognizes many methods
for dealing with outliers however in most cases the correct
application of these methods is based on very strong assumptions
concerning the size and distribution of the data set as well as the
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
TABLE 1 | Summary statistics of variables included in the dataset.
For each measure we report the average (Mean) along with the standard deviation (St. Dev.), the minimum (Min), the 25-th and 75-th percentiles (Pctl), the maximum (Max), mean value
of the variable for active companies (Active), mean value of the variable for defaulted companies (Defaulted).
randomness of the outliers. In this context, we do not substitute
or cancel outliers because we believe they can provide important
insights concerning the companies included in the sample. All
data and code employed is available as Supplementary Material.
2.1. Credit Risk Models
Credit risk models are useful tools for modeling and predicting
individual ﬁrm default. Such models are usually grounded on
regression techniques or machine learning approaches often
employed for ﬁnancial analysis and decision-making tasks .
Consider N ﬁrms having observation regarding T diﬀerent
variables (usually balance-sheet measures or ﬁnancial ratios). For
each institution n deﬁne a variable γn to indicate whether such
institution has defaulted on its loans or not, i.e., γn = 1 if
company defaults, γn = 0 otherwise. In a nutshell, credit risk
models develop relationships between the explanatory variables
embedded in T and the dependent variable γ .
Against this background, we employ logistic regression,
discriminant analysis, classiﬁcation and regression trees and
support vector machine . The following
paragraphs brieﬂy summarize the characteristics of the models
we use for the present analysis.
The logistic regression model is one of the most widely used
method for credit scoring. The model aims at classifying the
dependent variable into two groups characterized by diﬀerent
status (defaulted v.s. active) by the following model:
where pn is the probability of default for institution n, xi =
(xi,1, ..., xi,T) is the T-dimensional vector of borrower speciﬁc
explanatory variables, the parameter α is the model intercept
while βt is the t-th regression coeﬃcient. It follows that the
probability of default can be found as:
pn = (1 + exp(α +
Discriminant analysis assumes that diﬀerent classes generate data
based on diﬀerent Gaussian distributions. Linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) approaches the problem by assuming that the
conditional probability density functions p(x|γ
1) are both normally distributed with mean and
covariance parameters (µ0, V0) and (µ1, V0) respectively. In this
context, the decision rule is based on the Linear Score Function,
a function of the population means for each of the populations, i,
as well as the pooled variance-covariance matrix.
Classiﬁcation and regression trees (CART) is another widely
used statistical technique in which a dependent variable is
associated with a set of input factors through a recursive sequence
of simple binary relations. Put simply, it is a step-by-step process
which results in a decision tree which is constructed either by
splitting or not splitting each node into daughter nodes. The
splitting strategy follows a node impurity function meaning that
at each stage of the recursive partitioning, all possibles splits are
considered and the one which leads to the greatest increase in
node purity is chosen.
Support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁes data by detecting the
best hyperplane that separates all data points of one class from
those of the other class. Given a data set of N institutions of the
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
form (x1, γ1), ..., (xN, γN) where the γn indicates the class to which
the point xn belongs. Each xn is a T-dimensional real vector. SVM
ﬁnds the “maximum-margin hyperplane” that separates data
points xn for which γ = 1 from the data points for which γ = 0,
which is deﬁned so that the distance between the hyperplane and
the nearest point xn from either group is maximized. In formula:
where A and B are disjoint subsets and wx −b
represents a hyperplane.
2.2. Assessing Model Performance
For evaluating the performance of each model, we employ, as
a reference measure, the indicator γ ∈{0, 1} that is a binary
variable which takes value one whenever the institutions has
defaulted and value zero otherwise. For detecting default events
represented in γ , we need a continuous measurement p ∈ 
to be turned into a binary prediction B assuming value one
if p exceeds a speciﬁed threshold τ
∈ and value zero
otherwise. The correspondence between the prediction B and the
ideal leading indicator γ can then be summarized in a so-called
confusion matrix.
From the confusion matrix we can easy illustrate the
performance capabilities of a binary classiﬁer system. To this aim,
we compute the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) and Gini
coeﬃcient. The ROC curve plots the false positive rate (FPR)
against the true positive rate (TPR). To be more explicit:
Moreover, we also compute other measures for assessing models
performance such as the accuracy and the KS statistic. The overall
accuracy of each model can be computed as:
TP + TN + FP + FN
and it characterizes the proportion of true results (both true
positives and true negatives) among the total number of cases
under examination. In this context a key issue is setting the
threshold at which a company is classiﬁed as belonging to one
class rather than another.
Additional to this, another often-used characteristic in
describing the quality of the model (or the scoring function) is
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic (KS). This metric too seeks
to jointly consider speciﬁcity and sensitivity and it corresponds
to the maximum value of their sum as the threshold is varied.
Put diﬀerently, it represent the maximum diﬀerence between
the cumulative distribution of active and defaulted companies.
Consequently, the KS statistics is deﬁned as:
KS = maxj|FActive(xj) −FDefaulted(xj)|
For back-testing, while assessing the performance of each model,
available information must be exploited in a realistic manner. To
this end, we perform repeated sub-sampling validation approach.
Speciﬁcally, we randomly split the data set in 10 training and
validations data sets. For each such split, the model is ﬁtted on
the training data set and predictive utility is assessed on the
corresponding testing data. The results concerning the model
accuracy (area under the ROC curve, KS statistic, Gini index) are
then averaged over the splits.
2.3. The Distance Metric
In the present study we exploit information derived from
ﬁnancial statements of borrowing companies collected in a vector
xn representing the ﬁnancial composition of the balance-sheet
of institution n. We deﬁne a metric that provides the relative
distance between companies by applying the standardized
Euclidean distance between each pair (xi, xj) of institutions
feature vectors. More formally, we deﬁne the pairwise distance
di,j = (xi −xj)1−1(xi −xj)′
where 1 is a diagonal matrix whose i-th diagonal element
represent the standard deviation of the series. Namely, each
coordinate diﬀerence between pairs of vectors (xi−xj) is scaled by
dividing by the corresponding element of the standard deviation.
The distances can be embedded into a N ×N dissimilarity matrix
D such that the closer the companies i, j features are in the
Euclidean space, the lower the entry di,j.
Although D can be informative about the distribution of the
distances between the companies, the fully-connected nature
of this set does not help to ﬁnd out whether there exist
dominant patterns of similarities between institutions. Therefore,
to extract such patterns we derive the Minimal Spanning Tree
(MST) representation of borrowing companies’ balance-sheet
similarities .
2.4. The Minimal Spanning Tree
To ﬁnd out the MST representation of the system, we perform
hierarchical clustering by applying the nearest neighbor method.
At the initial step, we consider N clusters corresponding to the N
institutions. Then, at each subsequent step, two clusters li and lj
are merged into a single cluster if:
with the distance between clusters being deﬁned as:
with r ∈li and q ∈lj. These operations are repeated until a
single cluster emerges. This clustering process is also known as
the single link method since one obtains the MST of a network.
Given a connected graph, the corresponding MST is a tree of
N −1 edges that provides the minimum value of the sum of
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
the edge distances. More speciﬁcally, the hierarchical clustering
procedure takes N −1 steps to be completed when the graph is
composed by N nodes, and it exploits, at each step, a particular
distance di,j
D to merge two clusters into a single one.
In order to extract relevant information from the topology of
the network for discriminating between borrowing companies,
we compute diﬀerent measures from complex network theory.
In particular, the research in network theory has dedicated a
huge eﬀort to developing measures of interconnectedness, related
to the detection of the most important player in a network.
Moreover, beside investigating the importance each institution
has in the network, we are also interested in assessing whether
the network is characterized by a community structure and to
exploit such feature. This topological characteristic indicates the
presence of sets of companies usually deﬁned as very dense
sub-graphs, with few connections between them.
2.5. Network Measures
Various measures of centrality have been proposed in network
theory such as the count of neighbors of a node has, i.e., the
degree centrality, or measures based on the spectral properties
of the graph . These measures are
feedback, also know as global, centrality measures and provide
information on the position of each node relative to all other
nodes. For our purposes we employ both families of centrality
measures. In particular, for each node we compute the degree and
strength centrality. The degree ki of a vertex i with (i = 1, ..., N) is
the number of edges incident to it. More formally, let the binary
representation of the network be ˆD such that:
if dij > 0
then, the degree a vertex i is:
Similarly, the strength centrality measures the average distance
of a node with respect to its neighbors. Formally the strength of
vertex i is:
Moreover, since several studies have found the presence of sets
of very dense sub-graphs, with few connections between them, as
a result of similar patterns at the micro-level , we also apply the Louvain Method
to extract the community structure of the network . The identiﬁed communities maximize system’s
modularity, a measure that quantiﬁes the strength of the division
of the system into communities of densely interconnected nodes
that are only sparsely connected with the rest of the system . The modularity of our system is:
[Di,j −sisi
2m]δ(ci, ci)
FIGURE 1 | Minimal spanning tree representation of the borrowing companies
networks. The tree has been obtained by using the standardized Euclidean
distance between institutions features and the Kruskal algorithm. In the panel,
nodes are colored according to their ﬁnancial soundness, red nodes represent
defaulted institutions while green nodes are associated with active companies.
where di,j is the weight of the edge between nodes i and j, si is
the sum of the weights of the edges attached to node i, ci is the
community to which node i belongs, δ(u, v) is equal to 1 when
u = v and zero otherwise, and m =
i,j Di,j. The ﬁnal step
of our model speciﬁcation is to embed the obtained centrality
measures as well as information on the community structure
of the network, into a predictive model. We propose to extend
Chinazzi and Reyes, who incorporate network measures in a
linear regression model, to the credit scoring context (i.e., logistic
regression, linear discriminant analysis, CART, and SVM).
3. RESULTS
This section is devoted to show the results of the analysis.
First, we report the MST representation of the similarity
network obtained from companies’ feature distances. We show
nodes colored according to their ﬁnancial soundness, red nodes
represent defaulted institutions while green nodes represent
sound and active companies, see Figure 1. Notice how, defaulted
institutions occupy precise portion of the network, namely, such
companies belong to the leafs of the tree and form clusters. This,
in other words, suggests those companies form communities.
Information concerning the community structure of the
networks and the centrality measures are used to provide
synthetic topological variables at the node level. Such variables
are embedded into the credit scoring models to assess
whether they contain relevant information useful for forecasting
institutions default.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
FIGURE 2 | Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for the baseline credit risk models and for the network-augmented models. In blue, we show the results
related to the baseline models while in red we show the results related to the network-augmented models.
TABLE 2 | Summary Statistics of non-parametric analysis.
Summary statistics of the non-parametric analysis. From the left to the right: area under the ROC curve (AUC), KS Statistic (KS), Gini Index (Gini), Model accuracy (Accuracy),
and area under the Precision Curve (AUCPR). For each measure and for all the tested models we report the results obtained by the baseline scenario and for the
network-augmented conﬁgurations.
Figure 2 reports the results related to the performance of some
of the models tested in the paper. Basically, the upper left panel
shows the results from the logistic regression, the upper right
panel encompasses the same information from the discriminant
analysis while the bottom panel refers to the performance curves
of the SVM classiﬁer.
For sake of comparison, we have reported several measures
of predictive utility so to show that, overall, the inclusion of
topological information regarding similarity patterns among
companies feature, increases the forecasting performance of
various credit scoring models even when the data sets are
imbalanced between the two classes (defaulted vs. active). Notice
how, for most of the cases, red lines representing the performance
of the models feeded with network measures lie above the
blue lines representing baseline classiﬁers.
Considering that
graphically the improvements might not be fully visible,
performance improvements for all the tested models are also
reported in Table 2. The table summarizes the values of the
measures employed to assess the predictive gain of the networkaugmented credit scoring models. We report, the area under the
ROC curve (AUC), the KS statistic, the Gini Index and the overall
model accuracy (ACC).
From the results collected in Table 2, it is clear that
the inclusion of topological variables describing institutions
centrality in the similarity networks and the community structure
composing such networks increases the predictive performance
of the methods used for credit scoring even if the forecasting gain
obtained diﬀer from model to model. In particular, we observe an
increase of the predictive utility values for the logistic regression,
the linear discriminate analysis and the SVM classiﬁer once
network parameters are added to the speciﬁcation. Concerning
the overall models accuracy, the ACC measure is less sensitive
to the inclusion of topological variables with values between
the baseline and network-augmented methods remaining quite
similar across all models. Even though the increases in predictive
utility across models are not very large, it might make signiﬁcant
diﬀerence for P2P lending platforms. Furthermore, we also
notice that the predictive utility of the CART model does
not change with the inclusion of the community and network
parameters in the models speciﬁcation. Future research may
concern dealing with unbalanced samples and/or with multiple data sourrces .
4. CONCLUSION
FinTech services, such as peer-to-peer lending platforms, are
becoming part of the everyday life. Such new technologies can
increase ﬁnancial inclusion, but they can bring the cost of
an increase credit risks. To cope with such risk, ﬁntech risk
management becomes a central point of interest for regulators
and supervisors, to protect consumers and preserve ﬁnancial
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
May 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 3
Giudici et al.
Network-Based Credit Scoring
stability. In this work we have shown that topological information
embedded into similarity networks can be exploited to increase
the predictive performance of credit scoring models usually
applied by P2P lending companies. Topological information
are summarized computing centrality measures and community
detection. The forecasting gain obtained by the inclusion of
these variables has been then measured by employing nonparametric statistics. Standard performance measures such as
ROC, precision recall and accuracy reveal the usefulness of
the proposed methodology to build an early-warning signal
suitable for both policy makers and supervisors as well as
for practitioners.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
manuscript and/or the Supplementary Files.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
It is the result of a joint work between the three authors
in which, however, PG supervised the work and provided
the necessary research framework. BH-M wrote sections
Introduction,
Performance and Results. AS wrote sections The Distance
Metric, The Minimal Spanning Tree, Network Measures,
and Conclusion.
This research has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program FIN-TECH:
A Financial supervision and Technology compliance training
programme under the grant agreement No 825215 . In addition, the Authors thank
ModeFinance, a European ECAI, for the data; the partners
of the FIN-TECH European project, for useful comments
and discussions.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: 
00003/full#supplementary-material