SegAN: Adversarial Network with Multi-scale L1 Loss for Medical
Image Segmentation
Yuan Xue · Tao Xu · Han Zhang · L. Rodney Long · Xiaolei Huang
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Inspired by classic generative adversarial networks
(GAN), we propose a novel end-to-end adversarial neural
network, called SegAN, for the task of medical image segmentation. Since image segmentation requires dense, pixellevel labeling, the single scalar real/fake output of a classic
GAN’s discriminator may be ineffective in producing stable
and sufﬁcient gradient feedback to the networks. Instead, we
use a fully convolutional neural network as the segmentor
to generate segmentation label maps, and propose a novel
adversarial critic network with a multi-scale L1 loss function to force the critic and segmentor to learn both global
and local features that capture long- and short-range spatial relationships between pixels. In our SegAN framework,
the segmentor and critic networks are trained in an alternating fashion in a min-max game: The critic takes as input a
pair of images, (original image ∗predicted label map, original image ∗ground truth label map), and then is trained
by maximizing a multi-scale loss function; The segmentor
is trained with only gradients passed along by the critic,
with the aim to minimize the multi-scale loss function. We
show that such a SegAN framework is more effective and
stable for the segmentation task, and it leads to better performance than the state-of-the-art U-net segmentation method.
Yuan Xue and Tao Xu are Co-ﬁrst Authors.
Yuan Xue · Tao Xu · Xiaolei Huang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University,
Bethlehem, PA, USA
E-mail: {yux715, tax313, xih206}@lehigh.edu
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ,
E-mail: 
L. Rodney Long
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
E-mail: 
We tested our SegAN method using datasets from the MIC-
CAI BRATS brain tumor segmentation challenge. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed SegAN with multi-scale loss: on BRATS 2013
SegAN gives performance comparable to the state-of-the-art
for whole tumor and tumor core segmentation while achieves
better precision and sensitivity for Gd-enhance tumor core
segmentation; on BRATS 2015 SegAN achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art in both dice score and precision.
1 Introduction
Advances in a wide range of medical imaging technologies
have revolutionized how we view functional and pathological events in the body and deﬁne anatomical structures in
which these events take place. X-ray, CAT, MRI, Ultrasound,
nuclear medicine, among other medical imaging technologies, enable 2D or tomographic 3D images to capture invivo structural and functional information inside the body
for diagnosis, prognosis, treatment planning and other purposes.
One fundamental problem in medical image analysis is
image segmentation, which identiﬁes the boundaries of objects such as organs or abnormal regions (e.g. tumors) in images. Since manually annotation can be very time-consuming
and subjective, an accurate and reliable automatic segmentation method is valuable for both clinical and research purpose. Having the segmentation result makes it possible for
shape analysis, detecting volume change, and making a precise radiation therapy treatment plan.
In the literature of image processing and computer vision, various theoretical frameworks have been proposed for
automatic segmentation. Traditional unsupervised methods
such as thresholding , region growing , edge detecarXiv:1706.01805v2 [cs.CV] 16 Jul 2017
Yuan Xue et al.
tion and grouping , Markov Random Fields (MRFs) ,
active contour models , Mumford-Shah functional based
frame partition , level sets , graph cut , mean
shift , and their extensions and integrations 
usually utilize constraints about image intensity or object
appearance. Supervised methods , on
the other hand, directly learn from labeled training samples,
extract features and context information in order to perform
a dense pixel (or voxel)-wise classiﬁcation.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely
applied to visual recognition problems in recent years, and
they are shown effective in learning a hierarchy of features
at multiple scales from data. For pixel-wise semantic segmentation, CNNs have also achieved remarkable success.
In , Long et al. ﬁrst proposed a fully convolutional networks (FCNs) for semantic segmentation. The authors replaced conventional fully connected layers in CNNs with
convolutional layers to obtain a coarse label map, and then
upsampled the label map with deconvolutional layers to get
per pixel classiﬁcation results. Noh et al. used an encoderdecoder structure to get more ﬁne details about segmented
objects. With multiple unpooling and deconvolutional layers in their architecture, they avoided the coarse-to-ﬁne stage
in . However, they still needed to ensemble with FCNs in
their method to capture local dependencies between labels.
Lin et al. combined Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)
and CNNs to better explore spatial correlations between pixels, but they also needed to implement a dense CRF to reﬁne
their CNN output.
In the ﬁeld of medical image segmentation, deep CNNs
have also been applied with promising results. Ronneberger
et al. presented a FCN, namely U-net, for segmenting neuronal structures in electron microscopic stacks. With
the idea of skip-connection from , the U-net achieved
very good performance and has since been applied to many
different tasks such as image translation . In addition,
Havaei et al. obtained good performance for medical
image segmentation with their InputCascadeCNN. The InputCascadeCNN has image patches as inputs and uses a cascade of CNNs in which the output probabilities of a ﬁrststage CNN are taken as additional inputs to a second-stage
CNN. Pereira et al. applied deep CNNs with small kernels for brain tumor segmentation. They proposed different architectures for segmenting high grade and low grade
tumors, respectively. Kamnitsas et al. proposed a 3D
CNN using two pathways with inputs of different resolutions. 3D CRFs were also needed to reﬁne their results.
Although these previous approaches using CNNs for segmentation have achieved promising results, they still have
limitations. All above methods utilize a pixel-wise loss, such
as softmax, in the last layer of their networks, which is insuf-
ﬁcient to learn both local and global contextual relations between pixels. Hence they always need models such as CRFs
 as a reﬁnement to enforce spatial contiguity in the output
label maps. Many previous methods address this
issue by training CNNs on image patches and using multiscale, multi-path CNNs with different input resolutions or
different CNN architectures. Using patches and multi-scale
inputs could capture spatial context information to some extent. Nevertheless, as described in U-net , the computational cost for patch training is very high and there is a
trade-off between localization accuracy and the patch size.
Instead of training on small image patches, current stateof-the-art CNN architectures such as U-net are trained on
whole images or large image patches and use skip connections to combine hierarchical features for generating the label map. They have shown potential to implicitly learn some
local dependencies between pixels. However, these methods are still limited by their pixel-wise loss function, which
lacks the ability to enforce the learning of multi-scale spatial constraints directly in the end-to-end training process.
Compared with patch training, an issue for CNNs trained
on entire images is label or class imbalance. While patch
training methods can sample a balanced number of patches
from each class, the numbers of pixels belonging to different classes in full-image training methods are usually imbalanced. To mitigate this problem, U-net uses a weighted
cross-entropy loss to balance the class frequencies. However, the choice of weights in their loss function is taskspeciﬁc and is hard to optimize. In contract to the weighted
loss in U-net, a general loss that could avoid class imbalance
as well as extra hyper-parameters would be more desirable.
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end Adversarial Network architecture, called SegAN, with a multi-scale
L1 loss function, for semantic segmentation. Inspired by the
original GAN , the training procedure for SegAN is similar to a two-player min-max game in which a segmentor
network (S) and a critic network (C) are trained in an alternating fashion to respectively minimize and maximize an
objective function. However, there are several major differences between our SegAN and the original GAN that make
SegAN signiﬁcantly better for the task of image segmentation.
– In contrast to classic GAN with separate losses for generator and discriminator, we propose a novel multi-scale
loss function for both segmentor and critic. Our critic
is trained to maximize a novel multi-scale L1 objective
function that takes into account CNN feature differences
between the predicted segmentation and the ground truth
segmentation at multiple scales (i.e. at multiple layers).
– We use a fully convolutional neural network (FCN) as
the segmentor S, which is trained with only gradients
ﬂowing through the critic, and with the objective of minimizing the same loss function as for the critic.
– Our SegAN is an end-to-end architecture trained on whole
images, with no requirements for patches, or inputs of
SegAN: Adversarial Network with Multi-scale L1 Loss for Medical Image Segmentation
multiple resolutions, or further smoothing of the predicted label maps using CRFs.
By training the entire system end-to-end with back propagation and alternating the optimization of S and C, SegAN
can directly learn spatial pixel dependencies at multiple scales.
Compared with previous methods that learn hierarchical features with multi-scale multi-path CNNs , our SegAN network applies a novel multi-scale loss to enforce the learning
of hierarchical features in a more straightforward and ef-
ﬁcient manner. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed SegAN achieves comparable or better results than the state-of-the-art CNN-based architectures including U-net.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces our SegAN architecture and methodology. Experimental results are presented in Section 3. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 4.
2 Methodology
As illustrated in Figure 1, the proposed SegAN consists of
two parts: the segmentor network S and the critic network
C. The segmentor is a fully convolutional encoder-decoder
network that generates a probability label map from input
images. The critic network is fed with two inputs: original
images masked by ground truth label maps, and original images masked by predicted label maps from S. The S and
C networks are alternately trained in an adversarial fashion:
the training of S aims to minimize our proposed multi-scale
L1 loss, while the training of C aims to maximize the same
loss function.
2.1 The multi-scale L1 loss
The conventional GANs have an objective loss function
deﬁned as:
θD L(θG, θD)
= Ex∼Pdata[log D(x)] + Ez∼Pz log(1 −D(G(z)))] .
In this objective function, x is the real image from an
unknown distribution Pdata, and z is a random input for
the generator, drawn from a probability distribution (such
as Gaussion) Pz. θG and θD represent the parameters for the
generator and discriminator in GAN, respectively.
In our proposed SegAN, given a dataset with N training
images xn and corresponding ground truth label maps yn,
the multi-scale objective loss function L is deﬁned as:
θC L(θS, θC)
ℓmae(fC(xn ◦S(xn)), fC(xn ◦yn)) ,
where ℓmae is the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) or L1 distance; xn ◦S(xn) is the input image masked by segmentorpredicted label map (i.e., pixel-wise multiplication of predicted label map and original image); xn ◦yn is the input
image masked by its ground truth label map (i.e., pixel-wise
multiplication of ground truth label map and original image);
and fC(x) represents the hierarchical features extracted from
image x by the critic network. More speciﬁcally, the ℓmae
function is deﬁned as:
ℓmae(fC(x), fC(x′)) = 1
C(x′)||1 ,
where L is the total number of layers (i.e. scales) in the critic
network, and f i
C(x) is the extracted feature map of image x
at the ith layer of C.
2.2 SegAN Architecture
Segmentor. We use a fully convolutional encoder-decoder
structure for the segmentor S network. We use the convolutional layer with kernel size 4 × 4 and stride 2 for downsampling, and perform upsampling by image resize layer
with a factor of 2 and convolutional layer with kernel size
3 × 3 stride 1. We also follow the U-net and add skip connections between corresponding layers in the encoder and
the decoder.
Critic. The critic C has the similar structure as the decoder
in S. Hierarchical features are extracted from multiple layers
of C and used to compute the multi-scale L1 loss. This loss
can capture long- and short-range spatial relations between
pixels by using these hierarchical features, i.e., pixel-level
features, low-level (e.g. superpixels) features, and middlelevel (e.g. patches) features.
More details including activation layers (e.g., leaky ReLU),
batch normalization layer and the number of feature maps
used in each convolutional layers can be found in Figure 1.
2.3 Training SegAN
The segmentor S and critic C in SegAN are trained by backpropagation from the proposed multi-scale L1 loss. In an alternating fashion, we ﬁrst ﬁx S and train C for one step using gradients computed from the loss function, and then ﬁx
C and train S for one step using gradients computed from
the same loss function passed to S from C. As shown in
(2), the training of S and C is like playing a min-max game:
while G aims to minimize the multi-scale feature loss, C
tries to maximize it. As training progresses, both the S and
C networks become more and more powerful. And eventually, the segmentor will be able to produce predicted label
maps that are very close to the ground truth as labeled by
Yuan Xue et al.
Concatenation
Concatenation
GT masked images
160 x 160 x 3
Prediction masked
images 160 x 160 x 3
Ground truth (GT)
Multi-scale
feature loss 
Leaky ReLU
Input images
N256 S1 R2
N128 S1 R2
Image resize
Predicted class
probability map
Fig. 1 The architecture of the proposed SegAN with segmentor and critic networks. 4 × 4 convolutional layers with stride 2 (S2) and the
corresponding number of feature maps (e.g., N64) are used for encoding, while image resize layers with a factor of 2 (R2) and 3 × 3 convolutional
layers with stride 1 are used for decoding. Masked images are calculated by pixel-wise multiplication of a label map and (the multiple channels
of) an input image. Note that, although only one label map (for whole tumor segmentation) is illustrated here, multiple label maps (e.g. also for
tumor core and Gd-enhanced tumor core) can be generated by the segmentor in one path.
human experts. We also ﬁnd that the S-predicted label maps
are smoother and contain less noise than manually-obtained
ground truth label maps.
We trained all networks using RMSProp solver with batch
size 64 and learning rate 0.00002. We used a grid search
method to select the best values for the number of up-sampling
blocks and the number of down-sampling blocks for the segmentor (four, in both cases), and for the number of downsampling blocks for the critic (three).
2.4 Proof of training stability and convergence
Having introduced the multi-scale L1 loss, we next prove
that our training is stable and ﬁnally reaches an equilibrium.
First, we introduce some notations.
Let f : X →X ′ be the mapping between an input medical image and its corresponding ground truth segmentation,
where X represents the compact space of medical images1
1 Although the pixel value ranges of medical images can vary, one
can always normalize them to a certain value range such as , so it
is compact.
and X ′ represents the compact space of ground truth segmentations. We approximate this ground truth mapping f
with a segmentor neural network gθ : X →X ′ parameterized by vector θ which takes an input image, and generates
a segmentation result. Assume the best approximation to the
ground truth mapping by a neural network is the network gˆθ
with optimal parameter vector ˆθ.
Second, we introduce a lemma about the Lipschitz continuity of either the segmentor or the critic neural network
in our framework.
Lemma 1 Let gθ be a neural network parameterized by θ,
and x be some input in space X, then gθ is Lipschitz continuous with a bounded Lipschitz constants K(θ) such that
||gθ(x1) −gθ(x2)||1 ⩽K(θ)(||x1 −x2||1) ,
and for different parameters with same input we have
||gθ1(x) −gθ2(x)||1 ⩽K(x)||θ1 −θ2||1 ,
SegAN: Adversarial Network with Multi-scale L1 Loss for Medical Image Segmentation
Now we prove Lemma 1.
Proof Note that the neural network consists of several afﬁne
transformations and pointwise nonlinear activation functions
such as leaky ReLU (see Figure 1). All these functions are
Lipschitz continuous because all their gradient magnitudes
are within certain ranges. To prove Lemma 1, it’s equivalent to prove the gradient magnitudes of gθ with respect to x
and θ are bounded. We start with a neural network with only
one layer: gθ(x) = A1(W1x) where A1 and W1 represent
the activation and weight matrix in the ﬁrst layer. We have
∇xgθ(x) = W1D1 where D1 is the diagonal Jacobian of the
activation, and we have ∇θgθ(x) = D1x where θ represents
the parameters in the ﬁrst layer.
Then we consider the neural network with L layers. We
apply the chain rule of the gradient and we have ∇xgθ(x) =
k=1 WkDk where k represent the k-th layer of the network. Then we have
||∇xgθ(x)||1 = ||
Due to the fact that all parameters and inputs are bounded,
we have proved (4).
Let’s denote the ﬁrst i layers of the neural network by gi
(which is another neural network with less layers), we can
compute the gradient with respect to the parameters in i-th
layer as ∇θigθ(x) = (QL
k=i+1 WkDk)Digi−1(x). Then we
sum parameters in all layers and get
||∇θgθ(x)||1 = ||
WkDk)Digi−1(x)||1
WkDk)Di)gi−1(x)||1 .
Since we have proved that g(x) is bounded, we ﬁnish the
proof of (5).
Based on Lemma 1, we then prove that our multi-scale
loss is bounded and won’t become arbitrarily large during
the training, and it will ﬁnally converge.
Theorem 1 Let Lt(x) denote the multi-scale loss of our
SegAN at training time t for input image x, then there exists a small constant C so that
t→+∞Ex∈X Lt(x) ⩽C .
Proof Let g and d represent the segmentor and critic neural
network, θ and w be the parameter vector for the segmentor
and critic, respectively. Without loss of generality, we omit
the masked input for the critic and rephrase (2) and (3) as
||di(gθ(x)) −di(gˆθ(x))||1 ,
recall that gˆθ is the ground truth segmentor network and di
is the critic network with only ﬁrst i layers. Let’s ﬁrstly focus on the critic. To make sure our multi-scale loss won’t become arbitrarily large, inspired by , we clamp the weights
of our critic network to some certain range (e.g., [−0.01, 0.01]
for all dimensions of parameter) every time we update the
weights through gradient descent. That is to say, we have
a compact parameter space W such that all functions in
the critic network are in a parameterized family of functions {dw}w∈W. From Lemma 1, we know that ||dw(x1) −
dw(x2)||1 ⩽K(w)(||x1 −x2||1). Due to the fact that W is
compact, we can ﬁnd a maximum value for K(w), K, and
||d(x1) −d(x2)||1 ⩽K||x1 −x2||1 .
Note that this constant K only depends on the space W and
is irrelevant to individual weights, so it is true for any parameter vector w after we ﬁx the vector space W. Since
Lemma 1 applies for the critic network with any number
of layers, we have
||di(gθ(x)) −di(gˆθ(x))||1 ⩽K||gθ(x) −gˆθ(x)||1 .
Now let’s move to the segmentor. According to Lemma 1,
we have ||gθ(x)−gˆθ(x)||1 ⩽K(x)||θ−ˆθ||1, then combined
with (11) we have
||di(gθ(x))−di(gˆθ(x))||1 ⩽K(x)K||θ−ˆθ||1 . (12)
We know X is compact, so there’s a maximal value for K(x)
and it only depends on the difference between the ground
truth parameter vector ˆθ and the parameter vector of the segmentor θ. Since we don’t update weights in the segmentor
when we update weights in the critic, there’s an upper bound
for Lt when we update the critic network and it won’t be arbitrarily large during the min-max game.
When we update the parameters in the segmentor, we
want to decrease the loss. This makes sense because smaller
loss indicates smaller difference between ˆθ and θ. When
θ →ˆθ, Lt converges to zero because the upper bound of
L becomes zero. However, we may not be able to ﬁnd the
global optimum for θ. Now let us denote a reachable local
optimum for θ in the segmentor by θ0, we will keep updating parameters in the segmentor through gradient descent
and gradually approaches θ0. Based on (9) and (12), we denote the maximum of K(x) by K′ and have
t→+∞Lt(x) ⩽KK′||ˆθ −θ0||1 = C .
Since the constant C does not depend on input x, we have
proved Theorem 1.
Yuan Xue et al.
3 Experiments
In this section, we evaluated our system on the fully-annotated
MICCAI BRATS datasets . Speciﬁcally, we trained and
validated our models using the BRATS 2015 training dataset,
which consists of 220 high grade subjects and 54 low grade
subjects with four modalities: T1, T1c, T2 and Flair. We
randomly split the BRATS 2015 training data with the ratio 9 : 1 into a training set and a validation set. We did such
split for the high grade and low grade subjects separately,
and then re-combined the resulting sets for training and validation. Each subject in BRATS 2015 dataset is a 3D brain
MRI volume with size 240 × 240 × 155. We center cropped
each subject into a subvolume of 180 × 180 × 128, to remove the border black regions while still keep the entire
brain regions. We did our ﬁnal evaluation and comparison
on the BRATS 2015 test set using the BRATS online evaluation system, which has Dice, Precision and Sensitivity as
the evaluation metrics. The Dice score is is identical to the
F-score which normalizes the number of true positives to the
average size of the two segmented regions:
Dice = 2|P ∩T|
where P and T represent the predicted region and the ground
truth region, respectively. Since the BRATS 2013 dataset is
a subset of BRATS 2015, we also present our results on
BRATS 2013 leaderboard set.
Although some work with 3D patching CNNs have been
done for medical image segmentation, due to the limitation
of our hardware memory and for the reason that brain images in BRATS dataset are inconsistent in third dimension,
we built a 2D SegAN network to generate the label map for
each axial slice of a 3D volume and then restack these 2D label maps to produce the 3D label map for brain tumor. Since
each subject was center cropped to be a 180×180×128 volume, it yields 128 axial slices each with the size 180 × 180.
These axial slices were further randomly cropped to size
160×160 during training for the purpose of data augmentation. They were centered cropped to size 160 × 160 during
validation and testing.
We used three modalities of these MRI images: T1c, T2,
FLAIR. Corresponding slices of T1c, T2, FLAIR modalities are concatenated along the channel dimension and used
as the multi-channel input to our SegAN model, as shown in
Figure 1. The segmentor of SegAN outputs label maps with
the same dimensions as the input images. As required by the
BRATS challenge , we did experiments with the objective to generate label maps for three types of tumor regions:
whole tumor, tumor core and Gd-enhanced tumor core.
Complete tumor
Tumor core
Enhanced tumor
Fig. 2 Average dice scores of different architectures on BRATS validation set
3.1 Choice of components in SegAN architecture
In this section, we compare different implementations of the
proposed SegAN architecture and also evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed multi-scale L1 loss on the BRATS
validation set for the brain tumor segmentation task. Specifically, we compare the following implementations:
– S1-1C. A separate SegAN is built for every label class,
i.e. one segmentor (S1) and one critic (1C) per label.
– S3-1C: A SegAN is built with one segmentor and one
critic, but the segmentor generates a three-channel label map, one channel for each label. Therefore, each 3channel label map produces three masked images (one
for each class), which are then concatenated in the channel dimension and fed into the critic.
– S3-3C. A SegAN is built with one segmentor that generates a three-channel (i.e. three-class) label map, but three
separate critics, one for each label class. The networks,
one S and three Cs, are then trained end-to-end using
the average loss computed from all three Cs.
– S3-3C single-scale loss models. For comparison, we also
built two single-scale loss models: S3-3C-s0 and S3-3Cs3. S3-3C-s0 computes the loss using features from only
the input layers (i.e., layer 0) of the critics, and S3-3Cs3 calculates the loss using features from only the output
layers (i.e., layer 3) of the critics.
As shown in Figure 2, models S1-1C and S3-3C give similar
performance which is the best among all models. Since the
computational cost for S1-1C is higher than S3-3C, S3-3C is
more favorable and we use it to compare our SegAN model
with other methods in Section 3. In contrast, while model
S3-1C is the simplest requiring the least computational cost,
it sacriﬁces some performance; but by using the multi-scale
loss, it still performs better than any of the two single-scale
loss models especially for segmenting tumor core and Gdenhanced tumor core regions.
SegAN: Adversarial Network with Multi-scale L1 Loss for Medical Image Segmentation
Table 1 Comparison to previous methods and a baseline implementation of U-net with softmax loss for segmenting three classes of brain tumor
regions: whole, core and Gd-enhanced (Enha.)
Sensitivity
BRATS 2013
Leaderboard
Havaei 
Pereira 
BRATS 2015
Kamnitsas 
Fig. 3 Example results of our SegGAN (right) with corresponding T2
slices (left) and ground truth (middle) on BRATS validation set.
3.2 Comparison to state-of-the-art
In this subsection, we compare the proposed method, our
S3-3C SegAN model, with other state-of-the-art methods on
the BRATS 2013 Leaderboard Test and the BRATS
2015 Test . We also implemented a U-net model 
for comparison. This U-net model has the exact same architecture as our SegAN segmentor except that the multiscale SegAN loss is replaced with the softmax loss in the
U-net. Table 1 gives all comparison results. From the table,
one can see that our SegAN compares favorably to the existing state-of-the-art on BRATS 2013 while achieves better
performance on BRATS 2015. Moreover, the dice scores of
our SegAN outperform the U-net baseline for segmenting all
three types of tumor regions. Another observation is that our
SegAN-produced label maps are smooth with little noise.
Figure 3 illustrates some example results of our SegAN; in
the ﬁgure, the segmented regions of the three classes (whole
tumor, tumor core, and Gd-enhanced tumor core) are shown
in yellow, blue, and red, respectively. One possible reason
behind this phenomenon is that the proposed multi-scale L1
loss from our adversarial critic network encourages the segmentor to learn both global and local features that capture
long- and short-range spatial relations between pixels, resulting fewer noises and smoother results.
4 Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, our proposed SegAN is the
ﬁrst GAN-inspired framework adapted speciﬁcally for the
segmentation task that produces superior segmentation accuracy. While conventional GANs have been successfully
applied to many unsupervised learning tasks (e.g., image
synthesis ) and semi-supervised classiﬁcation , there
are very few works that apply adversarial learning to semantic segmentation. One such work that we found by Luc et
al. used both the conventional adversarial loss of GAN
and pixel-wise softmax loss against ground truth. They showed
small but consistent gains on both the Stanford Background
dataset and the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset; the authors observed that pre-training only the adversarial network was unstable and suggested an alternating scheme for updating the
segmenting networks and the adversarial networks weights.
We believe that the main reason contributing to the unstable
training of their framework is: the conventional adversarial
loss is based on a single scalar output by the discriminator that classiﬁes a whole input image into real or fake category. When inputs to the discriminator are generated vs.
ground truth dense pixel-wise label maps as in the segmentation task, the real/fake classiﬁcation task is too easy for
the discriminator and a trivial solution is found quickly. As
a result, no sufﬁcient gradients can ﬂow through the discriminator to improve the training of generator.
In comparison, our SegAN uses a multi-scale feature
loss that measures the difference between generated segmentation and ground truth segmentation at multiple layers
in the critic, forcing both the segmentor and critic to learn hierarchical features that capture long- and short-range spatial
relationships between pixels. Using the same loss function
for both S and C, the training of SegAN is end-to-end and
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end Adversarial
Network architecture, namely SegAN, with a new multiscale loss for semantic segmentation. Experimental evaluation on the BRATS brain tumor segmentation dataset shows
Yuan Xue et al.
that the proposed multi-scale loss in an adversarial training
framework is very effective and leads to more superior performance when compared with single-scale loss or the conventional pixel-wise softmax loss.
As a general framework, our SegAN is not limited to
medical image segmentation applications. In our future work,
we plan to investigate the potential of SegAN for general semantic segmentation tasks.
6 Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH),
National Library of Medicine (NLM), and Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications (LHNCBC),
under Contract HHSN276201500692P.