Learning the Preferences of Ignorant, Inconsistent Agents
Owain Evans
University of Oxford
Andreas Stuhlm¨uller
Stanford University
Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University
An important use of machine learning is to learn what
people value. What posts or photos should a user be
shown? Which jobs or activities would a person ﬁnd
rewarding? In each case, observations of people’s past
choices can inform our inferences about their likes and
preferences. If we assume that choices are approximately optimal according to some utility function, we
can treat preference inference as Bayesian inverse planning. That is, given a prior on utility functions and some
observed choices, we invert an optimal decision-making
process to infer a posterior distribution on utility functions. However, people often deviate from approximate
optimality. They have false beliefs, their planning is
sub-optimal, and their choices may be temporally inconsistent due to hyperbolic discounting and other biases. We demonstrate how to incorporate these deviations into algorithms for preference inference by constructing generative models of planning for agents who
are subject to false beliefs and time inconsistency. We
explore the inferences these models make about preferences, beliefs, and biases. We present a behavioral
experiment in which human subjects perform preference inference given the same observations of choices
as our model. Results show that human subjects (like
our model) explain choices in terms of systematic deviations from optimal behavior and suggest that they
take such deviations into account when inferring preferences.
Keywords: Bayesian learning, cognitive biases, preference
Introduction
The problem of learning a person’s preferences from observations of their choices features prominently in economics
 , in cognitive science , and in applied machine learning . To
name just one example, social networking sites use a person’s past behavior to select what stories, advertisements,
and potential contacts to display to them. A promising approach to learning preferences from observed choices is to
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
invert a model of rational choice based on sequential decision making given a real-valued utility function . This approach is known as Inverse Reinforcement Learning in an RL setting and
as Bayesian Inverse Planning in the setting of probabilistic generative models.
This kind of approach usually assumes that the agent
makes optimal decisions up to “random noise” in action selection . However, human deviations from optimality are more systematic.
They result from persistent false beliefs, sub-optimal planning, and from biases such as time inconsistency and framing effects . If such deviations are modeled as unstructured errors, we risk mistaken
preference inferences. For instance, if an agent repeatedly
fails to choose a preferred option due to a systematic bias,
we might conclude that the option is not preferred after all.
Consider someone who smokes every day while wishing to
quit and viewing their actions as regrettable. In this situation, a model that has good predictive performance might
nonetheless fail to identify what this person values.
In this paper, we explicitly take into account structured
deviations from optimality when inferring preferences. We
construct a model of sequential planning for agents with inaccurate beliefs and time-inconsistent biases (in the form
of hyperbolic discounting). We then do Bayesian inference
over this model to jointly infer an agent’s preferences, beliefs and biases from sequences of actions in a simple
Gridworld-style domain.
To demonstrate that this algorithm supports accurate preference inferences, we ﬁrst exhibit a few simple cases where
our model licenses conclusions that differ from standard approaches, and argue that they are intuitively plausible. We
then test this intuition by asking impartial human subjects to
make preference inferences given the same data as our algorithm. This is based on the assumption that people have
expertise in inferring the preferences of others when the domain is simple and familiar from everyday experience. We
ﬁnd that our algorithm is able to make the same kinds of
inferences as our human judges: variations in choice are explained as being due to systematic factors such as false beliefs and strong temptations, not unexplainable error.
The possibility of false beliefs and cognitive biases means
that observing only a few actions often fails to identify a
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)
single set of preferences. We show that humans recognize
this ambiguity and provide a range of distinct explanations
for the observed actions. When preferences can’t be identi-
ﬁed uniquely, our model is still able to capture the range of
explanations that humans offer. Moreover, by computing a
Bayesian posterior over possible explanations, we can predict the plausibility of explanations for human subjects.
Computational Framework
Our goal is to infer an agent’s preferences from observations of their choices in sequential decision problems. The
key question for this project is: how are our observations of
behavior related to the agent’s preferences? In more technical terms, what generative model 
best describes the agent’s approximate sequential planning
given some utility function? Given such a model and a prior
on utility functions, we could “invert” it (by performing
full Bayesian inference) to compute a posterior on what the
agent values.
The following section describes the class of models we
explore in this paper. We ﬁrst take an informal look at the
speciﬁc deviations from optimality that our agent model includes. We then deﬁne the model formally and show our implementation as a probabilistic program, an approach that
clariﬁes our assumptions and enables easy exploration of deviations from optimal planning.
Deviations from optimality
We consider two kinds of deviations from optimality:
False beliefs and uncertainty
Agents can have false or
inaccurate beliefs. We represent beliefs as probability distributions over states and model belief updates as Bayesian
inference. Planning for such agents has been studied in work
on POMDPs . Inferring the preferences of such agents was studied in recent work . Here, we are primarily interested in the interaction of false beliefs with other kinds of sub-optimality.
Temporal inconsistency
Agents can be time-inconsistent
(also called “dynamically inconsistent”). Time-inconsistent
agents make plans that they later abandon. This concept has
been used to explain human behaviors such as procrastination, temptation and pre-commitment , and
has been studied extensively in psychology 
and in economics . This
model holds that the utility or reward of future outcomes is
discounted relative to present outcomes according to a hyperbolic curve. For example, the discount for an outcome
occurring at delay d from the present might be modeled
as a multiplicative factor
1+d. The shape of the hyperbola
means that the agent takes $100 now over $110 tomorrow,
but would prefer to take $110 after 31 days to $100 after
30 days. The inconsistency shows when the 30th day comes
Naive Planner
Sophisticated Planner

 

 
Figure 1: Agents with hyperbolic discounting exhibit different behaviors depending on whether they model their future
discounting behavior in a manner that is (a) Naive (left) or
(b) Sophisticated (right).
around: now, the agent switches to preferring to take the
$100 immediately.
This discounting model does not (on its own) determine
how an agent plans sequentially. We consider two kinds
of time-inconsistent agents. These agents differ in terms of
whether they accurately model their future choices when
they construct plans. First, a Sophisticated agent has a fully
accurate model of its own future decisions. Second, a Naive
agent models its future self as assigning the same (discounted) values to options as its present self. The Naive
agent fails to accurately model its own time inconsistency.1
We illustrate Naive and Sophisticated agents with a decision problem that we later re-use in our experiments. The
problem is a variant of Gridworld where an agent moves
around the grid to ﬁnd a place to eat (Figure 1).
In the left pane (Figure 1a), we see the path of an agent,
Alice, who moves along the shortest path to the Vegetarian
Cafe before going left and ending up eating at Donut Store
D2. This behavior is sub-optimal independent of whether her
preference is for the Vegetarian Cafe or the Donut Store, but
can be explained in terms of Naive time-inconsistent planning. From her starting point, Alice prefers to head for the
Vegetarian Cafe (as it has a higher undiscounted utility than
the Donut Store). She does not predict that when close to
the Donut Store (D2), she will prefer to stop there due to
hyperbolic discounting.
The right pane (Figure 1b) shows what Beth, a Sophisticated agent with similar preferences to Alice, would do in
the same situation. Beth predicts that, if she took Alice’s
route, she would end up at the Donut Store D2. So she instead takes a longer route in order to avoid temptation. If
the longer route wasn’t available, Beth could not get to the
Vegetarian Cafe without passing the Donut Store D2. In this
case, Beth would either go directly to Donut Store D1, which
1The distinction and formal deﬁnition of Naive and Sophisticated agents is discussed in O’Donoghue and Rabin .
is slightly closer than D2 to her starting point, or (if utility
for the Vegetarian Cafe is sufﬁciently high) she would correctly predict that she will be able to resist the temptation.
Formal model deﬁnition
We ﬁrst deﬁne an agent with full knowledge and no time inconsistency,2 and then generalize to agents that deviate from
optimality.
We will refer to states s ∈S, actions a ∈A, a deterministic utility function U : S×A →R, a stochastic action choice
function C : S →A, and a stochastic state transition function T : S × A →S. To refer to the probability that C(s)
returns a, we use C(a; s).
Optimal agent: full knowledge, no discounting
agents we consider, this agent chooses actions in proportion
to exponentiated expected utility (softmax):
C(a; s) ∝eαEUs[a]
The noise parameter α modulates between random choice
(α = 0) and perfect maximization (α = ∞). Expected utility depends on both current and future utility:
EUs [a] = U(s, a) + E
s′,a′ [EUs′ [a′]]
with s′ ∼T(s, a) and a′ ∼C(s′). Note that expected future
utility recursively depends on C—that is, on what the agent
assumes about how it will make future choices.
Time-inconsistent agent
Now the agent’s choice and expected utility function are parameterized by a delay d, which
together with a constant k controls how much to discount future utility:
C(a; s, d) ∝eαEUs,d[a]
EUs,d [a] =
1 + kdU(s, a) + E
s′,a′ [EUs′,d+1 [a′]]
with s′ ∼T(s, a). For the Naive agent, a′ ∼C(s′, d + 1),
whereas for the Sophisticated agent, a′ ∼C(s′, 0). When
we compute what the agent actually does in state s, we set
d to 0. As a consequence, only the Sophisticated agent correctly predicts its future actions.3 An implementation of the
Naive agent as a probabilistic program is shown in Figure 2.
Time-inconsistent agent with uncertainty
We now relax
the assumption that the agent knows the true world state.
Instead, we use a distribution p(s) to represent the agent’s
belief about which state holds. Using a likelihood function
p(o|s), the agent can update this belief:
p(s|o) ∝p(s)p(o|s)
The agent’s choice and expected utility functions are now
parameterized by the distribution p(s) and the current observation o:
C(a; p(s), o, d) ∝eαEUp(s),o,d[a]
2This is the kind of agent assumed in the standard setup of an
MDP 
3This foresight allows the Sophisticated agent to avoid tempting
states when possible. If such states are unavoidable, the Sophisticated agent will choose inconsistently.
var agent = function(state, delay){
return Marginal(
function(){
var action = uniformDraw(actions)
var eu = expUtility(state, action, delay)
factor(alpha * eu)
return action
var expUtility = function(state, action, delay){
if (isFinal(state)){
var u = 1/(1 + k*delay) * utility(state, action)
return u + Expectation(function(){
var nextState = transition(state, action)
var nextAction = sample(agent(nextState, delay+1))
return expUtility(nextState, nextAction, delay+1)
Figure 2: We specify agents’ decision-making processes as
probabilistic programs. This makes it easy to encode arbitrary biases and decision-making constraints. When automated inference procedures invert such programs to infer utilities from choices, these constraints are automatically taken into account. Note the mutual recursion between
agent and expUtility: the agent’s reasoning about future expected utility includes a (potentially biased) model of
its own decision-making.
To compute expected utility, we additionally take the expectation over states. Now EUp(s),o,d [a] is deﬁned as:
1 + kdU(s, a) +
EUp(s|o),o′,d+1 [a′]
with s′ ∼T(s, a), o′ ∼p(o|s′) and a′ ∼C(p(s|o), o′, d +
1) (for the Naive agent) or a′ ∼C(p(s|o), o′, 0) (for the
Sophisticated agent).
Inferring preferences
We deﬁne a space of possible
agents based on the dimensions described above (utility
function U, prior p(s), discount parameter k, noise parameter α). We additionally let Y be a variable for the agent’s
type, which ﬁxes whether the agent discounts at all, and if
so, whether the agent is Naive or Sophisticated. So, an agent
is deﬁned by a tuple θ := (p(s), U, Y, k, α), and we perform inference over this space given observed actions. The
posterior joint distribution on agents conditioned on action
sequence a0:T is:
P(θ|a0:T ) ∝P(a0:T |θ)P(θ)
The likelihood function P(a0:T |θ) is given by the multistep generalization of the choice function C corresponding
to θ. For the prior P(θ), we use independent uniform priors on bounded intervals for each of the components. In the
following, “the model” refers to the generative process that
Utility for Donut
Utility for Vegetarian
Utility for Vegetarian
Discount strength (k)
Sophisticated
Utility for Noodle
P("Noodle shop open")
Sophisticated
Figure 3: Given data corresponding to Figure 1,
the model infers a joint
distribution
on preferences, beliefs
and other agent properties . WebPPL provides automated inference
over functional programs that involve recursion. This means
that we can directly translate the recursions above into programs that represent an agent and the world simulation used
for expected utility calculations. All of the agents above can
be captured in a succinct functional program that can easily
be extended to capture other kinds of sub-optimal planning.
Figure 2 shows a simpliﬁed example (including hyperbolic
discounting but not uncertainty over state).
For the Bayesian inference corresponding to Equation 1
we use a discrete grid approximation for the continuous variables (i.e. for U, p(s), k and α) and perform exact inference
using enumeration with dynamic programming.
Model inferences
We now demonstrate that the model described above can infer preferences, false beliefs and time inconsistency jointly
from simple action sequences similar to those that occur frequently in daily life. We later validate this intuition in our experiments, where we show that human subjects make inferences about the agent that are similar to those of our model.
Example 1: Inference with full knowledge
We have previously seen how modeling agents as Naive and Sophisticated might predict the action sequences shown in Figures
1a and 1b respectively. We now consider the inference problem. Given that these sequences are observed, what can be
inferred about the agent? We assume for now that the agent
has accurate beliefs about the restaurants and that the two
Donut Stores D1 and D2 are identical (with D1 closer to the
starting point).4 We model each restaurant as having an immediate utility (received on arriving at the restaurant) and a
delayed utility (received one time-step after). This interacts
with hyperbolic discounting, allowing the model to represent options that are especially “tempting” when they can be
obtained with a short delay.
For the Naive episode (Figure 1a) our model infers that either softmax noise is very high or that the agent is Naive (as
explained for Alice above). If the agent is Naive, the utility
of the Vegetarian Cafe must be higher than the Donut Store
(otherwise, the agent wouldn’t have attempted to go to the
Cafe), but not too much higher (or the agent wouldn’t give
in to temptation, which it in fact does). This relationship is
exhibited in Figure 3 (top left), which shows the model posterior for the utilities of the Donut Store and Vegetarian Cafe
(holding ﬁxed the other agent components Y , k, and α).
Example 2: Inference with uncertainty
In realistic settings, people do not have full knowledge of all facts relevant to their choices. Moreover, an algorithm inferring preferences will itself be uncertain about the agent’s uncertainty. What can the model infer if it doesn’t assume that
the agent has full knowledge? Consider the Sophisticated
episode (Figure 1b). Suppose that the Noodle Shop is closed,
and that the agent may or may not know about this. This creates another possible inference, in addition to Sophisticated
avoidance of temptation and high noise: The agent might
prefer the Noodle Shop and might not know that it is closed.
This class of inferences is shown in Figure 3 (bottom): When
the agent has a strong prior belief that the shop is open, the
observations are most plausible if the agent also assigns high
utility to the Noodle Shop (since only then will the agent attempt to go there). If the agent does not believe that the shop
is open, the Noodle Shop’s utility does not matter—the observations have the same plausibility either way.
In addition, the model can make inferences about the
agent’s discounting behavior (Figure 3 right): When utility
for the Vegetarian Cafe is low, the model can’t explain the
data well regardless of discount rate k (since, in this case,
the agent would just go to the Donut Store directly). The
data is best explained when utility for the Vegetarian Cafe
and discount rate are in balance—since, if the utility is very
high relative to k, the agent could have gone directly to the
Vegetarian Cafe, without danger of giving in to the Donut
Store’s temptation.
Example 3: Inference from multiple episodes
Hyperbolic discounting leads to choices that differ systematically
from those of a rational agent with identical preferences. A
time-inconsistent agent might choose one restaurant more
often than another, even if the latter restaurant provides more
4In Experiment 2, we allow the utilities for D1 and D2 to be
different. See row 3 of Figure 6 and the “Preference” entry for Sophisticated in Figure 7.

 

 
Figure 4: The observations in Experiment 3 show the Donut Chain Store being chosen twice and the Vegetarian Cafe once.
utility in total. Our model is able to perform this kind of inference. Figure 4 shows the same agent choosing in three
different episodes. While the agent chooses the Donut Store
two out of three times, our model assigns posterior probability 0.59 (+/- 0.05 for 95% CI) that the agent prefers the Vegetarian Cafe over the Donut Store. As we decrease the prior
probability of high softmax noise, this posterior increases
beyond 0.59. By contrast, a model without time inconsistency infers a preference for the Donut Store, and has to explain Episode 2 in Figure 4 in terms of noise, which leads to
high-entropy predictions of future choices.
Experiments with Human Subjects
We have shown that, given short action sequences, our
model can infer whether (and how) an agent is timeinconsistent while jointly inferring appropriate utilities. We
claim that this kind of inference is familiar from everyday life and hence intuitively plausible. This section provides support for this claim by collecting data on the inferences of human subjects. In our ﬁrst two experiments, we
ask subjects to explain the behavior in Figures 1a and 1b.
This probes not just their inferences about preferences, but
also their inferences about biases and false beliefs that might
have inﬂuenced the agent’s choice.
Experiment 1: Inference with full knowledge
Experiment 1 corresponds to Example 1 in the previous section (where the agent is assumed to have full knowledge).
Two groups of subjects were shown Figures 1a and 1b, having already seen two prior episodes showing evidence of a
preference for the Vegetarian Cafe over the other restaurants.
People were then asked to judge the plausibility of different
explanations of the agent’s behavior in each episode.5
Results are shown in Figure 5. In both Naive (Figure 1a)
and Sophisticated (1b) conditions, subjects gave the highest ratings to explanations involving giving in to temptation
(Naive) or avoiding temptation (Sophisticated). Alternative
explanations suggested that the agent wanted variety (having taking efﬁcient routes to the Vegetarian Cafe in previous
episodes) or that they acted purely based on a preference (for
a long walk or for the Donut Store).
5In a pilot study, we showed subjects the same stimuli and had
them write free-form explanations. In Experiment 1, subjects had
to judge four of the explanations that occurred most frequently in
this pilot.
Tempted by donut
Preference for variety
Prefers donut
Vegetarian too far
Average score for explanation
Avoid temptation
Preference for variety
Prefers walk
Try noodle
Sophisticated
Figure 5: Explanations in Experiment 1 for the agent’s behavior in Figure 1a (Naive) and 1b (Sophisticated). Subjects
(n=120) knew that the agent has accurate knowledge, and
saw prior episodes providing evidence of a preference for
the Vegetarian Cafe. Subjects selected scores in {1, 2, 3}.
Experiment 2: Inference with uncertainty
Experiment 2 corresponds to Example 2 above. Subjects see
one of the two episodes in Figure 1 (with Figure 1a modiﬁed
so D1 and D2 can differ in utility and Figure 1b modiﬁed so
the Noodle Shop is closed). There is no prior information
about the agent’s preferences, and the agent is not known to
have accurate beliefs. We asked subjects to write explanations for the agent’s behavior in the two episodes and coded
these explanations into four categories. Figure 6 speciﬁes
which formal agent properties correspond to which category.
While not all explanations correspond to something the
model can infer about the agent, the most common explanations map cleanly onto the agent properties θ—few explanations provided by people fall into the “Other” category (Figure 7). The model inferences in this ﬁgure show the marginal
likelihood of the observed actions given the corresponding
property of θ, normalized across the four property types. In
both the Naive and the Sophisticated case, the model and
people agree on what the three highest-scoring properties
are. Explanations involving false beliefs and preferences rate
more highly than those involving time inconsistency. This is
because, even if we specify whether the agent is Naive/So-
Formalization
Example explanation from our human subjects
Donut Store D1 is open.
p(D1 = open) < 0.15
“He decided he wanted to go to the Donut Store for lunch. He
did not know there was a closer location”
Noodle Shop is open.
p(N = open) > 0.85
“He was heading towards the noodle shop ﬁrst, but when he got
there, it was closed, so he continued on the path and ended up
settling for ... vegetarian cafe.”
Agent prefers D2 to D1.
U(D2) > U(D1)
“He might also enjoy the second donut shop more than the ﬁrst”
Agent is Naive / Sophisticated.
Y = Naive/Soph.
“He ... headed for the Vegetarian Cafe, but he had to pass by
the Donut shop on his way. The temptation was too much to
ﬁght, so he ended up going into the Donut Shop.”
Figure 6: Map from properties invoked in human explanations to formalizations in the model. The left column describes the
property. The center column shows how we formalized it in terms of the variables used to deﬁne an agent θ. The right column
gives an explanation (from our dataset of human subjects) that invokes this property.
Sophisticated
(Avoid) temptation
False belief
Preference
(Avoid) temptation
False belief
Preference
Frequency/probability of explanation
SubjectType
Figure 7: Explanations in Experiment 2 for the agent’s behavior in Figures 1a (Naive) and 1b (Sophisticated). Subjects
did not know whether the agent has accurate knowledge, and
did not see prior episodes. There were n=31 subjects (Naive)
and n=40 subjects (Sophisticated).
phisticated, the actions in Figure 1a/b are fairly unlikely—
they require a narrow range of utility values, as illustrated in
Figure 3 (top left), which favors more speciﬁc explanations.
Experiment 3: Inference from multiple episodes
Following Example 3 above, subjects (n=50) saw the
episodes in Figure 4 and inferred whether the agent prefers
the Vegetarian Cafe or the Donut Store. Like the model, the
majority of subjects inferred that the agent prefers the Vegetarian Cafe. Overall, 54% (+/- 7 for 95% CI) inferred a preference of Vegetarian Cafe over the Donut Store, compared
to the 59% posterior probability assigned by the model.
Episode 2 (in which the agent does not choose the Donut
Store) is identical to the Sophisticated episode from Figure
1. Experiments 1 and 2 showed that subjects explain this
episode in terms of Sophisticated time-inconsistent planning. Together with Experiment 3, this suggests that subjects use this inference about the agent’s planning to infer
the agent’s undiscounted preferences, despite having seen
the agent choose the Donut Store more frequently.
Conclusion
AI systems have the potential to improve our lives by helping us make choices that involve integrating vast amounts
of information or that require us to make long and elaborate
plans. For instance, such systems can recommend and ﬁlter
the information we see on social networks or music services
and can construct intricate plans for travel or logistics. For
these systems to live up to their promise, we must be willing
to delegate some of our choices to them—that is, we need
such systems to reliably act in accordance with our preferences and values. It can be difﬁcult to formally specify our
preferences in complex domains; instead, it is desirable to
have systems learn our preferences, just as learning in other
domains is frequently preferable to manual speciﬁcation.
This learning requires us to build in assumptions about
how our preferences relate to the observations the AI system
receives. As a starting point, we can assume that our choices
result from optimal rational planning given a latent utility
function. However, as our experiments with human subjects
show, this assumption doesn’t match people’s intuitions on
the relation between preferences and behavior, and we ﬁnd
little support for the simplistic model where what is chosen
most is inferred to be the most valued. We exhibited more realistic models of human decision-making, which in turn supported more accurate preference inferences. By approaching
preference inference as probabilistic induction over a space
of such models, we can maintain uncertainty about preferences and other agent properties when the observed actions
are ambiguous.
This paper has only taken a ﬁrst step in the direction we
advocate. Two priorities for further work are applications to
more realistic domains and the development of alternatives
to using human preference inferences as a standard by which
to evaluate algorithms. The goal for this emerging subﬁeld
of AI is to make systems better able to support humans even
in domains where human values are complex and nuanced,
and where human choices may be far from optimal.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Future of Life Institute grant
2015-144846 (all authors) and by ONR grant N00014-13-1-
0788 (NG).
This material is based on research sponsored by DARPA
under agreement number FA8750-14-2-0009 (AS and NG).
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding
any copyright notation thereon. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial policies
or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of DARPA or
the U.S. Government.