LOGIC, DESIGNS, PROCESSES, METHODS
AND APPROACHES
Bonn Obiekwe Nwa~olue, PhD
Christian C. Ezeibe, PhD
Ernest T. Adiche, PhD
Victor C. lwuoha, PhD
POLITICAL INQUIRY AND RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
LOGIC, DESIGNS, PROCESSES, METHODS AND APPROACHES
Bonn Obiekwe Nwanolue, PhD
Christian C. Ezeibe, PhD
Ernest T. Aniche, PhD
Victor C. Iwuoha, PhD
All Right Reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, record or otherwise without the prior permission of the
editors ..
Cover Design: Parakletos Creatives, Enugu
ISBN: 978-978-962-548-2
 
PARAKLETOS IMMUNIS DRIVE
3 Otuson Crescent, Independence Layout
Enugu, Nigeria
+2348060191914
DEDICATION
To the memory of Professor Ken lfesinachi: a colleague,
teacher and mentor.
Political Methodology was enriched by two remarkable events
that have combined to change the trajectory of research and
knowledge-production in the 20th Century. The behavioural
revolution and post-behavioural counter revolution have since
then continued to shape the Logic and Method of Political
Inquiry. Consequently, researches in political science have
been structured to reflect the methodological approaches or
paradigms in Political Science. Despite the multiplicity of
research text on research, most detailed political research texts
are authored by American, Asian and Europeans. It is therefore
rare to find political research texts written for Nigerian predegree, undergraduate and postgraduate students. Dominance
of Western research literature has led to information transfer
rather than an exchange, which fundamentally adumbrates the
significance and usefulness of most brilliant research works
from the developing world. Critical efforts at resolving this
setback are still minimal and fragmented in Africa. While more
and more universities in developing countries, including
Nigeria, are building institutional repositories, they appear to
encounter the same technical, cultural, and resource struggles
that are common in other parts of the developing world,
regarding research funding. This constrains the extent to which
African research could become or remain meaningful and
comparatively relevant in present-day research world.
This challenge is yet magnified if one considers how
inadequacy of "know-how" on methodological precepts that
could drive thought-provoking, inspiring and innovative
research has prevented and disallowed critical opportunities
for global research partnerships and opportunities for students
and scholars from the developing world. The argument
purporting that research from the Western world are more
sophisticated, superior and methodologically rooted than those
from developing world has become widespread, with
unnecessary magnification and ideologisation of Western
research. This is rather implicated in many rankings (e.g.,
journal impact factors) found within the precincts of global
research order; including Thomson Reuters (Web of Science)
or other Western-based entities that accommodate only a
fraction of African research of the total corpus of their
published works. This is often combined with the said 'editorial
bias' against article submissions from the developing world.
Whether this 'bias' confers a negative impact or not on the
advancement of research in and about the developing world is a
matter of serious concern and further argument. Meantime, the
critical task and focus of developing countries' scholars should
be directed at proving to the Western world that mere "access"
to scholarly information from the developed global North does
not necessarily provide relevant knowledge pertaining to
context-specific issues in Africa. This positive challenge can
only be vehement if a strong methodological front is forged by
African scholars. This makes our research highly in-depth,
meaningful and useful in global research order, regardless if
they are qualitative, quantitative or both. In fact, the
establishment of a sustainable, global knowledge society can
be achieved only when knowledge is effectively shared
globally. We can identify and pursue the most valuable content.
Not only would the producers of methodologically proven
African research benefit from greater exposure worldwide,
their research strides are globally discovered and used for
teaching and further research in Western world. This is the kind
of intellectual uproar this text is fashioned along.
The motivation for a new text on research methodology in
political science came from the persistent claim by students
that research is too abstract and technically specialised in
nature for their liking and understanding. This book is also an
outcome of recent developments in the research world since the
period preceding the 21 '
1 Century and after. Ever since,
research has become a serious business, in a newfound global
research order, especially when they are well-cooked with
-vproper 'ingredients' and 'methods' to the extent of engineering,
in~uencing and directing or leading a global debate. This book
was technically presented to evoke a newfound paradigmatic
orientation in both research process and research report. The
text aims primarily at eliminating the phobia for research
courses among students of political science at undergraduate
and postgraduate levels. This text defies the conventional
grounds of research phobia among students.
This thought provoking text equips students and researchers
for many prestigious national and global scholarships. The
combination of advanced research methodological skills, an
interest in interpreting the complex and shifting relationships
among diverse groups of researchers, and a sense of
responsibility as "citizens of the world" makes many
scholarships particularly relevant to Nigerian-based scholars.
This could go a long way in fulfilling one's intellectual and
professional needs by providing an unparalleled opportunity
to study and carry out research across the globe. A research
treatise of this kind with an integrated instructional approach,
appears so much as a reservoir of knowledge, a sort of mobile
research clinic in which political clinicians and political
scientists could repose confidence for learning and teaching.
The book is steeped in scientific and methodological rigour and
divided into twenty two chapters which adequately cover the
scope and various subjects and critical issues in Political
Inquiry and Research Methodology such as logic, research
designs, sampling, measurement, scaling, qualitative research,
quantitative research, research report,
documentation etc.
Therefore, this book will be useful to pre-degree,
undergraduate and postgraduate students writing their project,
seminar, proposal, synopsis, book review, dissertation and
BONN OBIEKWE G. NWANOLUE, PhD
CHRISTIAN C. EZEIBE, PhD
ERNEST T. ANICHE, PhD
VICTOR C. IWUOHA, PhD
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We give utmost thanks and sacrifice of praise to God Almighty, from
whom all knowledge, wisdom, understanding and inspiration
ultimately emanate and flow. He is the Alpha and Omeg of this book
project. We singularly express a huge sense of gratitude to all the
erudite scholars and political pundits who have cultivated and sowed
bountiful seeds of intellectual erudition into this study, for the sake of
continuous redemption of mankind in the form of education and reeducation through research. We are immensely indebted to the
researchers who contributed different chapters of this book.
A special recognition goes to Professors, Okwudiba Nnoli, Elo
Amucheazi, Humphrey Assissi Asobie, Obasi Igwe, Okechukwu
Ibeanu, Emmanuel Ezeani, Jonah Onuoha, Aloysius-Michaels
Okolie, Victor Adetula, O.S.A. Obikeze, Aja-Akuru Aja, Solomon
Akinboye, O.C. Nwaorgu, Collins Okafor, Heart Ofoeze, Felix
Asogwa, Eugene Nweke and Dr Ogban Ogban-J yam. Your academic
leaderships remain our points of intellectual contact. We also fondly
remember our fallen heroes including late Professors, Lambert
Ejiofor, Miriamlkejiani-Clarke, M.S.O Olisa, G.AfokaNweke, Ken
Ifesinachi. May their souls rest in peace. We also appreciate our
wonderful colleagues for their encouragement, insights, criticisms
and company.
We owe a lot of gratitude to our inspiring students in social and
management sciences, especially political science, public
administration and international relations from different universities
across Africa. Your constant expression of dissatisfaction over the
dearth of current and all-encompassing reading materials on Political
Inquiring and Research Methodology was a great source of
inspiration to write this text.
It is wonderful to imagine how much we could thank our different
families whose love, support and cooperation sustained our zeal and
focus to complete this book.
BONN OBIEKWE NWANOLUE, PhD
CHRISTIAN C. EZEIBE, PhD
ERNEST T. ANICHE, PhD
VICTOR C. IWUOHA, PhD
Dedication-------
---------------------------------------------iii
Preface---------------------------------------------------------i v
Acknowledgements------------------------------------------vii
Biography of the Contributors------------------------------viii
Chapter 1: ---------------------------------------------------1
Meaning, Nature and Scope of Political Inquiry and
Research Methodology- Victor Chidubem Iwuoha
Introduction
Meaning and Scope ofPolitical Inquiry
Basic Methods ofPolitical Inquiry
What is Research?
Separating Research Methods and Methodology
Research Method
Research Methodology
Importance of a Good Methodology Section
Structure and Writing Style ofResearch Methodology
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 2: ---------------------------------------------------19
Methods of Political Inquiry and Research Paradigms -
Charles Obiora & Ernest Udalla
Introduction
Case Study Research Method
Comparative Research Method
Survey Research Method
Making Methodological Choice in Political Science
Research Paradigms
Positivist Paradigm
Interpretivist Paradigm
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 3:------------------------------------------------------3 7
Methods and Instruments ofData Collection-
Ernest T. Aniche & Chioma M. Ofodum
Introduction
Types ofData·
Data Collection
Methods ofData Collection/Gathering
Qualitative and Quantitative Methods ofData Collection
Survey, Observation and Documentary Methods of Data
Collection
Direct and Indirect Methods ofData Collection
Instruments ofData Collection
Questionnaire Instrument
Structure of Questionnaire
Types/Forms of Questionnaire
Construction of Questionnaire
Distribution and Administration of Questionnaire
Interview Instrument
Guidelines for Conducting Interview
Administration oflnterview Schedule
Observation Instrument
Typologies of Observation
Observational Guidelines
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 4:------------------------------------------------------61
Methods of Data Analysis, Data Presentation and Scaling -
Bonn Obiekwe Godwin Nwanolue & Michael U. Egbuchulam
Introduction
Data Analysis
Methods ofDataAnalysis
Qualitative Methods ofDataAnalysis
Quantitative Methods of DataAnalysis
Descriptive Statistical Analysis and Inferential Statistical
Parametric Statistical Analysis and Non-Parametric Statistical
Univariate Statistical Analysis, Bivariate Statistical Analysis and
Multivariate Statistical Analysis
Methods ofData Presentation
Likert Scale ofMeasurement
Thurstone Scale ofMeasurement
Guthman Scale ofMeasurement
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 5:-----------------------------------------------------81
Qualitative Political Inquiry and its Foundations - Abraham
Introduction
What is Qualitative Political Inquiry and Why Does it Matter?
Scope ofPolitical inquiry
Objectives ofPolitical Inquiry
What Makes Qualitative Research "Scientific" or Scientific
Foundations of Qualitative Research
What is a Theory?
Types ofTheories in Political Science
Functions of a Theory
What is a Theoretical Framework of Analysis?
Methods and Methodology
Relationship between the Theoretical and Empirical Components
ofResearch
Political Inquiry and Theory Formulation
Forms ofPolitical Inquiry
Qualitative vs Quantitative Methods
Varieties of Qualitative Evidence, Processes of Acquiring them
Key Paradigms and Debates in Qualitative Research Methods
Problem of Complexity ofPolitical Phenomena
Formulation ofResearch Problem
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 6: -----------------------------------------------------101
Logic in Political Inquiry- Ogedi Jacob
Introduction
Characteristics ofLogic
History of Modem Logic
Types ofLogic
Logic as a Science or an Art
Fundamental Laws ofThought
Logical Fallacies
Importance of Logic to Political Inquiry
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
C ha pte r 7:-----------------------------------------------------117
Science and Method of Political Inquiry- Agaptus Nwozor
Introduction
Knowledge and Methods of Seeking Knowledge
Non-Scientific Methods of Knowing
Science and Scientific Methods ofKnowing
Clarifying Scientific Methods
Assumptions ofthe Scientific Method
Essentials of the Scientific Method
Components ofthe Scientific Method
Steps in Political Inquiry
Scientificity of Political Science Research
Conclusion
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 8:----------------------------------------------------15 7
Designing Qualitative Research - Moses M. Duruji
Introduction
Designing Qualitative Research: Preliminary Steps
Topic Selection
Research Questions
Writing a Literature Review
Theory and Theory Building
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 9: ----------------------------------------------------17 5
Analysing Qualitative Data- Wilfred M. Tarabinah
Introduction
What is Qualitative Data?
Meaning of Qualitative Data Analysis
Techniques in Qualitative Data Analysis
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 10:---------------------------------------------------197
Ethics in Political Science Research - Peter Mbah
Introduction
What is then Ethics?
Entering the Research Field: Purposes, identities, experiences,
field notes and ethics
Tips for Taking Field Notes
Ethical Issues in Social Science Research
Ethics in Social Science Research
Research Ethics and Politics
Ethics in Participatory Action Research (PAR)
Ethics in Participant Observation
Participant Observation Steps
Ethics in Research in Cyberspace
Ethical Problems in Social Science Research in Nigeria
Conclusion
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 11 :---------------------------------------------------225
Operationalisation - Love 0 . Arugu & Ozioma B. Orluwene
Introduction
What is Operationalisation?
Examples ofOperationalisation
Research Design
Qualitative versus Quantitative Research Methods
The Craft ofPolitical Research
Formulation ofResearch Problems
The Variables
Concept and Conceptualisation
Construct Validity
Correlations
Logic of Control
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 12:----------------------------------------------------2 65
Population and Sample- Ernest T. Aniche & Victor E. Ukaegbu
Introduction
Population
Sampling Unit and Sampling Frame
Sample Design
Sample Size Sample Size
Sampling Error
Sampling Techniques
Probability Sampling
Non-Probability Sampling
Mixed Designs
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 13: --------------------------------------------------2 79
Processes and Typologies of Research - Bonn Obiekwe Godwin
Nwanolue, Basil C. Onuoha & Victor Chibuike Obikaeze
Introduction
Historical Research
Basic and Applied Research
Survey Research
Descriptive Research
Case Study Research
Ex-Post Facto Research
Validity and Reliability Issues in Elite Interviewing
Observation and Ethnography
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 14:---------------------------------------------------315
Research Designs- Ernest T. Aniche & Harriet 0 . Efanodor
Introduction
Meaning ofResearch Design
Taxonomies ofResearch Design
Survey Research Designs
Experimental Research Designs
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 15:--------------------------------------------------331
Measurement in Political Science Research-
Stephen NnaemekaAzom
Introduction
Meaning ofMeasurement
Functions ofMeasurement
Levels ofMeasurement
Scales of Measurement
Reliability and Validity
Threats to Validity
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 16:--------------------------------------------------3 51
Questionnaire Format- Kelechukwu Charles Obi
Introduction
Meaning, Uses, Nature and Types of Questionnaire
Questionnaire's Relationship with Research Question and
Hypothesis
How to Prepare a Good Questionnaire and Elicit Objective
Wordings of the Questions, Phrasing and Response Structures or
Question Sequence and Layout of the Questionnaire
Pre-test (Pilot) and Revision
What are Code and Coding?
Coding Guidelines or Rules
Procedures in Coding Questionnaire
Sample of a Questionnaire
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 17:----------------------------------------------------381
Formulating a Political Research Question-
Enobong D. Umoh & Lawrence I. Edet
Introduction
Developing Political Research Questions
The Characteristics ofPolitical Research Questions
Formulating a Political Research Question
The Research Question and Research Design
The Research Question and Literature Review
Research Question and Data Collection/ Analysis
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 18:---------------------------------------------------3 95
Research Hypothesis- Ikechukwu Charles Akor
Introduction
What is Hypothesis?
Functions ofHypothesis
How to Formulate a Good Hypothesis
Structure ofHypothesis
Relationship ofVariables in Hypothesis
Null and Alternative Hypotheses
Testing ofHypothesis
Decision Rule
The Level ofSignificance
Degree ofFreedom
Critical Region or Region ofRejection
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 19: ---------------------------------------------------40 7
Research Writing and Reporting:
Seminar Papers,
Proposals, Projects, Dissertations and Theses-
Christian C. Ezeibe & UdochukwuA.O Ogbaji
Introduction
Guide to Writing Good Research Report
Steps in Preparing a Report
Writing Masters/PhD Seminar Paper
Writing Research Proposals for PhD Thesis
Writing Research Proposals for Fellowship Award
Writing a Grant Proposal
Common Mistakes in Proposal Writing
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 2 0:---------------------------------------------------43 7
Documentation and Bibliographical Citation in Research -
Elias Chukwuemeka Ngwu
Introduction
Importance of Citation
Bibliographic Citations
Types ofBibliographic Citation
Functions ofBibliographic Citation
Types ofBibliography
Reference Styles
Types ofReferencing Styles
APA- The American Psychological Association
Modem Language Association (MLA)
Kate Turabian (Chicago) Style
Comparing APA and MLAReferencing Styles
ComparingAPAand Turabian Styles
A Few Differences between the Harvard System and the APA
Meaning of some Latin Words and Expression Used in
Referencing
Documentation Formats
MLA System: Parenthetical Author-Page References
General Guidelines for Referencing
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 21 : ---------------------------------------------------463
Book Review- Laz. Etemike & Harriet Omokiniovo Efanodor
Introduction
What is Book Review? Definition and Conceptualisation
Purpose ofBook Review
Goals ofBook Review
Style ofBookReview
Structure of a Book Review
Language of a Review
Common Errors in Reviews
Choosing a J oumal to Publish a Review
A Sample ofBook Review
Conclusion
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
Chapter 22: ---------------------------------------------------4 77
Marxist Analytical Framework in Political Research -
Onoho'Omhen Ebhohirnhen
Introduction
Classical German Philosophy
English Political Economy
French Socialism
Marxist Philosophy
Marxist Political Economy
Marxism in Contemporary Political Economy Analyses
Marxist Theory of Class Struggle
Critics of Class Struggle
Some Tools ofMarxistAnalyses
Cause and Effect or Causality
Contradiction
Marxism and Social Revolution
Theoretical Marxism in Contemporary World
Marxism and the African Condition
Marxist Analyses of the Nigerian Condition
Conclusion
Review Questions
Selected Bibliography
CHAPTER EIGHT
DESIGNING QUALITATIVE RESEARCH
Moses M. Duruji
Introduction
Research is the process of systematic inquiry that aims at
increasing our knowledge ofhow things are, why things are the
way they are and how they might be changed .
But the fact that the world is large and diverse implies that for
researchers who engage in the creation of knowledge to be
successful in that exercise, they must concentrate in an aspect
of the world. To do that, they are required to articulate a topic in
that field of knowledge of which their research effort would
now focus so as to enable us get more understanding of the
phenomenon that they intend to research about. An important
decision to be taken by such researcher is to align the process of
undertaking this effort to that already accepted by a community
of academics . In order words, for the research
outcome to be accepted, the research must be conducted in line
with the prevalent paradigm. A paradigm is an entire
constellation of beliefs, values, techniques etc. shared by a
given (scientific) community in which universally recognised
scientific achievement for a time provide model problem and
solutions to a community of practitioners . The
researcher of necessity defines the method of undertaking the
research; as such research design is important in any research
There are basically two main ways of going about this that is
the quantitative and qualitative research designs. Qualitative
method uses unstructured forms of data collection, both
interviewing and observation. It employs more of verbal
description and explanation rather than measurement and
statistical analysis . In this chapter,
we shall examine the preliminary steps in the design of
qualitative research including topic selection, research
-157 questions, writing literature review, theory and theory
building. At the end of the chapter, questions for exercises were
provided to help the readers gauge comprehension.
Designing Qualitative Research: Preliminary Steps
Conducting a research is vital as a means of creating and
expanding the frontiers of knowledge. In the course of this
exercise, individuals' considering utilising qualitative methods
must understand that it is a method that diverges from scientific
explanation models in terms of the need for hypothesis testing.
A scientific hypothesis is based on a background theory that
typically assumes the form of a proposition whose validity
depends on empirical confirmation (Bireenu-Nnabugwu,
By contrast, qualitative researchers contend that their work
does not consist of proposing and testing hypotheses. Their
primary interest is to achieve understanding of a particular
situation, or individuals, or groups of individuals, or (sub)
cultures, etc. rather than to explain and predict future
behaviours as in the so-called hard sciences, with their arsenal
of laws, theories, and hypotheses employed or rejected on the
basis of their predictive value . In summary,
qualitative methods are primarily inductive, in contrast to the
deductive methods of experimental science.
So it is important to understand the nature of a qualitative
method which Hammersely , describes as the range of
research techniques using unstructured forms of data
collection, both interviewing and observation and employing
verbal description and explanation rather than quantitative
measurement and statistical analysis. On another hand,
Erinisho et al opines that qualitative methodology is
sufficiently equipped to study the process of social life at the
local and small-scale levels. They further argued that it is
useful in the examination and analysis of various types of
groups' interaction where there is need to understand the
diverse strands of social participation.
With this understanding, the preliminary step in qualitative
research design that must be undertaken includes the
-158formulation ofkey concepts. This will inform the researcher on
the direction of the study in terms of research objectives.
Another important preliminary step, is mapping out research
strategy. A good first step here is the formulation of research
questions. Once the researcher has thought through the key
elements of the research questions, hypotheses, specific aims,
and research design, then the ingredients for a concept paper
has emerged. This is an important tool to help the researcher to
organize thoughts, as well as to promote, disseminate, or get
feedback on ideas. A concept paper is a succinct description of
the research plan and can be particularly useful when a
researcher is trying to recruit collaborators or solicit letters of
Topic Selection
Framing of topic is one of the most important things any
researcher undertaking a study must consider. Of course before
this can be done, the individual must be convinced that he/she
has sufficient research interest in that area of study. Developing
interest would encourage the researcher to undertake a study of
the available literature so as to be sufficiently equipped with
the state of knowledge in that area of study, including getting
acquaintance with concepts and variables, as well as ideas of
possible areas that are unclear. Consequently, the topic selected
would thus be topical and generally accepted wherever it is
presented.
The ability to develop a good topic for research is an important
skill that students or researchers must possess. However in the
process of deciding a topic, there are vital steps that the
researcher is expected to undertake. They include the
following;
Brainstorming for ideas: Here you must ensure that the topic
you fmally settle with must be of interest to you. In going about
this, the following questions would be ofhelp;
Do you have a strong opinion on a social or political
controversy? For instance 'resources control'.
Did you read or see a news story recently that has irked
your interest or made you angry or anxious for instance
'political corruption'
Do you have a personal issue, problem or interest that
you would like to know more about? For instance
'leadership crisis in Africa'
Do you have a research paper that is due for submission
Is there an aspect of a class that you are interested in
learning more about?
Use search engines such as Google, Bing or any other to
research of sites that will provide more information that would
enable you to settle on the subject matter of your research
Choosing a topic that will enable the researcher to read and
understand the literature: The researcher should engage in
reading articles on the top two or three topics he/she is
considering. Reading a broad summary enables the researcher
to get an overview of the topic and see how his/her idea relates
. to broader, narrower and related issues. It also provides a great
source for finding words commonly used to describe the topic.
These keywords may be very useful in later research. Use of
broader terms must be employed to expand the dragnet of
search and the researcher must feel free to ask help from
Liberians. The researcher should browse encyclopaedia for
information on their topic. Beside this, the use of periodical
indexes to scan current magazine, journal or newspaper articles
on their topic will be helpful. Use of web search engines like
Google and Bing can also be of help in bringing hits related to
the topic of interest.
Ensuring that the topic is manageable and that material are
available: It is important to note that a topic may be too
difficult to research if it is too locally confined. Such topics are
specific and may only be covered in local newspaper, if at all.
Example: What are the causes of insurgency in Chibok? If a
-160topic is quite recent, books or journal articles may not be
available but newspaper or magazine articles may. Also web
sites related to the topic may not be available. Broadly
interdisciplinary - here it is in the sense where the researcher
may be overwhelmed with superficial information. Example:
How has insurgency in the Northeast contributed to politics
and business in Nigeria? Popular - here there are popular
articles and topics about political figures and high-profile
celebrities and politicians. If there are difficulties or questions
on your topic, discuss the topic with an instructor or with a
librarian.
Making list of keywords: Here researchers are to keep track of
the words that are used to describe their topic. Look for words
that best describe your topic. Look for them in when reading
encyclopaedia articles and background and general
information. Find broader and narrower terms, synonyms, and
key concepts for key words to widen your search capabilities.
Make note of these words and use them later when searching
databases and catalogues
Being flexible: this is necessary because you can never be sure
of what you may find in the process of searching for
information on your topic. So it is common to modify your
topic. In that process of search, the researcher may find too
much and need to narrow his/her focus, or too little and need to
broaden the focus which is a normal part of the research. When
researching, you may not wish to change your topic, but you
may decide that some other aspect of the topic is more
interesting or manageable. The researcher must keep in mind
the assigned length of the proposed study, the depth of
coverage needed and the due date. The decision on how much
and when to modify chosen topic is determined by the factors
mentioned above.
Definition of the topic as a focused research question: Here
researchers start with a word and then develop a more focused
-161interest in an aspect of something relating to that word, then
begin to have questions about the topic. For example: ideas=
Obasanjo's administration or democratisation in Nigeria.
Research Question = How did Obasanjo's administration affect
democratisation in Nigeria. Focused Research Question =
what policies of Obasanjo's administration deepened
democracy in Nigeria
Researching and reading more about the topic: The
researchers must apply the use of key words to research in the
catalogue, article databases and internet search engine, so as to
find more information to help answer the research questions.
The researcher need to do some research and reading before
selecting a final topic. Is there enough information to answer
research question bearing in mind that selecting a topic is an
important and complex part ofthe research process
Formulation of a thesis statement: the researcher should
write their topic as a thesis statement as it may be the answer to
their research question or way to clearly state the purpose of the
research. The thesis statement will usually be one or two
sentences that states precisely what is to be answered, proven
or what the researcher would inform his/her audience about the
topic. For example, a thesis statement could be: Obasanjo's
administration political reform conference and strict adherence
to rule of law depended democracy in Nigeria. His style of
administration has opened the space for democracy such that
many political parties were formed and registered during his
tenure. The title of the paper may not be exactly the same as the
research question or thesis statement, but the title should
clearly convey the focus, purpose and meaning of the research.
For example, a title could be: Obasanjo's Administration and
Democratisation in Nigeria.
One important point that must not be glossed over is the fact
that selection of a topic may not be easy. It must be narrow and
focused enough to be interesting, yet broad enough to find
adequate information. It is important to keep the topic
-162manageable because it will be very difficult to research if it is
too broad or narrow. One way to narrow a broad topic such as
'insurgency' is to limit the topic: Some common ways to limit a
topic are:
By geographical area. Example: What kind of
insurgency is raging in Nigeria?
By culture. Example: How does insurgency fit into the
Islamic world view?
By time frame. Example:
What are the prominent
issues of insurgency since 2009?
By discipline. Example: How does issue of insurgency
affect the politics ofNigeria?
By population group. Example: what are the impacts of
insurgency on the people of northeast Nigeria?
Research Questions
According to Bierrenu-Nnabugwu , the research
question is an anchor statement that guides the researcher in his
quest for answers to the problem that is being investigated. It is
a reduced specific researchable breakdown of the statement of
problem . It is often a logical follow up to the
formulation of a topic and the review of relevant literature
 . Collaborating this view point,
McQueen and Knussen , had argued that research
question provides a statement of the overall aims of a piece of
research and at the same time indicates in broad terms, what the
researcher is trying to do.
A research question is a statement that identifies the
phenomenon to be studied. For example, "What resources are
helpful to researchers engaging in insurgency or terrorism?" To
develop a strong research question from your ideas, you should
ask yourselfthe following:
Do I know the field and its literature well?
What are the important research questions in my field?
What areas need further exploration?
Could my study fill a gap? Could my study lead to
-163greater understanding?
Has a great deal of research already been conducted in
this topic area?
Has this study been done before? If so, is there room for
improvement?
Is the timing right for this question to be answered? Is it
a hot topic, or is it becoming obsolete?
Would funding sources be interested?
Most importantly, will my study have a significant
impact on the field?
The research questions that would be formulated to achieve the
objectives, give the research an idea of the kind oftechniques to
collect relevant data and analyse the data accordingly so as to
fulfil the goal of the research. A good research question helps
Guide the research process,
Construct a logical argument,
Write a literature review,
Plan chapters of your project, dissertation or thesis,
Devise efficient search strategies.
There are six properties that can be used to write a notional
research question. This activity will help in writing a good
research question, or help in reflecting on a research question
the researcher already have. The end result does not necessarily
need to be the exact question the researcher will use for the
work. The question might be revised and refined throughout
the research as the researcher comes to a more sophisticated
understanding of the topic and target a more specific area of
scholarship. The end result would be a research question
relevant to the discipline where the following six properties
A well-defined research question:
1. Identifies the theoretical construct you want to learn
more about
2. Displays recognisability and assists you to code
literature according to a logical structure
3. Transcends the data used to conduct the research
4. Draws attention to the significance of the research
5. Has the capacity to surprise the researcher as they
6. Encourages a complex answer (i.e. not a 'yes' or 'no'
response).
The summary of the matter is that a good research question
identifies the theoretical construct, transcends the data and has
recognisability, significance, robustness and the capacity to
Writing a Literature Review
The Literature review plants the seeds that will grow your
study from those that came before it. A Literature review is a
discussion of your knowledge about the topic under study. We
can also describe it as a discussion of your knowledge that is
supported by the research literature: It is a foundation for the
study (Okolie, 20 16). It is an analysis and synthesis of primary
source materials, written in a specific style which flows from
broad to narrow, and takes into account both the theoretical and
empirical issues of the problem without over citing any source
or sources. A literature review is an examination of the research
that has been conducted in a particular field of study. Note that
it is not an information dump. According to Hart (1 998), a
literature review is the selection of available documents on the
topic, which contain information, ideas, data and evidence.
This selection is written from a particular standpoint to fulfil
certain aims or express certain views on the nature of the topic
and how it is to be investigated. It is also the effective
evaluation of these documents in relation to the research being
Literature review serves as an overview of significant literature
published on a subject matter under investigation. According to
(Lyon, nd), a typical literature review is not an annotation as
most students tend to confuse in their project, long essays and
dissertations but must of necessity include the following:
An overview of the subject, issue or theory under
----165 consideration, along with the objectives of the
literature review
Division of works under review into categories (e.g.
those in support of a particular position, those against,
and those offering alternative theses entirely)
Explanation of how each work is similar to and how it
varies from the others
Conclusions as to which pieces are best considered in
their argument, are most convincing of their opinions,
and make the greatest contribution to the understanding
and development of their area of research
Embarking on literature review should entail some level of
preparation. This is very essential to ensure that the literature
review is properly done, so as to set the stages for the research.
There are four main stages in the preparation of literature
1. Define your topic: you must define your topic and
components of your topic
2. Search for materials: use search tools (such as the
library catalogue, databases, bibliographies) to find
materials about your topic
3. Evaluate what you have found: read and evaluate what
you have found in order to determine which material
makes a significant contribution to the understanding
ofthetopic
4. Analysis and interpretation: provide a discussion of the
findings and conclusions of the pertinent literature
5. The researcher must actually do a thorough job to
ensure that all the relevant literatures are gathered. In
assessing each piece, consideration should be given to:
6. Provenance: What are the author's credentials? Are the
author's arguments supported by evidence (e.g.
primary historical material, case studies, narratives,
statistics, and recent scientific findings)?
7. Objectivity: Is the author's perspective even-handed or
prejudicial? Is contrary data considered or is certain
pertinent information ignored to prove the author's
-166point?
8. Persuasiveness: Which of the author's theses are
most/least convincing?
9. Value: Are the author's arguments and conclusions
convincing? Does the work ultimately contribute in
any significant way to an understanding ofthe subject?
The literature review itself, however, does not present new
primary scholarship. But it may constitute an essential chapter
of an undergraduate project, dissertation, or thesis or may be a
self-contained review of writings on a subject (such as a journal
article). Whatever the case maybe, its purpose is to:
Place each work in the context of its contribution to the
understanding ofthe subject under review
Describe the relationship of each work to the others
under consideration
Identify new ways to interpret, and shed light on any
gaps in, previous research
Resolve conflicts amongst seemingly contradictory
previous studies
Identify areas of prior scholarship to prevent
duplication of effort
Point the way forward for further research
Place one's original work (in the case of theses or
dissertations) in the context of existing literature
It is important to note that a Literature Review is not;
A study-by-study, or article-by-article, description of
studies previously done
Are-statement of the studies previously done
A brief overview of articles
A Review ofLiterature is not a summary or an abstract
of articles.
It is not an Op-Ed.
It is not an annotated bibliography.
It is not a rehashing of another authors work
Working with literature is an essential part of the research
process that generates ·ideas, helps form significant questions
and instrumental in the process of research design. To
-167undertake a literature review, the researcher will probably
collect information from journal papers, conference papers,
books, media releases, websites, official publications,
archives, etc.
It is important to consider the following when assessing the
information.
Who wrote it and why did they write it (what info did
they leave out, how did they 'spin' the results, etc.)?
Where was it published and how was it reviewed/edited
(i.e. journal paper or mad magazine)?
When was it published (and what info has come out
since)? Are the conclusions valid based on the results?
How rigorous were the tests performed/data analysed?
You will need an opinion on the literature you review as to how
good, bad or useful it is- this needs to come out in your review.
Begin with a search of the available literature and then
critically analyse each article you select, organise the review
with an outline, write the review, summarise the review and
using the literature, present a rationale for your study.
Make sure the structure is logical- a good literature review will
ensure that the reader does not need to think while they read it.
Make sure your research question is obvious and its importance
clearly highlighted by the end of the review. Be mindful of the
recommended reference style and stick to it. Ensure that all the
in-text references are put into the reference section. Keep and
file copies of relevant books, articles, etc. because it helps you
to be organised. Avoid lending out your 'only copies' . Empirical
theories deal with facts, quantities and relationships
 . These theories are amenable to empirical
measurement and verification and subject to hypothetical
testing . The second strand,
normative theories, is theories that incorporate value
judgment: "good and bad" and "should and should nots".
Although not amenable to hypothetical testing, normative
theories are referred to as norms regarding right, good and
beautiful, which differ from person to person and culture to
culture .
The positivist orientation in social sciences, however, lays
emphasis on empirical theories which perform unique
functions in political research. Theory in this regard is the hub
-169of scientific work.
Goods and Hart identify the functions performed by
theory to include:; definition of the major orientation of
sciences, like the kind of data to be abstracted; offering of
conceptual scheme by which the relevant phenomena are
systematised, classified and interrelated; summarising facts
into empirical generalisations; predicting facts; and pointing to
gaps in knowledge. In another hand, Selltiz et al observe
that theory summarises existing knowledge; provides an
explanation for observed events and relationships helps to
predict the occurrence of unobserved events and relationship
on the basis of explanatory principles embodied in the theory;
increases the fruitfulness of research by providing significant
leads for inquiry and by directing research and contributes
directly to the development and organisation of knowledge. A
theory makes generalisations about observations and consists
of a set of interrelated and coherent models which applies to all
studies science disciplines including political studies. In a
methodological view of political theory, Rodee et al 
argue that it is a branch of political science which attempts to
arrive at generalisations and draws inferences from the data
gathered by various specialists relating to political phenomena.
In other words, political theory reflects sustained attempt to
arrive at generalisations in political science . This way, theory explains, organizes,
systematises and coordinates existing knowledge in a
particular area . It also plays an important
heuristic role in the generalization of hypothesis. Theory
guides practice and research; practice enables testing of theory
and generates questions for research; research contributes to
theory-building and selecting practice guidelines. So, what is
learned through practice, theory and research interweaves to
create the knowledge fabric of a discipline .
Theory is important because theory development is the goal of
science. Science itself deals with evidence and provable data.
For instance "All politicians are corrupt". The theory stated
----170above can be based on evidence we observe the constraint is
that this is limited only to the observable world beyond that we
know nothing (we can never have all the knowledge). The term
theory has technical and commonsense meaning. In
commonsense terms, theory means ideas, preposition and
explanations that get to the essential truth behind something
that is often hidden for example 'phenomenon of male
dominance in politics' can be explained as resulting from
cultural restraint on the women folk. Therefore, theory and
truth are equivalent in commonsense knowledge. Technical
meaning of theory proffers conditional connection with
explanation that is founded on empirical evidence.
This brings us to the types of theory; normative and empirical.
Normative theories are sets of interrelated ideas and
proposition that are embedded with an explicit value
preference e.g. social contract; force theory etc. empirical
theories are sets of interrelated ideas or propositions derive
from facts that explain a phenomenon.
The goal of scientific research is the construction of a theory. In
political science, they are oftwo types; middle range theories
and grand theories.
Grand theories are of grand scale that seeks to encompass very
general and abstract explanation of the social world as a whole.
This type of theories goes beyond what can be observed and
measured. Example is historical materialism; this theory in
seeking understanding of social life, says it is rooted in the
forces and relations of production. It projects backward to
explain historical process and forward to account for the
emergence of new forms of social life. Another example is
Parson's theory of social system that explains how society is
structured. Another example is Gidden's theory of structuration
that attributes that the phenomenon of globalization results
from link between social structure and social action i.e.
globalization.
The middle range theories refer to discrete domains of society
or social action of more manageable population. They are
concerned with explanation of some regularities instead of
-171 ---explaining all observed uniformities in social life as in grand
theories. Examples include theories of nationalism
(primordialism, social constructivism, instrumentalism) and
theories of integration (federalism, functionalism, neofunctionalism).
Theory building in a scientific research can be formulated in
two ways, through inductive and deductive reasoning.
Deductive reasoning is based on syllogism. In its simplest
form, syllogism consists of a major premise based on a priori or
self-evident proposition, a minor premise providing a
particular instance and a conclusion. The assumption
underlying the syllogism is that through a sequence of formal
steps of logic; from the general to the particular, a valid
conclusion can be deduced from a valid premise. Syllogism is a
specific form of argument that has three steps;
1. Every X has the characteristic ofY
2. This thing is X
3. Therefore, this thing has the characteristic ofY
The above can be represented thus;
1. All Nigerians are tribalist
2. All human beings are tribalist
3. Therefore every Nigerian is a tribalist
However, inductive reasoning is concerned with inferences
from the particular to the general. An example is given below;
1. Every Nigerian public office holder has been indicted
of corruption
2. Nigerian politicians are still stealing
3. All Nigerian politicians are corrupt
There are three important utilities of theory;
1. It opens up research problems by identifying what
hitherto has been hidden; for instance why is the male
gender dominant in Nigerian politics?
2. Theory can draw together unrelated fragments of
empirical evidence of research. In other words, theories
help to simplify explanation of the empirical
regularities we observe in the social or real world.
3. It gives focus to research because it is theory-
-172dependent in the sense that it is conducted in the light of
theory and data gathered is used to verify original
theoretical ideas. But sometimes a theory can be
intended as outcome of research especially in an
exploratory research.
Review Questions
1. Highlight the factors that determine decision on how
much and when to modify chosen topic for research.
2. What are the vital steps researchers are expected to
undertake before deciding on a topic?
3. Conducting a research is vital as a means of creating and
expanding the frontiers ofknowledge. Discuss.
4. Describe the nature of a qualitative research and the
preliminary steps in qualitative research design?
5. Demonstrate your understanding of how to formulate a
thesis statement.
6. Using clear examples state the common ways oflimiting a
7. Describe the role of a research question in a research.
8. What are the effects of a good research question to the
research process?
9. Discuss the properties of a well-defined research question
to the research.
10. What are the stages in preparation for literature review?
11. What are the purpose of a literature review to a research
12. Articulate those things that typical literature reviews are
13. In assessing materials for a literature review, what are
those things a researcher must consider?
14. What is theroleoftheory in a research?
15. Using clear examples show your understanding of
building a theory through inductive and deductive
Selected Bibliography
Asika, N. . Research Methodology in the Behavioural
Sciences. Lagos: Longman.
Bassey, C. and Ndiyo, N. . "Research Design: Types
and Application". In A. Okolie & O.G Ajene (eds.)
Research Methodology in Social Science Analysis,
pp. 98-113. Keffi: Nigerian Political Science
Association.
Biereenu-Nnabugwu, M. . Methodology of Political
Inquiry: Issues and Teaching of Research Methods in
Political Science. Enugu: QuintagonPublishers.
Buchanan, W. . Understanding Political Variables.
New York: Charles Scribner& Sons.
Dionco-Adetayo, E. (200 1 ). Guide to Writing Business
Research. Ile-Ife: Obafemi Awolowo University
Duruji, M.M. . An Examination of the Heuristic Role
of Theory in Undergraduate Political Research, US-
China Education Review B Volume 4, Number 2,
February,pp.114-122.
Goode, W.J. and Hart, P.K. . Methods in Social
Research. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Obasi, I. . Research Methodology in Political Science.
Enugu: Academic Publishing.
Okolie, A.M. . "Analysis of Literature Review and
Theoretical Framework". In A. Okolie and O.G.
Ajene (eds.) Research Methodology in Social Science
Analysis, pp. 67-82. Keffi: Nigerian Political Science
Association.
Erinosho, L., Obasi, I. and Maduekwe, A. .
Interdisciplinary Methodologies in the Social
Sciences. Ahuja: Social Science Academy ofNigeria.
Isaak, A. . Scope and Methods in Political Science.
Homewood: The Dorsey Press
Kuhn, T.S. . The Structure of Scientific Research.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Liehr, P. and Smith, M.J. (1 999). Middle range theory:
Spinning research and practice to create knowledge
for the new millennium. Advances in N ursing
Science, 21 (4), 81-91.
Lyons, K. (nd). How to Write a Literature Review. Santa
Cruz.: McHenry Library, University of California.
Mallett, S. . Understanding home: A critical review of
the literature. The Sociological Review, 52 (1), 62-89.
Ma'.dani, M. (20 11 ). "The importance of Research in a
University". A Keynote address at Makerere
University Research and Innovation Dissemination,
h ttppp: th inkafrica . com/ugnand/importanceresearch-university.
Rodee, C.C. et al (1 983). Introduction to Political Science.
Tokyo: McGraw-Hill International Book.
Selltiz, C. et al . Research Methods in Social Relations.
London: Methuen.
Tsuwa, J.T., Ugabi, J.I. and Odey, B.U. . Systematic
Approaches to Political Science Methodology and
Issues in Social Studies.
Makurdi: Booksworks
Publishers.
Varma, S.P. . Modern Political Theory. New Delhi:
Vikas Publishing House.
Umflint. (nd). How Select Research Topic. Available
h ttps: I lwww. umflin t. edu/li brary /how-selectresearch-topic.