Machine Learning, 13, 103-130 
© 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Prioritized Sweeping: Reinforcement Learning With
Less Data and Less Time
ANDREW W. MOORE
 
CHRISTOPHER G. ATKESON
 
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, NE43-771, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract. We present a new algorithm, prioritized sweeping, for efficient prediction and control of stochastic
Markov systems. Incremental learning methods such as temporal differencing and Q-learning have real-time performance. Classical methods are slower, but more accurate, because they make full use of the observations. Prioritized sweeping aims for the best of both worlds. It uses all previous experiences both to prioritize important
dynamic programming sweeps and to guide the exploration of state-space. We compare prioritized sweeping with
other reinforcement learning schemes for a number of different stochastic optimal control problems. It successfully
solves large state-space real-time problems with which other methods have difficulty.
Keywords. Memory-based learning, learning control, reinforcement learning, temporal differencing, asynchronous
dynamic programming, heuristic search, prioritized sweeping
1. Introduction
This article introduces a memory-based technique, prioritized sweeping, which can be used
both for Markov prediction and reinforcement learning. Current, model-free, learning
algorithms perform well relative to real time. Classical methods such as matrix inversion
and dynamic programming perform well relative to the number of observations. Prioritized sweeping seeks to achieve the best of both worlds. Its closest relation from conventional AI is the search scheduling technique of the A* algorithm . It is a
"memory-based" method in that it derives much of its power from
explicitly remembering all real-world experiences. Closely related research is being performed by Peng and Williams into a similar algorithm to prioritized sweeping, which
they call Queue-Dyna.
We begin by providing a review of the problems and techniques in Markov prediction
and control. More thorough reviews may be found in Sutton , Barto et al. ,
Sutton , Kaelbling , and Barto et al. .
A discrete, finite Markov system has S states. Time passes as a series of discrete clock
ticks, and on each tick the state may change. The probability of possible successor states
is a function only of the current system state. The entire system can thus be specified by
S and a table of transition probabilities.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Figure 1. A six-state Markov system.
where qij denotes the probability that, given we are in state i, we will be in state j on the
next time step. The table must satisfy Ej=1 qij = 1 for every i.
Figure 1 shows an example with six states corresponding to the six cells. With the exception of the rightmost states, on each time step the system moves at random to a neighbor.
For example, state 1 moves directly to state 3 with probability 1/2, and thus ql3 = l/i.
The state-space of a Markov system is partitioned into two subsets: the non-terminal states,
NONTERMS, and the terminal states, TERMS. Once a terminal state is entered, it is never
left (k E TERMS =>qkk = 1). In the example, the two rightmost states are terminal.
A Markov system is defined as absorbing if from every non-terminal state it is possible
to eventually enter a terminal state. We restrict our attention to absorbing Markov systems.
Let us first consider questions such as, "Starting in state i, what is the probability of
eventual absorption by terminal state k!" Write this value as irik. All the absorption probabilities for terminal state k can be computed by solving the following set of linear equations. Assume that the non-terminal states are indexed by 1, 2, ..., Snt where Sn, is the
number of non-terminals.
When the transition probabilities {qij} are known, it is thus an easy matter to compute
the eventual absorption probabilities. Machine learning can be applied to the case in which
the transition probabilities are not known in advance, and all we may do instead is watch
a series of state transitions. Such a series is normally arranged into a set of trials—each
trial starts in some state and then continues until the system enters a terminal state. In our
example, the learner might be shown
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Learning approaches to this problem have been widely studied. A recent contribution
of great relevance is an elegant algorithm called Temporal Differencing ..
1.1. The temporal differencing algorithm reviewed
We describe the discrete state-space case of the temporal differencing (TD) algorithm. TD
can, however, also be applied to systems with continuous state-spaces in which long-term
probabilities are represented by parametric function approximators such as neural networks
 .
The prediction process runs in a series of epochs. Each epoch ends when a terminal
state is entered. Assume we have passed through states i1( i2, • • • in, in+1 so far in the current epoch, n is our age within the epoch and t is our global age. in -> in+l is the most
recently observed transition. Let £/*[*] be the estimated value of wik after the system has
been running for t state-transition observations. Then the TD algorithm for discrete statespaces updates these estimates according to the following rule:
(the set of non-terminal states)
(the set of terminal states)
where a is a learning state parameter
is a memory constant
In practice there is a computational trick that requires considerably less computation than
the algorithm of equation (4) but which computes the same values . The
TD algorithm then requires O(St,) computation steps per real observation, where St, is the
number of terminal states. Convergence proofs exist for several formulations of the TD
algorithm .
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
1.2. The classical approach
The classical method proceeds by building a maximum likelihood model of the state transitions, qij is estimated by
After t + 1 observations, the new absorption probability estimates are computed to satisfy,
for each terminal state k, the Snt x Snt linear system
where succs(i) is the set of all states which have been observed as immediate successors
of i and NONTERMS is the set of non-terminal states. It is clear that if the qik estimates were
correct, then the solution of equation (7) would be the solution of equation (2).
Notice that the values irik[t + 1] depend only on the values of qik after t + 1
observations—they are not defined in terms of the previous absorption probability estimates
Tjt[f ]. However, it is efficient to solve equation (7) iteratively. Let {pik} be a set of intermediate iteration variables containing intermediate estimates of nik[t + 1]. What initial
estimates should be used to start the iteration? An excellent answer is to use the previous
absorption probability estimates
The complete algorithm, performed once after every real-world observation, is shown
in figure 2. The transformation on the piks can be shown to be a contraction mapping
as defined in section 3.1 of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis , and thus, as the same reference
proves, convergence to a solution satisfying equation (7) is guaranteed. If, according to
the estimated transitions, all states can reach a terminal state, then this solution is unique.
The inner loop ("for each k € TERMS ...") is referred to as a probability backup operation, and requires 0(S,/isuccs) basic operations, where USUCCS is the mean number of observed stochastic successors.
Figure 2. Stochastic prediction with full Gauss-Seidel iteration.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Gauss-Seidel is an expensive algorithm, requiring O(Sntt) backups per real-world observation for the inner loop 2.2 alone. The absorption predictions before the most recent observation, xik[t], normally provide an excellent initial approximation, and only a few iterations are required. However, when an "interesting" observation is encountered—for example, a previously never-experienced transition to a terminal state—many iterations, perhaps
more than Snt, are needed for convergence.
2. Prioritized sweeping
Prioritized sweeping is designed to perform the same task as Gauss-Seidel iteration while
using careful bookkeeping to concentrate all computational effort on the most "interesting"
parts of the system. It operates in a similar computation regime as the Dyna architecture
 , in which a fixed, but non-trivial, amount of computation is allowed between each real-world observation. Peng and Williams are exploring a closely related
approach to prioritized sweeping, developed from Dyna and Q-learning .
Prioritized sweeping uses the A value from the probability update step 2.2 in the previous
algorithm to determine which other updates are likely to be "interesting'—if the step produces a large change in the state's absorption probabilities, then it is interesting because
it is likely that the absorption probabilities of the predecessors of the state will change.
If, on the other hand, the step produces a small change, then we will assume that there
is less urgency to process the predecessors. The predecessors of a state i are all those states
i' that have, at least once in the history of the system, performed a one-step transition i' ->i.
If we have just changed the absorption probabilities of i by A, then the maximum possible one-processing-step change in predecessor i' caused by our change in i is qi'i A. This
value is the priority P of the predecessor i'., and if i' is not currently on the priority queue
it is placed there at priority P. If it is already on the queue, but at lower priority, then
it is promoted.
After each real-world observation i ->j, the transition probability estimate qij is updated
along with the probabilities of transition to all other previously observed successors of
i. Then state i is promoted to the top of the priority queue so that its absorption probabilities are updated immediately. Next, we continue to process further states from the
top of the queue. Each state that is processed may result in the addition or promotion of
its predecessors within the queue. This loop continues for a preset number of processing
steps or until the queue empties.
Thus if a real-world observation is interesting, all its predecessors and their earlier
ancestors quickly find themselves near the top of the priority queue. On the other hand,
if the real-world observation is unsurprising, then the processing immediately proceeds
to other, more important areas of state-space that had been under consideration on previous
time steps. These other areas may be different from those in which the system currently
finds itself.
Let us look at the formal algorithm in figure 3. On entry we assume the most recent
state transition was from i„,<,„„,. We drop the [t] suffix from the irtt[r] notation.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
1. Promote state irecent to top of priority queue.
2. While we are allowed further processing and priority queue not empty
2.1 Remove the top state from the priority queue. Call it i
2.3 for each
2.4 for each i' € preds(i)
P : = qi'i Ama*
If P > E (a tiny threshold) and if (i' is not on queue or P
exceeds the current priority of i') then promote i' to new
priority P.
Figure 3. The prioritized sweeping algorithm.
The decision of when we are allowed further processing, at the start of step 2, could
be implemented in many ways. In our subsequent experiments, the rule is simply that a
maximum of B backups are permitted per real-world observation.
There are many possible priority queue implementations, including a heap ,
which was used in all experiments in this article. The cost of the algorithm is
basic operations, where at most B states are processed from the priority queue and
PQCOST(N) is the cost of accessing a priority queue of length N. For the heap implementation, this is log2 N.
States are only added to the queue if their priorities are above a tiny threshold E. This
is a value close to the machine floating-point precision. Stopping criteria are fraught with
danger, but in this article we discuss such dangers no further except to note that in our
experiments they have caused no problems.
Prioritized sweeping is a heuristic, and in this article no formal proof of convergence,
or convergence rate, is given. We expect to be able to prove convergence using techniques
from asynchronous Dynamic Programming and variants of
the temporal differencing analysis of Dayan . Later, this article gives some empirical
experiments in which convergence is relatively quick.
The memory requirements of learning the S X 5 transition probability matrix, where
5 is the number of states, may initially appear prohibitive, especially since we intend to
operate with more than 10,000 states. However, we need only allocate memory for the
experiences the system actually has, and for a wide class of physical systems there is not
enough time in the lifetime of the system to run out of memory.
Similarly, the average number of successors and predecessors of states in the estimated
transition matrix can be assumed < 5. A simple justification is that few real problems
are fully connected, but a deeper reason is that for large 5, even if the true transition probability matrix is not sparse, there will never be time to gain enough experience for the
estimated transition matrix to not be sparse.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Figure 4. A 500-state Markov system. Each state has, on average, five stochastic successors.
3. A Markov prediction experiment
Consider the 500 state Markov system depicted in figure 4, which is a more complex version of the problem presented in figure 1. The appendix gives details of how this problem
was randomly generated. The system has 16 terminal states, depicted by white and black
circles. The prediction problem is to estimate, for every non-terminal state, the long-term
probability that it will terminate in a black, rather than a white, circle. The data available
to the learner comprise a sequence of observed state transitions.
Temporal differencing, the classical method, and prioritized sweeping were all applied
to this problem. Each learner was shown the same sequence of state transitions. TD used
parameters X = 0.25 and a = 0.05, which gave the best performance of a number of
manually optimized experiments. The classical method was required to compute up-todate absorption probability estimates after every real-world observation. Prioritized sweeping
was allowed five backups per real experience (0 = 5); it thus updated the Kik estimates
for the five highest priority states between each real-world observation. The threshold for
ignoring tiny changes, ε, was 10-5. Each method was evaluated at a number of stages of
learning, by stopping the real time clock and computing the error between the estimated
white-absorption probabilities, which we denote by icj>WHITE>and me true values, which
we denote by ir(>WHITE. The following RMS error over all states was recorded:
A.W. MOORE AND C.O. ATKESON
Figure 5. RMS prediction error between true absorption probabilities and predicted values, plotted against number
of data-points observed. For prioritized sweeping, B = 5, and t = 10-5.
In figure 5 we look at the RMS error plotted against the number of observations. After
100,000 experiences, all methods are performing well; TD is the weakest, but even it
manages an RMS error of only 0.1.
In figure 6 we look at a different measure of performance: prediction error plotted against
computation time. Here we see the great weakness of the classical technique. Performing
Figure 6. RMS prediction error between true absorption probabilities and predicted values, plotted against real
time, in seconds, running the problem on a Sun-4 workstation.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Table 1. RMS prediction error: mean and standard deviation for ten experiments.
After 100,000 observations
After 300 seconds
0.14 ± 0.077
0.079 ± 0.067
0.024 ± 0.0063
0.23 ± 0.038
Pri. Sweep
0.024 ± 0.0061
0.021 ± 0.0080
the Gauss-Seidel algorithm of figure 2 after each observation gives excellent predictions
but is very time consuming, and after 300 seconds there has only been time to process
a few thousand observations. After the same amount of time, TD has had time to process
almost half a million observations. Prioritized sweeping performs best relative to real time.
It takes approximately ten times as long as TD to process each observation, but because
the data are used more effectively, convergence is superior.
Ten farther experiments, each with a different random 500 state problem, were run. These
further runs, the final results of which are given in table 1, indicate that the graphs of figures
5 and 6 are not atypical.
This example has shown the general theme of this article. Model-free methods perform
well in real time but make weak use of their data. Classical methods make good use of
their data but are often unpractically slow. Techniques such as prioritized sweeping are
interesting because they may be able to achieve the advantages of both.
There is an important footnote concerning the classical method. If the problem had only
required that a prediction be made after all transitions had been observed, then the only
real-time cost would have been recording the transitions in memory. The absorption probabilities could then have been computed as an individual large computation at the end of
the sequence, giving the best possible estimate with a relatively small overall time cost.
For the 500-state problem, we estimate the cost as approximately 30 seconds for 100,000
points. Prioritized sweeping could also benefit from only being required to predict after
seeing all the data, although with little advantage over the simpler, classical algorithm.
Prioritized sweeping is thus most usefully applicable to the class of tasks in which a prediction
is required on every time step. Furthermore, the remainder of this article concerns control
of Markov decision tasks, in which the maintenance of up-to-date predictions is particularly beneficial.
4. Learning control of Markov decision tasks
Let us consider a related stochastic prediction problem, which bridges the gap between
Markov prediction and control. Suppose the system gets rewarded for entering certain states
and gets punished for entering others. Let the reward of the ith state be ri. An important
quantity is then the expected discounted reward-to-go of each state. This is an infinite sum
of expected future rewards, with each term supplemented by an exponentially decreasing
weighting factor 7* where 7 is called the discount factor. The expected discounted rewardto-go is
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
(This reward)
(Expected reward in 1 time step)
(Expected reward in 2 time steps'
(Expected reward in k time steps)
For each i, j, can be computed recursively as a function of its immediate successors.
which is another set of linear equations that may be solved if the transition probabilities
qij are known. If they are not known, but instead a sequence of state transitions and rt
observations is given, then slight modifications of TD, the classical algorithm, and prioritized
sweeping can all be used to estimate Ji,-.
Markov decision tasks
Markov decision tasks are an extension of the Markov model in which, instead of passively watching the state move around randomly, we are able to influence it.
Associated with each state, i, is a finite, discrete set of actions, act ions(/). On each
time step, the controller must choose an action. The probabilities of potential next states
depend not only on the current state, but also on the chosen action. We will supplement
our example problem with actions:
actions(l) = {RANDOM,RIGHT} actions(3) = {RANDOM,RIGHT} actions(5) = {STAY}
act ions(2) = {RANDOM,RIGHT} actions(4) = (RANDOM,RIGHT) actions(6) = {STAY} (12)
where RANDOM causes the same random transitions as before, RIGHT moves, with probability 1, to the cell immediately to the right, and STAY makes us remain in the same state.
There is still no escape from states 5 and 6.
We use the notation (qij for the probability that we move to state j, given that we have
commenced in state i and applied action a. Thus, in our example qRANDOM = 1/2 and
A policy is a mapping from states to actions. For example, figure 7 shows the policy
1 -> RIGHT 3 -> RIGHT 5 -> STAY
2 -> RANDOM 4 -> RANDOM 6 -> STAY
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Figure 7. The policy defined by equation (13). Also shown is a reward function (bottom left of each cell). Large
expected reward-to-go involves getting to '5' and avoiding '6'.
If the controller chooses actions according to a fixed policy, then it behaves like a Markov
system. The expected discounted reward-to-go can then be defined and computed in the
same manner as equation (11).
If the goal is large reward-to-go, then some policies are better than others. An important
result from the theory of Markov decision tasks tells us that there always exists at least
one policy that is optimal in the following sense. For every state, the expected discounted
reward-to-go using an optimal policy is no worse than that from any other policy.
Furthermore, there is a simple algorithm for computing both an optimal policy and the
expected discounted reward-to-go of this policy. The algorithm is called Dynamic Programming . It is based on the following relationship, known as Bellman's equation, which holds between the optimal expected discounted reward-to-go at different states.
Dynamic programming applied to our example gives the policy shown in figure 7, which
happens to be the unique optimal policy.
A very important question for machine learning has been how to obtain an optimal, or
near optimal, policy when the <$ values are not known in advance. Instead, a series of
actions, state transactions, and rewards is observed. For example:
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
A critical difference between this problem and the Markov prediction problem of the earlier
sections is that the controller now affects which transitions are seen, because it supplies
the actions.
The question of learning in such systems is studied by the field of reinforcement learning, which is also known as "learning control of Markov decision tasks." Early contributions to this field were the checkers player of Samuel and the BOXES system of
Michie and Chambers . Even systems that may at first appear trivially small, such
as the two-armed bandit problem have promoted rich and interesting work in the statistics community.
The technique of gradient descent optimization of neural networks in combination with
approximations to the policy and reward-to-go (called the "adaptive heuristic critic") was
introduced by Sutton . Kaelbling introduced several applicable techniques,
including the Interval Estimation algorithm. Watkins introduced an important modelfree asynchronous Dynamic Programming technique called Q-learning. Sutton has
extended this further with the Dyna architecture. Christiansen et al. applied a planner, closely related to Dynamic Programming, to a tray tilting robot. An excellent review
of the entire field may be found in Barto et al. .
4.1. Prioritized sweeping for learning control of Markov decision tasks
The main differences between this case and the previous application of prioritized sweeping are
1. We need to estimate the optimal discounted reward-to-go, J, of each state, rather than
the eventual absorption probabilities.
2. Instead of using the absorption probability backup equation (6), we use Bellman's equation
 :
where Ji is the estimate of the optimal discounted reward starting from state i, r is the
discount factor, act i ons(i) is the set of possible actions in state i, and qfj is the maximum likelihood estimated probability of moving from state i to state j given that we
have applied action a. The estimated immediate reward, rf, is computed as the mean
reward experienced to date during all previous applications of action a in state i.
3. The rate of learning can be affected considerably by the controller's exploration strategy.
The algorithm for prioritized sweeping in conjunction with Bellman's equation is given
in figure 8. The only substantial difference between this algorithm and the prediction case
is the state backup step, namely, the application of Bellman's equation in step 2.2. Notice
also that the predecessors of a state are now a set of state-action pairs.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
1. Promote state irecent to top of priority queue.
2. While we are allowed further processing and priority queue not empty
2.1 Remove the top state from the priority queue. Call it i
2.5 for each (i', a') € preds(i)
P:=qi,i,Amax
If P > e (a tiny threshold) and if (i' is not on queue or P
exceeds the current priority of /') then promote i` to new
priority P.
Figure 8. The prioritized sweeping algorithm for Markov decision tasks.
Let us now consider the question of how best to gain useful experience in a Markov
decision task. The formally correct method would be to compute the exploration that maximizes the expected reward received over the robot's remaining life. This computation, which
requires a prior probability distribution over the space of Markov decision tasks, is
unrealistically expensive. It is computationally exponential in all of 1) the number of time
steps for which the system is to remain alive, 2) the number of states in the system, and
3) the number of actions available .
An exploration heuristic is thus required. Kaelbling and Barto et al. both
give excellent overviews of the wide range of heuristics that have been proposed.
We use the philosophy of optimism in the face of uncertainty, a method successfully
developed by the Interval Estimation (IE) algorithm of Kaelbling and by the exploration bonus technique in Dyna . The same philosophy is also used by Thrun
and Moller .
A slightly different heuristic is used with the prioritized sweeping algorithm. This is
because of minor problems of computational expense for IE and the instability of the exploration bonus in large state-spaces.
The slightly different optimistic heuristic is as follows. In the absence of contrary evidence,
any action in any state is assumed to lead us directly to a fictional absorbing state of permanently large reward ropt. The amount of evidence to the contrary that is needed to
quench our optimism is a system parameter, Tbored. If the number of occurrences of a given
state-action pair is less than 7^^,
we assume that we will jump to a fictional state with
subsequent long-term reward ropt + -yropt + -y2ropt + . .. = ropt/(l - 7). If the number
of occurrences is more than T^red. then we use the true, non-optimistic, assumption. Thus
the optimistic reward-to-go estimate jopt is
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
where ni is the number of times action a has been tried to date in state i. The important
feature, identified by Sutton , is the planning to explore behavior caused by the appearance of the optimism on both sides of the equation. A related exploration technique was
used by Christiansen et al. . Consider the situation in figure 9. The top left-hand
corner of state-space only looks attractive if we use an optimistic heuristic. The areas near
the frontiers of little experience will have high /opt, and in turn the areas near those have
nearly as high Jopt. Therefore, if prioritized sweeping (or any other asynchronous dynamic
programming method) does its job, from START we will be encouraged to go north towards
the unknown instead of east to the best reward discovered to date.
The system parameter ropt does not require fine tuning. It can be set to a gross
overestimate of the largest possible reward, and the system will simply continue exploration until it has sampled all state-action combinations Tbored times. However, section 6
discusses its use as a search-guiding heuristic similar to the heuristic at the heart of A *
The rbored parameter, which defines how often we must try a given state-action combination before we cease our optimism, certainly does require forethought by the human
programmer. If too small, we might overlook some low-probability but highly rewarding
stochastic successor. If too high, the system will waste time needlessly resampling already
reliable statistics. Thus, the exploration procedure does not have full autonomy. This is,
arguably, a necessary weakness of any non-random exploration heuristic. Dyna's exploration bonus contains a similar parameter in the relative size of the exploration bonus compared to the expected reward, and Interval Estimation has the parameter implicit in the
optimistic confidence level.
Figure 9. The state-space of a very simple path-planning problem.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
The selection of an appropriate Tbored would be hard to formalize. It should take into
account the following: the expected lifetime of the system, a measure of the importance
of not becoming stuck during learning, and perhaps any available prior knowledge of the
stochasticity of the system, or known constraints on the reward function. An automatic
procedure for computing Tbored would require a formal definition of the human programmer's requirements and a prior distribution of possible worlds.
5. Experimental results
This section begins with some comparative results in the familiar domain of stochastic
two-dimensional maze worlds. It then examines the /3 parameter, which specifies the amount
of computation (number of Bellman equation backups) allowed per real-world observation, and also the Tbored parameter, which defines how much exploration is performed.
A number of larger examples are then used to investigate performance for a range of different discrete stochastic reinforcement tasks.
Maze problems
Each state has four actions: one for each direction. Blocked actions do not move. One
goal state (the star in subsequent figures) gives 100 units of reward, all others give no reward,
and there is a discount factor of 0.99. Trials start in the bottom left corner. The system
is reset to the start state whenever the goal state has been visited ten times since the last
reset. The reset is outside the learning task: it is not observed as a state transition.
Dyna and prioritized sweeping were both allowed ten Bellman's equation backups per
observation (B = 10). Two versions of Dyna were tested:
1. Dyna-PI+ is the original Dyna-PI of Sutton , supplemented with the exploration bonus (E = 0.001) from the same paper.
2. Dyna-opt is the original Dyna-P I supplemented with the same Tbored optimistic heuristic
that is used to evaluate prioritized sweeping in this paper.
Table 2 shows the number of observations before convergence. A trial was defined to have
converged by a given time if no subsequent sequence of 1000 decisions contained more
than 2% suboptimal decisions. The test for optimality was performed by comparison with
the control law obtained from full dynamic programming using the true simulation.
We begin with some results for deterministic problems, in the first three rows of table
2. The first row shows that Dyna-P I + converged for all problems except the 4528 state
problem. A smaller exploration bonus than e = 0.001 might have helped the latter problem converge, albeit slowly. The other two rows used the optimistic heuristic with ropl =
200 and Tbored =1• The r°pt value thus overestimated the best possible reward by a factor
of two—this was to see if we would converge without an accurate estimation of the true
best possible reward. Tbored = 1 meant that as soon as something was tried all optimism
was lost. This is a safe strategy in a deterministic environment.
The learning controller was given no clues beyond those implicit in the two parameters
ropt and Tbored . Thus, to ensure convergence to the optimum, it had to sample each stateaction pair at least once.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Table 2. Number of observations before 98% of decisions were subsequently optimal.
These values have been rounded. For prioritized sweeping (and Dyna, where applicable) B = 10, E = 10-3,
and ropt = 200. The tabulated experiments were all only run once; however, further multiple runs of the optimistic Dyna and priortized sweeping have revealed little variance in convergence rate. See also figures 11 and 14.
Prioritized sweeping required fewer steps than optimistic Dyna in all mazes but one small
one. All learners and runs took between 10-30 seconds per thousand observations running
on a Sun-4 workstation. Interestingly, prioritized sweeping usually took about half the real
time of Dyna. This is because during much of the exploration there were so few surprises
that it did not need to use its full allocation of Bellman's equation processing steps. This
effect is even more pronounced if 300 processing steps per observation are allowed instead
of ten. For example, in the 4528 state problem, optimistic Dyna then required 143,000
observations and took three hours. Prioritized sweeping required 21,000 observations and
took 15 minutes.
The lower part of table 2 shows the results for stochastic problems using the same mazes.
Each action had a 50% chance of being corrupted to a random value before it was applied.
Thus if "North" was applied, the outcome was movement North 1/2 + 1/8 = 5/8 of the
time, and each other direction 1/8 of the time. Prioritized sweeping and optimistic Dyna
each used a Tbored value of 5. Thus, they sampled every state-action combination five times
before losing their optimism. This value was chosen as a reasonable balance between exploration and exploitation, given the authors' knowledge of the stochasticity of the system, and
happily it proved to be satisfactory. As we discussed in section 4.1, the choice of Tbored
is not automated for any of these experiments.
These stochastic results also include a recent interesting incremental technique called
Q-learning , which manages to learn without constructing a state-transition
model. Additionally, we tried Q-learning using the same Tbored optimistic heuristic as prioritized sweeping. The initial Q values were set high to encourage better initial exploration
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
than a random walk. Much effort was put into tuning Q for this application. Its performance was, however, worse. In particular, the optimistic heuristic is a disaster for Q-learning
that easily gets trapped—this is because Q-learning only pays attention to the current state
of the system, while the "planning to explore" behavior requires that attention is paid to
areas of the state-space which the system is not currently in.
For the stochastic maze results, the difference between optmistic Dyna and prioritized
sweeping is less pronounced. This is because the large number of predecessors quickly
dilutes the wave of interesting changes that are propagated back on the priority queue, leading
to a queue of many, very similar, priorities. However, prioritized sweeping still required
less than half the total real time of either version of Dyna before convergence.
A small, fully connected, example
We also have results for a five-state benchmark problem described by Sato et al. 
and also used in Barto and Singh . The transition matrix is in figure 10, and the
results are shown in table 3. A Tbored parameter of 20 was used. In fact, Tbored = 5 also
converged 20 times out of 20, taking on average 120 steps and therefore Tbored = 20 was
considered a safe safety margin. The two Q-learners were extensively tweaked to find their
best performance. The EQ-algorithm is designed to guarantee convergence at all costs—and so its poor comparative performance here is to be expected.
Dyna-P I + was given what was probably too small an exploration bonus for the problem.
The reduced exploration meant fester convergence, but on one occasion some misleading
early transitions caused it to get stuck with a suboptimal policy.
n=0 n=l n=2 n=3 n=4
Figure 10. Transition probabilities (X100) and expected rewards of a five-state, three-action, Markov control
problem. R is the reward, n is the destination state, and sa indicates the current state and action.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Table 3. The mean number of observations before > 98% of subsequent decisions were optimal.
2105 ± 520
2078 ± 430
Dyna-P I +
(one failure)
7105 ± 662
Note: Each learner was run 20 times and in all cases, bar one, there was eventual convergence to optimal performance. Also shown is the standard deviation of the 20 trials. The discount factor was 7 =0.8. For the optimisitic
methods, ropt = 10 and Tbored = 20. For priortized sweeping and Dyna B = 10, and for priortized sweeping
The system parameters for prioritized sweeping
We now look at two results to give insight into two important parameters of priortized sweeping. Firstly we consider its performance relative to the number of backups per observation. This experiment used the stochastic, 605 state example from table 2, and the results
are graphed in figure 11. Using one operation is almost equivalent to optimistic Q-learning
which does not converge. Even using only two backups gives reasonable performance, and
performance improves as the number of backups increases. Beyond 50 backups, the priority
queue usually gets exhausted on each time step, and there is little further improvement.
The other parameter is Tbored- We use a test case in which inadequate exploration is particularly dangerous. The maze in figure 12 has two reward states. The lesser reward of 50
comes from the state in the bottom right. The greater reward of 100 is from the more inaccessible state near the top right. Trials always begin from the bottom left, and the world is
stochastic in the same manner as the earlier examples. Trials are reset when either goal state
is encountered ten times. If Tbored is set too low and if there is bad luck while attempting
to explore near the large reward state, then the controller will lose interest, never return
Fig. 11. Number of experiences needed for prioritized sweeping to converge, plotted against number of back-ups
per observation ((3). This used the 605 state stochastic maze from table 2 (7 = 0.99, ropt = 200, Tbored = 5,
E = 10-3). The error bars show the standard deviations from ten runs with different random seeds.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
figure 12. A misleading maze. A small reward in the bottom right tempts us away from a larger reward.
figure 13. The frequency of correct convergence versus Tbored for the misleading maze (y = 0.99, ropt =
200, 0 = 10, e = 10-3).
and very likely spend the rest of its days traveling to the inferior reward. Each value of Tbored
was run ten times, and we recorded the percentage of runs that had converged correctly
by 50,000 observations. Figure 13 graphs the results. For this problem, Tbored = 5 (which
was checked a further 30 times) appears sufficient to ensure that we do not become stuck.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Figure 14, The mean and standard deviation of the number of experiences before convergence for ten independent experiments, as a function of Tbored for the misleading maze. Parameter values are as in figure 13.
Figure 14 shows the number of experiences needed for convergence as a function of
Tbored for the same set of experiments.
Other tasks
We begin with a task with a 3-D state-space quantized into 14,400 potential discrete states:
guiding a rod through a planar maze by translation and rotation. There are four actions:
move forward one unit along the rod's length, move backward one unit, rotate left one
unit, and rotate right one unit. In fact, actions take us to the nearest quantized state. There
are 20 X 20 position quantizations and 36 angle quantizations producing 14,400 states,
though many are unreachable from the start configuration. The distance unit is l/20th the
width of the workspace, and the angular unit is 10°. The problem is deterministic but requires a long, very specific, sequence of moves to get to the goal. Figure 15 shows the
problem, obstacles, and shortest solution for our experiments.
Q, Dyna-P I +, Optimistic Dyna, and prioritized sweeping were all tested. The results
are in table 4.
Q and Dyna-P I + did not even travel a quarter of the way to the goal, let alone discover
an optimal path, within 200,000 experiences. It is possible that a very well-chosen exploration bonus would have helped Dyna-P I +, but in the four different experiments we tried,
no value produced stable exploration.
Optimistic Dyna and prioritized sweeping both eventually converged, with the latter requiring a third the experiences and a fifth the real time.
When 2000 backups per experience were permitted, instead of 100, then both optimistic
Dyna and prioritized sweeping required fewer experiences to converge. Optimistic Dyna
took 21,000 experiences instead of 55,000 but took 2900 seconds—almost twice the real
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Figure 15. A three-DOF problem and the shortest solution path.
Table 4. Performance on the deterministic rod-in-maze task.
Dyna-P 1 +
Optimistic Dyna
Prioritized Sweeping
Experiences to converge
Real time to converge
Both Dynas and priortized sweeping were allowed 100 backups per experience (7
time. Prioritized sweeping took 13,500 instead of 14,000 experiences—very little improvement, but it used no extra time. This indicates that for prioritized sweeping, 100 backups
per observation is sufficient to make almost complete use of its observations, so that all
the long-term reward (J,-) estimates are very close to the estimates that would be globally
consistent with the transition probability estimates (qfj). Thus, we conjecture that even
fiill dynamic programming after each experience (which would take days of real time) would
do little better.
We also consider a more complex extension of the maze world, invented by Singh ,
which consists of a maze and extra state information dependent on where you have visited
so far in the maze. We use the example in figure 16. There are 263 cells, but there are
also four binary flags appended to the state, producing a total of 263 X 16 = 4208 states.
The flags, named A, B, C, and X, are set whenever the cell containing the corresponding
letter is passed through. All flags are cleared when the start state (in the bottom left-hand
corner) is entered. A reward is given when the goal state (top right) is entered, only if
flags A, B, and C are set. Flag X provides further interest. If X is clear, the reward is
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Figure 16. A maze with extra state in the form of four binary flags.
100 units. If X is set, the reward is only 50 units. This task does not specify in which
order A, B, and C are to be visited. The controller must find the optimal path.
Prioritized sweeping was tried with both the deterministic and stochastic maze dynamics
(ry = 0.99, ropt = 200, 0 = 10, E = 10-3). In the deterministic case, Tbored = 1. In the
stochastic case, Tbored = 5. In both cases it found the globally optimal path through the
three good flags to the goal, avoiding flag X. The deterministic case took 19,000 observations and 20 minutes of real time. The stochastic case required 120,000 observations and
two hours of real time.
In these experiments, no information regarding the special structure of the problem was
available to the learner. For example, knowledge of the cell at coordinates (7, 1) with flag
A set had no bearing on knowledge of the cell at coordinates (7, 1) with A clear. If we
told the learner that cell transitions were independent of flag settings, then the convergence
rate would be increased considerably. A far more interesting possibility is the automatic
discovery of such structure by inductive inference on the structure of the learned state transition matrix. See Singh for current interesting work in that direction.
The third experiment is the familiar pole-balancing problem of Michie and Chambers
 . There is no place here to discuss the enormous number of techniques that have
been applied to this problem along with an equally enormous variation in details of the
task formulation. The state-space of the cart is quantized at three equal levels for cart position, cart velocity, and pole angular speed. It is quantized at six equal levels for pole angle.
The simulation used four real-valued state variables, yet the learner was only allowed to
base its control decisions on the current quantized state. There are two actions: thrust left
10N and thrust right ION. The problem is interesting because it involves hidden state—the
controller believes the system is Markov when in fact it is not. This is because there are
many possible values for the real-valued state variables in each discretized box, and
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
successor boxes are partially determined by these real values, which are not given to the
controller. The task is defined by a reward of 100 units for every state except one absorbing
state corresponding to a crash, which receives zero reward. Crashes occur if the pole angle
or cart position exceed their limits. A discount factor of 7 = 0.999 is used, and trials
start in random survivable configurations. Other parameters are (ropt = 200, /3 = 100,
= 1, 6 = 10-3).
If the simulation contains no noise, or a very small amount (0.1 % added to the simulated
thrust), prioritized sweeping very quickly (usually in under 1000 observations and 15
crashes) develops a policy that provides stability for approximately 100,000 cycles. With
a small amount of noise (1 %), stable runs of approximately 20,000 time steps are discovered
after, on average, 30 crashes.
6. Heuristics to guide search
In all experiments to date, the optimistic estimate of the best available one-step reward,
ropt, has been set to an overestimate of the best reward that is actually available. However,
if the human programmer knows in advance what is the best possible reward-to-go from
any given state, then the resultant, more realistic, optimism does not need to experience
all state-action pairs.
For example, consider the maze world. If the robot is told the location of the goal state
(in all previous experiments it was not given this information), but is not told which states
are blocked, then it can nevertheless compute what would be the best possible reward-togo from a state. It could not be greater than the reward obtained from the shortest possible
path to the goal. The length of the path, /, can be computed easily with the Manhattan
distance metric, and then the best possible reward-to-go is
When this optimistic heuristic is used, initial exploration is biased towards the goal, and
once a path is discovered then many of the unexplored areas may be ignored. Ignoring
occurs when even the most optimistic reward-to-go of a state is no greater than that of
the already obtained path.
For example, figure 17 shows the areas explored using a Manhattan heuristic when finding the optimal path from the start state at the bottom leftmost cell to the goal state at the
center of the maze. The maze has 8525 states of which only 1722 needed to be explored.
For some tasks we may be satisfied to cease exploration when we have obtained a solution known to be, say, within 50% of the optimal solution. This can be achieved by using
a heuristic which lies: it tells us that the best possible reward-to-go is that of a path that
is twice the length of the true shortest possible path.
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
Figure 17. Dotted states are all those visited when the Manhattan heuristic was used to derive ropt(r = 0.99,
0 = 10- Tbored = 1, E = 10-3).
7. Discussion
Generalization of the state transition model
This article has been concerned with discrete state systems in which no prior assumptions
are made about the structure of the state-space. Despite the weakness of the assumptions,
we can successfully learn large stochastic tasks. However, very many problems do have
extra known structure, and it is important to consider how this knowledge can be used.
By far the most common knowledge is smoothness—given two states that are in some way
similar, in general their transition probabilities will be similar.
TD can also be applied to highly smooth problems using a parametric function approximator such as a neural network. This technique has recently been used successfully on
a large complex problem, backgammon, by Tesauro . The discrete version of prioritized sweeping given in this article could not be applied directly to backgammon because
the game has 1023 states, which is unmanageably large by a factor of at least 1010. However, a method that quantized the space of board positions, or used a more sophisticated
smoothing mechanism, might conceivably be able to compute a near-optimal strategy.
We are currently developing memory-based algorithms that take advantage of local
smoothness assumptions. In these investigations, state transition models are learned by
memory-based function approximators . Prioritized sweeping
takes place over non-uniform tessellations of state-space, partitioned by variable resolution
&d-trees . We are also investigating the role of locally linear control rules
and reward functions in such partitionings, in which instead of using Bellman's equation
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
(16) directly, we use local linear quadratic regulators (LQR) . It is worth remembering that, if the system is sufficiently linear, LQR is
an extremely powerful technique. In a pole-balancer experiment in which we used local
weighted regression to identify a local linear model, LQR was able to create a stable controller based on only 31 state transitions!
Other current investigations that attempt to perform generalization in conjunction with
reinforcement learning are Mahadevan and Connell , which investigates clustering
parts of the policy; Chapman and Kaelbling , which investigates automatic detection
of locally relevant state variables; and Singh , which considers how to automatically
discover the structure in tasks such as the multiple-flags example of figure 16.
7.1. Related work
The Queue-Dyna algorithm of Peng and Williams
Peng and Williams have concurrently been developing a closely related algorithm
that they call Queue-Dyna. This conceptually similar idea was discovered independently.
Where prioritized sweeping provides efficient data processing for methods that learn the
state-transition model, Queue-Dyna performs the same role for Q-learning ,
an algorithm that avoids building an explicit state-transition model. Queue-Dyna is also
more careful about what it allows onto the priority queue: it only allows predecessors that
have a predicted change ("interestingness" value) greater than a significant threshold 5,
whereas prioritized sweeping allows everything above a minuscule change (e = 10-5 times
the maximum reward) onto the queue. The initial experiments in Peng and Williams 
consist of sparse, deterministic maze worlds of several hundred cells. Performance, measured
by the total number of Bellman's equation processing steps before convergence, is greatly
improved over conventional Dyna-Q .
Other related work
Sutton identifies reinforcement learning with asynchronous dynamic programming
and introduces the same computational regime as that used for prioritized sweeping. The
notion of using an optimistic heuristic to guide search goes back to the A * tree search
algorithm of Nilsson , which also motivated another aspect of prioritized sweeping:
it too schedules nodes to be expanded according to an (albeit different) priority measure.
More recently, Korf gives a combination of A * and Dynamic Programming in the
LRTA* algorithm. LRTA* is, however, very different from prioritized sweeping: it concentrates all search effort on a finite-horizon set of states beyond the current actual system
state. Finally, Lin has investigated a simple technique that replays, backwards, the
memorized sequence of experiences that the controller has recently had. Under some circumstances, this may produce some of the beneficial effects of prioritized sweeping.
8. Conclusion
Our investigation shows that prioritized sweeping can solve large state-space real-time problems with which other methods have difficulty. Other benefits of the memory-based
A.W. MOORE AND C.G. ATKESON
approach, described in Moore and Atkeson , allow us to control forgetting in potentially changeable environments and to automatically scale state variables. Prioritized sweeping is heavily based on learning a world model, and we conclude with a few words on
this topic.
If a model of the world is not known to the human programmer in advance, then an
adaptive system is required, and there are two alternatives:
Learn a model and from
Learn a control rule
this develop a control
without building a
Dyna and prioritized sweeping fall into the first category. Temporal differences and Qlearning fell into the second. Two motivations for not learning a model are 1) the interesting
fact that the methods do, nevertheless, learn, and 2) the possibility that this more accurately
simulates some kinds of biological learning . However, a third
advantage that is sometimes touted—that there are computational benefits in not learning a
model—is, in our view, dubious. A common argument is that with the real world available
to be sensed directly, why should we bother with less reliable, learned internal representations? The counterargument is that even systems acting in real time can, for every one real
experience, sample millions of mental experiences from which to make decisions and improve control rules.
Consider a more colorful example. Suppose the anti-model argument was applied by
a new arrival at a university campus: "I don't need a map of the university—the university
is its own map." If the new arrival truly mistrusts the university cartographers, then there
might be an argument for one full exploration of the campus in order to create his or her
own map. However, once this map has been produced, the amount of time saved overall
by pausing to consult the map before traveling to each new location—rather than exhaustive
or random search in the real world—is undeniably enormous.
It is justified to complain about the indiscriminate use of combinatorial search or matrix
inversion prior to each supposedly real-time decision. However, models need not be used
in such an extravagant fashion. The prioritized sweeping algorithm is just one example
of a class of algorithms that can easily operate in real time and also derive great power
from a model.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Mary Lee, Rich Sutton and the reviewers of this article for some very
valuable comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Stefan Schaal and Satinder Singh for
useful comments on an early draft. Andrew W. Moore is supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from SERC/NATO. Support was also provided under Air Force Office of Scientific
Research grant AFOSR-89-0500, an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship, the W.M. Keck Foundation Associate Professorship in Biomedical Engineering, Siemens Corporation, and a National Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator Award to Christopher G. Atkeson.
PRIORITIZED SWEEPING
Appendix: The random generation of a stochastic problem
Here is an algorithm to generate stochastic systems such as figure 4 in section 3. The
parameters are Snt, the number of non-terminal states; St, the number of terminal states;
and usuccs, the mean number of successors.
All states have a position within the unit square. The terminal states are generated on
an equispaced circle, diameter 0.9, alternating between black and white. Non-terminal states
are each positioned in a uniformly random location within the square. Then the successors
of each non-terminal are selected. The number of successors is chosen randomly as 1 +
X where X is a random variable drawn from the exponential distribution with mean usuccs
The choice of successors is affected by locality within the unit square. This provides
a more interesting system than allowing successors to be entirely random. It was empirically
noted that entirely random successors cause the long-term absorption probabilities to be
very similar across most of the set of states. Locality leads to a more varied distribution.
The successors are chosen according to a simple algorithm in which they are drawn from
within a slowly growing circle centered on the parent state.
If the parent state is i, and there are Ni successors, then the jth transition probability
is computed by Xj/(E$=i xk), where {X\, ,.., XNi} are independent random variables,
uniformly distributed in the unit interval.
Once the system has been generated, a check is performed that the system is absorbing—
all non-terminals can eventually reach at least one terminal state. If not, entirely new systems
are randomly generated until an absorbing Markov system is obtained.