Mean Field Theory of The Mott-Anderson Transition
[Journal reference: Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3943 ]
V. Dobrosavljevi´c
Department of Physics and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32306.
G. Kotliar
Serin Physics Laboratory, Rutgers University, PO Box 849, Piscataway NJ, 08855.
We present a theory for disordered interacting electrons that can describe both the Mott and the
Anderson transition in the respective limits of zero disorder and zero interaction.
We use it to
investigate the T = 0 Mott-Anderson transition at a ﬁxed electron density, as a the disorder strength
is increased. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd two critical values of disorder Wnfl and Wc. For W > Wnfl, the
system enters a “Griﬃths” phase, displaying metallic non-Fermi liquid behavior. At even stronger
disorder, W = Wc > Wnfl the system undergoes a metal insulator transition, characterized by the
linear vanishing of both the typical density of states and the typical quasiparticle weight.
PACS Numbers: 75.20.Hr, 71.55.Jv
The nature of the metal-insulator transition, is a fundamental problem in condensed matter science. There
are two basic mechanisms that cause electron localization. Mott demonstrated that electron-electron interactions, can produce a metal insulator transition (MIT)
even in a clean system . Anderson discovered that disorder, i. e. strong spatial ﬂuctuations in the potential
due to impurities , can drive a metal insulator transition in a system of non interacting electrons.
Following these early ideas, important advances were
made following the application of scaling approaches
 to the problem. In the interacting case, these formulations turned out to be closely connected to Fermi
liquid ideas .
These eﬀorts notwithstanding, many basic questions
remain. In particular, it proved very diﬃcult to incorporate the eﬀects of strong electronic correlations, such
as the formation of local magnetic moments, in a comprehensive theory of the MIT. This is a serious shortcoming, since it is well established experimentally that
the metallic state close to the MIT is characterized by a
divergent magnetic susceptibility and linear speciﬁc heat
coeﬃcient. These observations form the basis of the two
ﬂuid phenomenology .
Very recently, a new approach to the strong correlation problem has been developed and successfully applied to systems in the vicinity of the Mott transition.
This dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory is in its spirit quite
similar to the well known Bragg-Williams theory of magnetism, and as such becomes exact in the limit of large
coordination.
The approach has furthermore been extended to disordered systems , and used to investigate phenomena such as disorder-induced local moment
formation . However, if formulated in its strict largecoordination limit, the theory misses strong spatial ﬂuctuations, and thus cannot incorporate Anderson localization eﬀects.
The goal of the present study is to present a theory that
can describe both the Mott and the Anderson route to
localization, and therefore address the interplay of these
eﬀects. We follow an approach very similar to the well
known Thouless-Anderson-Palmer (TAP) formulation of
the mean ﬁeld theory of spin glasses . Speciﬁcally, we
treat the correlation aspects of the problem in a dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory fashion, but allow spatial variations
of the order parameter in order to allow for Anderson
localization eﬀects. The theory is then exact in the noninteracting limit, and reduces to the standard dynamical
mean ﬁeld theory in absence of disorder.
For simplicity, we consider a simple single-band Hubbard model with random site energies, as given by the
Hamiltonian
(−tij + εiδij)c†
i,σcj,σ + U
Within the dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory, all local correlation functions can be evaluated using a single-site effective action of the form
i,σ(τ)(δ(τ −τ ′) (∂τ + εi −µ)
+∆i,σ(τ, τ ′))ci,σ(τ ′) + U
dτni,↑(τ)ni,↓(τ).
Here, we have used functional integration over Grassmann ﬁelds ci,σ(τ) that represent electrons of spin σ on
site i, and ni,σ(τ) = c†
i,σ(τ)ci,σ(τ). The “ hybridization
function” ∆i(τ, τ ′) is obtained by formally integrating
out all the degrees of freedom on other sites in the lattice, and is given by
The sum over j runs over the z neighbors of the site i, and
j (ωn) =< c†
j(ωn)cj(ωn) > are the local Green’s functions evaluated on site j, but with the site i removed.
For z ﬁnite, and arbitrary lattices, G(i)
j (ωn) cannot be
expressed through local Green’s functions only, but the
situation is simpler on a Bethe lattice , where a simple
recursion relation can be written for this object, expressing it through similar objects on neighboring sites. In
particular, G(i)
j (ωn) can be computed from a local action
of the form identical as in Eq. (2), except that in the
expression for ∆j(τ, τ ′), the sum now runs over z −1
neighbors, excluding the site i.
We note that this local action is identical as the action
of an Anderson impurity model embedded in a sea of
conduction electrons described by a hybridization function ∆j(τ, τ ′). We conclude that the objects G(i)
j (ωn) are
related by a stochastic recursion relation, that involves
solving Anderson impurity models with random on-site
energies εi.
To make further progress, it is crucial to identify appropriate order parameters that can characterize diﬀerent phases of the system and describe quantitatively the
approach to the transition. In early work, it has already
been stressed by Anderson that a proper description
of disordered systems should focus on distribution functions, and that typical rather than the average values
should be associated with physical observables. Our formalisms maps the original model onto an ensemble of
Anderson impurity models, and its low energy behavior
is naturally described in terms of the distribution function of the corresponding local density of states (DOS),
deﬁned as ρj = −ImGj(0) . From this distribution
we can extract the typical DOS ρtyp = exp{< ln ρ >},
which is a natural order for the metal insulator transition.
On the metallic side of the transition, the distribution function of a second quantity, the local quasiparticle
(QP) weight, which is obtained from the Greens functions
−∆j]|ω=0, is necessary to characterized the low energy behavior near the transition.
Important information is obtained from the typical value of
the random variable qj, deﬁned as qtyp = exp{< ln qj >},
which emerges as a natural order parameter from previous studies of the Mott transition.
It is also useful to consider the average quasiparticle
(QP) density of states ρQP =< ρj/qj > . This object is
very important for thermodynamics, since it is directly
related to quantities such as the speciﬁc heat coeﬃcient
γ = C/T , or the local spin susceptibility χloc.
It is instructive to discuss the behavior of these order
parameters in the previously studied limiting cases. In
the limit of large lattice coordination spatial ﬂuctuations
of the bath function ∆i(ωn) are unimportant, and there
is no qualitative diﬀerence between typical and average
quantities. In the Mott insulating phase there is a gap
in the density of states, while there is a ﬁnite density of
states on the metallic side of the transition. As the MIT
is approached from the metallic side, ρtyp remains ﬁnite,
but qtyp is found to linearly go to zero.
Another well studied limit is that of noninteracting
electrons on the Bethe lattice, which is known 
to display an Anderson transition. In the Anderson insulator phase the local density of states has strong spatial
ﬂuctuations, few sites with discrete bound states near the
Fermi level have large density of states while the density of states in most of the sites is zero. The average
DOS is ﬁnite both in the insulating and in the metallic
phase, and is non critical at the transition.
Similarly,
by deﬁnition qtyp = 1 in this noninteracting limit, so it
also remains non critical. On the other hand, the typical
density of states ρtyp is ﬁnite in the metal and zero in
the Anderson insulator. This quantity is critical, and is
found to vanishes exponentially with the distance to
the transition.
Equation 2 is a system stochastic equations, i.e. they
depend on the realization of the random variables describing the disorder. To calculate the probability distributions of ρj and qj we use a simulation approach, where
the probability distribution for the stochastic quantity
j (ωn) is sampled from an ensemble of N sites, as originally suggested by Abou-Chacra et al. . To solve Anderson impurity models for given bath functions ∆j(τ, τ ′)
we use the slave boson (SB) mean-ﬁeld theory ,
which is known to be qualitatively and even quantitatively correct at low temperature and at low energies.
We now discuss our results for the nontrivial situation
where both the disorder and the interactions are present.
We consider a z = 3 Bethe lattice, in the limit of inﬁnite
on-site repulsion U at T = 0 and ﬁxed ﬁlling n = 0.3,
in the presence of a uniform distribution of random site
energies εi of width W (following the notation of Ref.
 , W is measured units of the hopping element t). We
begin by concentrating on the evolution of the probability distribution of the local quasiparticle weights qi, as
the disorder is increased.
The sites with qi ≪1 represent disorder-induced local magnetic moments,
and as such will dominate the thermodynamic response
(see the deﬁnition of ρQP ). For weak disorder we expect
relatively few local moments and the quasiparticle weight
distribution is peaked at a ﬁnite value. As the disorder
is increased, the distribution of qj-s broadens. At a critical value of the disorder Wnfl, a transition to a NFL
metallic state takes place. To illustrate this behavior we
display the integrated distribution of the variable q, n(q)
for diﬀerent values of disorder in Fig. 1(a). If n(q) ∼qα,
as q →0, and α ≤1, then P(q) →+∞in this limit.
Since the local Kondo temperatures T (i)
K ∼qi , this
behavior reﬂects a singular distribution of Kondo temperatures. As a result, we immediately obtain non-Fermi
liquid (NFL) behavior with diverging γ and χloc
n(q) = P(q)dq
FIG. 1. Evolution of probability distributions for interacting electrons as a function of disorder at T = 0: (a) integrated
distribution for local quasiparticle weights (local Kondo temperatures).
Results are presented for W = 1, 3, 5 (dotted
lines), W = 7 (dashed line), and W = 9, 10, 11 (full lines).
The transition to the NFL regime is signaled by the divergence of the slope of n(q) at q = 0.
(b) The evolution of
the local DOS distribution is presented by plotting P(ln ρ)
for W = 3, 5, 7, 9, 10.
We ﬁnd that the maximum, i.
< ln ρ > shifts, as the transition is approached. Note also
the extremely large width of the distribution, so that ρ now
spans many orders of magnitude.
at T = 0. As we can see, there is a well deﬁned value
of disorder Wnfl ∼7, beyond which the slope of n(q) at
q = 0 diverges, and we enter the NFL phase. It is worth
mentioning that a similar transition to a NFL metal, well
before the MIT, has been found from the ﬁeld-theoretical
approaches in 2+ε dimensions . In the NFL phase
the thermodynamics is dominated by disorder-induced
local moments. The probability distribution of the second order parameter ρ, P(ln ρ) , for diﬀerent values of
the disorder strength is shown in Fig. 1(b). Notice that
not only the width, but also the maximum of the distribution shifts with disorder, a behavior reminiscent of
an ordinary Anderson transition.
The typical DOS is
strongly depressed at strong disorder. This behavior is
even more clearly seen if we plot the DOS averages at the
Fermi energy as a function of disorder, as presented in
Fig. 2(b). The typical DOS decreases in a clearly linear
fashion, as the transition at W = Wc ≈11 is approached.
Typical DOS
Average DOS
(a) Noninteracting
DOS averages
DOS averages
Typical DOS
Average DOS
(b) Interacting
Disorder W
(c) Interacting
Typical QP Weight
Order parameters as functions of the disorder
strength W . In the noninteracting limit (a), the typical DOS
vanishes exponentially with disorder, while the average DOS
is non critical. When interactions are present (b), the typical
DOS decreases linearly with disorder, while at the same time
the average one diverges. The divergence is clearly seen by
plotting 1/ < ρ >ab (dotted line), which vanishes linearly as
the critical disorder is approached. Both quantities are found
to be critical at W = Wc ≈11. Also shown is 1/ < ρ >QP
(thin full line), which vanishes at W = Wnfl ≈7. Finally,
we show in (c) the critical behavior of the typical QP weight,
which also vanishes linearly at W = Wc, similarly as in a
Mott transition
This should be contrasted to the U = 0 Anderson
transition, where we ﬁnd (see Fig. 2(a)) the decrease to
be exponential in agreement with analytical results .
We mention that at least in the noninteracting limit ,
the typical DOS behaves in a fashion which is qualitatively identical to that of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Having this in mind, one is tempted to interpret our results
as indicating linear behavior of the conductivity near the
transition, as found experimentally in many “compensated” systems. Even more dramatic is the behavior of
the average DOS which is non-critical both near a conventional U = 0 Anderson transition, and near a clean
Mott transition.
This quantity is found to diverge at
the same value of disorder where the typical DOS vanishes. The fact that we indeed have the divergence, is
further conﬁrmed by plotting 1/ < ρ >av as a function
of disorder, as shown by a dotted line in Fig.2(b). This
quantity vanishes linearly at the same critical disorder
W = Wc ≈11. In the same ﬁgure we exhibit the divergence of the QP DOS, at the transition to the NFL
phase. Finally, we consider the behavior of qtyp, which
is also found to vanish linearly at W = Wc, similarly as
in the case of the Mott transition, but in contrast to the
noninteracting scenario. Physically, this indicates that
a ﬁnite fraction of electrons turn into strictly localized
magnetic moments at the metal-insulator transition.
To summarize, in this paper we have presented a new
self-consistent theory of disordered interacting electrons
that can describe both the Anderson and the Mott route
to localization. In this approach, the typical local DOS
and the typical local resonance width play the a role of
order parameters, but the entire probability distributions
are needed to fully characterize the behavior of the system. Our equations take a form of stochastic recursion
relations for these quantities that involves solving an ensemble of Anderson impurity models. As a speciﬁc application of this approach, we have considered a large U
limit of the Hubbard model at a ﬁxed electron density,
and investigated eﬀects induced by gradually turning on
the disorder. We ﬁnd that the correlations eﬀects produce dramatic modiﬁcations of the conventional Anderson scenario. At intermediate disorder, there is a transition to a non-Fermi liquid phase, characterized by singular thermodynamics, but conventional transport. At
larger disorder a metal-insulator transition takes place.
This is a new type of transition, having some of the features of both the Anderson and the Mott scenario. Remarkably, the main features our treatment, a non Fermi
liquid phase before the metal insulator transition and a
linearly vanishing conductivity are found in compensated
doped semiconductors.
Our framework suggest several research directions.
One would like to relate response functions that determine the transport coeﬃcients to the local order parameters, as was done in the non interacting case by Efetov
and Viehweger . Our calculations should be extended
to to the vicinity of half ﬁlling where correlations eﬀects
should be even more pronounced. This study could cast
some light on the diﬀerent types of metal insulator transitions that occur in compensated and uncompensated
doped semiconductors.
One of us (VD) acknowledges useful discussions with
Sasha Finkelshtein, Lev Gorkov, E. Miranda, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and G. Thomas. VD was supported by the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University. GK was supported by NSF DMR 95-29138.
 N. F. Mott, Metal-Insulator Transitions .
 P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 109, 1498 .
 E. Abrahams, P. W. Anderson, D. C. Licciardello, T. V.
Ramakrishnan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 673 .
 F. Wegner, Z. Phys. B 25, 327 ; F. Wegner Phys.
Rev. B 19 783; Sch¨aﬀer and F. Wegner, ibid. 38,
113 .
 K. B. Efetov Sov. Phys. JETP 65, 360; M. Zirnbauer, Phys. Rev. B 34, 6394.
 A. M. Finkelshtein, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 84, 168 
[Sov. Phys. JETP 57, 97 ]; 86, 367 [59, 212
 ]; Z. Phys. B56, 189 .
 C. Castellani and C. Di Castro Phys. Rev. B34, 5935
 . C. Castellani, G. Kotliar, P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 56, 1179 .
 A. M. Finkelshtein, Pis’ma ZhETF, 40, 63 ; D. Belitz, T. R. Kirkpatrick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1296 .
 T. R. Kirkpatrick, D. Belitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 862
 ; ibid, 74, 1178 .
 For a review, see, D. Belitz and T. R. Kirkpatrick, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 66, 261 .
 M. A. Paalanen, J. E. Graebner, R. N. Bhatt, S. Sachdev,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 597 .
 For a review see, A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and
M. J. Rozenberg; Rev. Mod. Phys., 68, 13 .
 V. Janis and D. Vollhardt, Phys. Rev. B 46, 15712
 ; V. Dobrosavljevi´c and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 71, 3218, and Phys. Rev. B 50, 1430 .
 M. Milovanovi´c, S. Sachdev, R. N. Bhatt, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 63, 82 .
 D. J. Thouless, P. W. Anderson, R. G. Palmer, Phil.
Mag. 35, 593 .
 R. Abou-Chacra, P. W. Anderson, D. J. Thouless, J.
Phys. C 6, 1734 .
 The deﬁnition of the local order parameters ρi and qi
represent in essence a parametrization of the objects
j (ωn) that are obtained from our stochastic recursion
relations. However, following Ref. , we stress that the
qualitative behavior of these “cavity functions” is in fact
identical to the one describing the original local Green’s
functions Gi(ω), in the vicinity of the metal-insulator
transition. As in Ref. , we thus ignore the distinction between the two objects, and drop the superscript
(i), which is implied in the deﬁnition of our local order
parameters ρi and qi.
 A. D. Mirlin, Y. N. Fyodorov, Nucl. Phys. B366, 507
 ; K. B. Efetov, and O. Viehweger, Phys. Rev. B
45, 11546 ;
 This unusual exponential critical behavior is speciﬁc to
the Bethe lattice, in contrast to the usual power law dependence expected to hold in ﬁnite dimensions. However,
detailed studies have shown that all the other qualitative features of an Anderson transition are present even
for the Bethe lattice, so we believe that this model does
contain all the crucial ingredients required to investigate
the interplay of localization and correlation eﬀects. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that interactions eliminate the exponential behavior, so we expect our conclusions to be valid for
general lattices.
 J. Barnes, J. Phys. F 7, 2637 , N. Read, D. M.
Newns, J. Phys. C 16, L1055 , P. Coleman, Phys.
Rev. B 35, 5072 .
 The slave boson approach was applied to the disorderinteraction problem , in the uniform approximation, by
G. T. Zimanyi and E. Abrahams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64,
2719 .
 R. N. Bhatt and D. S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3072
 V. Dobrosavljevi´c, T. R. Kirkpatrick, and G. Kotliar,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1113 .
 E. Miranda, V. Dobrosavljevic and G. Kotliar, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 78, 290 .
 From a numerical point of view, it is extremely diﬃcult even to locate the critical value of the disorder Wc
in situations where the order parameter is exponentially
small near the transition. Such behavior is found in the
noninteracting limit. In contrast, when interactions are
present, linear critical behavior makes it much easier not
only to determine Wc, but also to compute with high numerical accuracy the behavior of all relevant quantities.