First-Principles Models for van der Waals Interactions in Molecules
and Materials: Concepts, Theory, and Applications
Jan Hermann,† Robert A. DiStasio Jr.,*,‡ and Alexandre Tkatchenko*,†,§
†Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany
‡Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States
§Physics and Materials Science Research Unit, University of Luxembourg, L-1511 Luxembourg, Luxembourg
ABSTRACT: Noncovalent van der Waals (vdW) or dispersion forces are ubiquitous in
nature and inﬂuence the structure, stability, dynamics, and function of molecules and
materials throughout chemistry, biology, physics, and materials science. These forces are
quantum mechanical in origin and arise from electrostatic interactions between
ﬂuctuations in the electronic charge density. Here, we explore the conceptual and
mathematical ingredients required for an exact treatment of vdW interactions, and
present a systematic and uniﬁed framework for classifying the current ﬁrst-principles
vdW methods based on the adiabatic-connection ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD)
theorem (namely the Rutgers−Chalmers vdW-DF, Vydrov−Van Voorhis (VV),
exchange-hole dipole moment (XDM), Tkatchenko−Scheﬄer (TS), many-body
dispersion (MBD), and random-phase approximation (RPA) approaches). Particular
attention is paid to the intriguing nature of many-body vdW interactions, whose
fundamental relevance has recently been highlighted in several landmark experiments.
The performance of these models in predicting binding energetics as well as structural,
electronic, and thermodynamic properties is connected with the theoretical concepts and provides a numerical summary of the
state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld. We conclude with a roadmap of the conceptual, methodological, practical, and numerical challenges
that remain in obtaining a universally applicable and truly predictive vdW method for realistic molecular systems and materials.
1. Introduction
2. Conceptual understanding of vdW interactions in
molecules and materials
3. Experimental evidence for the nonlocal and
nonadditive nature of van der Waals dispersion
interactions
4. Theoretical framework for van der Waals models
4.1. From point polarizability to nonlocal polarizability and back
4.2. Exact correlation energy from the nonlocal
dynamic polarizability
4.3. Local eﬀective polarizability from the electron density
4.3.1. Anisotropy of αeff(r)
4.3.2. Harmonic oscillator model of the
dynamic response
4.4. Classiﬁcation of approximate van der Waals
4.4.1. Coarse-graining the ACFD formula and
Dyson equation
4.4.2. Truncating the many-body expansion of
the long-range correlation energy
4.5. Methods based on the random-phase
approximation
4.5.1. Range-separated random-phase approximation
4.5.2. Approximate exchange-correlation kernels
4.5.3. Renormalized perturbation theory to
second order
4.6. Nonlocal density functionals
4.6.1. A simple nonlocal functional
4.6.2. vdW-DF functional
4.6.3. Variations of vdW-DF
4.7. Fragment-based pairwise methods
4.7.1. Fragment-based pairwise models from
the ACFD formula
4.7.2. Models for C6 dispersion coeﬃcients
and other vdW parameters
4.8. Many-body dispersion framework
4.8.1. Many-body dispersion framework from
the ACFD formula
4.8.2. Range-separated many-body dispersion
4.8.3. General remarks about MBD and nbody expansions
5. Models for vdW interactions: Applications
5.1. Benchmark databases
5.2. Structural and electronic properties
5.3. Molecular dynamics
July 11, 2016
Published: March 8, 2017
pubs.acs.org/CR
© 2017 American Chemical Society
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
6. Challenges and outlook
7. Concluding remarks
Associated Content
Special Issue Paper
Author Information
Corresponding Authors
Biographies
Acknowledgments
References
1. INTRODUCTION
The ongoing challenges associated with modeling increasingly
large and more complex molecular and condensed-phase
materials have led to the universal realization that van der
Waals (vdW) dispersion interactions,1−4 commonly considered
to be only a small contribution to the total energy, are in fact a
crucial ingredient of both a qualitatively correct and
quantitatively accurate description of the binding properties
in a majority of molecular systems5−7 and materials.8−10 In fact,
it has become increasingly more apparent that the relevance of
vdW interactions extends well beyond binding and cohesive
energies, encompassing the structural,7,9 mechanical,11,12
spectroscopic,13 kinetic,14 and even electronic15,16 signatures
of condensed matter. With an inﬂuence that ranges from drug
binding in proteins and double-helix stability in DNA17 to pedal
adhesion in geckos18,19 and cohesion in asteroids,20,21 these
nonbonded forces are quantum mechanical in origin and arise
from the electrostatic interactions between the constantly
ﬂuctuating electron clouds which constitute molecules and
materials.22 As such, vdW dispersion interactions are strongly
nonlocal, extending to distances exceeding 10 nm in nanoscale
materials,22−25 or even further in mesoscopic materials.26−28
With this context, the importance of understanding and
modeling vdW interactions in realistic systems can hardly be
overemphasized. However, our ability to accurately model these
interactions from ﬁrst principles is severely impeded by the
prohibitively high computational cost of the high-level wavefunction methods of quantum chemistry, as well as the lack of
eﬃcient yet accurate approximations to the many-body electron
correlation problem for large systems.29 In light of this fact, the
sophistication of approximate models for describing vdW
interactions has been steadily increasing, especially within the
context of electronic structure methods based on densityfunctional theory (DFT). The majority of these commonly
used vdW-inclusive methods ﬁnds a theoretical basis in the
quantum-mechanical treatment of two fragments A and B (e.g.,
atoms, localized orbitals, or inﬁnitesimal regions of the electron
density) separated by a distance RAB that places them outside of
density or orbital overlap, for which second-order perturbation
theory predicts the vdW interaction energy to be proportional
−6 (to leading order). Only recently have more advanced
theoretical models been developed which go beyond this
pairwise-additive approximation, resulting in quantitative
improvements in the predictive capabilities of vdW-inclusive
DFT calculations and novel conceptual insights into the nature
of many-body vdW interactions. At this point, the existence of
advanced theoretical models for describing vdW interactions
coupled with the rapid increase in available computational
resources has allowed us to achieve the accuracy needed for
meaningful prediction of binding energetics between small
organic molecules,30 and vdW-inclusive methods are now even
being extended toward quantitative predictions of the properties and functions of technologically and biologically relevant
materials.9,10
Meanwhile, the steep rise in the number of applications of
vdW-inclusive methods to larger and more complex systems
has led to a more comprehensive understanding of their
inherent strengths and weaknesses, as well as a rough
delineation of their respective ranges of applicability. Despite
such substantial progress in the ﬁeld of modeling vdW
interactions, many questions still remain unanswered and
signiﬁcant further development is required before a universally
applicable approach emerges. For instance, the aforementioned
pairwise-additive interatomic vdW methods are frequently used
to describe adsorption of organic molecules on inorganic
surfaces.31−34 Despite the fact that such an approach eﬀectively
ignores the relatively strong electrodynamic response screening
present in bulk materials, the results often have a reasonable
level of accuracy. Another example comes in the form of use of
the nonlocal vdW-DF family of functionals35−38 to describe
binding between molecules, which often leads to an acceptable
level of accuracy even though one would not expect the
employed homogeneous dielectric approximation to work well
for molecules. These examples highlight the need for a deeper
understanding of the physical reasons why these diﬀerent
approaches often yield relatively good results outside their
expected domains of applicability, as this is a determining factor
in the development of more robust approximations.
In general, vdW interactions can be remarkably sensitive to
the geometry and electronic structure of a given system.
Therefore, these interactions not only aﬀect the structure and
dynamics of the system, but can also have a visible eﬀect on the
electronic charge distribution and other properties derived from
the charge density (e.g., multipole moments, work functions,
polarizabilities, electron aﬃnities, etc.),15 in accordance with the
theoretical insight into vdW interactions advocated by
Feynman.39 This observation highlights the need for ﬁrstprinciples-based methodsvdW methods that explicitly
depend on the charge density or orbitalsin which the vdW
interactions are treated in a fully self-consistent manner; as
such, these methods are the main focus of this work.
In this review, we will use the terms “van der Waals (vdW)
interactions” and “dispersion interactions” interchangeably.
Originally, vdW interactions encompassed (especially in the
chemistry literature) electrostatic (permanent moment−
permanent moment), induction (permanent moment−induced
moment), and dispersion (induced moment−induced moment) interactions. In the current work, however, this trio is
increasingly being referred to as noncovalent interactions, while
vdW interactions are reserved speciﬁcally for the dispersion
interactions, thus aligning the terminology with the physics
literature. This has perhaps been motivated by the everincreasing overlap between chemistry and condensed-matter
physics in the ﬁeld of vdW interactions. Another matter of
terminology that extends well beyond semantics concerns the
use of the phrase “many-body”; here the communities
signiﬁcantly diﬀer in their association of a given physical (or
mathematical) entity with the label “body”. For example, a body
would typically refer to a molecule in the ﬁeld of molecular
modeling, although it could also refer to an atom, as
demonstrated by the literature on the Axilrod−Teller−Muto
three-body (three-atom) potential.40,41 In the quantum
chemistry community, the coupled-cluster hierarchy is a
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
particular class of methods within many-body perturbation
theory, and in this case, the bodies are electrons (electronic
excitations). In this review, we will use the term many-body
when referring to interactions between more than two bodies
(i.e., beyond pairwise), as the point of this term is to delineate
the degree of coupling in a given model. The meaning of the
term body will therefore change according to the context, and
we hope that our exposition will make it clear why such a ﬂuidic
use of this term is indeed helpful in deﬁning a general
conceptual and mathematical framework for describing vdW
interactions.
This review concentrates on the conceptual, methodological,
mathematical, and numerical aspects of various approaches for
treating vdW interactions based on ﬁrst principles. For the
plethora of other aspects associated with vdW interactions, we
refer the interested reader to the following set of reviews, which
is by no means an exhaustive list but includes many works
which are complementary to that presented here.5−7,9,30,42−51
This review begins with a conceptual introduction to the
treatment of vdW interactions in molecules and materials of
increasing complexity, showcasing the critical ingredients
necessary for a qualitatively correct and physically sound
description of these interactions in diﬀerent classes of systems.
We then proceed with a brief discussion of several recent
landmark experiments that clearly highlight the nontrivial
nature of vdW interactions at the nanoscale and demonstrate
that our understanding of these quantum-mechanical phenomena is only beginning to emerge. This is followed by a
comprehensive theoretical basis for the description of vdW
interactions that provides a systematic classiﬁcation scheme and
derivation for many of the popular ﬁrst-principles-based
methods within the framework of the adiabatic-connection
ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD) theorem. A critical assessment
of the performance of these models in predicting binding
energetics, structural and electronic properties, as well as
equilibrium quantities from ab initio molecular dynamics is then
discussed, as we introduce the many challenges that arise when
these methods are applied to increasingly realistic and
experimentally relevant systems. We conclude this review by
presenting an outlook which not only summarizes the
achievements in the ﬁeld of modeling vdW interactions in
the past decade, but also highlights the many remaining
challenges that we expect will keep this exciting ﬁeld quite
active for some time to come.
Figure 1. Structural features, electronic properties, and environmental eﬀects of relevance to noncovalent vdW interactions. Each of these distinct
system characteristics aﬀects the underlying electronic structure and therefore the associated vdW interactions, leading to complications in the
accurate modeling of these interactions in realistic systems. A seamless and universally applicable vdW method must meet this challenge and
accurately describe these eﬀects across the wide range of systems found in chemistry, biology, and physics.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
2. CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING OF VDW
INTERACTIONS IN MOLECULES AND MATERIALS
In this section, we discuss the current conceptual understanding
of noncovalent vdW interactions in molecules and materials. By
considering a set of fundamental systems, we demonstrate how
the vdW energy depends on local (additive or weakly
nonadditive) and nonlocal (nonadditive) eﬀects that originate
from the underlying electronic structure of the system. Our
focus here is on identifying and analyzing the ingredients
(Figure 1) that are necessary to correctly describe vdW
interactions across a wide array of systems characterized by
markedly diﬀerent structural features (e.g., size, dimensionality,
geometry/topology), electronic properties (e.g., covalent/ionic
bonding, hybridization, oxidation state, charge transfer), and
environmental eﬀects (e.g., solvation, interfaces, external
pressure).
Currently available vdW-inclusive methods are able to
describe how these structural, electronic, and environmental
considerations aﬀect the vdW energy only to a certain extent
which varies from method to method. In general, these
methods can be classiﬁed based on the approximations that
they use for the two central quantities required for the
description of vdW interactions, namely the nonlocal microscopic frequency-dependent polarizability α(r, r′, u) and the
eﬀective interaction potential v(r, r′) between points r and r′ in
space. This classiﬁcation scheme is illustrated in Figure 2 and
includes (a) the exact treatment of the electron correlation via
the adiabatic-connection ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD)
theorem,52−54 (b) fragment-based (or coarse-grained) manybody vdW methods,55,56 (c) fragment-based (or coarsegrained) pairwise vdW methods,57−61 and (d) nonlocal twopoint (ﬁne-grained) density-functional approximations.35−37,62
For a quick overview, we present a condensed description of
the most widely used vdW methods in Table 1, which includes
a brief synopsis of each method as well as a critical assessment
of their performance in treating diﬀerent aspects of vdW
interactions. Throughout this section we discuss the diﬀerent
scenarios that arise in the modeling of the polarizability and
interaction potential in systems of increasing complexity. While
this section focuses on a conceptual picture of vdW
interactions, Section 4 will address these issues from a
mathematical point of view. We aim to dispel several myths
about vdW interactions and note that many of these points will
be revisited and reinforced by the more formal presentation in
Section 4.
The exact solution of the electronic Schrödinger equation
would automatically incorporate the exact vdW contribution to
the total energy of a many-electron system, as this contribution
is strictly contained in the electron correlation energy.
However, the explicit solution of the Schrödinger equation
for a system containing more than a few electrons is still a
computationally prohibitive task, even when many approximations are used. For this reason, modeling of realistic
materials often starts with more tractable mean-ﬁeld models,
Figure 2. Theoretical approaches used by diﬀerent vdW models based on ﬁrst-principles. (a) Exact treatment of the correlation energy in the
framework of the adiabatic-connection ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD) theorem, which uses the full nonlocal response function χλ(r,r′,u). This
response function can be viewed as describing the propagation of ﬂuctuations throughout the molecule or material. (b) Fragment-based (coarsegrained) many-body methods correlate ﬂuctuations to inﬁnite order by using model response functions in the ACFD formula. (c) Fragment-based
(coarse-grained) two-body methods compute the pairwise contribution to the vdW energy by correlating only two dipoles (or multipoles) at a time.
(d) Long-range pairwise functionals use an inﬁnitesimal (ﬁne-grained) representation of dipolar ﬂuctuations and correlate only two dipoles at a time.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
such as the Hartree−Fock (HF) approximation, or the
alternative suite of density-functional approximations (DFAs),
which use the three-dimensional electron charge density, n(r),
instead of the exceedingly more complicated many-electron
wave function. However, these common approximations are
unable to describe the long-range electron correlation energy
and therefore fail to describe vdW interactions. This is true
even for the more advanced semilocal meta-GGA functionals.63−65
Even in the simple case of an isolated many-electron atom,
an accurate calculation of its (frequency-dependent) polarizability is a complicated many-body problem. However,
substantial progress has been made in this regard with the
development of post-HF quantum-chemical methods and timedependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations that can provide
reliable estimates of the dipole polarizability and dipole−dipole
vdW coeﬃcients for all atoms between hydrogen and
plutonium (Z = 1 to 102).58,66−69 Calculations that treat
many-electron correlation eﬀects explicitly (either wavefunction based or more recently TD-DFT methods) yield
electronic response properties with an accuracy of 2% to 10%
for gas-phase atoms.66−68,70,71 This high level of accuracy makes
the available free-atom polarizabilities and vdW coeﬃcients
useful as reference data for vdW methods in more complex
systems, as for example in the Tkatchenko−Scheﬄer (TS)60
and exchange-hole dipole moment (XDM)59 methods.
However, since the resulting atoms-in-molecules coeﬃcients
are inevitably approximate, we are faced with the question of
how the errors in asymptotic vdW coeﬃcients aﬀect the
binding energy at equilibrium distances.
The binding energy is a result of an interplay between the
Pauli repulsion and vdW attraction, so the vdW energy alone is
often larger (more attractive) than the net binding energy itself.
As an illustration, consider noble gas atom dimers, for which
interaction potentials of spectroscopic accuracy can be
constructed solely from highly accurate vdW coeﬃcients in
conjunction with mean-ﬁeld HF calculations.73,74 One can then
simply calculate that an error of 20% in the asymptotic vdW
coeﬃcients of the xenon atom results in an error of
approximately 40% in the equilibrium binding energy (Figure
3). Already this simple example highlights the importance of
accuracy in the parameters used for including vdW interactions
in electronic structure calculations. Even errors of 10%, which
are typical, may lead to unacceptable errors of 20% in the
corresponding binding energies. A common way to circumvent
these errors is via ﬁtting free parameters of a method to
reference binding energies, but this strategy is likely to fail for
systems outside the data set used for the ﬁtting. As one might
expect, these levels of uncertainty in the asymptotic vdW
coeﬃcients lead to even more serious problems in larger and
more polarizable systems. The vdW contribution to the binding
energy of a diindenoperylene molecule (C32H16) adsorbed on
the Cu(111) surface is approximately 5.3 eV.75 In this case, an
error of 20% in the vdW coeﬃcient would translate to an error
of 1.0 eV in the equilibrium binding energyexceeding the
energy of thermal ﬂuctuations (kT) at room temperature by a
Table 1. Approximate vdW Methods in Terms of Their General Properties and the Degree to Which They Incorporate Some
Eﬀects Inﬂuencing vdW Interactions
Hybridization, coordination and
chemical environment
Ions/oxidation states
Accuracy of C6 coeﬃcients of small
organic molecules
Polarization in
Nonadditive
polarizability
Only coord. eﬀects
Requires separate parametrization
Yes, but strong charge transfer
requires parametrization
Short-range
Yes, but strong charge transfer
requires parametrization
Short-range
Yes, but strong charge transfer
requires parametrization
All ranges
Short-range
Short-range
Short-range
All ranges
Anisotropy in vdW
parameters
Many-body vdW energy
Computational
Applicability
Small molecules
Three-body Axilrod−Teller can
Intermediate
Small and midsize molecules
Three-body Axilrod−Teller can
Small and midsize molecules
Three-body Axilrod−Teller can
Small and midsize molecules
Inﬁnite order
Broadly applicable. Take care with metals
Intermediate
Small molecules and bulk solids, sensitive to
exchange functional
Intermediate
Small molecules and bulk solids, sensitive to
exchange functional
Intermediate
Small and midsize molecules
Inﬁnite order
Broadly applicable
aD1,57 D2,107 and D358 are popular vdW methods that do not use electronic structure as input but are presented for comparison. XDM is the
exchange-hole dipole moment method.59 TS is the Tkatchenko−Scheﬄer method.60 MBD is the many-body dispersion method.88 vdW-DF135 and
vdW-DF236 are the nonlocal vdW density functionals. VV10 is the vdW functional of Vydrov and van Voorhis.62 dRPA is the direct RPA method;
see for example ref 108.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
factor of 35. We note that, in popular pairwise vdW corrections,
vdW coeﬃcients of molecules on metal surfaces can be
overestimated by as much as 500%, because these approaches
miss the complex polarization eﬀects in the extended surface
that are typically responsible for reducing the vdW coeﬃcients
of atoms in metals by 50−500% with respect to the free-atom
values.76,77
The discrepancies in the vdW energy caused by small errors
in asymptotic coeﬃcients can lead to qualitatively incorrect
conclusions about relative stabilities (not absolute energies) as
well, such as when studying molecular crystal polymorphs.78 In
systems of increasing size, the binding arises from an interplay
of short- and long-range interactions, so an accurate and reliable
vdW method must be able to describe the binding at both
equilibrium and asymptotic separations, as well as everything
in-between, on equal footing. For these reasons, the accuracy of
asymptotic vdW coeﬃcients must be given a signiﬁcant weight
when evaluating the performance of vdW-inclusive methods.
While accurate vdW parameters can now be obtained for
isolated gas-phase atoms, the situation in real molecules and
materials is vastly more complicated. Even for small molecules,
the molecular polarizability and vdW coeﬃcients cannot be
accurately represented simply as a sum over free-atom
parameters. Dobson49 calls this diﬀerence between a free
atom and an atom in a molecule type-A nonadditivityit is
caused by the increased kinetic energy of the valence electrons
due to the conﬁning molecular (instead of atomic) external
potential. In many organic molecules (see Hybridization in
Figure 1), the main eﬀect is that orbital hybridization (i.e., a
relatively local eﬀect) reduces the eﬀective polarizability and
vdW coeﬃcients of the atoms. For example, the C6 coeﬃcient
of an isolated carbon atom is 46.6 (a.u.), but this value is
reduced to 29.8 for an sp-bonded atom and 22.1 for an sp3bonded atom.79 However, the hybridization (coordination
number) concept alone is insuﬃcient to fully account for the
inﬂuence of the local chemical environment on vdW
coeﬃcients. For example, consider the methane (CH4) and
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) molecules. In both these
molecules, the carbon atoms are sp3-hybridized with 4-fold
coordination, and are therefore identical according to these two
measures of the local chemical environment. Yet the local
chemical environments experienced by these atoms are
substantially diﬀerent, with the C−H bond distance of 1.1 Å
in CH4 compared to the C−Cl distance of 1.8 Å in CCl4. This
results in increased volume and lowered kinetic energy of the
valence electrons in CCl4 compared to CH4. The TS method is
able to capture these local environment eﬀects and yields a
C−C coeﬃcient of 43.1 in CCl4 and 24.1 in CH4. As these
local chemical eﬀects are important in capturing qualitative
trends in vdW parameters, they are now captured by most
vdW-inclusive methods (see Table 1). Indeed, it is quite
remarkable that the C6 coeﬃcients of small molecules can be
obtained very accurately (i.e., to within 5.5%) only from the
knowledge of the relative volume of an atom in its environment
compared to the corresponding gas-phase atom.60
The local chemical environment (volume scaling) is only the
ﬁrst eﬀect in a series of electronic structure contributions to
vdW parameters. Another mostly local eﬀect is caused by
charge transfer and diﬀerent oxidation states in many-electron
systems (see Oxidation State/Solvation and Charge Transfer/
Ionic Compounds in Figure 1). In rock salt (NaCl), being a
classical example of charge transfer, simple volume-based
models cannot be used to calculate vdW coeﬃcients
unambiguously, because there are multiple ways to assign
atomic densities to the Na and Cl atoms. One limit assumes
that NaCl consists of a superposition of Na and Cl free-atom
densities, yielding a polarizability of 182.7 (a.u.) per unit cell.
The other limit assumes Na+ and Cl−ions, yielding a
signiﬁcantly reduced polarizability of 21.6.80 The large
diﬀerence between these two limits is caused by the change
in the polarizability from 167.7 for neutral Na atom to 0.9 for
Na+. Measurements of dielectric properties81 and high-level
calculations82 demonstrate that the polarizability of NaCl solid
is in fact closer to the sum of Na+ and Cl−ions. Large changes
in vdW parameters also occur for diﬀerent oxidation states of
metal atoms in molecules and solids.83−85 In contrast to the
hybridization eﬀects, charge transfer and oxidation states can
only be treated seamlessly by vdW methods that explicitly use
electronic structure information.35,36,55,59,60,62 Methods that
rely on atomic fragments require sophisticated deﬁnitions of
the atomic fragment densities to yield quantitative accuracy for
charge transfer and oxidation states.86,87
Another manifestation of electronic structure in vdW
parameters is their dependence on the contraction or expansion
of the crystal lattice (see Lattice Expansion/Contraction in
Figure 1). For instance, Zhang et al. demonstrated a substantial
linear dependence of αSi and C6
Si−Si in zinc blende silicon on the
lattice constant using TD-DFT calculations.80 This behavior
cannot be explained by the coordination of the silicon, because
this is unchanged throughout the lattice contraction, but rather
can be related to the change in the electronic band gap.
Nonlinear dependence of vdW parameters on the lattice
constant can be observed in semiconductors, such as Ge, where
the small band gap becomes zero upon the metallic phase
transition induced by the lattice contraction. Such eﬀects are
reliably reproduced only by methods that explicitly consider
electronic orbitals and their energies (e.g., RPA and TD-DFT
methods). Consistent treatment of vdW interactions in systems
with widely varying band gaps remains challenging because the
electronic response is diﬃcult to extract from the electron
density alone. The linear increase of the polarizability with
lattice constant in semiconductor solids is reproduced
quantitatively by the many-body dispersion (MBD) method,55,88 which models the response of valence electrons by
overlapping quantum harmonic oscillators, qualitatively by
Figure 3. Potential energy curve of the xenon dimer as a function of
the interatomic distance R. The black curve represents the exact
potential energy curve,72 while the blue (red) curve was obtained by
increasing (decreasing) all (C6, C8, C10) vdW coeﬃcients by 20%. This
change in the vdW coeﬃcients yields an error of ±40% in the binding
energy at the equilibrium distance, illustrating the importance of highly
accurate asymptotic vdW coeﬃcients for equilibrium predictions.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
nonlocal density functionals, in which the polarizability
depends on the electron density and its gradient,35,62 and not
at all by pairwise fragment-based methods.57−60
All eﬀects discussed so far were mostly local: the local
behavior of the electron density is often suﬃcient to describe
coordination, charge transfer, oxidation states, and variation of
vdW parameters with small changes in structure. However, the
frequency-dependent polarizability is a nonlocal function that
explicitly depends on two points, r, r′, in space: α(r, r′, u). The
many eﬀects in vdW interactions that require an explicit
nonlocal description necessarily have a nonadditive many-body
nature. For instance, the prototypical benzene molecule has a
strongly anisotropic response, with the in-plane component of
the polarizability being approximately twice as large as the outof-plane component. Already this well-known nonadditive
contribution is neglected by most vdW methods, which rely
on an isotropic deﬁnition of vdW parameters.35,57−60,62
However, many of these isotropic pairwise methods are able
to quite accurately approximate binding energies between small
molecules, and this suggests that the eﬀects of anisotropy might
be partially compensated by the empirical damping functions
used in these methods and the lack of many-body vdW energy
terms (Axilrod−Teller and higher order). The importance of
nonadditive eﬀects increases dramatically with system size and
lower dimensionality. For example, the in-plane component of
the polarizability increases in a strongly nonlinear fashion in
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.89,90 This nonlinear increase
of polarizability then translates into vdW coeﬃcients being
strongly nonadditive.91−93
Dobson calls these eﬀects type-B nonadditivity,49 and they
depend sensitively on the size, structure, and dimensionality of
a given system. To illustrate these eﬀects, we calculated the
nonlocal fully interacting polarizability tensor α(r, r′, u = 0) of
three molecules (Figure 4): adamantane C10H16, naphthalene
C10H14, and decapentaene C10H12. The polarizability matrix is
constructed using a self-consistent coupled dipole approach,55,94,95 which models the response of the valence
electrons to an internal electric ﬁeld by a projection to a set of
overlapping and interacting dipole oscillators. Although the
polarizability matrix in Figure 4 is not the exact α(r, r′, u = 0),
as could be obtained by TD-DFT calculations, it provides a
reliable approximation to the polarization, as has been
demonstrated in numerous studies.55,92,95−97 The polarizability
tensor is a dense matrix for all three molecules, and a diagonal
isotropic approximation of such a tensor, as used in many vdW
methods, is clearly incomplete. The dependence of polarization
Figure 4. Nonlocal polarizability αAB of three hydrocarbon molecules with 10 carbon atoms: bulky, saturated adamantane; planar, aromatic
naphthalene; and linear, conjugated decapentaene. Solution of the dipole screening equation gives the nonlocal polarizability αAB ≡αAB
ij (A, B label
atoms, i, j Cartesian coordinates). Three diﬀerent visualizations of this quantity are shown: (a) Molecular structures and Cartesian components of
the total molecular polarizability ∑ABαAB. x, y, and z components are encoded with green, blue, and red, respectively. All arrows have the same scale.
(b) Visualization of αAB
ij for the subset of A and B being carbon atoms. Each 10-by-10 matrix corresponds to the αAB
ij matrix with i and j ﬁxed. The
color encodes the sign (red for positive, blue for negative), and the intensity encodes the magnitude of a given matrix element. (c) Dependence of
the magnitude of αAB
ij on the distance between carbon atoms A and B in a log plot. The data points are ﬁtted with a single exponential curve.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
on the geometry and bonding is nontrivial, with a much slower
decay in decapentaene compared to naphthalene and
adamantane. The possible eﬀects of such nonlocal behavior
on the polarizability can be illustrated on two diﬀerent
orientations of the benzene dimer: the sandwich and T-shaped
conﬁgurations. The plots in Figure 5 show, for instance, that
the higher symmetry of the sandwich conﬁguration makes the
xz component of the polarizability tensor vanish, whereas this is
not the case for the T-shaped structure. The isotropic pairwise
approximation would be unable to capture the full complexity
of these polarization eﬀects.
Polarization eﬀects scale nonlinearly, so much stronger
eﬀects can be observed in nanoscale molecules and materials
compared to the illustrative case of the benzene dimer. The
stability and mobility of defects in solids,14 polymorphism in
molecular crystals,7,13,98,99 adsorption of atoms and molecules
on surfaces,100,101 self-assembly of nanostructured materials,12,92 and relative stability of secondary structure motifs in
peptides and proteins102 have all been shown to require explicit
nonlocal and nonadditive treatment of polarizability and vdW
interactions. In general, the presence of any environment (be it
liquid phase, crystal, or presence of edges and surfaces) will
strongly aﬀect the polarizability and vdW interactions within
and between molecules and materials. Last but not least,
electromagnetic ﬁelds can also change the electron density
distribution and its response, thereby potentially inﬂuencing
vdW interactions. Our understanding of these complex
polarization eﬀects is still fairly limited, and much current
work is dedicated to the study of the behavior of intermolecular
interactions in complex environments.
Particularly strong nonadditive and nonlocal eﬀects (called
type-C by Dobson49) occur in nanoscale materials of reduced
dimensionality,23,49 such as in fullerenes, nanotubes, nanoribbons, and multilayered graphene, or in materials without cubic
(spherical) symmetry. The coupling between many electrons
over extended length scales leads to farsighted quantummechanical ﬂuctuations (as opposed to nearsighted correlation103) that are responsible for long-range vdW forces.22 The
inherent delocalization of free electrons in metals coupled with
low dimensionality leads to an especially slow decay of the vdW
force between metallic chains and layers as a function of their
separation,23 a modiﬁcation of the conventional asymptotic
behavior which dominates at very large distances (e.g., beyond
10−20 nm in bilayer graphene).104 In this context, Misquitta et
al.105,106 demonstrated that, upon closure of the band gap,
semiconducting nanowires may also exhibit unconventional
power-law behavior at intermediate separations, followed by
asymptotic convergence to the pairwise-additive limit.
The preceding discussion concentrated on describing manybody eﬀects in the vdW energy that stem from the
nonadditivity of polarizability in complex molecules and
materials. This is often the dominant many-body eﬀect, but
there are other types of many-body contributions to the vdW
energy, which can be understood using higher-order
perturbation theory on isotropic fragments with ﬁxed polarizability. This approach was originally used by Axilrod and
Teller,40 and independently by Muto,41 resulting in the socalled Axilrod−Teller−Muto (ATM) three-body term, with a
characteristic decay of RABC
−9 , where RABC is the geometric mean
of the three mutual distances between fragments A, B, and C.
By continuing this perturbative expansion, one can derive an
expression for four-body and higher-order terms that decay
faster with respect to the distance between the objects. Because
of this short-range nature of higher-order terms, it is common
to argue that many-body terms beyond the three-body ATM
term are negligible for realistic interatomic distances found in
molecules and materials. However, the ATM expansion was
derived assuming ﬁxed isotropic fragments and additive
localized polarizabilitiesassumptions that are not general
enough, as discussed above. In general, a subtle interplay
between nonadditive polarization and higher-order vdW energy
terms determines the many-body contributions to the vdW
energy, which can in turn be both attractive or repulsive. The
sign will sensitively depend on the topology, size, dimensionality, and polarizability density distribution. An empirical way to
account for this interplay is to renormalize the dispersion
coeﬃcients that enter the pairwise and ATM terms. However,
such a procedure cannot be transferable, and more
sophisticated methods have been developed that include both
nonadditive polarization and higher-order many-body eﬀects by
construction. This intriguing nature of many-body eﬀects and
coupling between diﬀerent terms in the many-body expansion
Figure 5. Nonlocal polarizability αAB of two essential conﬁgurations of
the benzene dimer: T-shaped and sandwich geometry. (a) A single
benzene molecule and the Cartesian components of the total
molecular polarizability ∑ABαAB. x, y, and z components are encoded
with green, blue, and red, respectively. All arrows have the same scale.
(b) Visualization of the full nonlocal polarizability αAB
ij of the T-shaped
and sandwich conﬁgurations of the benzene dimer with A and B
restricted to carbon atoms. See the caption of Figure 4b for a detailed
description.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
is analyzed in the theoretical part of this review, especially in
Section 4.8.3.
While the exact ACFD formulation (see Figure 2(a)) is able
to seamlessly include all the described nonadditive contributions to noncovalent vdW interactions, this is not the case for
many approximate methods discussed in this section. For quick
guidance, Table 1 provides a succinct description of a range of
approximate methods for modeling vdW interactions, together
with their ability to treat some nonadditive aspects of these
forces. We hope that this table together with the discussion in
this and the next two sections will aid understanding of the
reasons behind the good performance of some methods for
particular classes of systems, and the failures of varying degree
for other molecules and materials.
3. EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR THE NONLOCAL
AND NONADDITIVE NATURE OF VAN DER WAALS
DISPERSION INTERACTIONS
Our understanding of vdW interactions in complex systems
relies mostly on theoretical concepts and the analysis of the
results of computer modeling. However, several recent seminal
experiments ﬁnd unexpected collective behavior in vdW
interactions that simple models based on pairwise approximations are unable to explain satisfactorily. These experimental
results are discussed here; taken together, they indicate a need
to revise our understanding of vdW interactions based on a
rigorous, explicit, nonlocal, and many-body description.
The group led by Stefan Tautz directly measured the force
gradients caused by the interaction of a single molecule
attached to a tip of an atomic force microscope with clean
(111) terraces of a gold surface.109 The high precision of these
measurements allowed them to conﬁrm the well-known
Lifshitz−Zaremba−Kohn (LZK)110,111 Z−3 power law for the
interaction of a molecule with an underlying surface as a
function of their separation Z. This study also validated the
LZK approximation for a range of increasingly large molecules
derived from perylene. The most remarkable ﬁnding is that the
vdW attraction of perylene derivatives with the gold surface
scales nonlinearly with the number of carbon atoms. This
ﬁnding was attributed to a superlinear increase of the
polarizability with size, and was explained using calculations
at the RPA level of theory.109
Stronger nonlocality was observed in experiments carried out
in the group of Karin Jacobs, who studied the interaction of
nanoscale, mesoscale, and macroscale objects with polarizable
heterointerfaces composed of SiO2 thin ﬁlms grown on a Si
surface.24,25 They studied the force between nanoscale proteins,
mesoscale bacteria, and macroscale gecko feet and SiO2/Si
interfaces by varying the thickness of the SiO2 thin ﬁlm. This
allows determining the critical SiO2 thickness at which the
underlying Si surface becomes “invisible” for the interacting
object. The conventional pairwise treatment of vdW
interactions yields a critical thickness of approximately 1 nm,
after which the vdW interaction should vanish. Remarkably, the
experiments indicate that the measured force converges only
when a thickness of 10−20 nm is reached, indicating that vdW
interactions are more nonlocal and farsighted than expected
from simple models. In contrast, explicit many-body models for
vdW interactions predict much slower convergence of vdW
forces for heterointerfaces with complex dielectric proﬁles.92
Such interfaces are characterized by electric ﬁelds that
propagate far into the vacuum, which explains the observed
order-of-magnitude slower decay of vdW interactions.
Another manifestation of many-body eﬀects is the recently
observed complete screening of vdW interactions by a singlelayer graphene or MoS2 adsorbed on a SiO2 surface by Tsoi et
al.112 This group carried out atomic-force microscopy experiments on top of the SiO2 surface and the same surface covered
by a single-layer graphene or MoS2. Whereas for a pristine SiO2
surface the usual Lifshitz theory explains the experimental
observations, covering the surface with graphene or MoS2 leads
to measurements that can only be explained by assuming that
the tip interacts exclusively with the adsorbed single layer. A
possible explanation for this behavior is that the covering layers
are characterized by a strongly anisotropic polarizability tensor,
with in-plane ﬂuctuations having a dominant role. Because
these ﬂuctuations are not signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by adsorption
on the insulating SiO2 substrate, the tip−substrate force is
dominated by the interaction with the 2D in-plane ﬂuctuations,
making any contribution of the underlying SiO2 surface
negligible.
The nonlocality and nonadditivity of vdW interactions is also
manifested in the nontrivial behavior of nanoclusters adsorbed
on extended nanostructures.113,114 A simple additive model
would lead to a linear dependence of the adsorption density on
the accessible nanotube surface area. Instead, Rance et al.
observed quadratic dependence.113 Furthermore, the attractive
interactions increased nonlinearly for larger, more polarizable
gold nanoparticles.
While all these experiments provide a strong evidence for the
many-body nature of vdW interactions in complex materials, it
is expected that they are just the “tip of the iceberg” in the
ocean of molecules and materials. The complex interplay of
size, dimensionality, and polarization response will continue to
surprise us and lead to new insights into vdW interactions, and
ultimately to better control over the self-assembly of complex
polarizable molecules and materials into useful ensembles.114
4. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR VAN DER WAALS
After summarizing the general concepts behind the current
understanding of vdW interactions in the previous section, we
now present a mathematical framework for discussing these
concepts and for describing the diﬀerent vdW models with a
single terminology. We start with the exact adiabaticconnection ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD) theorem for the
electron correlation energy and formulate a general classi-
ﬁcation of currently used approximations to this expression. We
will be concerned only with models that treat the correlation
between electrons explicitly via an interacting potential and in
which this potential has a correct asymptotic power-law
behavior. In this regard, we will not discuss semilocal density
functionals that, to some degree, capture the short-range part of
the correlation energy responsible for vdW interactions, such as
the Minnesota family of functionals,63,64 or the class of explicit
vdW models which can only be applied in situations with nonnegligible electron density overlap, such as the method of von
Lilienfeld et al. based on atomic pseudopotentials.115−119 We
also do not discuss ab initio methods that are based on
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT),120,121 since
such approaches use a diﬀerent deﬁnition of the noninteracting
reference system that can only be applied to systems with
distinct interacting fragments (although this limitation has been
a focus of recent work122).
Although the framework presented here is general and could
be used to discuss the modeling of vdW interactions even in
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
fully empirical methods such as classical force ﬁelds, we will
focus only on ﬁrst-principles approximations, that is, methods
which explicitly take into account the electronic structure of a
molecule or material via the electron density or orbitals. As
such, we limit the scope of this review to the context of
electronic structure methods, in particular density-functional
theory (DFT). In this case, a vdW model can be included in the
self-consistent Kohn−Sham (KS) equations via its dependence
on the electron density or orbitals, and hence can predict not
only the eﬀect of the long-range electron correlation on the
total energy, but also its eﬀect on the electronic structure. This
observation is closely related to the well-known Feynman
picture of vdW interactions,39 which essentially provides a
phenomenological connection between these two eﬀects, and
which does not apply to models that depend only on the
geometry and topology of a molecule or material. (The
Hellmann−Feynman theorem applied to the electronic
Hamiltonian of two well-separated fragments implies that the
long-range electron correlation slightly disturbs the fragment
electron densities, and in a fully self-consistent method, these
distortions can be used to alternatively express the vdW forces
on atoms as pure electrostatic attraction between the nuclei and
the surrounding electron density. However, an electron
correlation method is needed to calculate the distortions in
the ﬁrst place, so the Feynman picture does not practically solve
that problem.)
We begin this section with the introduction and discussion of
diﬀerent variants of the polarizabilitya quantity that is central
to the description of the long-range electron correlation. This is
followed by a detailed analysis of the ACFD formula and
related equations, and by the presentation of a theoretical
framework for the development of systematic approximations
to this formula based on range-separation and the quantum
harmonic oscillator model. Finally, we introduce a general
classiﬁcation scheme for such approximations and apply it to
the currently used vdW models, which are then reviewed
individually in detail in the subsequent sections.
4.1. From point polarizability to nonlocal polarizability and
The electrical polarizability, α, indicates the willingness of a
molecule or a material to respond (become polar) under the
inﬂuence of a perturbation of the electric ﬁeld. As such, α is
only one of several commonly used response functions for
describing this behavior, each of which diﬀers by expressing the
perturbation (cause) and polarization (eﬀect) as diﬀerent
quantities. Other typical response functions are the density
response function χ and the relative electric permittivity ε.
Originally, these quantities of classical electrodynamics were
considered as macroscopic, that is, they were “smoothed” over
the rapid variations in the ﬁelds and densities that occur in a
material on the length scale of individual atoms. However, they
can in fact also be used in the microscopic regime, now
phenomenologically describing the behavior of the electrons
that can be fully explained only by quantum mechanics. In its
simplest form, the (point) polarizability αpt determines the
(point) dipole p of a molecule or a crystal unit cell that is
induced by an external electric ﬁeld E,
We will now generalize the point polarizability to a continuous
nonlocal time-dependent tensor quantity, α(r, r′, t, t′), relate
this form to the simple one above and to other response
functions, comment on why this is still not the full picture, and
ﬁnally show why this has anything and everything to do with
vdW interactions.
First, the ﬁeld and the induced dipole may not have the same
direction in a general anisotropic material. In other words, the
induced dipole in some Cartesian direction, pi, may not depend
only on the component of the perturbing ﬁeld in that direction,
Ei, but also on the other components, Ej. This can be captured
mathematically by considering the polarizability as a tensor
quantity α with Cartesian components αij, as was discussed in
Section 2 and shown illustratively in Figures 4 and 5. Second,
we switch to a continuous time-dependent description, where
both the external ﬁeld and the response depend on the position
in space and in time. When a small perturbation in the external
potential Δϕ(r, t) (or the corresponding ﬁeld E(r, t) =
−∇(Δϕ(r, t))) is applied, assuming ﬁxed nuclear charges, the
material responds with a change in the electron (charge)
density Δn(r′, t′). The time-dependent point dipole p(t) = ∫dr
Δn(r, t)r has its continuous analog in the polarization density
P(r, t), which can also be understood as a dipole density, p(t) =
∫dr P(r, t). We note that there is no nontrivial point
counterpart to Δn, because the total charge in a material cannot
be changed by an applied external ﬁeld, ∫dr Δn(r) = 0 (unless
the ﬁeld is strong enough to produce emission, which is a
completely diﬀerent kind of eﬀect). The induced charge density
and polarization density are related by
The response of the material is in general nonlocal; that is, the
polarization here and now does not depend only on the ﬁeld
here and now. This eﬀect can be captured with α being a
nonlocal function. In fact, it is this sole ability of the
polarizability to relate the response at a point r to a
perturbation at a point r′, which enables it to capture the
electron correlation. Thus, in the most general form, the
relationship between the polarization density and the polarizing
electric ﬁeld is
where the integrals are over all space and time and the sum over
Cartesian components can be understood as multiplication of
the matrix α and the vector E. In what follows, we will often
drop the explicit sum and enumeration over Cartesian
components and simply write ∑jαijEj = (αE)i. Equation 3
would thus be written as
Although α is the dipole polarizability, one can recover all the
higher induced multipoles from its fully nonlocal form, by ﬁrst
calculating P, followed by Δn via eq 2, and from that any
induced multipole moment.
Now we follow the path back to the molecular isotropic
polarizability. To do so, one must ﬁrst assume a static electric
ﬁeld, and drop the dependence on time, i.e., E(r). (This will be
discussed in more detail later when discussing the vdW energy.)
Second, one must assume a spatially homogeneous electric
ﬁeld, E(r) = E, for which
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
where we introduced a new quantity, αloc(r), termed here as a
local polarizability. Although αloc is now formally a local
quantity, it eﬀectively contains the integrated nonlocal response
at point r to the (homogeneous) ﬁeld at all points r′. This is
analogous to how the local exchange-correlation energy density
in the homogeneous electron gas is formally a local quantity at
point r, but contains integrated correlation contributions from
all points r′. Integrating over r′ in α(r, r′) reduces the amount
of information contained in α; hence, αloc is no longer able to
completely describe the response of a material to a general
inhomogeneous ﬁeld. Indeed, using αloc to get a full response of
a material subject to an inhomogeneous perturbation would be
an approximation, akin to using the local density approximation
(LDA) in DFT when treating inhomogeneous systems such as
molecules.
Next, if one requires only the knowledge of the total point
dipole of a molecule or material in a homogeneous ﬁeld, then
where αpt is now the anisotropic point polarizability, obtained
by integrating over both r and r′ in α(r, r′), i.e., αpt = ∬dr dr′
α(r, r′). Finally, if one assumes an isotropic material, for which
the response is the same in all directions, αpt,ij = αptδij, then
which brings us back to the point polarizability in eq 1.
The nonlocal polarizability α(r, r′) is related to other
response functions, such as χ or ε by simple formulas, which
mirrors the fact that all these response functions carry
essentially the same information. The density response χ
relates a perturbation in the external potential to a response in
terms of the induced density,
By comparing eqs eqs 8 and 3, and using the relationships
between Δϕ, Δn, E, and p, we arrive at
That is, the density response is the result of the divergence
operator applied to both r and r′ of the nonlocal polarizability.
We note that whereas α is a tensor, χ is only a scalar. As in the
case of Δn, χ has no nontrivial point analog, because ∬dr dr′
χ(r, r′, t, t′) = 0 by charge conservation. For this reason, we will
use α rather than χ throughout this review. The relationship
between the density response χ (and hence the nonlocal
polarizability) and the relative permittivity ε is obtained directly
from their macroscopic deﬁnitions in the context of the
Maxwell equations, and in atomic units (ε0 = 1/4π) reads as
where v(r, r′) = |r −r′|−1 is the Coulomb potential.
Although α, χ, and ε are fully nonlocal time-dependent
response functions, they still do not describe the response of a
material in its full complexity, but only within the linear regime.
In general, the response of a material is a nonlinear functional
of the perturbation, and the response functions presented
above are the corresponding ﬁrst functional derivatives of these
quantities,
This additional complexity is however not signiﬁcant for a
discussion of the electron correlation energy, because the
electron pair density, n2(r, r′), from which the correlation
energy can be calculated directly, can be fully recovered from
the linear response functions only. The fundamental reason for
this is that the Coulomb potential 1/|r −r′| acts between two
points in space, whereas the higher functional derivatives of the
nonlinear response depend on three or more positions in space.
Thus, these quantities essentially carry more information about
the electronic system than is needed for the calculation of the
correlation energy.
Before proceeding further, the ﬁnal step is to transform these
linear response functions from the time domain to the
frequency domain. All approaches discussed in this review are
concerned with systems in equilibrium (stationary states in
quantum mechanics). Then, the response depends only on the
time diﬀerence t −t′. This allows one to Fourier transform the
polarizability α(r, r′, t −t′) to the frequency domain, α(r, r′,
u), with the frequency denoted as u; namely:
The frequency-dependent polarizability α(r, r′, u) is often
called the dynamic polarizability. This transformation introduces a new level of complication by making the polarizability a
complex quantity with real and imaginary components.
However, these two components have a clear physical
interpretation: the real part describes a non-lossy response of
a material and the imaginary part represents dissipation.
4.2. Exact correlation energy from the nonlocal dynamic
polarizability
So far, we have not discussed the role that the nonlocal
dynamic polarizability plays in the description of vdW
interactions. This connection is formulated as an exact
expression for the electron correlation energy that is usually
referred to as the ACFD theorem. We will not repeat its
elaborate derivation here, as it can be found elsewhere,54,123 but
instead cover the physical ideas embodied in the derivation.
The connection between the correlation energy and the
polarizability starts with the realization that the response of a
medium to an electromagnetic ﬁeld, which is captured by the
imaginary part of the dynamic polarizability, leads to dissipation
of the ﬁeld in the medium. The ﬂuctuation−dissipation
theorem then relates the behavior of this dissipation to the
charge density ﬂuctuations that are present in every quantummechanical system even at equilibrium. In essence, this theorem
claims that the relaxation of a system from a perturbed state
behaves according to the same laws both in the case when the
perturbation was caused by an external ﬁeld (such as when
probing a molecule spectroscopically) or when it is an internal
spontaneous ﬂuctuation.124 This enables one to describe the
density ﬂuctuations in terms of dynamic response functions,
such as the polarizability, α(r, r′, u). Once we have the
description of these ﬂuctuations, the electron correlation energy
then follows directly from their Coulomb interaction. In this
way, one obtains the full electron correlation energy, of which
the long-range part is responsible for vdW interactions. The
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
reason why the ACFD framework is especially relevant for the
problem of vdW interactions is that it is possible to construct
good approximations to both α(r, r′, u) and the ACFD
expression itself when one is concerned only with the longrange part of the correlation energy.
In the literature, the ACFD is typically written in terms of the
density response function χ(r, r′, u) (see eqs 8 and 12),
, i )) ( ,
where r, r′ are spatial coordinates, u is the frequency, v(r, r′) =
1/|r −r′| is the Coulomb potential, λ is a coupling strength that
connects the Kohn−Sham (KS) electronic system (λ = 0) to
the real system (λ = 1), χλ is the density response function of
the system at coupling strength λ, and χ0 is simply χλ for λ = 0,
that is, the density response function of the noninteracting KS
system. The integral over λ from 0 to 1 is the adiabaticconnection that gives the other half of the name to the ACFD
formula and originates from the Hellmann−Feynman theorem
applied to the full electronic Hamiltonian with the electronic
repulsion term scaled by λ. The integral of χ over imaginary
frequencies is simply a mathematical trick, and is in fact
equivalent to the integral over real frequencies of the imaginary
part of χ,125
It is the form on the right-hand side which comes directly from
the ﬂuctuation−dissipation theorem, because the imaginary
part of the response function, Im χ, accounts for dissipation.
The KS response, χ0, is directly given by the Adler−Wiser
sum over the KS orbitals ϕμ(r),126,127
where ϵμ are the orbital energies and fμ are the occupation
For the purposes of this review, we will express the ACFD
formula in an equivalent128 form in terms of the polarizability
α(r, r′, u) and the dipole potential T(r, r′),
Using the relationship between α and χ in eq 9, the divergence
theorem,129 and the limit χ(r, r′)v(r, r′) →0 for |r −r′| →∞,
one can transform
where the trace is over Cartesian components of αT. The
ACFD formula can then be rewritten as
, i )) ( ,
Both the interacting αλ and noninteracting α0 are in general
nonlocal functions, but only the former contains information
about the electron correlation. To explain this point, we note
that the statement above, that α0 is the response of the KS
system of noninteracting electrons, does not mean that it is the
response one would get from a KS calculation in the presence
of an electric ﬁeld. Indeed, in such a calculation the density and
hence the mean ﬁeld for the electrons would change under the
inﬂuence of the perturbing electric ﬁeld, so that all correlation
eﬀects described by the exchange-correlation potential would
be propagated into the obtained response. In fact, with the
exact exchange-correlation functional, one would obtain the
exact α1 from such a calculation. On the other hand, the
response described by α0 assumes that the mean ﬁeld for the
electrons (comprising the Hartree and exchange-correlation
potential) is not changed by the perturbing ﬁeld. That is, α0
describes a process where each electron responds individually
to the perturbing ﬁeld while moving within the mean ﬁeld of
the unperturbed electrons. This is a crude approximation that
neglects the essential mechanism in which the response of an
electron is inﬂuenced by the response of all the other electrons.
In the aforementioned KS calculation in the presence of an
electric ﬁeld, this mechanism is actually ensured by the selfconsistent adaptation of the mean ﬁeld, whereas, in the Dyson
approach introduced below, it is achieved by direct coupling of
the electrons. In both cases, the response of an electron takes
into account all the other electrons as it must. An indirect
consequence of the approximations made in α0 is that its spatial
extent and nonlocal character are determined only by singleelectron behavior. As a result, α0 is exponentially localized in
materials with a ﬁnite gap;130 that is, α0(r, r′) goes
exponentially quickly to zero as |r −r′| increases. We note
that this may not be the case for α1 even in such materials,
because the long-range correlation between electrons can
induce long-ranged character in α1. It is this diﬀerence between
αλ and α0 that is exploited by the adiabatic-connection formula
in eq 17 to obtain the correlation energy.
The interacting polarizability αλ(r, r′,u) can be expressed in
terms of α0 by means of the self-consistent Dyson equation,
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
where Txc,λ(r, r′, u) = T(r, r′) −λ−1∇r∇r′ f xc,λ(r, r′, u) is the
dipole potential accompanied by the exchange-correlation
kernel f xc,λ(r, r′, u) = δvxc,λ(r, u)/δn(r′, u), ⟨·⟩denotes the
use of the shorthand implicit notation for the spatial integrals,
and the dependence on the frequency has been omitted for
clarity. The polarizability of the real system is expressed here as
an inﬁnite sum over progressively more coupled terms built
from the polarizability of the noninteracting Kohn−Sham
system. Straightforward use of the ACFD formula together with
the Dyson equation to calculate the correlation energy from α0
is impossible due to the lack of knowledge of the exact
exchange-correlation kernel f xc. This quantity is notoriously
more diﬃcult to approximate than the exchange-correlation
functional itself.
The ACFD formula in eq 17 and the Dyson equation in eq
18 are the two basic building blocks for the ﬁrst-principles
description of vdW interactions. The latter is essentially the
exact expression for the response of a material, while the former
uses this response to give the exact correlation energy. So far,
we have discussed an exact theoretical framework without any
approximations. Now, we connect the ACFD framework to
DFT by introducing new eﬀective quantities. In a typical DFT
calculation, the short-range part of the electron correlation is
obtained from a semilocal or hybrid density functional.131,132
However, the ACFD formula gives the total correlation energy,
including the short-range part, and if it was used in its full form,
the short-range part would be double-counted. To solve this
issue, the ACFD expression can be range-separated; that is, the
double integral over all space in eq 17 can be split into two
where f(R) is some range-separating function for which f(0) = 0
and f(R) →1 as R →∞. The ﬁrst and second terms on the
right-hand side correspond to the short- and long-range parts,
respectively. Such a range separation usually leads to
approximate approaches as described below; however, despite
being arbitrary, it is in principle exact if the treatment of the two
parts is done consistently. For a more rigorous introduction of
the range separation, see refs 133 and 134. The partition splits
the electron correlation energy into two parts,
The short-range part, Ec,sr, can then be approximated with a KS
calculation, while the long-range correlation energy, Ec,lr, is
given by the long-range part of the ACFD formula, that is, by
eq 17 with ∬dr dr′ replaced with ∬dr dr′ f(|r −r|).
We note at this point that we do not identically equate the
long-range correlation energy with vdW dispersion interactions.
Whereas the former is uniquely deﬁned by specifying a
particular range separation, the latter has no formal nonperturbational deﬁnition. With that said, however, the overlap
of the two phenomena is large and it is safe to say that the longrange electron correlation provides the microscopic explanation
of vdW interactions. It is in this context that we present vdW
methods as methods for calculating the long-range correlation
energy. We also stress that, at large enough distances, the
contribution of long-range electron correlation to the electronic
energy can be understood fully in terms of vdW interactions (or
corresponding retarted Casimir interactions). In particular,
although static (left−right, on-site) electron correlation is
manifest at large separations and is only partially captured by
semilocal density functionals, it is nevertheless caused by the
short-range part of the Coulomb potential. In other words,
issues with static correlation would persist in a hypothetical
world in which the long-ranged Coulomb potential would be
replaced with a short-ranged Yukawa potential.
The range-separating function f must depend on the
underlying density functional that is used for the short-range
correlation; more precisely, f must depend on the range to
which the functional is able to capture the electron correlation.
In addition, the range separation must certainly also be systemdependent, as can be seen from the following examples. First,
consider the case of the homogeneous electron gas, for which
all LDA-based semilocal functionals give the exact energy; that
is, range separation is unnecessary in this case. In contrast, in
the case of nonoverlapping fragments, no such functional can
capture the electron correlation between these entities.
However, neither the functional nor the system dependence
are completely known or understood theoretically, and the
particular form of the range-separating function is thus a matter
of a long and unsettled debate in the literature. We will discuss
the various approaches to this range separation in the respective
sections below.
In analogy to the ACFD formula, the Dyson screening eq 18
can also be split into short- and long-range parts, albeit in a less
straightforward manner. First, the coupling potential, Txc,λ, can
be split as follows:
where f is again some (in general diﬀerent) range-separating
function, and we replaced the screened dipole potential in the
long-range part with the bare dipole potential, since it is
assumed that the range of the exchange-correlation kernel is
shorter than that of the range-separating function f. This
separation splits the n-th term in the Dyson equation into 2n
terms, each of which is formed by some particular combination
of Tsr and Tlr.
Now we contract all the short-range segments ...α0Tsrα0...
contained in these terms and introduce an eﬀective short-range
screened polarizability αsr(r, r′) such that the Dyson equation
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
Here, only the long-range coupling is considered explicitly via
Tlr, whereas the short-range coupling enters implicitly in the
eﬀective short-range screened polarizability αsr.
The range separation of both the energy in the ACFD
expression and α in the Dyson equation enables us to combine
these two equations, after performing one ﬁnal simpliﬁcation.
The functions used for range separating both of these quantities
should in principle be diﬀerent. In the case of the energy, the
separation should be governed by the underlying semilocal or
hybrid density functional. In the case of the polarizability, the
separation should be constructed based on the model for αsr(r,
r′). However, we will invoke a ﬁnal approximation here, done
by all vdW approaches known to us, by equating these two
range-separating functions. In principle, one can always
construct a model for αsr(r, r′) such that these two functions
match. Inserting eq 22 into the long-range part of eq 17 and
integrating over λ, we arrive at
Starting at second order, eq 23 expresses the long-range
electron correlation energy as an inﬁnite sum over all orders of
the long-range coupling of the short-range screened polarizability. To clarify the various shorthands, the lowest order
contribution Ec,lr
(2), written out in full form, is
The structure of the individual terms in eq 23 is illustrated in
Figure 6b for the case of the benzene dimer. These terms can
be viewed as closed chains (loops) of quantum-mechanical
Figure 6. Schematic representation of the diﬀerent types of interaction terms present in exact and approximate models for van der Waals interactions
as shown for the benzene dimer. (a) The legend for the individual quantities that are present in the diﬀerent interaction terms. In the left column
from top, the long-range dipole potential Tlr(r,r′) (eq 21), its square, and the coarse-grained long-range dipole potential Tlr,AB (Section 4.4.1). In the
right from top, the short-range screened nonlocal polarizability αsr(r, r′) (eq 22), the local eﬀective polarizability αeff(r) (eq 25), and the coarsegrained local eﬀective polarizability αeff,A (Section 4.7.2). The clouds around αeff hint at the eﬀective spatial extent of the local polarizability. (b)
Examples of terms in the formally exact many-body expansion of the long-range correlation energy in eq 23. Points in space interact via chained
short-range polarizabilities and long-range dipolar interactions. The red and orange colors distinguish examples of the second- and third-order terms,
respectively. αsr(r, r′) is largest when spatially localized on atoms and decays exponentially (in nonzero gap materials) with distance (see Figure 4c).
On the other hand, αlr is damped at short distances, but decays only polynomially with distance. The terms in the ﬁgure illustrate contributions not
only from atoms, but also from bonds and even the tails of atomic densities (Section 4.3). (c) Examples of long-range correlation energy terms
captured by nonlocal density functionals (Section 4.6). In this case, only second-order terms are accounted for and the short-range nonlocal
polarizability is approximated by a density-derived eﬀective local polarizability αeff(r) (Section 4.3). (d) Examples of terms in a coarse-grained version
of the full many-body expansion of the long-range correlation energy (Section 4.8). In this case, the second- (red) and third-order (orange) terms are
depicted. Here, the interactions terms occur only between whole atoms.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
events, in which a spontaneous ﬂuctuation at some point
generates a perturbation at another, which produces a response
at yet another, which again generates a perturbation, etc., until
some ﬂuctuation interacts with the initial one. The closed form
of these terms corresponds to the fact that these events are not
triggered by an external perturbing ﬁeld, but are spontaneous
internal ﬂuctuations.
Equation 23 represents a general framework in which one
can discuss all major vdW-inclusive methods in terms of the
various realizations and approximations of this expression.
When assessing a given vdW model, one can start with a
discussion of how αsr and Tlr are constructed, followed by a
discussion of how are they coupled. The fundamental
motivation for the separation of the whole problem into
short- and long-range components is that the explicit coupling
T is relatively easy to handle at long range and the properties of
a material captured by α can be reasonably modeled from the
electron density at short range, as we show in the next section.
4.3. Local eﬀective polarizability from the electron density
In this section, we argue that it is reasonable to approximate
αsr(r, r′) by its local counterpart αeff(r). We already introduced
a local polarizability, αloc(r) = ∫dr′ α(r, r′), which captures the
local response to a homogeneous perturbation at all points. The
main diﬀerence between αloc(r) and αeff(r) is that the former is
obtained from the full α(r, r′), whereas the latter comes from
αsr(r, r′), which is α0(r, r′) that was screened at short range
only. As argued above, α0 has mostly local character in ﬁnitegap systems, which implies that αsr(r, r′) is also mostly shortranged. That is, αsr(r, r′) describes only the response at points r
that are near the perturbing ﬁeld at point r′. It is then
reasonable to assume that the electric ﬁeld is approximately
homogeneous in this local neighborhood M(r) surrounding r,
and hence the response can be well described with a local
eﬀective polarizability given by
This integration can be limited to the local neighborhood
because αsr(r, r′) goes quickly to zero for large |r −r′|. Since
αeff only depends on the local properties of a material, it turns
out that reasonably good approximations for this quantity can
be constructed using the electron density, its derivatives, or
other density-derived quantities, which essentially was the
motivation for range-separating the Dyson equation in the ﬁrst
place. In addition, the eﬀective local polarizability also
signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the Dyson equation and hence our
central correlation energy expression, eq 23. Here, αeff(r) must
enter these equations as δ(r −r′)αeff(r′), where δ is the Dirac
delta function. For example, the second-order contribution in
eq 24 reduces in the following way after the substitution of
Several distinct regions of the electron density can be
considered when constructing a density model for αeff(r),
which may inﬂuence diﬀerent types of materials as discussed in
Section 2. The inner-shell electrons are relatively unresponsive,
yet they cannot be safely neglected in all circumstances,
especially for heavier atoms. Most of the response comes from
the valence electrons, and hence, a good model must capture
the changes in the response associated with the formation of
covalent bonds. In this regard, the tails of the electron density
contain indirect information about the unoccupied electronic
states, and hence, they are useful in models of αeff. Ionic
(charge-transfer) states are reﬂected in the depletion and
accumulation of the electron density and its derivatives with
respect to neutral atoms. In all these examples, the response can
be in principle captured well by a semilocal model for αeff, and
the diﬃculties lie mostly in constructing a model that is general
enough to describe all the cases as well as the continuous
transitions between them on the same footing.
4.3.1. Anisotropy of αeff(r). The (point) polarizability of a
molecule is in general an anisotropic quantity. A well-known
example is the benzene molecule, in which the in-plane
components of the polarizability are approximately two times
larger than the out-of-plane component (see Figure 5a).
Because this quantity is coupled with the highly anisotropic
dipole potential Tlr, a proper account of the anisotropy in the
polarizability is crucial for an accurate estimate of the longrange correlation energy Ec,lr. In the context of eq 23, the
contribution from the anisotropy emerges in two distinct ways.
First, αsr(r, r′) (or αeff(r)) introduces the anisotropy directly
into the expression for Ec,lr. This aspect of the anisotropy is
neglected in most vdW models. This approximation enables
one to write the polarizability as a scalar, αeff(r) ≈αeff(r), which
simpliﬁes the equations by making αeff and Tlr commute. For
example, the second-order contribution to Ec,lr in eq 24 reduces
to the familiar 1/R6 dependence on the distance R=|r −r′|:
where we introduced
( , i ) ( , i )
which is a generalization of the Casimir−Polder integral, and f
is the damping function used for range-separating Tlr = f(R)T
(see eq 21). C6(r, r′) deﬁned in this way is just a more general
form of the familiar atomic C6,AB coeﬃcients.
Second, the anisotropy is also accounted for automatically by
the long-range coupling in eq 23. This follows from the Dyson
screening (eq 18), which was incorporated into the ACFDT
formula (eq 17). In this regard, αλ obtained from the Dyson
equation can be strongly anisotropic even if α0 was isotropic.
4.3.2. Harmonic oscillator model of the dynamic
response. The exact dependence of the polarizability on the
frequency is in general unknown. Here, we brieﬂy introduce the
model system of a quantum harmonic oscillator (QHO), which
is used to a diﬀerent degree by many vdW approaches in
modeling the frequency dependence of the local eﬀective
polarizability. Because of the harmonic force and associated
quadratic potential, the QHO is the simplest model for
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
studying small perturbations of a system in equilibrium. In our
case, the equilibrium system is the electronic ground state, or
the ground-state electron density, and the small perturbations
are the quantum-mechanical charge ﬂuctuations. The QHO
also happens to be a quantum system with equidistant energy
levels, which makes it a perfect tool for “counting” electronic
excitations, which in turn describe all response properties of
molecules and materials. It is for both these intertwined reasons
that QHOs are such a useful model for describing vdW
interactions, among others.
Many properties of a QHO can be derived analytically. In
particular, the dynamic (point) polarizability of a QHO is
where q is the charge of the oscillator, m is its mass, ω is its
excitation (characteristic) frequency, and δ is an inﬁnitesimally
small number. The oscillator may be considered also
inﬁnitesimal, in which case m and q would be inﬁnitesimals
dm and dq, respectively. The inﬁnitesimal imaginary part in the
denominator is necessary to satisfy the Kramers−Kronig causal
identities for response functions, and its physical meaning is
simply that the absorption spectrum is a Dirac delta function
located at ω (in the imaginary part of αQHO). In other words,
the QHO only absorbs electromagnetic radiation corresponding to its own excitation frequency. Furthermore, this
inﬁnitesimal imaginary part disappears in the integral over the
imaginary frequency iu, as can be seen for example in the form
of eq 14 for αQHO
The QHO model, with its single-frequency absorption
spectrum, is insuﬃcient to describe the full spectrum of a real
atom. However, a frequency integral of such a complicated
spectrum (imaginary part of α) is a single number, and as such
can be eﬀectively captured by an integral of a simple spectrum
characterized by a single frequency. The choice of such an
eﬀective frequency necessarily depends on the particular form
of the integrand, and the use of a single eﬀective frequency for
all cases constitutes the so-called Unsöld approximation.135 For
instance, consider the generalization of the Casimir−Polder
integral for the C6 coeﬃcient in eq 27. This expression
demonstrates that the second-order correlation energy between
two atoms (with complicated absorption spectra) can be
captured exactly by the interaction between two QHOs (with
single-frequency spectra) as long as the pairs of atoms and
QHOs have the same C6 coeﬃcient. The C6 coeﬃcient for two
identical QHOs depends only on the static dipole polarizability
and the characteristic excitation frequency:
A useful combination rule holds for the C6 coeﬃcient of two
QHOs A and B (with diﬀerent sets of parameters q, ω, and m):
where C6,AA are the C6 coeﬃcients between two identical
oscillators A from eq 31 and αA(0) are the corresponding static
dipole polarizabilities. However, using eq 32 for combining the
C6 coeﬃcients of real atoms is precisely an example of the
Unsöld approximation, as the eﬀective frequencies needed to
exactly capture the integrals in eqs 31 and 32 would in general
be diﬀerent. On the other hand, it has been shown that this
approximation leads to a mean absolute relative error of only
3% in the C6 coeﬃcients for heteronuclear atomic pairs.60
4.4. Classiﬁcation of approximate van der Waals methods
Here, we introduce a general classiﬁcation of vdW methods
based on two independent approximations to the general
expression for Ec,lr in eq 23. The ﬁrst one involves coarsegraining spatial quantities such as α(r, r′), αeff(r), or T(r, r′).
The second approximation involves truncating the inﬁnite
series, or the many-body expansion, in eq 23 to some ﬁnite
order. Methods that do not use either of these two
approximations (but use others instead) comprise the class of
models based on the random-phase approximation (see Section
4.5). Nonlocal density functionals, which will be discussed in
Section 4.6, constitute a class of truncated, but non−coarsegrained methods. The many-body dispersion (MBD) framework of coupled harmonic oscillators represents a class of
coarse-grained, but nontruncated models (see Section 4.8).
Finally, both the coarse-graining and truncation approximations
are used in the popular class of pairwise methods (see Section
4.4.1. Coarse-graining the ACFD formula and Dyson
equation. Each of the spatial integrals (over r and r′) in the
ACFD expression in eq 17 can be partitioned into N parts with
the use of a set of functions, wA(r), which satisfy ∑A = 1
1 at each point r. When these functions are spatially localized,
they naturally deﬁne a set of N fragments. Using such a
partitioning scheme breaks the ACFD formula into N2 terms,
, i )) ( ,
One may now coarse-grain the two-point dipole potential,
T(r,r′), via
in which T(RA, RB) is the dipole potential between the centers
RA and RB of fragments A and B. Such an approximation then
enables one to reduce the spatial integrals in the ACFD
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
where we deﬁned αAB = ∬dr dr′ α(r, r′) wA(r) wB(r′) and TAB
= T(RA, RB), which are now coarse-grained versions of α(r, r′)
and T(r, r′), respectively. A simple, yet illustrative example of
such a coarse-graining procedure is any numerical, real-space
grid implementation of the ACFD formula, in which RA are
simply the grid points. In this case, the error associated with
approximating T(r, r′) with TAB would be considered a
numerical error arising from the use of a grid that is too coarse.
In the case of vdW models, however, one is only concerned
with the long-range part of T, Tlr, and hence the fragments A
can be much larger than grid points, while still maintaining a
reasonable level of accuracy. Here, the fragments are typically
chosen to be atoms, whereby an eﬀective atoms-in-molecules
partitioning scheme wA(r) is used; however, other fragmentation schemes can also be used with good results. Using an
analogy from electrostatics, we now connect the coarse-graining
to the standard multipole expansion procedure. The electrostatic interaction energy of two charge distributions, nA(r), is
. The same
distributions,
r r P r T r r P r
. En−n can be expanded
into the multipole series q−q, q−p, p−p, p−Q, etc., where q, p,
and Q denote monopole (charge), dipole, and quadrupole
moments, respectively. Likewise, the dipole distribution
interaction energy EP−P can also be expanded into an analogous
series starting with the p−p term. Here, we consider only
charge distributions nA(r) that arise from dipole distributions
PA(r) via nA(r) = −∇·PA(r) and are therefore characterized by
zero monopole (charge) moments. It then follows that the
energies En−n and EP−P, as well as their multipole expansions,
would in fact be identical. Within this context, the coarsegraining of eq 34 simply corresponds to considering only the
p−p term in the multipole expansion of EP−P.
The feasibility of such an approximation is determined by the
spatial extent of each wA(r) around RA relative to the distances
between the fragments. When the fragments are atoms, the
issue of considering only the dipole−dipole term is a wellknown and well-analyzed approximation. Some models
improve upon this approximation by including higher-order
terms from the multipole expansion, such as the dipole−
quadrupole or quadrupole−quadrupole terms. However, the
multipole expansion of Tlr(r, r′) = f(|r −r′|)T(r, r′) is not
simply the multipole expansion of T(r, r′) multiplied by the
damping function f(|r −r′|). Therefore, the coupling of the
higher-order moments is not separable from the damping
function itself; rather, it can be partially and eﬀectively captured
in f, as this function often contains some empiricism anyway.
An alternative path to mitigate this error would simply involve
the use of a ﬁner graining for α(r, r′). This returns to the fact
that the fully nonlocal dipole polarizability is suﬃcient for an
exact description of the long-range electron correlation.
As was done for the ACFD formula, one can also coarsegrain the Dyson equation in eq 18:
where the meaning of ⟨·⟩has been extended to denote also
implicit summation over fragments in addition to implicit
integration over space. As a result, the many-body expansion of
Ec,lr in eq 23 can also be coarse-grained,
The coarse-grained versions of these equations will serve as a
basis for discussing the pairwise and many-body dispersion
vdW methods. We note that the only approximation made so
far is the replacement of the full multipole expansion with the
dipole−dipole term. As long as all short-range correlation
eﬀects are properly accounted for in αsr,AB, there is no reduction
in generality in this regard.
4.4.2. Truncating the many-body expansion of the
long-range correlation energy. In eq 23, Ec,lr is expanded in
the number of interactions of αsr via the coupling potential Tlr.
The second-order (i.e., the lowest-order) contribution corresponds to two interactions, the third-order contribution to
three interactions, etc. These interactions occur between bodies
(atoms, molecules, points in space), which motivates the
terminology of two-, three-, and four-body contributions to the
interaction energy. We point out that the correspondence
between the m-body and n-th order contributions is not
straightforward. Starting at n = 4, some terms at n-th order
describe interactions between m < n bodies and hence
contribute to the m-body interaction energy. For instance, the
term at fourth order contains four Tlr between two bodies, and
so contributes to the 2-body interaction energy (at fourth
order). On the other hand, the lowest-order contribution to a
given n-body interaction energy is typically the largest, which
justiﬁes the colloquial equivalence of these two distinct
expansions.
The lowest-order contribution to Ec,lr corresponds to two Tlr
(e.g., red lines in Figure 6b). The higher-order contributions in
eq 23 tend to cancel out in weakly polarizable systems or for
symmetrical geometries, which is the basis for pairwise schemes
and nonlocal density functionals. In general, the quality of this
second-order approximation is diﬃcult to assess; however,
three universal factors can be distinguished. First, the increasing
number of the interactions Tlr decreases the magnitude of the
higher-order terms. This eﬀect dominates at long range, where
Tlr is small, and indeed the asymptotic interaction between
ﬁnite bodies corresponds to the second-order truncation.
However, this requires that the correlation is treated to inﬁnite
order within the interacting bodies to obtain their respective
nonlocal polarizabilities. Second, the increasing number of
terms within each order may increase the total magnitude of
the higher-order contributions. This eﬀect is important in larger
molecular systems and materials. , and hence the relative number of terms in subsequent
orders grows as O(N).) The third universal factor is the
symmetry and dimensionality of the system. Whereas the
second-order terms always lower the total energy of the system
(i.e., stabilize), the signs of the individual higher-order terms
have an angular dependence. In high-symmetry crystals with
simple unit cells and lattices, the higher-order terms tend to
cancel out, leading to higher-order contributions that may be
collectively negligible. In contrast, this is not the case in lowdimensional materials, in which nontrivial behavior in Ec,lr and
response properties can be observed.
In the present context, the often used Axilrod−Teller−Muto
(ATM) three-body potential constitutes a third-order contribution to Ec,lr. The previous discussion makes it clear that
while such a correction may extend the applicability of a
second-order model, it does not provide a universal description
of vdW interactions. A more detailed discussion of these terms
can be found in Section 4.8, which deals with the many-body
dispersion framework.
4.5. Methods based on the random-phase approximation
Here, we discuss electronic structure methods within the
ACFD formalism that do not coarse-grain nor truncate the
expression for the correlation energy, but work with α0 in the
molecular orbital basis as obtained directly from a KS
calculation via eq 15. These methods construct a model for
the nonlocal polarizability in a way that is also applicable for the
short-range correlation energy, which distinguishes them from
the explicit models for Ec,lr discussed in the next three sections.
For the purpose of this review, we discuss these methods only
from the point of view of long-range electron correlation and
refer the reader elsewhere for a more general exposition.136,137
A starting point for the methods of this section is the
random-phase approximation (RPA), in which the exchangecorrelation kernel f xc(r, r′, u) = δvxc(r, u)/δn(r′, u) in the
Dyson equation (eq 18) is set to zero. Its name comes from the
original derivation of the approximation, in which the
ﬂuctuations of electrons are assumed to be inﬂuenced only
by in-phase Coulomb contributions, whereas out-of-phase
terms are considered to be random and hence cancel out.
This was later shown to be equivalent to the f xc = 0 deﬁnition in
DFT. The application of RPA to the Dyson equation leads to a
conceptually simple method for the electron correlation energy,
which amounts to evaluating the expression eq 23 with αsr and
Tlr replaced by α0 and T, respectively, that is
Using the explicit Adler−Wiser expression in eq 15 for the bare
response in the χ-representation, this expression can be
evaluated numerically in a straightforward manner, yielding
the total electron correlation energy.108 In DFT, α0 is obtained
from a KS calculation carried out with some approximate
density functional, and hence is only an approximation to the
true α0 that would be obtained with the exact functional. The
remainder of the total electronic energy is usually taken as the
sum of the kinetic, nuclear-electron attraction, Hartree, and
exact-exchange terms, which are themselves approximate due to
the fact that they were obtained from KS orbitals based on an
approximate density functional.
RPA treats not only the long-range but also the short-range
electron correlation explicitly via the coupling potential, both
on the level of the energy, Esr, in the ACFD formula, and the
level of the response, αsr, in the Dyson equation. This raises
two issues. First, the short-range correlation energy may be
inadequate, leading to an incorrect description of vdW systems
in equilibrium geometries, where this quantity plays a
signiﬁcant role. Second, the fully coupled αλ may lack
contributions from fxc at short range, leading to inaccurate
molecular polarizabilities and hence incorrect long-range vdW
coeﬃcients. Below, we discuss three diﬀerent approaches to
mitigate these issues.
4.5.1. Range-separated random-phase approximation. The ﬁrst attempt at correcting the behavior of RPA at
short range was given by Kurth and Perdew.138 They suggested
a correction to RPA, termed RPA+, given by
RPA is the RPA correlation energy, Ec
GGA@RPA is the
correlation energy calculated with a special GGA designed for
capturing Ec
RPA, and Ec
GGA is the correlation energy from a
standard GGA. The idea of the RPA+ approach is to remove
the incorrect short-range part of the correlation energy from
RPA with the use of a special GGA, and then reintroduce a
better approximation to it using a standard GGA, such as
PBE.139 The special GGA designed for this purpose was
constructed by replacing the LDA part of the PBE correlation
functional with an LDA parametrized to reproduce the RPA
correlation energy of the homogeneous electron gas. This was
later reﬁned by specially constructing also the density-gradient
dependent part using additional properties of the short-range
behavior of RPA.140 Here, the short-range correlation energy,
Ec,sr, comes from a GGA density functional, while the RPA is
used only for the long-range part, Ec,lr. However, the range
separation is accomplished only approximately using Ec
and depends on how well this GGA functional describes the
short-range part of RPA. The issue of explicit range separation
of RPA was later attacked by Toulouse et al.134 In their work, a
range-separated version of the KS scheme was used, in which
only the short-range part of the electron correlation was
included in the exchange-correlation potential for the electrons,
while the long-range part was treated explicitly via the longrange version of the ACFD formula. In such a scheme, the long
range Dyson equation in eq 22 is essentially solved with α0
instead of αsr; that is, the long range is treated as in RPA, but at
short-range, it is assumed that v(r, r′) and f xc(r, r′) partially
cancel each other.
4.5.2. Approximate exchange-correlation kernels. In a
diﬀerent approach, the ACFD framework is used in full without
range separation, but a suitable approximation to f xc is
constructed. A straightforward nontrivial approximation can
be obtained from any density functional Exc[n] via
where the kernel is approximated as local and independent of
frequency. This so-called adiabatic local density approximation
(ALDA) violates several known limits of f xc, which make it
unsuitable for use in the ACFD formula. Olsen and Thygesen
analyzed the ALDA in the homogeneous electron gas in
reciprocal space and noticed that whereas ALDA provides a
good description of the small-q (large-wavelength) behavior of
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
the electron correlation hole, it decays too slowly to zero for
large q compared to the exact behavior. This observation lead
them to introduce the renormalized ALDA (rALDA) by
modifying the dependence of f xc in ALDA on large q.141−143 By
transforming back to real space and generalizing to
inhomogeneous densities, this deﬁnes a universal approximation to f xc and hence a method for obtaining the electron
correlation energy via the ACFD formula. Compared to RPA,
the short-range part of the coupling in the Dyson equation is
described more realistically here, which propagates into a better
description of both the short-range correlation energy and the
short-range eﬀects in the polarizability.
A more straightforward, but computationally more demanding approach is to approximate f xc with the exact exchange
kernel, f x, leading to the so-called tdEXX method.144,145 The
development of more accurate and sophisticated kernels is the
domain of TD-DFT and the associated study of response
properties, which is beyond the scope of this review. For a way
to make these approaches faster and hence more easily
applicable to studying vdW interactions, as well as for an
overview of this rich ﬁeld, see, for example, ref 146 and the refs
4.5.3. Renormalized perturbation theory to second
order. Yet a diﬀerent path to ﬁxing the issues of RPA comes
from the standard many-body perturbation theory for electrons.
The Møller−Plesset correlation energy at second order (MP2)
consists of the Coulomb and exchange terms, of which only the
former is signiﬁcant at all ranges (decays polynomially with
distance) whereas the latter is signiﬁcant only at short range
(decays exponentially). In this context, RPA can be described as
an inﬁnite-order sum of the so-called ring excitations, of which
the Coulomb term of MP2 is the ﬁrst one (the higher orders
are combinations of the single Coulomb term). This
renormalization of the Coulomb term resolves many of the
deﬁciencies of MP2, such as its inapplicability to zero-gap
systems and its tendency to overestimate Ec,lr. In the same
breath, RPA neglects exchange eﬀects, which are partially
captured at the MP2 level, which can lead to issues at short
range, where these eﬀects become important. The second-order
screened exchange (SOSEX) is constructed in a similar way as
RPA by renormalizing the exchange part of MP2, that is, by
summing the corresponding type of the perturbation term to
inﬁnite order. Together, RPA and SOSEX form a method that
extends well beyond MP2 via renormalization of both the
Coulomb and exchange terms, resulting, for instance, in a
description of one-electron systems free of self-correlation.
A renormalized form of the full second-order perturbation
theory (rPT2) can be obtained by adding the ﬁrst-order
perturbation term, the so-called single-excitation (SE)
correction.147 This term is trivially zero in the standard MPn
scheme, because Brillouin’s theorem guarantees that single
excitations of the HF orbitals do not contribute to the
correlation energy. In a KS-based calculation, however, this
term is required because the KS orbitals are not stationary with
respect to the RPA and SOSEX energy expression. In addition,
the SE correction was found to approximately compensate for
the diﬀerence between the exact exchange energies evaluated
with HF and KS orbitals. In analogy to RPA and SOSEX, the
SE term can be summed to inﬁnite order, leading to the
renormalized SE (rSE) correction. The resulting rPT2 method
combines the rSE, RPA, and SOSEX schemes.148 Klimeš et al.
derived an alternative formulation of rSE, in which the singles
excitation energies are taken from the GW approximation.149 A
detailed discussion of many diﬀerent ﬂavors of RPA-like
approximations can be found in other publications.150−152
4.6. Nonlocal density functionals
Nonlocal density functionals derive their name from their twopoint dependence on the electron density via
( ) ( ) [ ]( ,
where Φ is a so-called nonlocal kernel, constructed to capture
the long-range part of the correlation energy. The ﬁrst universal
functional of this type, called vdW-DF, was derived by Dion et
al.35 as a culmination of the body of work established by
Langreth and Lundqvist throughout the course of three decades
(for a detailed discussion of the vdW-DF class of nonlocal
functionals, see refs 38, 153, and 154. We start this section with
a review of the general approximations to the ACFD formula
leading to nonlocal functionals and continue with a detailed
description of particular functionals, including the vdW-DF
family. The section concludes with a discussion of the
relationships between nonlocal functionals and other vdW
Nonlocal density functionals represent the class of noncoarse-grained and second-order truncated approximations to
the ACFD formula. In addition, they use an isotropic densitydependent model for the eﬀective polarizability αeff which was
deﬁned in Section 4.3.1. We start the discussion by rewriting
the second-order contribution to Ec,lr from eq 27 in a diﬀerent
[ ]( , i )
[ ]( , i ) [ ](
where the functional dependence on the electron density is
explicitly denoted in all relevant quantities and the rangeseparating function f is generalized to depend on the frequency.
Examples of the interaction terms under the spatial integral sign
are depicted in Figure 6c. Here, pairs of inﬁnitesimal
ﬂuctuations with properties described by αeff are correlated
via the coupling potential f 2/R6.
The use of αeff is the ﬁrst of two local approximations used by
all nonlocal functionals. As described in Section 4.3, αeff(r) is
the local counterpart of the short-range nonlocal polarizability
αsr(r, r′) and in general can be constructed as an integral over
the local neighborhood surrounding r as in eq 25. We note that
eq 42 does not specify the explicit functional form for the
dependence of αeff on the electron density. In this sense, the
second local approximation commonly enters via the models
used for αeff(r), which depend only on the electron density and
its gradient,
Because the polarizability in these methods is also
approximated as isotropic, the directional information in the
density gradient is not used; this leads to the further
simpliﬁcation that only the norm of the density gradient enters
the formulas: αeff[n](r) ≈αeff(n(r),|∇n(r)|). This leaves
potential room for further improvement, as the density gradient
in fact does contain information about the directionality of
bonds, for example, and hence the diﬀerential response of the
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
electron density parallel and perpendicular to them (see Figure
5 in Section 2 and the discussion there).
The density gradient is the key ingredient for a successful
density-functional model of the local eﬀective polarizability.
Although early nonlocal functionals did not depend explicitly
on the density gradient, even these approaches used this
quantity to determine hard cutoﬀs for the spatial integrals in eq
42 when treating nonoverlapping fragments.155 The usefulness
of the gradient is apparent from the fact that the ratio of the
density gradient to the density in the density tail region of an
atom or a molecule determines their ionization potential. The
ionization potential is approximately proportional to the
average excitation energy in the Unsöld approximation, which
is in turn inversely proportional to the polarizability, thus
establishing the connection. The dependence on the density
gradient enables αeff[n] to capture electron correlation eﬀects in
the neighborhood of a given point, similar to how GGA
functionals achieve the same compared to LDA. From this
analogy, a natural idea is to extend the current functionals for
αeff to depend on the kinetic energy density in the spirit of
meta-GGA density functionals; such functionals have not been
suggested so far.
The dependence of αeff(r, iu) on the frequency in all nonlocal
functionals is approximated with that of an inﬁnitesimal
harmonic oscillator:
where dq = ndr and it is assumed that the ratio q/m
corresponds to that of an electron, that is, it is equal to 1 (in
atomic units). Here, the characteristic frequency ω corresponds
to the plasma frequency, the frequency of the macroscopic
oscillations in a homogeneous electron gas of the same density.
Using this form for αeff[n], the correlation energy expression in
eq 42 can be recast into the standard form for a nonlocal
functional in eq 41 with the nonlocal kernel
where the diﬀerences between distinct nonlocal functionals
reside in the speciﬁc functional forms of ω[n] and f[n].
4.6.1. A simple nonlocal functional. Vydrov and van
Voorhis designed a simple model for the local eﬀective
frequency ω[n] and the range-separating function f[n], which
together form the VV10 nonlocal functional. Here, we provide
an alternative derivation of the VV10 nonlocal functional
equivalent to the original one. In VV10, ω[n](r) is
approximated with156
where C is an empirical parameter ﬁtted to a reference set of C6
coeﬃcients. There are three distinct ideas used in this
expression. First, the 4πn term is motivated by the
homogeneous electron gas. Second, the factor 1/3 comes
from the Clausius−Mossotti equation and makes the expression
exact for the limiting case of a jellium sphere in a vacuum.
Third, the gradient term is constructed as a local eﬀective
correction to the characteristic frequency due to the nonzero
gap between occupied and unoccupied orbitals. In the density
tails of atoms, the gradient term goes to a constant which
smoothly damps the polarizability expression and avoids the
need for hard cut-oﬀs.
The speciﬁcation of ω[n] already fully describes the
asymptotic behavior of the functional, leaving out only the
short-range behavior. The construction of the range-separating
function f in VV10 is motivated by considering the overlap of
the two oscillators at short distances, which eﬀectively
attenuates their mutual interaction. This is modeled with a
second pair of oscillators in which ω depends on the distance
between them and increases in such a way that they in fact
never overlap. The damping mechanism can be then written as
a range-separating function of the form
where α̃eff(r, iu, R) is the polarizability of an oscillator modiﬁed
by the presence of the other oscillator at distance R. The Rdependent term in ω contains the second empirical parameter
of VV10, b, which eﬀectively controls the onset of the range
separation. This parameter is ﬁtted to reference interaction
energies and is speciﬁc for each semilocal functional, with which
the VV10 functional is combined.157 The two empirical
parameters, C and b, control two distinct properties of VV10:
C controls the local eﬀective response, and b controls the range
separation. The VV10 nonlocal kernel was later slightly
modiﬁed by Sabatini et al. to enable eﬃcient evaluation in a
plane-wave basis.158 Two reparametrizations of VV10 targeted
at binding in layered materials were presented by Björkman.159,160
4.6.2. vdW-DF functional. We start the discussion of the
vdW-DF functional with the model it uses for ω[n]:
where ϵxc is the exchange-correlation energy density and Z is a
constant.161 The ﬁrst equality is obtained by using ω[n] for a
calculation of the total exchange-correlation energy of a slowly
varying electron gas. In vdW-DF, ϵxc is then approximated with
a GGA functional. The GGA functional is used here only for
the parametrization of ω[n], and its choice is completely
independent from the functional used for calculating the shortrange exchange-correlation energy. Despite ω[n] in vdW-DF
having a completely diﬀerent form from that of VV10, both
functionals feature a single parameter which controls the
essential density gradient term. In vdW-DF, however, the value
of this parameter is determined from ﬁrst-principles arguments.
We ﬁnd it remarkable that the functional forms of ω[n] in
vdW-DF and VV10 diﬀer even in powers of n and |∇n|, yet
both functionals provide relatively accurate polarizabilities. This
agreement might deteriorate for heavier elements, where the
ratio of the density and the density gradient changes
signiﬁcantly compared to the lighter elements.
The range-separation mechanism in vdW-DF is more
elaborate than in VV10, partly because it is constructed in
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
reciprocal space. There are two distinct mechanisms that
saturate the vdW-DF functional at short range. The ﬁrst one is
analogous to that in VV10: the local frequency ω is made to
increase as q2 for large q (short wavelengths), akin to ω
increasing with R−2 in VV10. This leads to a contraction of the
inﬁnitesimal oscillators and a decrease of the local eﬀective
polarizability αeff. The second mechanism comes from the
requirement that the vdW-DF functional evaluates to zero for
the homogeneous electron gas. This requirement forces the
nonlocal kernel to positive values at short distances R when
transformed back to real space. In VV10, this condition is
trivially satisﬁed by an a posteriori addition of a constant energy
term for a given number of electrons, wheras, in vdW-DF, this
requirement is built directly into the nonlocal kernel. As a
result, the range-separating function f [n](|r −r′|,u) in vdW-DF
has a complicated form and we do not present it here; however,
this function still serves merely to damp the nonlocal functional
at short range and goes to unity at long range.
The original vdW-DF functional used a particular value of
the parameter Z that was derived earlier in the context of
semilocal functionals. This choice provides relatively accurate
polarizabilities when used in conjunction with the GGA
functional for ω[n] in eq 48. By construction, Z controls not
only ω[n] and hence the long-range asymptotic behavior, but
also the onset of the short-range damping mechanism. This
seemingly elegant property introduces complications when one
wants to couple Ec,lr from vdW-DF with the short-range part
Ec,sr from some semilocal density functional. Essentially, there is
no way to adapt the range separation of vdW-DF without
modifying its asymptotic behavior at the same time. Hence,
instead of adapting a single parameter for a given semilocal
functional as is done in VV10, vdW-DF (with Z ﬁxed by
enforcing the correct long-range behavior) requires some a
priori unknown semilocal functional that would complement it
in the short-range. The original work suggests that the revised
PBE (revPBE) functional162 is such a complement, but other
alternatives were found later, as discussed in the next section. In
any case, vdW-DF cannot be easily paired with a given density
functional that might be the best choice for the short-range part
of the electron correlation energy. Attempts at changing the
value of Z were also made, but this in general leads to incorrect
long-range behavior.36
The vdW-DF functional was implemented self-consistently,163−165 which enables calculations of the electron density
polarization stemming from vdW interactions. Román-Pérez
and Soler used the fast Fourier transformation to eﬃciently
evaluate the nonlocal functional in periodic systems,166
avoiding the otherwise costly evaluation of the double integral
4.6.3. Variations of vdW-DF. There are two popular ways
to modify nonlocal density functionals: ﬁrst, by changing the
nonlocal functional itself, and second, by using a diﬀerent
semilocal or hybrid functional for the short-range part of the
electron correlation energy. A simple modiﬁcation of vdW-DF
can be done by changing its single parameter Z, which controls
the density gradient contribution to the local frequency ω[n].
The value used in the original formulation (vdW-DF) predicts
good C6 coeﬃcients and was combined with the semilocal
revPBE functional. In the second version, vdW-DF2, Z is more
than twice as large, leading to larger values of ω[n] and hence
smaller polarizabilities and C6 coeﬃcients, which turn out to be
severely underestimated. This is compensated at short range
with a change of the underlying semilocal functional: here,
PW86167 was suggested as a good candidate. The combination
of Z and the GGA functional used in vdW-DF2 gives more
accurate results for the binding energies of small vdW
complexes, where the short-range behavior dominates over
the long range.
More signiﬁcant modiﬁcations of vdW-DF were presented by
Vydrov and van Voorhis. In vdW-DF-09, a diﬀerent form for
ω[n] was used as well as a slightly diﬀerent range-separation
mechanism.168 This modiﬁcation makes the damping independent of the magnitude of the gradient term in ω[n], in
contrast to the original vdW-DF; this allows one to determine
the short- and long-range behavior of the functional separately
by ﬁtting to reference binding energies and C6 coeﬃcients,
respectively. This makes the nonlocal functional usable in
conjunction with any semilocal or hybrid functional. The idea
of having two distinct parameters in the nonlocal functional
that control the short- and long-range behavior turned out to
be decisive for achieving better accuracy. The follow-up to
vdW-DF-09, called VV09, can be considered a transition
between vdW-DF and VV10.37,169,170 Whereas the damping
mechanism was still constructed in reciprocal space as in vdW-
DF, the functional form for ω[n] in VV09 was already the same
as that used later in VV10.
Several attempts were made to ﬁnd semilocal or hybrid
density functionals that would be more compatible with vdW-
DF than the original suggestion of revPBE.171 Cooper designed
a new GGA exchange functional, termed C09, whose gradient
behavior interpolates between that of a simple gradient
expansion of LDA to that of revPBE.172 Pernal et al. devised
a “dispersion-less” GGA functional by using the symmetryadapted perturbation theory without the dispersion component
as a reference.173 A diﬀerent approach to the same problem was
suggested by Rajchel et al., in which electronic motion is treated
by full DFT within interacting fragments, but the interfragment
degrees of freedom are described by Coulomb and exchange
terms, resulting in an eﬀective dispersionless description ready
to be supplemented by a vdW model.174 Klimeš et al.
reparametrized the PBE and B88175 functionals (termed
optPBE and optB88) by ﬁtting their parameters to reference
binding energies of a set of small vdW complexes.176,177 These
reparametrizations break some of the exact constraints used in
the construction of PBE and B88 with unclear consequences.
Wellendorf et al. used statistical methods, several reference sets,
and a relatively general form of a GGA exchange functional to
ﬁnd an optimal short-range complement to vdW-DF2, called
BEEF.178 They found that the optimal exchange functional
signiﬁcantly depends on the particular system under study. As
the original vdW-DF functional has better long-range behavior
than vdW-DF2, better results might have been obtained if
BEEF used vdW-DF. Hamada reparametrized B86b179 to better
suit vdW-DF2,180 while Berland and Hyldgaard devised a new
exchange functional that interpolates between the Langreth−
Vosko functional and revised PW86, and combined it with
vdW-DF.181 Several authors identiﬁed that vdW-DF is not
compatible with exact exchange and the use of hybrid
functionals leads to considerable overbinding when coupled
with the vdW-DF family.
4.7. Fragment-based pairwise methods
The simplest pairwise models of vdW interactions are
constructed using the following formula,
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
where the sum is over pairs of fragments A and B (e.g., atoms),
RA is the position of fragment A, g is some short-range damping
function, and the C6 coeﬃcient was deﬁned via the Casimir−
Polder integral in eq 27. We use the term “fragment” when
referring to A and B to cover all vdW methods; the fragments
are atoms in most cases, but not in all.
The R−6 potential, which describes the asymptotic attraction
between two fragments at distance R, was derived for the ﬁrst
time from quantum mechanics by Wang in 1927182 for the case
of two hydrogen atoms and later generalized by London.183−185
This potential served as a basis for vdW corrections to theories
ranging from the HF mean-ﬁeld approximation,186 to the
Lennard−Jones potential, to semiempirical quantum-chemical
methods, long before having been used in DFT.79,187,188. In
2004, Grimme popularized this approach in DFT by illustrating
that even a simple empirical scheme of this kind improves the
performance of standard semilocal exchange-correlation functionals for vdW-bound systems.57 This was then followed by
the development of several models for C6 coeﬃcients that
explicitly take into account the electronic structure of a given
molecule or material, which are discussed here.
Equation 49 is a nontrivial generalization of the textbook R−6
potential between a single pair of fragments to a pairwise sum.
In this section, we show which approximations to the
expression for Ec,lr in eq 23 lead to this pairwise sum and
then present an overview of several particular pairwise models.
4.7.1. Fragment-based pairwise models from the
ACFD formula. Like the nonlocal functionals, the pairwise
methods use a second-order truncation of Ec,lr and an isotropic
local eﬀective model for the short-range polarizability. Unlike
the nonlocal functionals, however, these methods also use
coarse-graining of the spatial quantities: αeff, Tlr, and the
damping function g. It then follows that the pairwise formula in
eq 49 is obtained from the second-order long-range correlation
energy in eq 27 by using the coarse-graining presented in
Section 4.4.1:
This formula is identical to eq 49 after identifying f 2 ≡g and
C6,AB = ∬dr dr′ C6(r, r′)wA(r)wB(r′). Formally, this expression
could be obtained by replacing the double spatial integral in the
nonlocal functional formula (in eq 41) with a double sum over
pairs of fragments. In this view, the role of the model for the
local frequency ω in nonlocal functionals is played by the
models for the C6 coeﬃcients in pairwise methods, and the
square of the range-separating function f corresponds to the
damping function g.
As discussed in Section 4.4.1, the coarse-graining is
equivalent to considering only the (lowest) dipole−dipole
term from the multipole expansion of the polarizability αeff(r)
wA(r) and the coupling potential T(r, r′). In pairwise schemes,
including the higher multipole terms is straightforward and
leads to the well-known series starting with C8/R8 and C10/R10.
We have also argued that these higher-order contributions can
be at least partially captured in the empiricism of the damping
function. This is further supported by the existence of simple
approximate recursive formulas for the higher-order Cn
coeﬃcients based on the C6 coeﬃcients and various integral
moments of the fragment densities.189,190
The accuracy and reliability of a given pairwise method is
inﬂuenced both by the particular model for the C6 coeﬃcients
and the choice of the damping function g. The quality of these
two components can be evaluated separately, because only the
C6 coeﬃcients determine the asymptotic behavior. Such a
distinction is useful, because the C6 coeﬃcients and damping
function g inﬂuence the performance of a method in diﬀerent
ways. For one, the relative importance of C6 and g for the
resulting vdW energies changes with system size. The C6
coeﬃcients become more important in larger molecular or
crystal systems, whereas the damping function plays a
substantial role in small vdW complexes.
Another diﬀerence comes from the fact that the models for
C6 coeﬃcients discussed here are typically based on some
underlying ﬁrst-principles arguments and assumptions, whereas
the damping functions are mostly empirical. For the most part,
this is caused by the lack of general knowledge about the
behavior of the short-range part of the electron correlation
energy as described by the underlying exchange-correlation
density functionals in the range of typical vdW equilibrium
distances. Furthermore, all other noncovalent interactions
(electrostatics, induction, Pauli repulsion) also in general
contribute to the binding energies in this regime. When
damping functions are ﬁtted to reference binding energies,
which is a common technique, any errors in the non-vdW part
of the energies propagate into the ﬁtted parameters, making the
resulting vdW model less transferable. This complicates the
discussion of the vdW methods separate from the underlying
functionals. We note that this issue is in fact common to all
methods that use a density-functional approximation for the
short-range correlation energy, including the range-separated
RPA methods, the nonlocal functionals, as well as the manybody dispersion framework that will be discussed in the next
4.7.2. Models for C6 dispersion coeﬃcients and other
vdW parameters. Although we set out to cover strictly vdW
methods that explicitly take into account the electronic
structure of a system, we open this section with a particular
family of methods that do not leverage any information about a
molecule or a solid besides its geometry. The DFT-D1,57 DFT-
D2,107 and DFT-D358 methods largely popularized the
approach of correcting DFT calculations for vdW interactions,
providing a context for further development of less empirical
models that use electronic structure as an input. As discussed in
Section 2, the spectrum of behaviors of vdW interactions in real
materials is vast, reﬂecting the intricacies of electronic structure
theory, and an eﬀort to capture all this complexity purely from
geometry is a formidable task, akin to classical force ﬁelds
attempting to calculate the electronic energy without explicitly
considering electrons. This is reﬂected in more elaborate
constructions of the DFT-Dn methods with increasing n, as
they tried to cover a wider array of systems.
DFT-D1 used ﬁxed atomic C6 coeﬃcients that did not
depend on any molecular environment. The heteronuclear
coeﬃcients were calculated using an expression that is
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
equivalent to eq 32 with polarizabilities of all atoms considered
equal. The damping function was constructed using vdW radii
in such a way that it did not go to unity for R →∞, leading to
incorrect asymptotic behavior. DFT-D2 followed the same
protocol (with some numerical reparametrizations) except for
the C6 combination rule, which used an expression equivalent
to eq 32 with α
, arguably a more
reasonable model than in DFT-D1. DFT-D3 introduced several
changes. First, the damping was modiﬁed to satisfy the expected
asymptotic behavior (f(R) →1 for R →∞). Second, ﬁxed C6
coeﬃcients were estimated from reference hydride dimers by
approximate decomposition of their long-range interaction into
contributions from the corresponding heavy atoms and the
hydrogen atoms. Third, the vdW radii were replaced with
atomic radii calculated as a distance at which an interaction
energy between the corresponding atoms calculated in a certain
special way58 equals an arbitrary threshold. Fourth, an
elementary dependence of the C6 coeﬃcients on the environment was included via empirical geometrical factors that
estimate a coordination number of the atoms. The reference C6
coeﬃcients are then interpolated for a given estimated
coordination number in a complicated but arbitrary way
motivated by numerical results. However, the true dependence
of the electronic structure on geometry is still much more
complex than what this comparably simple geometrical
interpolation captures, leading to unphysical bumps in the
potential energy surface of many molecular systems besides
simple organic compounds. Apart from these changes, C8
coeﬃcients were added to the model as a ﬁxed part, and
three-atom C9 coeﬃcients and the corresponding 3-atom
potential as an optional part, which seems to improve the
accuracy of DFT-D3 for large molecular systems, but worsens it
for smaller systems, without a clear consensus of the crossover
regime. In general, it is the absence of the dependence of C6
coeﬃcients on the environment in DFT-D1/2 and the diﬃculty
with which it was modeled based purely on the geometry in
DFT-D3 which motivated development of methods based on
electronic-structure information, described in the following.
Becke and Johnson devised a model for treating vdW
interactions based on the dipole moment of the exchange hole,
termed XDM. In a series of papers, they used this quantity to
construct a heuristic model for the C6 coeﬃcients of isolated
atoms and molecules.191 Later, the model was generalized to
the case of atoms in molecules with the use of a partitioning
scheme devised by Hirshfeld.192 In this scheme, a reference set
of free-atom densities is used to construct the following
stockholder model for the partition functions wA,
free(r) is the (radially averaged) density of atom A in
vacuo (i.e., a free atom) at a distance r from the nucleus and 0 <
Hirsh(r) ≤1 at each point in space by construction. (The
Hirshfeld-partitioned density of an atom A is then given by
nA(r) = n(r)wA
Hirsh(r).) The partitioned atomic C6 coeﬃcients
were then combined with a damping function to formulate a
full vdW model in ref 193. The approach was also extended to
include higher-order Cn coeﬃcients and modiﬁed so that the
dependence on the static molecular polarizability as an external
input was removed.194 Finally, all of these incremental
improvements were combined into a single general pairwise
method for vdW interactions in ref 195.
The dipole moment of the exchange hole used by the XDM
model is calculated from occupied KS orbitals.196−198 The
exchange hole represents the electron density that is pushed
away from an electron due to the Pauli exclusion principle. The
combined charge of the exchange hole and the reference
electron is always zero, but it possesses a nonzero dipole
polarization density, Px(r), which was argued to correspond to
instantaneous quantum-mechanical charge ﬂuctuations. The C6
coeﬃcients are thus obtained from the square of the dipole
moment of the exchange-hole polarization as
where αpt(0) is an isotropic static point polarizability of the
given atom or molecule.
(For an alternative density-functional explanation for vdW
interactions based on the correlation hole, see ref 199.) To
obtain the atomic C6 coeﬃcients, the integral above can be
coarse-grained with the Hirshfeld partitioning,
where the static atomic polarizabilities αeff,A(0) are obtained by
scaling the reference free-atom polarizabilities66 via
The integrated quantities Veff and Vfree in the numerator and
denominator are measures of the “volume” of the atom in a
molecule and the free atom, respectivelyquantities that
correlate with atomic polarizabilities.200 To get C6 coeﬃcients
between diﬀerent atoms, XDM uses the combination rule
derived in eq 32 for two harmonic oscillators. Similar
expressions can be used to calculate higher-order Cn coeﬃcients
from the higher multipole moments of the exchange-hole
polarization density, Px. The XDM model can also be used
together with density-functional approximations for the
exchange hole,201,202 which removes the dependence on the
occupied KS orbitals.203 The triple-dipole ATM-like term can
be obtained from the exchange-hole dipole model as well.204
Two distinct damping functions were suggested for
XDM.195,203 The ﬁrst one uses an approach based on
correlation energy ratios,
where Ec,A is the correlation energy of a free atom and c is a
ﬁtted empirical parameter. The second suggested damping
function follows a more common approach, which is based on a
ratio of length scales,
vdW is a vdW radius for atom A and c1 and c2 are
empirical constants.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
Tkatchenko and Scheﬄer (TS) devised a pairwise method
for vdW interactions in which the free-atom scaling approach is
extended to all relevant vdW parameters, that is, the atomic
polarizabilities, C6 coeﬃcients, and vdW radii,60 hence making
them all functionals of the electron density
The TS approach eﬀectively describes a larger portion of the
short-range correlation eﬀects based on accurate free-atom
values, whereas the XDM model tries to recover them from the
properties of the exchange hole. The strategy of using free-atom
reference values could also be viewed as constructing the
polarizability model in such a way that it satisﬁes the exactly
known (free-atom) limits, an approach that has been
successfully used for exchange-correlation density functionals,
where it is known as satisfying exact norms. In the case of
density functionals for polarizability, this normalization was so
far used only in the atomic models (αeff,A)properly normed
point functionals, αeff(r), are yet to be developed. Finally, the
TS model for the C6 coeﬃcients is combined with a logistic
damping function,
The TS method can be straightforwardly combined with a
wide range of semilocal and hybrid functionals by adjusting a
single range-separation parameter.205 The value of the rangeseparation parameter is close to 1 when TS is coupled with the
nonempirical PBE, PBE0, or HSE functional. Values slightly
larger are obtained for meta-GGA functionals,63,64,206 which
conﬁrms that these functionals can eﬀectively describe electron
correlation at intermediate interatomic distances.
In larger molecules and solids, many-body and screening
eﬀects become important, which motivated several improvements to the original TS approach. Bučko et al. applied
electrodynamic screening from eq 18 to the atomic C6
coeﬃcients, leading to improvements in the description of
layered materials.207 Zhang et al. and Ruiz et al.76,80 used the
dielectric function of bulk materials to deﬁne atomic polarizabilities in solids as an alternative to the free-atom reference
data used in eq 57. Such renormalized bulk reference
parameters can be used to investigate cohesion in solids80,208
and adsorption of molecules on surfaces.76,77,101,209 Furthermore, the TS approach was also extended from DFT60 to the
density-functional tight-binding (DFTB) method,210 as well as
classical force ﬁelds.211,212
Sato and Nakai developed an atomic pairwise method that
can be considered a direct bridge to the class of nonlocal
functionals, by directly expanding an ALL-like density functional into a multipole series around the atomic centers.213,214
They used the general formula for the dynamic polarizability of
an inﬁnitesimal harmonic oscillator in eq 44,215 combined with
the characteristic excitation frequency from the vdW-DF-09
nonlocal functional of Vydrov and van Voorhis,168
where λ is an empirical parameter to be ﬁtted to a set of C6
coeﬃcients. This formula shows yet another density functional
for the eﬀective local frequency which was the main topic in the
section about nonlocal functionals. A molecular system
described by this local eﬀective polarizability is then partitioned
into atomic fragments by means of the Becke scheme,216 which
is otherwise often used in DFT calculations to construct realspace integration grids, but serves here as an alternative to the
Hirshfeld partitioning used by the XDM and TS methods. By
assuming that the contribution to the polarizability from areas
of signiﬁcant atomic density overlaps is small, one obtains a
complete representation of αeff(r) in terms of the eﬀective
atomic dipole polarizabilities αeff,A and higher moments. This
then leads directly to C6, C8, and higher-order coeﬃcients via
the Casimir−Polder integral (the series is truncated after C10 in
practice). This method, named local response dispersion
(LRD), is then combined with the following damping function
(shown here only for the C6 coeﬃcients)
where c1 and c2 are parameters to be determined for each
underlying density functional by ﬁtting to a set of accurate
interaction energies, and the atomic polarizabilities serve here
as measures of atomic radii. We note that essentially any
nonlocal density functional for vdW interactions could be
turned into a fragment-based pairwise method by the same
multipole-expansion technique used in LRD. A related
approach to LRD was presented by Heßelmann,217 in which
the polarizability model is replaced by a more rigorous form
obtained by directly approximating the expression for an
uncoupled response function.
Silvestrelli formulated a pairwise method, named vdW-
WF,218 where the interacting fragments are not atoms, but
maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs).219 MLWFs
are essentially a generalization of localized Boys molecular
orbitals to periodic systems; as such, they are the counterparts
to the periodically symmetrized Bloch functions, which are by
deﬁnition fully delocalized. The vdW-WF model is constructed
by approximating each occupied MLWF with a single Slatertype s-function of the same spread S (spatial extent). Here, the
assumption of an exponential decay of the MLWF is
appropriate in systems with a nonzero gap, while the omission
of any angular structure is in general an approximation. Given
an approximate s-orbital, its dynamic polarizability is then
calculated using the ALL polarizability functional,155 where the
density gradient (of the approximate s-orbital) enters via the
deﬁnition of a MLWF-speciﬁc integration domain ΩA for the
following spatial integral,
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
where nA(r) is the electron density of the MLWF A as
approximated by the square of the corresponding s-function
and k is a nonempirical constant. The C6 coeﬃcients are then
directly obtained via the Casimir−Polder integral and the
damping function used in vdW-WF is the same as in the TS
model with the following modiﬁcation. The atomic vdW radii
in gTS in eq 58 are replaced by distances from the centers of the
MLWFs at which nA(r) falls below a predetermined threshold;
the choice for this distance was the subject of a later
modiﬁcation.220 The MLWF partitioning used in vdW-WF
signiﬁcantly diﬀers from the atomic partitioning used in the
XDM and TS models. Given that the ALL polarizability
functional is nonlinear in the input density (αALL[n1 + n2] ≠
αALL[n1] + αALL[n2]), using it with the individual fragment
densities as the input constitutes a diﬀerent scheme than
evaluating the functional integrand with the total density and
then partitioning the integral according to the MLWF
fragments. Furthermore, the use of the approximate s-functions
for the MLWFs results in a partitioning of the total density that
is not exact, that is, ∑AnA(r) ≠n(r).
Tao et al. developed a density functional for the point
dynamic polarizability (and hence the C6 coeﬃcient), which
uses the static polarizability as an input,221
where Ω is an integration domain, and a is a constant
determined by satisfying the exact high-frequency limit of
αpt(iu) and the limiting case of a classical metallic sphere
(consisting of a uniform electron density). The choice of the
integration domain in this functional guarantees that the input
static polarizability α(0) is recovered for u = 0. This model was
later extended to describe higher-multipole coeﬃcients as
well.222 In the context of general vdW methods, this model is
not fully complete, as the C6 coeﬃcient model is not combined
with a damping function, and still requires a prescription for the
input static polarizability. However, such a generalization could
be obtained in a straightforward manner, for example with the
approach used in the XDM or TS methods, and hence we
chose to present this model to illustrate the ﬂexibility with
which density-functional models for the local eﬀective polarizability can be constructed.
Besides developing new functionals for the C6 coeﬃcients,
novel pairwise methods can be constructed by using alternative
partitioning schemes. For instance, Steinmann and Corminboeuf adapted the XDM model by using the self-consistent
Hirshfeld partitioning scheme,61,223 which provides a more
robust description of ionic systems than the original Hirshfeld
partitioning.224 Similarly, Bučko et al. introduced this scheme
into the TS model,86,87 and demonstrated that it substantially
improves the performance of DFA+TS for systems with strong
local charge transfer. In these modiﬁed Hirshfeld schemes, the
original free-atom reference densities nA
free are modiﬁed into
generalized reference densities n0,A, which themselves depend
on the partitioned fragment densities nA. This makes eq 51 a
self-consistent equation that needs to be solved in an iterative
fashion. Several suggestions were made for the construction of
n0,A in terms of the fragment densities nA.225 The most common
approach, used in the modiﬁed XDM and TS methods, is to
consider n0,A as a linear combination of the free-atom and freeion reference densities for a given species, where the
coeﬃcients are determined in such a way that the charges of
the Hirshfeld density nA and the reference density n0,A are
equivalent.
4.8. Many-body dispersion framework
So far, we have covered three of the four classes of methods
which arise from the independent use of the second-order
truncating and coarse-graining approximations. In this section,
we conclude this overview by discussing the recent many-body
dispersion (MBD) framework, which represents a class of
nontruncated (akin to the RPA-based methods) and coarsegrained (akin to the fragment-based methods) approximations.
The central idea of the MBD model is the approximation of the
dynamic response of a molecule or a material by that of a fully
coupled system of QHOs, where each oscillator corresponds to
some fragment of the system of interest. Apart from the
response properties of the QHO model discussed above, the
motivation for this approach comes from the fact that the
correlation energy of such a system can be evaluated exactly by
diagonalizing the corresponding Hamiltonian, which is given by
A is the mass-weighted displacement
of the oscillator A from its equilibrium position RA (i.e., the
fragment center), ωA is the characteristic frequency of the
QHO, and αA(0) is its static polarizability. The ﬁrst two terms
in this Hamiltonian represent the single-oscillator kinetic and
potential energy terms, respectively, while the third term
corresponds to the interoscillator coupling. In the context of
vdW interactions, this model Hamiltonian was ﬁrst introduced
by Bade226,227 in 1957 and used later by Mahan,228 Lucas,229
Renne and Nijboer,230 and Donchev231 in the investigation of
various qualitative aspects of long-range interactions between
particles. In recent years, a renewed interest in this approach
was initiated by the introduction of a general scheme for
parametrizing and range-separating this Hamiltonian to obtain
a universal and quantitative model for treating the energetic55,88
and structural232 eﬀects of vdW interactions in molecules and
materials. In this section, we brieﬂy review how the MBD
Hamiltonian emerges from the long-range correlation energy
expression in eq 23, discuss several properties of this approach
in the context of other vdW methods, and ﬁnally describe the
range-separated MBD method in particular. We note that the
term “MBD” may refer to the general framework (Section
4.8.1) as well as a speciﬁc method within this framework
(Section 4.8.2).
4.8.1. Many-body dispersion framework from the
ACFD formula. The starting point for obtaining the MBD
Hamiltonian as a model for electron correlation is the coarsegrained version of the exact expression for the long-range
correlation energy in eq 37. In addition to the coarse-graining,
MBD also approximates the short-range polarizability in that
formula by a local eﬀective polarizability, which leads to the
following expression:
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
Although the local approximation to αsr(r, r′) in the MBD
framework is shared with both the nonlocal functionals and
pairwise methods, it is in general not required here that αeff(r)
be isotropic. We note that, here, the long-range correlation
energy is expanded into an inﬁnite series, and such an
expansion could be converted to the class of pairwise methods
discussed in the previous section if truncated at second order.
To proceed further, the dynamic polarizability αeff(iu) is
approximated by the corresponding expression for a QHO in
eq 28. This set of approximations then enables one to perform
the integration in the frequency domain in eq 65 analytically,233
leading to the so-called plasmon-pole formula for the
correlation energy,
where N is the number of fragments (depending on the system
and the choice of partitioning), the sum is over all 3N
characteristic frequencies of the system, ω̅ p are the frequencies
of the fully interacting system (corresponding to α1), and ωp
are the frequencies of the noninteracting system (corresponding to α0).
The plasmon-pole formulation of the correlation energy is a
general approach that can be used for many nontruncated
approximations to the ACFD formula, in particular the class of
RPA-based methods discussed in Section 4.5. In this
expression, the analytical integration in the frequency domain
is essentially performed by transforming the integral over
imaginary frequencies iu to the imaginary part of the integral
over real-valued frequencies u. In the latter form of the integral,
αeff,A(u) directly describes the absorption spectrum of a system
which is characterized by delta functions located at the
excitation frequencies for both the interacting and noninteracting cases. Therefore, the integral over real-valued
frequencies is reduced to a sum of the excitation frequency
diﬀerences in eq 66. It can also be shown that the plasmon-pole
expression can be obtained as a diﬀerence between the ground
state energy of a system of coupled QHOs and the ground state
energy of a system of uncoupled QHOs, thereby establishing
the equivalence between the plasmon-pole formulation and the
Hamiltonian formulation in eq 64.233 In other words, whereas
the plasmon-pole expression is only an approximation to the
exact correlation energy of the full electronic system, it is in fact
exact for the correlation energy of a system of QHOs coupled
within the dipole approximation.
The Hamiltonian formulation of the long-range correlation
energy gives a useful insight into the nature of vdW
interactions. In the noninteracting limit (λ = 0), the charge
ﬂuctuations are fully localized on the individual fragments; as λ
is increased toward the interacting limit (λ = 1), these localized
ﬂuctuations couple to form plasmon-like delocalized charge
oscillations. These delocalized ﬂuctuations have lower characteristic frequencies on average than their localized counterparts,
and hence the coupling decreases (stabilizes) the total energy of
the system.
4.8.2. Range-separated many-body dispersion method. At ﬁrst, Tkatchenko et al. developed a MBD method based
on fully screened atomic polarizabilities,55 which lead to a
double counting of the long-range correlation eﬀects in some
cases. Later, this was avoided by using a range-separating
approach, in which the atomic polarizabilities are screened by
the surrounding atoms only at short range.88 Here, we describe
only the latter approach, termed MBD@rsSCS, where “rsSCS”
stands for range-separated self-consistent screening. To deﬁne a
particular method within the MBD framework, one needs to
specify the partitioning scheme, the models for the static
polarizabilities αeff,A(0) and the noninteracting characteristic
frequencies ωA, and the range-separating function f(R) which
deﬁnes Tlr. The MBD@rsSCS method partitions the electronic
system into atomic fragments by means of the Hirshfeld
scheme, which is also used in the XDM and TS pairwise
methods. The eﬀective atomic polarizabilities αeff,A(0) are then
obtained in a two-step manner. First, the volume-scaling
approach of the TS method is applied to the reference freeatom polarizabilities, while the characteristic frequencies are
kept unchanged. Second, the Dyson screening in eq 18 with
only the short-range part of the dipole potential is applied to
the atomic dynamic polarizabilities, which produces the shortrange nonlocal polarizability αsr,AB(iu). The range separation
used in this second step is the same that is later used to deﬁne
Tlr, which is used to obtain the long-range correlation energy.
In this regard, the short-range response and the long-range
coupling are constructed consistently in the MBD@rsSCS
To obtain the local eﬀective dynamic polarizabilities of the
atomic fragments, αsr,AB(iu) is then summed along one
fragment coordinate, αeff,A = ∑Bαsr,AB, which is equivalent to
eq 25 for the coarse-grained case when the neighborhood is
taken to be the entire system. Finally, the fragment polarizabilities are spherically averaged, and in this regard, the
MBD@rsSCS scheme does not use the full ﬂexibility of the
MBD framework, which in general supports anisotropic local
eﬀective polarizabilities. To fully specify MBD@rsSCS, the
range-separating function f(R) is of the same type as the
damping function in eq 58 used in the TS method, and is
parametrized on a reference set of small- and medium-sized
vdW complexes at various binding distances. The rangeseparating functions f(R) used to deﬁne Tlr are in general much
smoother than the damping functions g(R) of the pairwise
methods, as the latter are in fact the square of the
corresponding f(R). With all relevant quantities determined,
the MBD@rsSCS long-range correlation energy is then
obtained by diagonalizing the general MBD Hamiltonian in
eq 64 and evaluating the plasmon-pole formula in eq 66. Bučko
et al. derived and implemented a formulation of MBD@rsSCS
for periodic boundary conditions in reciprocal space, which
results in faster and more easily converged calculations.234
4.8.3. General remarks about MBD and n-body
expansions. As brieﬂy discussed in Section 4.4.2, the inﬁnite
n-th order expansion of the long-range correlation energy in the
MBD framework is not equivalent to the general (and ﬁnite) nbody expansion, where the latter is often used to discuss
beyond-pairwise corrections to the pairwise methods. Here, we
discuss the correspondence between various higher-order terms
of the gn(R)Cn/Rn type and the n-th order terms in MBD in
more detail.
To go beyond the pairwise approximation, the three-body
(triple-dipole) ATM term of the form g9(R)C9/R9 is sometimes
used in the class of pairwise models. For the n = 3 case, the nbody and n-th order expansions are equivalent, and hence, these
triple-dipole terms are contained in the third order of MBD.
However, the origins of the corresponding terms diﬀer
signiﬁcantly in MBD and in the beyond-pairwise models and
so does the eﬀective contribution of these terms to the longrange correlation energy. In particular, the three-body term in
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
the beyond-pairwise methods is constructed independently of
the pairwise term; that is, the C9 coeﬃcients are not in exact
correspondence with the C6 coeﬃcients (via the general
Casimir−Polder integrals) and the damping function g9
contains parameters that are independent of the parameters
in g6. Therefore, the contributions of all the higher n-body
terms (n ≥3) in such a scheme inﬂuence the parametrization
of the three-body term. As such, the resulting three-body
energetic contribution eﬀectively captures the eﬀects of these
higher-order terms, thus raising the question of transferability.
In contrast, the three-body triple-dipole term arises automatically in the MBD framework and is constructed with the same
atomic polarizabilities and long-range potential as the secondorder dipole−dipole term. In other words, the range-separating
function f and the polarizability αeff,A are the same for the
second, third, and higher orders. Furthermore, the higher-order
contributions in MBD have typically an alternating sign, as
given by eq 65, and hence their sum, that is, the diﬀerence
between the total long-range correlation energy and the
second-order approximation to it, can be signiﬁcantly smaller
than the third-order contribution. Finally, the triple-dipole term
is an example of an n-th order term acting between n bodies, yet
there is also the other class of n-th order terms acting between
m < n bodies. For m = 2, these terms correspond to the higherorder contributions to the two-body energy and these are not
accounted for explicitly in pairwise approximations; for
example, the lowest 4-th order two-body term would
correspond to the C12/R12 term in the language of dispersion
coeﬃcients.
The other class of higher-order Cn/Rn terms that come from
higher-order multipoles of the polarizability (dipole−quadrupole, quadrupole−quadrupole) can be in principle obtained in
the MBD framework in three ways. First, the higher multipoles
can be partially captured in the parametrization of the rangeseparating function, as was the case with pairwise methods.
Second, additional oscillators and coupling potentials describing quadrupole oscillations could be added. The contributions
of such oscillators would reduce to the higher-order Cn/Rn
terms when evaluated at second order. Third, the higher
multipole terms could be evaluated as a perturbation to the
dipole-coupled Hamiltonian due to the full Coulomb coupling
by means of the perturbation theory. We note that none of
these approaches have been yet introduced in a working
5. MODELS FOR VDW INTERACTIONS: APPLICATIONS
In this section, we continue with an assessment of the
numerical performance of vdW models in treating systems for
which vdW interactions play a key role. First, we discuss
benchmark databases that consist of small noncovalently bound
dimers, molecular crystals, and supramolecular complexes. We
then follow with a brief survey of other important results for
select systems, focusing on structural and electronic properties
beyond binding and cohesive energies. This section is then
concluded with a concise review of recent ab initio molecular
dynamics simulations that use approaches based on ﬁrst
principles for describing vdW interactions.
Critical evaluation of exchange-correlation functionals
through benchmarking and extensive testing plays a central
role in DFT. Such an approach is particularly crucial for density
functionals with a higher degree of empiricism, but served also
to identify the robustness of many ﬁrst-principles functionals,
for which theoretical reasons were often found only later. A
similar situation can be found in the ﬁeld of vdW methods,
where critical assessment is essential for the more empirical
approaches, but is of great value even for the ﬁrst-principlesbased methods covered in this review. There are several reasons
why a quantitative assessment is needed, as opposed to a
qualitative evaluation. First, it provides evidence for the level of
uncertainty in predicted quantities that one may expect when
using a particular method for a particular class of systems. This
becomes ever more important as computational chemistry and
materials physics play an increasingly predictive, rather than
supportive, role to experiment. Second, quantitative evaluation
can identify both speciﬁc and systematic issues of a given
method and hence provide guidance for further improvement.
This is particularly important as quantitative diﬀerences in the
relative energies of molecular systems and materialsthe
primary results of electronic structure calculationsoften
translate into qualitative diﬀerences in derived quantities such
as structural, thermodynamic, and response properties. In this
regard, the systematic veriﬁcation of a given vdW method is
usually achieved through comparison against the results of
higher-level (more costly and more accurate) theoretical
methods or to experimental results with suﬃcient resolution.
The presented vdW methods consist of many ingredients
(models for response, partitioning schemes, range separation
approaches, treatments of higher-order contributions) which all
contribute to their overall performance. As a result of this
composition, evaluations of vdW methods are often interpreted
in terms of these individual ingredients. However, it is not
always clear to what degree the individual choices for the
ingredients contribute to the overall diﬀerence in performance
between diﬀerent methods. Detailed analyses of the performance in this regard are rare and remain to be performed for
many popular vdW methods, even on simple model systems.
This presents one clear path forward for the development of
more robust and transferable vdW models, in which such
comparative analyses can be used to identify the best
ingredients from individual models, which can then be
combined to form new methods with better performance.
5.1. Benchmark databases
In this section, we brieﬂy discuss four benchmark databases for
noncovalent interactions that were used to test many of the
methods reviewed here. The tradition of such high-quality
noncovalent databases started with the S22 test set of Jurečka et
al.,251 which contains 22 binary complexes with a median
number of atoms of 19, molar mass of 131 g/mol, and binding
energy of 4.7 kcal/mol. The S22 set constitutes a representative
sample of hydrogen-bonded, vdW bound, and mixed
complexes. A similarly designed but more extensive set of 66
dimers (the S66 test set), with a median number of atoms of
20, molar mass of 126 g/mol, and binding energy of 4.1 kcal/
mol, was published several years later.252 The reference
energies in both these databases were obtained using highlevel coupled-cluster calculations with single, double, and
perturbative triple excitations (CCSD(T)) extrapolated to the
complete basis set (CBS) limit, which represents the goldstandard electronic structure method in quantum chemistry.
The benchmark C21 database240 extends the analysis to
condensed-phase systems via 21 molecular crystals with
reference binding energies obtained from experimental
sublimation enthalpies. This work was later extended and
reﬁned to cover 23 molecular crystals in the X23 database,253
with a median number of atoms per molecule of 10, molar mass
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
of 89 g/mol, and binding energy of 7.3 kcal/mol. The ﬁnal
database considered in this section, the S12L set, deals with
large molecules and consists of 12 supramolecular complexes
with a median number of atoms of 134, molar mass of
1060 g/mol, and binding energy of 28 kcal/mol, with reference
binding energies obtained from experimental Gibbs free
energies of association, or alternatively from quantum Monte
Carlo calculations.254,255 Although the available data in the
literature are far from complete (i.e., binding energies of every
method discussed in this review on every one of these databases
have not been calculated to date), Figure 7 still illustrates the
following general trend: the diﬀerences in the predictions
among the individual vdW methods increase as the size and
complexity of the systems in question grow. In other words, the
reliability of the vdW methods seems to decrease with
increasing system size and complexity. However, this trend is
also accompanied by a corresponding decrease in the accuracy
and reliability of the underlying benchmark energies. In the
following, we elaborate on various reasons for this observation,
accompanied by an illustrative analysis of the diﬀerences
between particular methods on select systems from these
databases.
The S22 and S66 databases are relatively similar in design
and will be discussed together. Figure 7 shows that the error
ranges corresponding to the S22 and S66 databases are
narrowest among the four benchmark sets. (We note that the
error distribution is narrower for the S66 set due to its
increased size with respect to the S22 seta larger “sample”
leads to a smaller variance between methods.) The consistent
performance observed for these data sets illustrates that, after
intense development throughout the past decade, the majority
of popular vdW methods have managed to capture this ﬁrstrung level of complexity of nonbonded interaction energies. In
the same breath, however, this does not mean that these simple
systems cannot provide further insight into the performance of
a given vdW model. On the contrary, a detailed analysis of a
particular system can reveal valuable information about the
relative contributions of diﬀerent physical phenomena to the
total binding energy as well as the degree to which those
phenomena are accounted for in a given model. We will focus
on two systems from these data sets, namely the benzene dimer
and the adenine−thymine complex, each of which will serve to
illustrate diﬀerent potential complications that may occur when
describing vdW interactions.
The benzene dimer has been the primary model system for
noncovalent interactions over the past 40 years.256−263 In
particular, the ﬁne balance between the Pauli repulsion,
electrostatic (quadrupole−quadrupole) interactions, and vdW
dispersion results in an intricate potential energy surface (PES)
with many local minima.264 The nearly degenerate T-shaped
and parallel-displaced (PD) conformations of the benzene
dimer are contained in both S22 and S66 sets, but whether a
particular method reproduces this degeneracy is naturally not
reﬂected in the corresponding statistical errors. Another reason
why these two geometries are particularly interesting is
precisely the fact that they are two probes of the same PES
and hence the number of potential sources of error in their
description is limited. In this system, a physically sound
description of the anisotropy in the vdW interactions becomes
crucial for quantitative prediction of the ﬁner details of the PES.
As discussed in Section 2, the PD conformation exhibits
alignment among the distinct in-plane charge ﬂuctuations,
whereas such ﬂuctuations are orthogonal in the T-shaped
conformation (see Figure 5). To capture these eﬀects, a given
vdW model has to correctly describe both the monomer
screening and polarizability as well as the intermolecular
coupling of these anisotropic ﬂuctuations (see the short-range
αsr(r,r′) and its long-range coupling in eq 22). This diﬃcult
task may be one of the underlying reasons why many secondorder vdW methods, which neglect such eﬀects, and even RPAbased methods fail to predict this degeneracyboth versions of
vdW-DF either predict a diﬀerence of 0.6 kcal/mol (20%) at
the true equilibrium geometries36 or overestimate the binding
distances by as much as 0.5 Å;265 the error of the pairwise TS
method on the PD conformation is 0.8 kcal/mol,50 and all
RPA-derived methods reviewed in Section 4.5 overbind the PD
conformation by ∼0.7 kcal/mol.148 In contrast, the MBD
method, which explicitly accounts for the intra- and
Figure 7. Overall performance of vdW methods on four benchmark data sets. The selection includes the methods XDM, MBD, TS, VV10, RPA,
rPT2, vdW-DF, and vdW-DF2. When a vdW method speciﬁes a particular exchange-correlation functional, results with that functional were taken;
otherwise, the PBE functional was considered. The blue and red data points reﬂect the mean and range of mean absolute percentage errors (MAPE)
and mean absolute errors (MAE), respectively, on a given data set. The dotted line denotes 1 kcal/mol. The displayed structures are illustrative
examples of systems of a given size and complexity. Data are collected from refs 36, 62, 88, 98, 142, 148, 157, 204, 205, and 235−250.
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
intermolecular many-body eﬀects, reduces the error of the TS
description to only 0.2 kcal/mol. Exceptions to this clear
distinction are some parametrizations of the XDM model238
and the VV10 functional,62 which predict the degeneracy within
a 10% margin, while being only second-order approximations.
However, the XDM predictions substantially depend on a
particular choice of the exchange-hole model, which suggests
that other eﬀects may eﬀectively cancel out with the higherorder contributions in this particular system.
The adenine−thymine complex can be considered as a
prototypical biological system and is represented twice in the
S22 set: ﬁrst, as a vdW bound stacked conformation; second, as
a classical Watson−Crick nucleobase pair. While the ﬁrst case is
similar in character to the PD benzene dimer, the latter case
contains strong directional hydrogen bonds in which several
types of noncovalent binding contribute (electrostatic interactions, induction, and dispersion), posing a diﬃcult
challenge.266−268 Of all these interactions, only dispersion is
described by vdW models whereas the other components are
treated at the level of the underlying exchange-correlation
functional. In this regard, an accurate description of electrostatic interactions relies predominantly on the correct assignment of permanent moments to the individual interacting
molecules. For the case of induction, this must also be
accompanied by a consistent treatment of the molecular
polarizabilities. In DFT, all these quantities are predicted only
approximately, yet these inaccuracies are rarely decoupled or
even discussed separately from the errors introduced by the
vdW models. A similar conclusion can also be made for the
Pauli repulsion, the magnitude of which can be relatively large
compared to the total binding energy, yet its description via
diﬀerent exchange functionals can vary greatly. The decomposition of the total binding energy of hydrogen-bonded
complexes into the individual components varies greatly with
distance,269 which may potentially lead to decreased transferability between diﬀerent system sizes if some of the errors
mentioned above are eﬀectively incorporated into the shortrange behavior or mutually compensate at a certain size range.
Indeed, while the Watson−Crick pair is described relatively
well by most vdW methods, with diﬀerences within 1.5 kcal/
mol (10%), the relative errors across the range of hydrogenbonded complexes of diﬀerent sizes vary signiﬁcantly.270 These
observations suggest that at least a part of the remaining errors
in the predicted binding energies can not only be attributed to
the vdW methods themselves, but rather also to the underlying
density functionals.
The fact that certain pairwise dispersion corrections are
seemingly able to achieve good accuracy for molecular crystals
stems from their more empirical nature and parametrization on
large molecular systems. Essentially all pairwise methods (D3,
XDM, TS) can be made accurate enough for the X23 database
by adjusting two empirical parameters.253 However, such
adjustments just serve the purpose of mimicking some of the
dielectric screening eﬀects and can only be successful for
relatively symmetric systems. The true nature of dielectric
screening in arbitrary systems and geometries can only be
captured with explicit many-body approaches.
One large class of complex molecular environments consists
of molecular crystals. The X23 database contains 23 such
systems with a similar proﬁle of the local intermolecular
bonding as in the S22 and S66 sets (ranging from hydrogenbonded to vdW bound and mixed complexes). While this might
lead one to expect a comparable range of errors for the diﬀerent
vdW methods, Figure 7 reveals that there is in fact a signiﬁcant
decrease in the reliability among the methods when treating
molecular crystals as opposed to gas-phase molecular dimers.
As a model case for discussion, consider the benzene crystal,
which is a natural extension of the benzene dimer from the
molecular databases, yet it is signiﬁcantly more complicated.271−274 For instance, the second-order, pairwise TS
method overestimates the lattice energy by 3 kcal/mol, while
treatment of the electron correlation to all orders within the
MBD method results in a prediction within 1 kcal/mol (though
a slightly better result is obtained with PBE0 compared to PBE,
suggesting small error cancellation in play). Similarly,
considering only individual pairs of benzene molecules in the
crystal within SAPT(DFT) or only double excitations within
the coupled-cluster method leads to overestimation of the
energy by 2 kcal/mol, while increasing the degree of correlation
decreases the error under 1 kcal/mol. In contrast, the DFT-D3
method achieves 1 kcal/mol without considering any manybody eﬀects, and their addition worsens the results by
approximately 1 kcal/mol.275 There are several possible reasons
for the increased complexity and less predictable behavior of a
crystal compared to the molecular dimer. First, the benzene
crystal contains individual pairs of benzene molecules in many
diﬀerent orientations, each of which needs to be described with
the same level of accuracy; as such, the molecular crystal serves
as another indirect probe into the quality of the dimer PES.
Second, the solid state introduces stronger intermolecular
polarization in addition to the intramolecular polarization that
was already present in the isolated molecular complex; this
coupling of short- and long-range many-body eﬀects further
increases the polarizability of a molecule within the crystal.
Third, the presence of the three-dimensional crystal lattice
eﬀectively screens the long-range dipole correlations, resulting
in an overall decrease in the lattice energies. The total
contribution of the latter two competing long-range eﬀects can
range from negative to positive in the prediction of lattice
energies and, hence, adds to the mixed conclusions regarding
the applicability of pairwise schemes and three-body corrections
for the description of molecular crystals.
To put these numerical diﬀerences into perspective, consider
that a correct ordering of crystal polymorphs necessary for
successful crystal structure prediction requires an accuracy of
only fractions of a kcal/mol.7,78,276,277 More than half of the
compounds in a pharmaceutically relevant data set show
polymorphism,278 and the energy diﬀerences between polymorphs are usually less than 1 kcal/mol and often even less
than 1 kJ/mol (0.24 kcal/mol). The X23 database contains two
polymorphs of oxalic acid, for which the experimental energy
diﬀerence between the α and β forms amounts to only 0.05
kcal/mol.240,253,279 Yet, current vdW-inclusive ﬁrst-principle
approaches yield energy diﬀerences between about −1 and 1
kcal/mol. PBE+MBD has an absolute error in the diﬀerence of
only 0.12 kcal/mol but predicts the wrong ordering,7 whereas
PBE0+MBD correctly predicts the ordering with an absolute
error of 0.22 kcal/mol, illustrating how subtle the diﬀerences in
the two polymorphs are. The three polymorphs of glycine have
also been studied with a variety of methods, of which only
PBE0+MBD was able to correctly predict the relative stability
ordering as observed in experiment.78 Molecular crystals are
usually studied experimentally at ﬁnite temperature and
pressure, requiring that free energies are considered instead
of bare lattice energies. For instance, form I of the aspirin
crystal is much more abundant in nature than form II, yet both
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
forms have almost degenerate bare lattice energies. The higher
stability of form I could only be explained by considering
harmonic free energies at room temperature.280 Thermal and
pressure eﬀects are not only crucial for the stability under
thermodynamic conditions, but are also essential for the unitcell structure itself and a variety of response properties, such as
vibrational spectra and elastic constants.281 The most recent
structure prediction blind test for organic crystals282 featured a
practically relevant and highly polymorphic system involving a
quite ﬂexible molecule. This ﬂexibility leads to a much larger
number of local minima within a narrow energy window
compared to crystals containing only rigid molecules. While
most polymorphs have been found by at least one participant
within the top 100 predicted structures, the relative ordering of
the polymorphs is still challenging. That said, inclusion of
many-body eﬀects in the description of vdW interactions and
accounting for free energies clearly improves the relative
stability prediction.
A related class of solid-state systems, which shares similar
features to the vdW binding motifs in molecular crystals,
consists of layered materials. To date, there is no systematic
benchmark database for such systems; however, we can still
learn from particular representative systems. We will consider
graphite, one of the prototypical layered materials for which
there is an abundant number of both experimental and
theoretical results,283−288 regarding both its energetic and
structural properties.289 Graphite features the same set of
many-body eﬀects as found in molecular crystals, but these
eﬀects are ampliﬁed by the extreme diﬀerence in response
properties between the in-plane and out-of-plane directions in
the graphene layers. The correlation of the long-range
ﬂuctuating dipole waves within each layer decays very slowly
with distance, as demonstrated by the slow convergence of the
binding energy of multilayer graphene.9,22,92 On the other
hand, these correlations are nontrivially screened by the inner
layers, resulting in a competition between these two eﬀects as
captured by the various correlation orders in eq 23. Although
approximate, RPA describes these eﬀects at least on a
semiquantitative basis, and so can serve as a ﬁrst-order
reference with the predicted binding energy of 1.11 kcal/mol
per carbon atom. Many vdW methods, including all nonlocal
density functionals and most atom-based pairwise methods, fall
short from this result, with predictions ranging from 0.46 to
1.86 kcal/mol per carbon atom. When structural data such as
lattice constants and bulk moduli are considered as well, only
methods that treat the dipole correlations to all orders are
capable of matching the experimental reference results. For
instance, while both the XDM and MBD methods provide
good estimates of the interlayer lattice parameter and the
binding energy, XDM underestimates the curvature of the
energy minimum more than 2-fold, whereas MBD predicts a
value within 15% of experiment.12,289
As a ﬁnal benchmark data set, we consider the S12L (S30L)
set of 12 (30) supramolecular complexes.246,290 In these
systems, the total binding energies are mostly dominated by
vdW interactions and hence the choice of a particular
underlying density functional is of less importance than in
the previous data sets, which makes this database an ideal
playground for analyzing vdW methods. As a prototypical
example, we will discuss the so-called buckyball catcher
complex, as it was studied most extensively both theoretically
and experimentally. A prominent feature of this system is the
strong anisotropy in the polarizability of the pincers of the
catcher, which results in nonlocal dipole ﬂuctuations spanning
the whole complex. This situation is partially analogous to the
mechanisms occurring in graphite and graphene, but the
screening of the dipole correlations is much weaker in this case
(in contrast to graphite) and there is no cancellation of the
higher-order eﬀects due to symmetry (in contrast to graphene).
This results in the nonlocal ﬂuctuations having a large
destabilizing contribution to the binding energy, which can
reduce this quantity by as much as 10 kcal/mol with respect to
a pairwise-additive decomposition of the long-range correlation
energy in the TS, VV10, and bare XDM model, resulting in 2to 4-fold reduction in the mean relative error.88,246 By
accounting for the eﬀect of such ﬂuctuations (either inherently
as in MBD or by higher-order corrections in the XDM, VV10,
or DFT-D3 models), the reference binding energies can be
predicted within 2 kcal/mol (5%), leading to many-body eﬀects
playing a crucial role in the binding of supramolecular
complexes.
Apart from the established data sets discussed above, we
brieﬂy list others that have not seen broader adoption. All data
sets mentioned below were benchmarked using the CCSD(T)/
CBS method. The X40 set comprises complexes of small
halogenated organic molecules and provides a good test of how
well a method handles strongly ionic and charge-transfer
compounds.291 The L7 set consists of larger organic complexes
than those included in the S22 and S66 sets, but smaller than
the supramolecular complexes in the S12L set.292 The 3B-69
data set is of particular interest to the discussion here, as it
benchmarks molecular three-body contributions to interactions
energies.293 An interesting approach was used by Faver et al.,294
who dissected a protein−ligand complex 1HSG into 21 smaller
fragment dimers bound by noncovalent interactions.
A ﬁnal point in the discussion of the benchmark data sets
concerns the reliability of the underlying reference data. For the
S22 and S66 sets, well-converged state-of-the-art electronic
structure theory methods were used by several groups to obtain
the benchmark data. These eﬀorts leave very little room for
potential improvement, with the possible exception of almost
degenerate structures such as the aforementioned benzene
dimer conformations, where an accuracy of less than 0.1 kcal/
mol is needed to decisively determine the most stable
geometry. The X23 set presents a more diﬃcult challenge
not only for the approximate vdW methods, but also for the
computational techniques used for obtaining the benchmark
energetics. The common method of deriving these energies
from experimental sublimation enthalpies involves several
approximations, the particular choice of which can lead to
diﬀerences as large as 1 kcal/mol.240,253 In contrast, Yang et al.
recently calculated the lattice energy of a benzene crystal at the
CCSD(T) level with an estimated uncertainty of only ∼0.1
kcal/mol,295 which may mark a future path toward obtaining
suitably accurate benchmark energetics for molecular crystals.
Finally, the S12L data set is a diﬃcult problem due to the sheer
size of the complexes in question and the fact that they have
not been isolated experimentally in the gas phase. The original
reference binding energies were obtained by subtracting the
vibrational and solvation contributions from the experimental
Gibbs free energies of association.254 The largest uncertainty in
this approach comes from the solvation contributions that are
obtained by using semiempirical models with uncertainties that
can exceed ±5 kcal/mol. Indeed, the diﬀerences between the
experimentally derived binding energies and those obtained by
the diﬀusion quantum Monte−Carlo (DQMC) method
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
(statistically converged to 1 kcal/mol) are similar in magnitude
to the uncertainties in the solvation contributions.
Besides systematic benchmark databases, much work has also
been done on select systems bound by vdW interactions, which
are in some ways representative of a wider class of molecules or
materials. The vdW-WF method was tested on small dimers
and adsorption of small molecules on various surfaces in several
studies.296−299 Sorescu et al. performed an extensive study of
many diﬀerent methods on a set of 26 nitrogen containing
molecular crystals.300 With the benzene dimer being such a well
studied complex, its natural extension is the adsorption of a
single benzene molecule on a surface. Such a system has an
appeal both from an experimental point of view as a model for
heterogeneous catalysis, as well as from a theoretical stance, as
it combines contributions coming from electrostatic interactions (benzene quadrupole moment) and long-range polarization induced in the surface. Typical choices for the surface
are a single graphene sheet301,302 and metallic surfaces.100,208,303−305 In the latter case, the surface charge
ﬂuctuations of the metallic electrons have a large eﬀect on
the polarizability of the adsorbed molecule and substantially
change its response compared to the gas-phase case, thus
inﬂuencing the resulting binding energy. However, the metallic
response has an intricate many-body character, and a general
ﬁrst-principles approximate method for the description of vdW
interactions in hybrid interfaces is yet to be seen. A further step
in complexity can be taken by studying the interaction of a
single graphene sheet with a metallic surface.143,306−310 Here,
the long-range response of a covalent two-dimensional zero-gap
semiconductor is coupled with the response of surface
plasmons of the metal, presenting a severe test for vdW
models. Maurer et al. summarized the performance of diﬀerent
methods for graphene/Ag(111) binding energy, with results
ranging from 0.77 to 1.67 kcal/mol per carbon atom.311 This
work demonstrates the sheer complexity of describing vdW
interactions in complex nanostructured materials.
To fully assess the complicated nature of realistic systems
when testing approximate models, they need to be probed in
many diﬀerent ways, either by using diﬀerent conﬁgurations
and conformations, or by investigating other properties besides
binding energies, such as polarizabilities, stress tensors, and
work functions or dynamical properties. Such studies are the
topic of the following sections.
5.2. Structural and electronic properties
Up to this point, we have been concerned primarily with the
binding energy eﬀects of long-range electron correlation, as
those are typically large in relative magnitude. In this section,
we discuss the eﬀects of vdW interactions on structural and
electronic properties. While the energy ordering of diﬀerent
conformers of the benzene dimer poses a signiﬁcant challenge
to all vdW models, an even more sensitive probe into the
robustness of a given model and a gateway to obtaining
equilibrium structures as well as dynamical properties of
systems at nonzero temperatures is provided by derivatives of
the energy with respect to the nuclear coordinates, −dE/dRA.
Furthermore, the vdW models discussed here all directly
depend on the electron density and, therefore, via the
functional derivative of the energy, δE/δn, and the Hohenberg−Kohn variational principle, necessarily inﬂuence the
electron density and hence all electronic properties. Whereas
the structural eﬀects have been recognized since the beginning
of the empirical treatment of vdW interactions, the electronic
eﬀects have been largely neglected and it is only in recent years
that they have become the topic of investigation.
Although searching for local minima on a PES forms the
basis of most computational chemistry studies, it is used to
systematically evaluate the accuracy of vdW methods to a much
smaller degree than the corresponding binding energies.
Recently, several researchers attempted to close this gap.
Witte et al. investigated the performance of may electronic
structure methods in predicting the equilibrium geometries of
small to large molecular complexes.312 They found that the
Figure 8. Structural changes induced by vdW interactions as predicted by several methods. D3 is the semiempirical DFT-D3 model of Grimme et
al.58 (a) Errors in monomer distances of ten locally stable conformations of the benzene dimer with respect to reference DFT/CCSD(T) results.264
(b) Predicted structures of 76 conformers of 5 isolated small peptides using diﬀerent methods are aligned with reference MP2 structures by
minimizing the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the atomic coordinates. The minimized RMSDs are represented using their mean, quartiles,
and whiskers covering data within the 1.5-fold quartile range. The outliers are plotted as individual points. (c) The equilibrium geometries of the
buckycatcher−C60 complex as predicted by PBE+MBD (blue) and PBE+D3 (red). [Adapted with permission from Blood-Forsythe et al.232].
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
nonlocal density functionals vdW-DF2 and VV10 perform
reasonably well on small systems with respect to CCSD(T);
however, the relative errors associated with vdW-DF2 increase
with system size, whereas the accuracy associated with VV10
was more transferable to larger systems. This issue can be
possibly traced back to the way that the vdW-DF2 functional is
constructed, as explained in Section 4.6. Compared to the
original vdW-DF functional, the second version uses a larger
density gradient contribution, leading to more rapid cutoﬀof
the tail densities in the polarizability density functional and
hence decreased C6 coeﬃcients. When coupled with a more
attractive semilocal functional than the original revPBE, this
approach may reach better accuracy than vdW-DF on small
systems, but as the system size grows, the part of the binding
that comes from the short-range diminishes, while the
underestimation of the long-range contribution begins to
manifest itself.
Blood-Forsythe et al. investigated the performance of the
MBD and TS methods together with the DFT-D3 model in the
description of the PES of the benzene dimer, a set of small
peptides, and a large supramolecular complex.232 For the
benzene dimer, they found an almost perfect agreement
between MBD and the reference structures of CCSD(T)
quality (RMS error of 0.01 Å), whereas both the pairwise TS
and D3 methods yield errors that are several times larger in
magnitude (Figure 8a). Comparing the diﬀerences between
MBD and TS for the individual conformations, it can be seen
that the pairwise approximation shortens the binding distances
in stacked conformations, whereas they are increased in the Tshaped structures. This can be explained by the anisotropy in
the polarizability of the benzene molecule, which is neglected in
the pairwise approximation. Because the destabilizing manybody eﬀects are pronounced in cases where the larger
components of the polarizability are aligned, the binding
distances are shortened when these eﬀects are neglected,
consistent with the observed behavior. Similar trends were also
observed in the prediction of the secondary structures of select
small peptides (Figure 8b), governed by subtle intramolecular
nonbonded interactions. The fragment separation in the
supramolecular buckycatcher complex was found to decrease
by 0.2 Å with the MBD model (Figure 8c), demonstrating a
distinct eﬀect of many-body vdW interactions on the structure
of larger and more realistic molecular systems of interest.
After discussing the nuclear degrees of freedom of the total
molecular Hamiltonian, we turn to the electronic degrees of
freedom. The long-range electron correlation energy is typically
around 5 orders of magnitude smaller than the total electronic
energy, and accordingly the electron density changes associated
with vdW interactions are of a similar relative magnitude with
respect to the total electron density. This is the reason why
vdW methods can be applied in a perturbative fashion as an a
posteriori correction to the total energy, without aﬀecting the
electron density, which is obtained a priori from the selfconsistent Kohn−Sham equations. On the other hand, for any
method that is formulated as a functional of the density, Ec[n],
one can derive the corresponding contribution to the exchangecorrelation potential, δEc/δn, and include it in the Kohn−Sham
equations, resulting in subtle changes in the electron density. In
fact, the Hellman−Feynman theorem shows that it is this
charge polarization induced by the long-range correlation of
quantum electron ﬂuctuations that acts as the origin of the vdW
forces on the nuclei.39,313 Self-consistent implementations have
been recently provided for several vdW methods discussed
throughout Section 4, including RPA,314 nonlocal density
functionals,163−165 as well as the TS15 and XDM315 pairwise
methods. In many of these works, the eﬀects of self-consistency
on the binding energies are reported as negligible and, in
general, the electron density is polarized in such a way that it
shifts slightly away from the atoms toward the intermolecular
regions. However, these conclusions were reached on small,
typically organic gas-phase molecular dimers. In contrast,
Figure 9 shows that the charge polarization induced by vdW
interactions on a metallic surface depends signiﬁcantly on the
particular metal: whereas the charge density is accumulated
above the surface in the case of copper and silver, it is depleted
in the case of gold. The eﬀects of this charge redistribution can
be directly compared to experiment via the surface work
function. This quantity is the energy associated with extracting
an electron from the surface and is directly inﬂuenced by the
dipole density of the surface, which is in turn connected to the
charge distribution along the direction normal to the surface. As
a result of the charge polarization shown in Figure 9, the work
functions of the coinage metals can be changed by as much as
0.3 eV due to long-range electron correlation.15 These work
functions can then be additionally tuned by noncovalent
adsorption of organic molecules on the metallic surface in
hybrid organic−inorganic interfaces.15,303,316
5.3. Molecular dynamics
After considering the eﬀects of vdW interactions on microscopic structural and electronic properties, we now consider
how these forces inﬂuence the macroscopic properties of
materials. As argued previously, a ﬁrst-principles description of
vdW interactions is required to accurately treat the variety of
structural, electronic, and environmental features that inﬂuence
the properties of systems found throughout biology, chemistry,
physics, and materials science (see Figure 1). Ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD), in which PES is generated “on
the ﬂy” from the electronic ground state without the need for
empirical input, provides such a framework. The AIMD
technique has been applied to many problems317−319 and
allows for a quantum-mechanical treatment of the structure and
dynamics of a given molecular system as well as its electronic
and dielectric properties, and potential chemical reactions. In
this section, we consider several examples of studies which
demonstrate that the predictive power of AIMD simulations
Figure 9. Charge density polarization of metallic surfaces due to longrange electron correlation. Δn is the integrated diﬀerence between the
total electron densities obtained by the PBE functional and the selfconsistent PBE+vdWsurf method. [Reprinted with permission from ref
15. Copyright 2015 American Physical Society.]
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
depends crucially upon the accuracy of the underlying potential
and, in particular, the inclusion of and choice for the respective
vdW description.
As a ﬁrst example, we consider the eﬀects of vdW
interactions on the structure and properties of liquid
water.323 Many AIMD studies demonstrated that vdW
interactions signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the microscopic structure
and macroscopic equilibrium density324−326 of ambient liquid
water. However, the inﬂuence of vdW forces on its properties
largely depends on the particular vdW approach. For instance,
the semiempirical pairwise DFT-D approach of Grimme57
tends to reduce the intensity of the ﬁrst maximum in the
oxygen−oxygen radial distribution function (gOO(r)) of liquid
water over a wide range depending on the underlying
functional.324,327,328 With the use of the nonlocal density
functionals from the vdW-DF family, one can obtain mixed
results in reproducing the second coordination shell in ambient
liquid water depending on the choice of the underlying
exchange-correlation functional.329−331 On the other hand,
AIMD simulations using a self-consistent (SC) exchangecorrelation potential that accounts for both exact exchange (via
the PBE0 functional) and vdW interactions (via the pairwise TS
model) are able to quantitatively reproduce the experimentally
derived gOO(r) of liquid water322 (see Figure 10a). In this case,
the PBE0 hybrid functional reduces the amount of selfinteraction error in the underlying exchange-correlation
potential and thereby weakens the hydrogen-bond strength in
liquid water relative to a GGA such as PBE; in doing so,
hydrogen-bonded molecules in the ﬁrst shell move outward,
resulting in a marked increase in the population of molecules
located in the interstitial region, i. e., the region between the
ﬁrst and second coordination shells (see Figure 10b). On the
other hand, vdW forces, as described by the TS method, are
nondirectional and strengthen the interactions between a given
water molecule and the molecules in its ﬁrst and second
coordination shells (and stabilize broken hydrogen-bond
conﬁgurations in general), which causes the molecules in the
second shell to move inward and populate the interstitial region
(see Figure 10b). In terms of dynamical properties, one also
observes a signiﬁcant increase in the predicted diﬀusion
coeﬃcient of liquid water when going from PBE (D =
0.02 Å 2·ps−1) to PBE0+TS-vdW(SC) (D = 0.15 Å2·ps−1),
which makes it much closer to the experimental value of
0.23 Å2·ps−1.332 As such, both these eﬀects work collectively to
yield a microscopic description of liquid water that is less
structured, more ﬂuidic, and signiﬁcantly closer to experiment.
As a second example, we consider the use of vdW-inclusive
AIMD (via the optB88-vdW nonlocal functional) to map the
molecular structure and energetics of liquid water ﬁlms on
layered materials, such as graphene and hexagonal boron nitride
(BN), to the complex transport of water at the nanoscale.333
Here, AIMD simulations reveal that the structures of the liquid
water ﬁlms, substantially inﬂuenced by vdW interactions, are in
fact very similar for both graphene and BN; however, slight
diﬀerences in the contact layer (that are not related to the
wetting properties of these interfaces) give rise to a remarkably
diﬀerent water slippage of these sheets (see Figure 11). This 3fold increase in the friction on BN with respect to graphene is
not captured by force-ﬁeld-based molecular dynamics simulations, thus stressing the importance of a ﬁrst-principles-based
description in predicting transport properties at complex
interfaces.
As a third and ﬁnal case, we consider the role played by vdW
interactions in stabilizing key helical domains in the secondary
structure of gas-phase polypeptides.102,335−338 In a recent
AIMD study,334 it was shown that the inclusion of vdW forces
can explain the notable stability of polyalanine (Ac-Alan-LysH+)
Figure 10. Individual and collective eﬀects of vdW interactions and
exact exchange on the structure of liquid water. (a) The oxygen−
oxygen radial distribution functions, gOO(r), of liquid water obtained
from theory (via DFT-based AIMD simulations) and various
scattering experiments.320,321 (b) Contributions from the ﬁrst and
second shells of neighboring water molecules to the gOO(r) of liquid
water. The arrows indicate systematic shifts in the main peak positions
and intensities of the computed distributions with the addition of selfconsistent vdW interactions and exact exchange in the underlying
exchange-correlation functional. [Adapted with permission from ref
322. Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC.]
Figure 11. Similar structure but diﬀerent friction of water on graphene
and hexagonal boron nitride surfaces. (a) Average density proﬁle of a
liquid water ﬁlm computed at the optB88-vdW level as a function of
the height from a graphene (GRA) and hexagonal boron nitride (BN)
sheet. (b) Comparison between the Green−Kubo estimate of the
friction coeﬃcient of liquid water on GRA and BN (with shaded areas
representing the uncertainties in the coeﬃcients). [Reprinted with
permission from ref 333. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.]
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
helices up to a temperature of 725 K.339 Figure 12 illustrates the
fact that AIMD simulations at the PBE and PBE+TS levels of
theory paint very diﬀerent pictures of the dynamical helix
structure over a wide range of temperatures. For instance,
AIMD simulations at 700 K with PBE+TS give a structure that
is comprised of both α and 310-helical motifs with an overall
helical structure that is preserved after 65 ps of simulation,
whereas PBE predicts that the α-helical motifs quickly
disappear within 5−7 ps, in contradiction to the experimental
6. CHALLENGES AND OUTLOOK
Recent developments of sophisticated methods for modeling
vdW interactions have brought unprecedented insights into the
nature of noncovalent interactions in complex molecules and
materials. The development of vdW methods based on ﬁrstprinciples vastly extended the applicability of density-functional
calculations in chemistry, biology, and materials science. The
continuing eﬀorts to increase the accuracy and reliability of
these methods will further improve our understanding and
capacity to model the noncovalent interactions in large
molecular systems.
Despite all of these advances, a uniﬁed method that could
accurately model noncovalent interactions in a wide range of
molecular and extended systems has yet to become available.
All existing vdW-inclusive methods have their advantages and
limitations. Recognizing the limitations is perhaps the most
important area of current research, which will eventually enable
systematic developments toward a universally applicable
method. Aiming toward this goal, we present here a set of
challenges which we deem as particularly important to address
to enable progress in the ﬁeld of modeling vdW interactions:
• Is it possible to develop an eﬃcient density-based
method for vdW interactions which would allow reliable
description of the wide range of phenomena and systems
illustrated in Figure 1? Could such a uniﬁed method treat
neutral small and large molecules, salts, ions, metals, and
interfaces between these systems, on equal footing?
Besides developing improved methods, this goal also
requires creating systematic data sets of validated
structures, binding and cohesive energies, and response
properties for a wide range of noncovalently bound
• It has been convincingly demonstrated that the manybody eﬀects in the vdW energy are crucial for both
qualitatively correct and quantitatively accurate modeling
of large molecular systems. Can simple rules of thumb be
developed that would allow design of molecular systems
that exhibit desirable properties stemming from collective
many-body eﬀects? While explicitly correlated quantumchemical methods allow achieving quantitative accuracy,
insights are more easily obtained from coarse-grained
• As the molecular size grows, eventually quantum
electrodynamic or Casimir-like eﬀects, not considered
by existing vdW-inclusive methods, become important:
retardation due to the ﬁnite speed of light or thermal
ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, among others. Can we develop
methods that seamlessly cross from the vdW into the
Casimir regime? Can we devise rules based on system
Figure 12. Importance of vdW interactions in determining the thermodynamic stability of polypeptide helices. (a) Overall number of hydrogen
bonds recorded throughout AIMD simulations at the PBE+TS-vdW and PBE levels of theory, with the α-helical bonds (red) and 310-helical bonds
(blue) counted separately. (b) Snapshots of the helical conformations from the corresponding AIMD simulations. [Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 334. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society.]
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
sizes and topologies for when such a crossover becomes
necessary?
• Can we develop eﬃcient density-based methods for
modeling vdW interactions in systems subject to both
homogeneous and inhomogeneous electric ﬁelds,
between excited-state (and ground-state) molecules, or
in general molecules embedded in complex static or
ﬂuctuating environments? How can we properly include
the eﬀect of a generalized frequency-dependent bath on
vdW interactions in complex molecular systems?
• How do nuclear (classical or quantum) ﬂuctuations at
ﬁnite temperature aﬀect vdW interactions between
molecules? Do they compensate or accentuate manybody eﬀects? Are there novel phenomena resulting from
the coupling between quantum nuclear ﬂuctuations and
long-range electronic correlations?
• The crucial role of vdW interactions in the structure and
stability of molecular systems is convincingly established
by now. What about the role of vdW interactions in
vibrational, mechanical, electronic, optical, and other
response properties of molecular systems?
• What is the role of solvents on intermolecular
interactions? This question combines the contribution
of both thermal eﬀects and electrodynamic ﬂuctuations.340
We now proceed by raising methodological questions
relevant for the development of improved methods for vdW
interactions and for better understanding of long-range
electronic correlation in general:
• Is there a systematic way to combine semilocal density
functionals with long-range models for vdW interactions?
As density functionals become more farsighted and vdW
models become more nearsighted, what is the optimal
crossover between semilocal and nonlocal approaches to
electron correlation? How can balance between manybody electronic eﬀects in the semilocal functional and the
nonlocal electron correlation be achieved?341
• Is there a systematic way to combine classical force ﬁelds
that approximately model bonding and electrostatics with
methods for long-range vdW interactions? For example,
recent work by Martyna et al. lays the foundation for
quantum-mechanical force ﬁelds based on quantum
Drude oscillators.342−344 How much quantum mechanics
can (should) an empirical force ﬁeld capture?
• Some of the vdW methods discussed in this review
provide a link between DFT, semiempirical densityfunctional approaches, and classical force ﬁelds. For
example, the TS method was extended from DFT60 to
the tightbinding method210 and force ﬁelds.211,212 Can
such ﬂexibility be transferred to other vdW methods?
• What is the nature of nonlocal ﬂuctuations contained in
χ0(r, r′) and α0(r, r′)? How well can they be represented
locally? Could the freedom in the gauge of the α vector
ﬁeld be used to some advantage?
• Can narrow-gap or zero-gap materials be described with
a local α0? Is the atom-dipole description, which is an
eﬃcient approximation for ﬁnite-gap materials, eﬃcient
also for metals?
• Is there a clear-cut theoretical distinction between dipole
and charge ﬂuctuations? Can charge ﬂuctuations be
modeled eﬃciently with semilocal dipole ﬂuctuations
even in metallic systems?
• How good is the single-oscillator Unsöld approximation
in general? Can we systematically generalize this model
to a many-body approach with multiple frequencies per
• How much can be achieved with ﬁner coarse-graining of
the response? Apart from mitigating the dipoleapproximation error, can more complex electronic eﬀects
be encoded in ﬁnely grained local response functions?
• Is the equivalence of electronic χ and α transferable to
the coarse-grained (oscillator) descriptions?
• How can the anisotropic local polarizability be
constructed in both the atomic case and densityfunctional case? Can we use the directionality of the
density gradient?
• Can we have truly nonlocal functionals for αeff(r) =
∫r′∈M(r) dr′ F(r, r′)?
• Can we have more exact constraints and limits on α[n]?
Can we go to meta-GGA functionals for α[n]? Can we
have point functionals that are exact for isolated atoms?
• When information from the density is used to construct
the local eﬀective α[n], what is the “range” of such
Finally, we mention a range of possible applications that
should enable better understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of existing vdW-inclusive methods and guide the
development of the next generation of uniﬁed methods:
• Databases of high-quality binding or cohesive energies of
molecular systems at equilibrium geometries (S22/S66,
S12, C21/X23) have substantially contributed to the
development of better vdW-inclusive methods during the
past decade. Some of these methods are now able to
consistently achieve a relative accuracy of 5−10% and an
absolute accuracy of 1 kcal/mol on these data sets.
However, the performance seems to deteriorate once the
methods are applied outside the domain of those
databases. Substantially more reference data should
become available in the next few years for increasingly
heterogeneous and complex molecular systems, including
nonequilibrium geometries and transition states. It
remains to be seen how well existing vdW-inclusive
methods perform for such more complex benchmarks,
representing molecules in more realistic nonequilibrium
situations.
• The performance of the methods strongly varies with the
complexity and size of a system (Figure 7). For small
molecular dimers in the S22/S66 data sets, all methods
perform well, but this changes as the systems become
increasingly nontrivial. Can we better understand the
scaling of vdW interactions with size and complexity?
When do many-body or higher-multipole eﬀects become
more important? Answering such questions would
require development of an eﬃcient method that includes
both multipolar and many-body eﬀects to inﬁnite order
in perturbation theory.
• How well do current vdW-inclusive methods model
diﬀerent phases of solids? The nature of bonding
strongly depends on the solid structure, and diﬀerent
phases of the same building block (atom, molecule, or
cluster) can exhibit very diﬀerent polarization responses.
Substantial understanding can be gained by analyzing the
performance of vdW-inclusive methods for cohesive and
elastic properties of diﬀerent solid phases. This applies to
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
both hard solids (semiconductors, ionic solids, metals)80,83 and molecular crystals when studying polymorphism.7,78,99
• Is the performance of vdW-inclusive methods uniform
across the periodic table? There is some evidence that
performance deteriorates for heavier elements and
materials with nontrivial electronic states, such as
narrow-gap semiconductors, metals, polarizable 2D
materials, and topological insulators. Many more benchmarks are required to gain better understanding of the
performance for diﬀerent elements in the periodic table.
• Hybrid interfaces between organic and inorganic systems
play an important role in fundamental science and
technological applications. The structure and binding of
such hybrid interfaces is often determined by vdW
interactions.209 Considerable experimental data is available for structures and energetics of such interfaces.
Continuous assessment of vdW methods for such
interface properties is necessary to enable predictive
simulations of hybrid systems.
• Do existing vdW-inclusive methods perform consistently
for dimers, clusters, and solids of polarizable elements,
such as semiconductors and metals? When going from a
dimer through larger clusters to a solid, the polarizability
scales nonlinearly, and this can have a strong inﬂuence
on vdW interactions.55,91,92 Do methods exhibit correct
scaling of vdW interactions with system size from dimers
to large clusters and extended solids?
• Biological systems provide a rich playground for the
assessment of vdW-inclusive methods. Much work has
been done evaluating diﬀerent vdW methods on small
peptides,337 protein secondary-structure elements,334
DNA,17 crystals of biological molecules,13,17,78,345 and
ions interacting with biological molecules,346,347 among
other systems.
• Can we control intermolecular vdW interactions by the
presence of nanostructures? Experiments clearly demonstrate that it is possible to dramatically enhance24,25 or
attenuate112 vdW interactions by the presence of
heterostructured surfaces with complex dielectric proﬁles.
Hence, it seems that it should be possible to design
molecular interaction proﬁles by carefully chosen
nanostructures with speciﬁc geometries and dielectric
properties.
• What is the role of microsolvation to full solvation on
vdW interactions between solutes? Similar to the
previous point, this ﬁeld is highly controversial340 and
demands systematic experimental and theoretical investigations of a wide range of solutes in solvents of varying
polarity and polarizability.
7. CONCLUDING REMARKS
During the past decade, the atomistic modeling community has
started to understand the broad implications of vdW dispersion
interactions for a wide variety of molecules and materials. The
development of sophisticated ﬁrst-principles approximations to
model vdW interactions lead to an exponentially growing
“black-box” use of these approaches in combination with semilocal density functionals. However, as is the case with semi-local
density-functional approximations, all existing vdW-inclusive
methods have their advantages and limitations, and care must
be taken when applying these methods to systems outside of
their “comfort zone”. The contributions of many-body eﬀects,
polarization screening, polarizability anisotropy, multipolar
expansion, nontrivial electronic states (metallic or topological),
coarse-graining of the electronic response functionall these
questionsremain open to debate in the modeling of vdW
interactions in realistic materials.
In this review, we presented a concise discussion of the
ingredients necessary for an accurate description of vdW
interactions in a wide range of materials (Section 2). The
various existing vdW-inclusive methods have been classiﬁed
according to their treatment of the microscopic polarizability
and the interaction potentialthe two fundamental quantities
required for the modeling of vdW interactions. We discussed
systems for which the polarizability can be reasonably
approximated with local models, and where such local
approximations fail. We emphasized the high accuracy in the
polarizabilities (and vdW coeﬃcients) of 5−6% that is required
to obtain reliable results for the long-range vdW energy;
deviations of just 10% in these quantities can lead to
unacceptably large errors.
Based on recent landmark experiments probing the nontrivial
nature of vdW interactions at the nanoscale, we argued that the
ubiquitous many-body eﬀects are crucial for both a qualitative
understanding and a quantitative description of the vdW
energy. Furthermore, these experiments demonstrate that our
understanding of quantum-mechanical vdW eﬀects is still only
emerging (see Section 3).
We followed by introducing the theoretical framework for
calculating vdW interactions based on the adiabatic-connection
ﬂuctuation−dissipation (ACFD) theorem in Section 4. This
part also discussed the crucial role of diﬀerent response
functions and the relation between them as used by diﬀerent
approximate vdW methods. We emphasize here that the exact
treatment of vdW interactions in arbitrary materials can be
formulated exclusively using the microscopic dipolar polarizability of the system.
Finally, we reviewed the performance of widely used vdWinclusive methods on a variety of molecular binding or cohesive
energy databases in Section 5. Although the performance is
generally very good for small molecular dimers, only some
available methods perform well for larger more complex
supramolecular systems and extended molecular crystals.
Current eﬀorts directed at obtaining reliable benchmarks for
more realistic systems and applying vdW methods to
increasingly large molecules will provide signiﬁcant insights
into the successes and limitations of diﬀerent methods.
In summary, painstaking and systematic work on the
concepts, theory, and applications of vdW-inclusive methods
should eventually enable us to develop an eﬃcient method for
vdW interactions with broad applicability in chemistry, biology,
physics, and materials science. Such a uniﬁed method should be
ﬁrmly based in the ACFD formalism and combine the best
features of interatomic approaches, nonlocal density functionals, and many-body perturbation theory.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Special Issue Paper
This paper is an additional review for Chem. Rev. 2016, 116,
issue 9, “Noncovalent Interactions”.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: .
Chemical Reviews
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00446
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4714−4758
*E-mail: .
Alexandre Tkatchenko: 0000-0002-1012-4854
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
Biographies
Jan Hermann received a double B.Sc. in Chemistry and Physics
followed by a M.Sc. in Material Modeling from Charles University in
Prague, while working under Ota Bludský and Petr Nachtigall on
intermolecular interactions in zeolites. Now a Ph.D. candidate in the
Tkatchenko group at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck
Society in Berlin, Hermann focuses on the development of general
models for van der Waals interactions applicable to realistic materials.
Robert A. DiStasio Jr. is a Professor of Chemistry and Chemical
Biology at Cornell University. He earned a B.S. summa cum laude in
Biology and Chemistry from Portland State University while working
with Carl C. Wamser and the late George S. Hammond. He received a
Ph.D. in Theoretical Chemistry from the University of California,
Berkeley for his work on local and canonical approximations in
Møller−Plesset perturbation theory with applications to dispersion
interactions with Martin Head-Gordon. This was followed by
Postdoctoral Research at Princeton University, where he worked
with Roberto Car, Salvatore Torquato, and Frank H. Stillinger, as well
as Alexandre Tkatchenko and Matthias Scheﬄer (at the Fritz Haber
Institute of the Max Planck Society in Berlin). DiStasio is an author of
and active contributor to both the Q-Chem and Quantum ESPRESSO
software packages, has given more than 75 seminars and colloquia
worldwide, and published more than 40 articles in peer-reviewed
academic journals.
Alexandre Tkatchenko is a Professor of Theoretical Chemical Physics
at the University of Luxembourg. He obtained his bachelor degree in
Computer Science and a Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry at the
Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana in Mexico City. In 2008−
2010, he was an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at the Fritz Haber
Institute (FHI) of the Max Planck Society in Berlin. Between 2011 and
2016, he led an independent research group at FHI. Tkatchenko has
given more than 70 invited talks plus 70 seminars and colloquia
worldwide, published more than 100 articles in peer-reviewed
academic journals, and serves on the editorial board of Science
Advancesan open-access journal in the Science family. He has
received a number of awards, including the Gerhard Ertl Young
Investigator Award of the German Physical Society in 2011, and two
important grants from the European Research Council: a Starting
Grant in 2011 and a Consolidator Grant in 2016.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A.T. acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the European Research
Council (ERC-StG VDWCMAT) and the DFG SPP-1807
Research Network. R.D. acknowledges partial support from
Cornell University through startup funding and the Cornell
Center for Materials Research through funding from the NSF
MRSEC program (DMR-1120296). This research used
resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility at
Argonne National Laboratory, which is supported by the Oﬃce
of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research also used resources
of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center,
which is supported by the Oﬃce of Science of the U.S.
Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-
05CH11231.