AC 2009-92: “FLIPPING” THE CLASSROOM TO EXPLORE ACTIVE LEARNING
IN A LARGE UNDERGRADUATE COURSE
Sarah Zappe, Pennsylvania State University
Dr. Sarah Zappe is the Director of Assessment and Instructional Support in the Leonhard Center
for the Enhancement of Engineering Education at Pennsylvania State University. Her background
is in educational psychology with an emphasis on educational testing and assessment. She can be
reached at .
Robert Leicht, Pennsylvania State University
Robert is currently a PhD Candidate in the Architectural Engineering Department at Penn State.
Robert’s research focuses on the improvement of team collaboration while leveraging advanced
data modeling and visualization technologies for building design and construction. Robert earned
his Masters in Architectural Engineering at Penn State, as well as having a background in the
construction industry. In addition, Robert has also spend time working with VTT, the Technical
Research Center of Finland, as a visiting scholar with their Building Informatics team. Robert’s
interest in Multi-Media educational methods has grown through his research into improving team
collaboration through improved communication technology. He can be reached at
 .
John Messner, Pennsylvania State University
Dr. John Messner is an Associate Professor of Architectural Engineering and the Director of the
Computer Integrated Construction Research Program at Penn State. He teaches courses in
construction engineering and management; Building Information Modeling; and virtual
prototyping. He recently led a project to construct the Immersive Construction (ICon) Lab, an
affordable, 3 screen immersive display system for design and construction visualization, and is
developing an interactive virtual construction simulation application for engineering education.
He can be reached at .
Thomas Litzinger, Pennsylvania State University
Tom Litzinger is Director of the Leonhard Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Education
and a Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Penn State, where he has been on the faculty since
1985. His work in engineering education involves curricular reform, teaching and learning
innovations, faculty development, and assessment. He teaches and conducts research in the areas
of combustion and thermal sciences. He was selected as a Fellow of ASEE in 2008. He can be
reached at .
Hyeon Woo Lee, Pennsylvania State University
Hyeon Woo Lee is an assistant professor at Department of Education, Sangmyung University in
Seoul Korea. His research interests are instructional systems design, new technology integration,
and social networking in virtual world.
© American Society for Engineering Education, 2009
Page 14.1385.1
“Flipping” the Classroom to Explore Active Learning in a Large
Undergraduate Course
Key Words: active learning, teaching with technology, e-learning
In traditional approaches to teaching engineering classes, the instructor plays the role of
information conveyor, while the students assume a receiver role with primary responsibilities of
listening and note-taking. Research into how students learn suggests that students need to be
more actively engaged with the course material to maximize their understanding. The literature
contains many examples of active learning strategies, such as teams solving problems in class
and the use of student response systems with conceptual questions. Incorporating active learning
strategies into a class means that there will be less time for delivering material via lecture.
Therefore, instructors who choose to utilize active learning strategies must find ways to ensure
that all required course content is still addressed.
This paper discusses an instructional technique called the “classroom flip” model which was
assessed in a larger, undergraduate architectural engineering class. In this model, lecture content
is removed from the classroom to allow time for active learning, and the content that was
removed is delivered to students via on-line video. This approach ‘flips’ the traditional use of
lecture and more active learning approaches. Lecture occurs outside of class, and more active
learning, such as problem solving, happens during class. Assessment data was collected to
examine students’ use of the video lectures and perceptions of the classroom flip. The students’
feedback suggests that while the active learning and additional project time available in class
improved their understanding, they would prefer that only about half the classes be flipped and
some use of traditional lectures should be maintained.
Introduction
Engineering instructors are often encouraged to try instructional techniques that encourage their
students to be more actively engaged with course material. Active learning is defined by the
engineering education community as the “involvement of students in their own learning.”1
Active learning encompasses a variety of instructional techniques, in which students participate
in activities during class time that involve more than passive listening. Active learning
techniques include in-class group work, think-pair-share, “clicker” questions using student
response systems, and minute papers.
Active learning is necessary in order to increase understanding and for enhancing problem
solving skills. The National Research Council has stated that “…the new science of learning is
beginning to provide knowledge to improve significantly people’s abilities to become active
learners who seek to understand complex subject matter and are better prepared to transfer what
they have learned to new problems and settings” (p. 13) 2 However, many instructors still utilize
class time for lecture and are concerned that active learning consumes valuable time that is
needed to cover material. The lecture method is often used as the primary method to make sure
Page 14.1385.2
that material is covered. However, the lecture method may not be the most effective way to
ensure student understanding. As Felder states, “You have roughly 40 contact hours in a
typical course. If all you do in them is lecture, you might as well just hand out your notes and let
the students find something more productive to do with all that time.” 3 Research has supported
that active learning strategies result in higher student engagement and greater learning gains as
compared to traditional instructor-centered methods such as lecture.4 Even with the mounting
evidence on the effectiveness of active learning strategies, instructors still struggle with this
balance of engaging students and covering important material, especially in larger classrooms.
One method that allows instructors to include active learning elements without sacrificing course
content is called the “classroom flip” or the “inverted classroom.” 5 The classroom flip utilizes
the internet to place substantial amounts of class material online, often in video format as a
“virtual lecture.” Students are then asked to use out-of-class time to watch the lectures.
Recent technology has made inverting the classroom easier for faculty and more accessible by
students. 6 Software programs such as Camtasia Studio, Adobe Captivate, Camstudio, and
UltraVNC Screen Recorder, to name a few, allow instructors to record spoken voice and/or video
while also capturing on-screen materials such as software demonstrations, worked problems, or
PowerPoint slides. In addition, the use of classroom management systems, such as Web CT,
Blackboard, and ANGEL, makes the uploading of the class materials easy and secure.
By requiring students to access the “virtual lectures,” the instructor can spend valuable class-time
leading students in engaging activities without sacrificing time that is needed to cover course
content. In the classroom flip method, the role of the instructor shifts. No longer is the
instructor the “sage on the stage” in which the primary role is to transmit information during
class time. Rather, the student must take initiative during his or her own time to prepare for
class. Class-time can then be devoted to other types of activities.7 Particularly in the
engineering domain, students need sufficient time to be able to practice problem-solving.
Flipping the class provides additional time for the students to work out problems, while having
the instructor there as a guide if needed.
In order to ensure that students do indeed access the online lectures, instructors need to
implement a sort of “gate-check” such as a pre-class quiz that tests students’ understanding of
the material. These online quizzes serve multiple purposes. First, having online quizzing
increases the likelihood that students will use out-of-class time to watch the videos in order to
learn the material necessary to be successful in the quizzes. This helps to assure that students
will be prepared for the in-class activities. Second, the instructor can use the results of the
quizzes as a launching point for discussion and adjust the class plan as necessary to address any
student misconceptions or lack of understanding, in a form of just-in-time teaching. 8
The classroom flip method may be perceived to be particularly beneficial to students who prefer
certain types of learning environments. According to the Felder-Solomon Learning Styles Index,
students may classify themselves along four dimensions as being a certain type of learner:
active/reflective, sensing/intuitive, visual/verbal, and sequential/global.9,10 The classroom flip
allows for a more active engagement, which may be a more conducive learning environment for
those students who consider themselves to be active learners. The use of more active methods in
Page 14.1385.3
the classroom may also potentially expand the skills of other students who have other types of
learning styles.
This paper discusses the use of the classroom flip strategy in an architectural engineering course
at Penn State University. Assessment data were collected to explore student perceptions of the
classroom flip and to examine how students used the video lectures.
Context of Study
In the spring of 2008, the classroom flip was used in a large undergraduate Architectural
Engineering course entitled “Introduction to the Building Industry.” The objective of the course
is for students to be able to learn and apply methods for organizing and managing construction
projects. The course combines business concepts, such as contracting methods and project
organization, with problem solving topics like cost estimating and critical path method
scheduling. The course enrolls approximately 100 students each semester that it is offered. It
consists of two 50-minute lecture periods and one 110 minute practicum weekly.
In 2007, the instructor of the course started using iTunesU to post video-records of lecture
material so that students would be able to review lectures and supplemental content. Students
were open to the use of the recorded lectures, as supported by preliminary assessment data
shown in Figure 1. The instructor of the course wanted to take the next step and flip the course
for a variety of reasons. First, the availability of online lectures would allow students to be
exposed to theory-based content outside of class time. Taking the lecture out of class would
allow greater time for in-class problem solving and increase the opportunity for increased
teacher-student interaction. In addition, the use of the practicum period, which had previously
been used to deliver course content, could be used for students to work on group projects, with
the instructor available for assistance and guidance.
Figure 1: Feedback regarding the interest in the use of iTunesU for posting lecture content.
The classroom flip method was used for cost estimating, one of three main topics in the course.
Having the iTunesU video content from the 2007 offering of the course enabled the instructor to
take the previous year’s lecture content, edit the video to provide specific course content, and
Page 14.1385.4
post the videos for students to watch before attending class. To help ensure that the students
watched the posted videos, online quizzes were utilized. The method was piloted with one
lecture topic well in advance of the cost estimating topics to ensure students could access the
video and to test the process of editing, posting, and providing access to the video. The first
video was 50 minutes in duration; the other videos for the estimating topics were shortened to 25
to 30 minutes each based on feedback from students. The online quizzes and videos were made
available to the students, who were then expected to watch the video and read any related
materials from the text in preparation for taking the quiz and attending the class. Videos were
not posted in advance of every lecture period, but were used typically once per week to match
sub-topics for the section of the class focused on cost estimating. In addition, extra examples
problems and solutions, which were not covered in class, were provided as additional videorecordings.
Research Questions
Two broad research questions were addressed for this study, which are described further below.
1. How did students use the video lectures?
Student success in active learning examples in the flipped classes depends on students’ level of
preparation for class. If students do not use out-of-class time to watch the videos, they will be
unlikely to succeed on the in-class exercises. One concern that some instructors may have with
the classroom flip is whether or not students will access the video lectures. Therefore, part of
this study examined students’ self-reported behaviors regarding video lectures, including the
frequency of watching the videos, frequency reviewing the videos, and the amount of time spent
watching the videos. This data addressed the question of how students used the videos.
2. What are students’ perceptions of the classroom flip?
A second area of exploration for this study focused on students’ perceptions of the classroom flip
in regards to their learning. Data was collected to answer questions such as: Do students prefer
the technique over traditional learning? What were the challenges of participating in the flipped
classes as compared to traditional lectures?
Data Collection
Assessment data was collected at several points of time during the semester. First, a minute
paper was given following the piloted flipped class session. Students were simply asked to state
what they liked and did not like about the classroom flip. The minute paper was given during
class time on pencil and paper. The information from this short minute paper was coded and
used to create two longer surveys.
Following six flipped class sessions, a longer course survey was administered to the students.
This survey (Course Survey 1) consisted of a variety of open-ended, check-lists, and rating scale
items. The questions asked the students how they utilized the online videos, what benefits they
perceived from the flipped classes, and whether they preferred the flipped classes or traditional
Page 14.1385.5
lecture periods. The information from this survey was used for both summative and formative
purposes. In other words, the information was used to both understand students’ perceptions of
the classroom flip and to guide changes to the method with the intention of maximizing student
An additional course survey was administered to the students at the end of the semester. This
survey (Course Survey 2) was used as a summative evaluation of the classroom flip method.
The survey consisted of 35 items across 5 subscales in which students were asked to rate their
level of agreement. The subscales were intended to measure student perceptions of: 1) the
effectiveness of video content, 2) pre-class material (videos versus reading), 3) online quizzes, 4)
in-class delivery of material, and 5) the use of the practicum to work on projects. Student
responses were coded from 1 to 5, with strongly disagree representing a 1. Averages and
standard deviations were calculated for each item. Both of the course surveys were administered
online via the university’s course management system.
Copies of these surveys are available in Appendix A. Both surveys were developed by the
authors in order to gather specific student perception data. Because the surveys were tailored
specifically to assess the course innovation, psychometric evidence is not currently available to
support the reliability and validity of the instruments.
Of the 95 students enrolled in the course, approximately 80% were male with less than 10%
minority representation. A total of 77 students completed the Course Survey 1 and provided
consent for their data to be used for research purposes. The response rate for this survey was
80.2%. A total of 80 students responded to Course Survey 2 and provided consent. The
response rate for this survey was 83.3%. Select results from Course Survey 1 are displayed in
tables below. In addition, Appendix B displays the frequency data and descriptive statistics for
the rating scale items from Course Survey 1. Appendix C displays the frequency data and
descriptive statistics for all items administered during Course Survey 2.
How do students use the video lectures?
The overwhelming majority of the students reported watching each video that was available
online. Most students (92%) reported watching the video one time, although many students
reported reviewing unclear portions of the video. Figure 2 displays the frequency distribution of
the number of students who reviewed unclear portions.
Page 14.1385.6
Figure 2: Number of students reviewing unclear portions of the video
The majority of the students reported watching the videos either straight through (36.4%) or
straight through with review of unclear pieces (53.5%). Most students spent either 30 or 45
minutes watching the lectures in one sitting. Over half of the students thought that the optimum
length of posted lectures was 20 minutes (59.5%), though having the pilot video length at 50
minutes may have raised the duration students found acceptable. Figures 3 and 4 display the
frequency distributions for the time spent watching lectures and the optimum lengths of posted
Figure 3: Typical time spent watching video lectures
Page 14.1385.7
Figure 4: Perceived optimum length of posted lectures
In summary, students were willing to use out-of-class time to watch the videotaped lectures.
Many watched portions of the videos multiple times in order to better understand unclear
sections. Not surprisingly, students tended to prefer watching videos of a shorter duration.
What are students’ perceptions of the classroom flip?
The majority of the students (74%) felt that the flipped classes were helpful to their
understanding of the concepts. An additional 24.7% felt that the flipped classes were somewhat
helpful. A total of 75.3% of the students agreed or strongly agreed that the additional time spent
problem solving in class improved their understanding of the estimating methods.
While the majority of the students found the flipped class periods to be helpful to understanding,
the vast majority of the students did not want every class to be held in the inverted format (see
Figure 5). Rather, most students felt that the courses should be flipped about half the time.
According to 70.1% of the students, the instructors of the course dedicated an appropriate
amount of time to the in-class activities (see Figure 6).
Page 14.1385.8
Figure 5: How often students think course should be held in the flipped format
Figure 6: Perceptions of amount of time dedicated to in-class activities
As mentioned above, Appendix B displays the frequency distributions, means, and standard
deviations for rating scale items included on Course Survey 1. Approximately half of the
students preferred to listen to a lecture face-to-face, rather than watching the lecture on video.
However, only 20% felt that they had a difficult time following the video content.
Approximately half the students felt that it was easy to get distracted while listening to the video
Data collected after the six flipped class sessions showed that 76.6% of the students felt that
more time needed to be spent at the beginning of the class for review. The instructor made
Page 14.1385.9
changes to the course so that a short review was used to remind student of the video content and
prepare them for the in-class activities. By the end of the semester, a total of 68.8% of the
students said that the video reviews at the start of class helped the transition to the in-class
exercises. In addition, the overwhelming majority of the students (91.3%) said that they
understood the in-class exercises better when an example was shown at the start of the class.
Students were asked whether they preferred watching the videos as a way to prepare for class,
rather than reading a textbook. Students rated the usefulness of both the textbook and the videos
similarly. As shown by the data in Appendix C, a total of 43.6% of the students thought that the
videos were a more effective delivery than the textbook (41% were uncertain). Over half of the
students (52.6%) felt that the videos allowed them to “sit back and absorb the material.”
On Course Survey 2, students were also asked about their perceptions of the practicum for group
projects. A total of 78.8% of the students felt that the use of the practicum for the group projects
was a good use of time. In addition, 61.3% of the students thought that using the practicum for
the group projects made it worth having to watch the videos outside of class. A total of 90.1%
thought that having the instructor and teaching assistant present during the practicum helped
understanding of how to perform well on the project.
Summary and Discussion
The classroom flip experiment in the architectural engineering course had generally positive
reactions from the students. Students thought that flipping the classes led to increased
understanding of the subject material and assigned projects. Students reported watching the
videos outside of class, as their homework assignment. The instructor of the course has decided
to continue using the model in future semesters, given the results of the assessment.
While the experiment was judged to be a success, the assessment results did yield some
suggestions for others who may want to try the method. First, the students desire that the videos
be kept somewhat short. The students were less willing to watch videos that were an hour long.
Rather, they desired to have videos around 20 minutes in length. A second suggestion for
instructors would be to briefly review the course content before in-class activities begin during
class periods. This brief review serves as a refresher for course material similar to how one
might highlight content from an assigned reading and allows for emphasis of the most important
course concepts, and provides students the opportunity to ask questions. The goal of this
refresher should not be to replicate all the information from the video, but rather to be a brief
reminder of the course material so that students will be better able to complete the in-class
activities successfully. In addition, the review allowed the instructor to see where students had
difficulty and watch for signs of confusion, which would only be possible in the live classroom
The instructor of the course often had included short example problems during his review.
Another possibility would be to ask the students to complete these examples online for a
homework assignment, in order to reduce the possibility that students were relying on the
instructor reviews to gather a basic understanding of the material rather than watching the videos
on their own time.
Page 14.1385.10
In summary, the authors suggest the following recommendations for other instructors who would
like to attempt the classroom flip technique in their own class:
1. Require students to complete an online quiz before students come to class as a “gatecheck” to make sure that they are prepared.
2. Keep the videos relatively short (no longer than 20-30 minutes) in order to ensure that
students watch them.
3. Briefly review the course content before in-class activities to answer any questions and to
make sure that the majority of the students have sufficient understanding of the material.
4. Consider adding multi-media to the online lectures in order to keep students interested
and engaged in the material.
This study does have several limitations. First, no control or comparison groups were available
to compare the impact of the course changes. Second, the instruments developed for the survey
were tailored to the specific course changes by the authors. While tailor-made surveys allow for
the assessment of very specific course innovations, they lack evidence for validity of the
instrument. Future investigations need to be performed in order to gather information to support
the reliability and validity of the instruments used in this study.
Future research is being conducted to better understand the impact of the classroom flip.
Additional data has been collected from the students to understand the relationship between
student preferences for the inverted classroom and their learning styles. This work will answer
questions such as do students with active learning styles have a more positive perception of the
method. In addition, an investigation into the impact of the flipped classes on student learning is
necessary. This paper focuses on the students’ perception of the flipped classes. While students
stated that the instructor’s use of the method helped their understanding, research needs to be
done to examine the impact on direct measures of student learning, such as course assignments,
tests, and project grades. These areas will be explored in future research.
The classroom flip method is a useful way to add active learning to the classroom without
sacrificing valuable class time needed for coverage of content. Students are given the
responsibility of independently learning the course material so that more class time can be
dedicated towards problem solving and active learning exercises. The potential exists for
instructors in many disciplines to apply the method, using class time for a variety of different
types of exercises. In addition, while the flip technique is described here for a face-to-face
setting, the potential exists for the technique to shape blended learning environments.