IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 32, NO. 4, JULY 1994
Hyperspectral Image Classification and
Dimensionality Reduction: An Orthogonal
Subspace Projection Approach
Joseph C. Harsanyi, Member, IEEE, and Chein-I Chang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstruct-Most
applications of hyperspectral imagery re-
quire processing techniques which achieve two fundamental
goals: 1) detect and classify the constituent materials for each
pixel in the scene; 2) reduce the data volumeldimensionality,
without loss of critical information, so that it can be processed
efficiently and assimilated by a human analyst.
In this paper, we describe a technique which simultaneously
reduces the data dimensionality, suppresses undesired or inter-
fering spectral signatures, and detects the presence of a spec-
tral signature of interest. The basic concept is to project each
pixel vector onto a subspace which is orthogonal to the unde-
sired signatures. This operation is an optimal interference
suppression process in the least squares sense. Once the inter-
fering signatures have been nulled, projecting the residual onto
the signature of interest maximizes the signal-to-noise ratio and
results in a single component image that represents a classifi-
cation for the signature of interest. The orthogonal subspace
projection (OSP) operator can be extended to k signatures of
interest, thus reducing the dimensionality of k and classifying
the hyperspectral image simultaneously. The approach is ap-
plicable to both spectrally pure as well as mixed pixels.
I. INTRODUCTION
YPERSPECTRAL imaging spectrometer data pro-
H vide a wealth of information which can be used to
address a variety of earth remote sensing problems. A
short list of applications includes environmental mapping,
global change research, geological research, wetlands
mapping, assessment of trafficability , plant and mineral
identification and abundance estimation, crop analysis,
and bathymetry. The common theme in all of these ap-
plications is the requirement for classification of each
pixel in the scene, and reduction of data volume to tract-
able levels.
Classification of a hyperspectral image sequence
amounts to identifying which pixels contain various spec-
trally distinct materials that have been specified by the
user. Several techniques for classification of multilhyper-
spectral pixels have been used from minimum distance
and maximum likelihood classifiers [ 13 to correlation/
matched filter-based approaches such as spectral signature
matching and the spectral angle mapper . The sta-
Manuscript received March 2, 1993; revised August 13, 1993 and March
J. Harsanyi is with Applied Signal & Image Technology Company, Pas-
C-I. Chang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
IEEE Log Number 9402661.
adena, MD, 21122.
of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 21228.
tistically based classifiers are limited since they do not
account for the prevalent case of mixed pixels which are
pixels that contain multiple spectral classes. Existing cor-
relatiodmatched filter-based approaches suffer from the
mixed pixel problem, as well as the limitation that the
output of the matched filter is nonzero and quite often
large for multiple classes since the spectral signatures of
materials are not generally orthogonal vectors.
To reduce the data volume, techniques for reducing the
image dimensionality are often applied. Typically, the di-
mensionality of a hyperspectral image cube is reduced by
applying a linear transformation, such as a principal com-
ponents transformation, and retaining only the significant
components for further processing. The principal com-
ponents transformation produces a new set of uncorre-
lated images that are ordered in terms of decreasing in-
formation or, equivalently, decreasing variance .
Although each hyperspectral pixel is a high (> 100) di-
mensional vector, most of the information about the scene
can be described by a few (generally less than ten) di-
mensions. This reduced dimensionality is known as the
intrinsic dimensionality [SI. A recent improvement to the
principal components transformation is the noise-adjusted
principal components transformation . This transfor-
mation orders the new images in terms of signal-to-noise
ratio, and thus deemphasizes noise in the resulting images
Although these approaches are sufficient for reducing
data volume, they do not emphasize individual spectral
classes or signatures of interest. For example, the first
principal component image contains the most infonna-
tiodvariance, but it is generally a linear combination of
information from several spectral classes. This is a direct
consequence of the fact that most materials resident in
hyperspectral scenes have spectral signatures that are cor-
related, whereas the eigenvectors used to derive the prin-
cipal component images are, of course, orthogonal.
In this paper, we describe a technique which simulta-
neously reduces data dimensionality to a user-prescribed
level and produces a new sequence of images which high-
light the presence of each signature of interest. These new
component images represent class maps for each of the
signatures of interest. The technique is based on the con-
cept of orthogonal subspace projection which is a result
from the theory of least squares and has been further de-
veloped in the sensor array processing community , .
0196-2892/94$04.00 0 1994 IEEE
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 32, NO. 4, JULY 1994
An equivalent result directed at image sequence process-
ing has also been developed using the concept of simul-
taneous diagonalization (SD) filtering [ 101. The technique
presented here recasts the results from -[lo] into an
intuitive two-step development. First, we determine the
matrix operator which eliminates undesired or interfering
signatures and is an optimal interference rejection process
in the least squares sense. Second, we develop a vector
operator which maximizes the residual desired signature
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A combination of these op-
erators into an overall OSP classification operator reduces
the non-Gaussian detection and classification problem
presented by mixed pixels to the solved problem of de-
tecting an unknown constant in white noise.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
I1 covers formulation of the problem. Section I11 intro-
duces the concept of orthogonal subspace projection, and
introduces the hyperspectral pixel classification operator.
Results of simulations and application of the operator to
AVIRIS data are presented in Sections IV and V, respec-
tively, and concluding remarks are given in Section VI.
11. PROBLEM
FORMULATION
A hyperspectral image cube is made up of hundreds of
spatially registered images, taken contiguously over a
large wavelength region, with high (< 10 nm) spectral
resolution [ 111. Each pixel in a hyperspectral image cube
is an observation vector which represents the reflected en-
ergy spectrum of the materials within the spatial area cov-
ered by the pixel. Existing hyperspectral sensors produce
observation vectors that have several hundred elements.
For example, each pixel from the NASAIJPL Airborne
Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) con-
tains 224 elements corresponding to 224 spectral wave-
length bands ranging from 0.4 to 2.5 pm. Each spectral
band has approximately a 10 nm bandwidth.
Generally, the spatial coverage of each pixel may en-
compass several different materials, each with a unique
spectral signature. In this case, the observation vector is
affected by the individual spectral signatures of each ma-
terial, and the pixel is termed mixed , . A mixed
pixel containing p spectrally distinct materials, denoted
by the 1 X 1 vector r(x, y), can be described by the linear
where 1 is the number of spectral bands, (n, y) is the spa-
tial position of the pixel, M = (ul - - - ui * * - up - d)
is an 1 X p matrix with linearly independent columns and
the 1 X 1 column vector ui is the spectral signature of the
ith distinct material, a(x, y) is a p X 1 vector where the
ith element represents the fraction of the ith signature
present in the pixel, and n(x, y) is an 1 x 1 vector repre-
senting random noise which is assumed to be an inde-
pendent, identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian process
with zero mean and covariance matrix a2Z.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the last col-
umn of M is the desired signature of interest which is de-
r(x, Y) = Ma(& Y) + n(x, Y)
noted by d. The remaining columns are undesired signa-
tures denoted by U = (uI - - ui - - - up-,) that are
assumed to be linearly independent. An equivalent state-
ment of (1) which separates the desired and undesired sig-
natures is given by
r = da, + Uy + It.
Here, we have suppressed the spatial position of the pixel
for convenience, ap is the fraction of the desired signa-
ture, and y is a vector which contains the first p - l ele-
ments of a.
We now develop an operator which eliminates the ef-
fects of U and maximizes the remaining signal energy with
respect to the noise.
111. HYPERSPECTRAL
PIXEL CLASSIFICATION
A. Interference Rejection by Orthogonal Subspace
Projection
The first step in deriving a classification operator for
the signature of interest d is to eliminate the effects of
interfering signatures which are represented by the col-
umns of U. The approach is to form an operator that pro-
jects r onto a subspace that is orthogonal to the columns
of U. The vector resulting from such an operation will
only contain energy associated with the desired signature
d and random noise. The least squares optimal interfer-
ence rejection operator is given by the 1 x 1 matrix
P = (I - UUU)
where U# = (UTU)-'UT is the pseudoinverse of U. This
operator has the same structure as the orthogonal comple-
ment projector from the theory of least squares and the
signal blocking matrix which has been used in the sensor
array processing community [SI. In the case at hand, how-
ever, the operator minimizes energy associated with the
signatures not of interest as opposed to minimizing the
total least squares error. Operating on (2), we have
Pr = Pda, + Pn.
It is clear that this approach is an optimal interference
rejection process in the least squares sense since P re-
duces the contribution of U to zero. Additional informa-
tion regarding orthogonal subspace projection operators
and their properties can be found in -[lo], [123, and
B. Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) Maximization
The second step in deriving the pixel classification op-
erator is to find the 1 X I operator x T which maximizes
the SNR. Operating on (4), we have
which is a scalar. The signal-to-noise-energy ratio is given
xTPr = xTPdap + xTPn
xTPda;dTPTx
a; xTp&TpTx
xTPE{nnT}PTx o2 xTppTx
where E{ * } denotes the expected value.
HARSANYI AND CHANG: HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE CLASSIFICATION & DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION
Maximization of this quotient is the generalized eigen-
vector problem
PddTPTx = XPPTx
where X = X(a2/ap). The value of x T which maximizes
can be determined in general using techniques outlined
in [lo] and the idempotent (P2 = P) and symmetric (PT
= P) properties of the interference rejection operator. The
where K is an arbitrary scalar.
C. Orthogonal Subspace Projection (OSP)
Classijication Operator
Substituting the result in (8) into (3, we see that the
overall classification operator for a desired hyperspectral
signature in the presence of multiple undesired signatures
and white noise is given by the 1 x I vector
This is an intuitively pleasing result since it first nulls the
interfering signatures, and then uses a matched filter for
the desired signature to maximize the SNR. The operator
is similar to a result from the sensor array processing
community which is used for higher rank spectrum esti-
mation or, equivalently, estimation of the SNR for a can-
didate multiemitter matched filter . It is also one of the
limiting special cases that is derived in [lo] for the si-
multaneous diagonalization (SD) filter with noise vari-
ance equal to zero. Finally, the operator can be shown to
provide least squares optimal fraction images [ 121 that are
equivalent to those produced by linear mixture modeling
techniques , , - .
An interesting consequence of the two-step develop-
ment approach that we have used to arrive at this result is
to show that the equivalent SD filter for the zero noise
variance case is also the least squares optimal interference
rejectiodmax SNR filter for the case when white noise is
present with variance u2. This is important from an au-
tomatic detection perspective since this operator reduces
the non-Gaussian mixed pixel classification problem to the
problem of detecting the unknown constant d TPdop in the
presence of white noise.
When the operator in (9) is applied to all of the pixels
in a hyperspectral scene, each 1 x 1 pixel is reduced to a
scalar which is a measure of the presence of the signature
of interest. The ultimate result is to reduce the I images
comprising the hyperspectral image cube into a single im-
age where pixels with high intensity indicate the presence
of the desired signature. This represents a significant re-
duction in data volume since 1 is >200 for current and
planned airborne hyperspectral sensors. Since the classi-
fication operator reduces each pixel to an unknown con-
stant in white noise, the resultant image can be sensibly
thresholded and an automatic binary classification deci-
sion can be made based on the Neyman-Pearson detection
criterion , . This criterion maximizes the proba-
bility of detecting the presence of the signature of interest
subject to a user designated false alarm rate.
The extension of this vector operator for a single sig-
nature to a matrix operator for k signatures of interest is
straightforward. The k X 1 matrix operator is given by
Q = ( q l * - * q i - - *
where each of the qr = d'P, is formed with the appro-
priate desired and undesired signature vectors. In this
case, the hyperspectral image cube is reduced to k images
which classify each of the signatures of interest.
IV. SIMULATION
In this section, we present an application of the orthog-
onal subspace projection (OSP) technique to linearly
mixed reflectance spectra. In the first case, 100 hyper-
spectral pixels were simulated using the red soil and dry
grass reflectance spectra shown in Fig. 1. These spectra
were first convolved to 10 nm spectral bands to simulate
the capability of current airborne hyperspectral sensors.
The abundance of each material varied from pixel to pixel,
and white Gaussian noise was added to each pixel to
achieve a 25 : 1 signal-to-noise ratio. The signal-to-noise
ratio is defined here as 50% reflectance divided by the
standard deviation of the noise. This should not be con-
fused with the signal-to-noise-energy ratio which is max-
imized in (6) to develop the optimal classification opera-
tor. Pixels 20, 40, 60, and 80 also contain the creosote
leaves reflectance spectrum, shown in Fig. 1, at 20, 15,
10, and 5% abundance, respectively. To illustrate the se-
verity of the detection/classification problem, pixels
18-22 are shown in Fig. 2. Pixel 20, which contains the
creosote leaves spectrum at 20% abundance, is not distin-
guishable from the neighboring pixels. The missing por-
tions of the spectra are where the 1.4 and 1.9 pm water
bands have been removed.
An OSP classification operator was formed using (9)
where d is the creosote leaves spectrum and the two col-
umns of U are the red soil and dry grass spectra. The
result of applying the operator to each pixel is shown in
Fig. 3. The pixels containing the creosote leaves spec-
trum are evident.
A second simulation was run using the reflectance spec-
tra in Fig. 4. Again, 100 mixed pixels were simulated,
and in this case, we form an operator to detect sage brush
in the presence of both creosote leaves and black brush.
As before, pixels 20, 40, 60, and 80 contain the target
reflectance spectrum, sage brush, at 20, 15, 10, and 5%
abundance, respectively. In this case, white Gaussian
noise was added to each pixel to achieve a 50: 1 signal-
to-noise ratio referenced to 50% reflectance. The result of
applying the operator to each pixel is shown in Fig. 5 .
This is clearly a more difficult classification problem than
the first simulation, but the presence of the sage brush
spectrum is detectable in all but the 5% abundance case.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 32, NO. 4, JULY 1994
WAVELENGTH (MICRONS)
Fig. 1. Reflectance spectra: simulation 1.
WAVELENGTH (MICRONS)
Fig. 2. Mixed spectra. This figure shows simulated pixels 18-22. Pixel
20, which contains the creosote leaves spectrum, is not distinguishable.
Discontinuities in the spectra are where atmospheric water bands have been
Fig. 3. OSP operator output: simulation 1. The result of operating on each
pixel vector is a scalar. The relative output power for each pixel is shown
as a function of pixel number. The presence of the creosote leaves spectrum
is detectable to approximately 5 % abundance in this case.
CREOSOTE LEAVES
WAVELENGTH (MICRONS)
Fig. 4. Reflectance spectra: simulation 2
0.1 !kL*l A,AJ
Fig. 5. OSP operator output: simulation 2. This result demonstrates the
difficult problem of discmination between spectrally similar vegetation. In
this case, the sage brush spectrum is detectable in all but the 5% abundance
V. EXPERIMENTAL
AVIRIS DATA
The OSP technique was also applied to a subsection of
an AVIRIS scene of the Lunar Crater Volcanic Field
(LCVF) which is located in Northern Nye County, NV.
Extensive field work has been done in this area, and the
AVIRIS scene covering it has been previously modeled
using spectral mixture analysis , [2 13. A single band
image from the AVIRIS data is shown in Fig. 6. Atmo-
spheric water bands and low SNR bands have been re-
moved from the data, reducing the image cube from 224
to 158 bands.
The signatures used to develop the OSP classification
operator are the same image endmembers that were used
to model the scene with spectral unmixing techniques in
 . These endmembers, which are extracted directly
from the image, are the radiance spectra of red oxidized
basaltic cinders, rhyolite, playa, vegetation, and shade
HARSANYI AND CHANG: HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE CLASSIFICATION & DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION
Fig. 6. AVIRIS image of the Lunar Crater Volcanic Field (0.752 pm
Fig. 7. OSP operator output: LCVF subsection. Operating on a 200 X 200 pixel subsection from the upper left comer of the
LCVF, scene (a) yields component images for each of the chosen material image endmembers. The component image in (b)
indicates the presence of red oxidized basaltic cinders, (c) clearly shows the dry playa lakebed, (d) indicates exposures of
rhyolite, (e) shows vegetation, and (f) represents shade which accounts for variable lighting and topography. The data reduction
provided by the operator in this case is from a 158 band hyperspectral image cube to five component images which provide
information of interest regarding the chosen image endmembers.
which accounts for topographic shadowing and variable
lighting geometries within the scene. It is important to
note that it is not necessary to calibrate the AVIRIS data
to reflectance before applying the orthogonal subspace ap-
proach. In this case, we develop an operator based on ra-
diance spectra, and operate directly on the measured ra-
diance for each pixel in the scene.
For this experiment, we develop the classification op-
erator for each of the image endmembers as in (10). Ap-
plying the overall operator to the image results in a di-
mensionality reduction in this case of 158 to 5. The
resultant component images for each of the endmembers
are shown in Fig. 7. These component images represent
class maps of the various endmembers, and are consistent
with known attributes of the scene which have been de-
termined by field observations and mapping , .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 32, NO. 4, JULY 1994
VI. CONCLUSION
An approach for simultaneously reducing hyperspectral
data dimensionality and detecting hyperspectral signa-
tures of interest in the presence of undesired or interfering
signatures has been developed and demonstrated. The
technique can be viewed as a combination of two linear
operators into a single classification operator. The first
operator is an optimal interference rejection process in the
least squares sense, and the second is an optimal detector
in the maximum SNR sense. The approach is applicable
to both mixed pixels as well as spectrally pure pixels, and
does not suffer from the limitations of standard statistical
classifiers and matched filtering/spectral signature match-
ing techniques which are suboptimal in the presence of
multiple correlated interferers.
Application of the technique to simulated hyperspectral
mixed pixels shows that representative signatures of in-
terest can be detected at abundance levels as low as a few
percent at signal-to-noise ratios ( 5 50 : 1) and spectral
resolution (10 nm) which are easily attainable with exist-
ing airborne hyperspectral sensors. Performance will, of
course, vary depending on the particular scenario, but this
technique can be used as an analysis tool to examine the
sensor capabilities required to solve a particular detection
and classification problem.
The technique has also been applied to data collected
with the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer
(AVIRIS) from the Lunar Crater Volcanic Field (LCVF)
in Nevada. The technique produces component images
which represent class maps of the various materials of in-
terest within the scene. Component images generated for
the LCVF scene are reasonable when compared to pub-
lished geologic maps of the area and corroborating
field observations .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Laboratory sample spectra were obtained from Brown
University’s RELAB and the University of Washington
(vegetation spectra). AVIRIS data of the Lunar Crater
Volcanic Field were provided by the Planetary Data Sys-
tem of the National Space Science Data Center, Principal
Investigator: R. Arvidson. Special thanks to W. Farrand
of Science Applications International Corporation for pro-
viding geological interpretation of the results in Section
V. The authors are also grateful to J. Hejl of the Applied
Signal and Image Technology Company for many useful
comments on drafts of this manuscript.