Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 1
NEUROINFORMATICS
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 27 January 2009
doi: 10.3389/neuro.11.011.2008
PyNN: a common interface for neuronal network simulators
Andrew P. Davison1*, Daniel Brüderle2, Jochen Eppler3,4, Jens Kremkow5,6, Eilif Muller7, Dejan Pecevski8,
Laurent Perrinet6 and Pierre Yger1
1 Unité de Neurosciences Intégratives et Computationelles, CNRS, Gif sur Yvette, France
2 Kirchhoff Institute for Physics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
3 Honda Research Institute Europe GmbH, Offenbach, Germany
4 Berstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany
5 Neurobiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biology III, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany
6 Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives de la Méditerranée, CNRS, Marseille, France
7 Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
8 Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
Computational neuroscience has produced a diversity of software for simulations of networks of
spiking neurons, with both negative and positive consequences. On the one hand, each simulator
uses its own programming or conﬁ guration language, leading to considerable difﬁ culty in porting
models from one simulator to another. This impedes communication between investigators and
makes it harder to reproduce and build on the work of others. On the other hand, simulation
results can be cross-checked between different simulators, giving greater conﬁ dence in their
correctness, and each simulator has different optimizations, so the most appropriate simulator
can be chosen for a given modelling task. A common programming interface to multiple
simulators would reduce or eliminate the problems of simulator diversity while retaining the
beneﬁ ts. PyNN is such an interface, making it possible to write a simulation script once, using
the Python programming language, and run it without modiﬁ cation on any supported simulator
(currently NEURON, NEST, PCSIM, Brian and the Heidelberg VLSI neuromorphic hardware). PyNN
increases the productivity of neuronal network modelling by providing high-level abstraction,
by promoting code sharing and reuse, and by providing a foundation for simulator-agnostic
analysis, visualization and data-management tools. PyNN increases the reliability of modelling
studies by making it much easier to check results on multiple simulators. PyNN is open-source
software and is available from 
Keywords: Python, interoperability, large-scale models, simulation, parallel computing, reproducibility, computational
neuroscience, translation
compiler standards and simulators develop. Another is that model
source code is often not written with reuse and extension in mind,
and so considerable rewriting to modularize the code is necessary.
Probably the most important barrier is that code written for one
simulator is not compatible with any other simulator.
Although many computational models in neuroscience are written from the ground up in a general purpose programming language such as C++ or Fortran, probably the majority use a special
purpose simulator that allows models to be expressed in terms
of neuroscience-speciﬁ c concepts such as neurons, ion channels,
synapses; the simulator takes care of translating these concepts
into a system of equations and of numerically solving the equations. A large number of such simulators are available , mostly as open-source software, and each has its
own programming language, conﬁ guration syntax and/or graphical interface, which creates considerable difﬁ culty in translating
models from one simulator to another, or even in understanding
someone else’s code, with obvious negative consequences for communication between investigators, reproducibility of others’ models
and building on existing models.
However, the diversity of simulators also has a number of positive
consequences: (i) it allows cross-checking – the probability of two
INTRODUCTION
Science rests upon the three pillars of open communication, reproducibility of results and building upon what has gone before. In
these respects, computational neuroscience ought to be in a good
position, since computers by design excel at repeating the same
task without variation, as many times as desired: reproducibility
of computational results ought, then, to be a trivial task. Similarly,
the Internet enables almost instantaneous transmission of research
materials, i.e. source code, between labs.
However, in practice this theoretical ease of reproducibility and
communication is seldom achieved outside of a single lab and a
time frame of a few months or years. While a given scientist may
easily be able to reproduce a result obtained a few months ago,
precisely reproducing a result obtained several years ago is likely to
be rather more difﬁ cult, and the general experience seems to be that
reproducing the results of others is both difﬁ cult and time consuming: very many published papers lack sufﬁ cient detail to rebuild a
model from scratch, and typographic errors are common.
Having available the source code of the model greatly improves
the situation, but here still there are numerous barriers to reproducibility and to building upon previously published models. One is that
source code can rapidly go out of date as computer architectures,
Edited by:
Rolf Kötter, Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Graham Cummins, Montana State
University, USA
Fred Howell, Textensor Limited, UK
*Correspondence:
Andrew Davison, UNIC, Bât. 32/33,
CNRS, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198
Gif sur Yvette, France.
e-mail: 
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 2
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
different simulators having the same bugs or hidden assumptions
is very small; (ii) each simulator has a different balance between
efﬁ ciency (how fast the simulations run), ﬂ exibility (how easy it is
to add new functionality; the range of models that can be simulated), scalability (for parallel, distributed computation on clusters
or supercomputers), and ease of use, so the most appropriate can
be chosen for a given task.
Addressing the problems associated with an ecosystem of multiple simulators while retaining the beneﬁ ts would greatly increase
the ease of reproducibility of computational models in neuroscience
and hence make it easier to verify the validity of published models
and to build upon previous work.
There are at least two possible (and complementary) approaches
to this. One is to enable direct, efﬁ cient communication between
different simulators at run-time, allowing different components
of a model to be simulated on different simulators . This approach addresses the problem of building a
model from diverse components, but still leaves the problem of having to use different programming languages, and does not enable
straightforward cross-checking. The other approach is to develop
a system for model speciﬁ cation that is simulator-independent.
Translation then only has to be done once for each simulator and
not once for each model.
Here we can take advantage of the recent, rapid emergence of
the Python programming language as an alternative interface to
several of the more widely-used simulators. Thus, for example, both
NEURON and NEST may be controlled either via their original,
native interpreter (Hoc and SLI, respectively) or via Python. More
recent simulators (e.g. PCSIM, Brian) have Python as the only available scripting language. This widespread adoption of Python is
probably due to a number of factors, including the powerful data
structures, clean and expressive syntax, extensive library, maturity
of tools for numerical analysis and visualization (allowing use of a
single language for the entire modelling workﬂ ow from simulation
to analysis to graphing), and the ease-of-use of Python as a glue
language which allows computation-intensive code written in a
low-level language such as C to be transparently accessed within
high-level Python code.
Python alone does not address the translation problem (although
it does make the translation process easier, since at least simple data
structures such as lists and arrays are the same for each simulator),
since neuroscience-speciﬁ c concepts are still expressed differently.
However, it is now possible to deﬁ ne a simulator-independent
Python interface for neuronal network simulators and to implement
automatic translation to any Python-enabled simulator. We have
designed and implemented such an interface, PyNN (pronounced
“pine”). In this paper we describe its design, concepts, implementation and use. We do not attempt here to provide a complete
user guide – this may be found online at http:// neuralensemble.
DESIGN GOALS
When designing and implementing a common simulator interface,
the following goals should be taken into account. These are the
goals we have kept in mind when designing and implementing
the PyNN interface, but they are equally applicable to any other
such interface.
Write the code for a model once, run it on any supported simulator or hardware device without modiﬁ cation. This is the primary
design goal for PyNN.
Support a high-level of abstraction. For example, it is often
preferable to deal with a single object representing a population of
neurons than to deal with all the individual neurons directly. Each
single neuron can be accessed when necessary, but in many cases
the population is the more useful abstraction. The advantages of
this approach are that (i) it is easier to maintain a conceptual idea
of the model, without being distracted by implementation details,
and (ii) the internal implementation of an object can be optimized
for speed, parallelization or memory requirements without changing the interface presented to the user.
Support any feature provided by at least two supported simulators. The aim is to strike a balance between supporting all features
of all simulators (unfeasible) and supporting only the subset of
features common to all simulators (overly restrictive).
Allow mixing of PyNN and native simulator code. PyNN should
not limit the range of models that can be implemented. Following
the two-simulator rule, above, there will be things that are possible
in one simulator and not in any other. Although a model implementation consisting of 100% PyNN is the best scenario for running on multiple simulators, an implementation with 50% PyNN
code will be easier to convert between simulators than one with
no PyNN code.
Facilitate porting of models between simulators. PyNN changes
the process of porting a model between simulators from all-or-
nothing, in which the validity of the translated model cannot be
tested until the entire translation is complete, to an incremental approach, in which the native code is gradually replaced by
simulator-independent code. At each stage, the hybrid code remains
runnable, and so it is straightforward to verify that the model
behaviour has not been changed.
Minimize dependencies, to make installation as simple as possible and maximize ﬂ exibility. There are no visualization and few
data analysis tools built-in to PyNN, which means the user can use
any such tools they wish.
Present a consistent interface on output as well as on input.
The formats used for simulation outputs are consistent across
simulator back-ends, making it a stable base upon which to build
more complex systems of simulation control, data-analysis and
visualization.
Prioritize compatibility over optimizations, but allow
compatibility-breaking optimizations to be selected by a deliberate choice of the user (e.g. the compatible_output ﬂ ag of the
various print() methods is True by default, but can be set to
False to get potentially-faster writing of data to ﬁ le).
API Versioning. The PyNN API will inevitably evolve over time,
as more simulators are supported and to take account of the preferences of the community of users. To ensure backwards compatibility, the API should be versioned so that the user can indicate
which version was used for a particular implementation. Note that
the examples given in this paper use version 0.4 of the API.
Transparent parallelization. Code that runs on a single processor
should run on multiple processors (using MPI) without changes.
Some of these goals are somewhat contradictory: for example, having a high level of abstraction and making porting easy.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 3
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
Reconciling this particular pair of goals has led to the presence in
PyNN of both a high-level, object-oriented interface and a lowlevel, procedural interface that is more similar to the interface of
many existing simulators. These will be discussed further below.
USAGE EXAMPLES
Before describing in detail the concepts underlying the PyNN
interface, we will work through some examples of how it is used
in practice: ﬁ rst a simple example using the low-level, procedural
interface and then a more complex example using the high-level,
object-oriented interface.
For the simple example, we will build a network consisting of
a single integrate-and-ﬁ re (IF) cell receiving spiking input from a
Poisson process.
First, we choose which simulator to use by importing the relevant module from PyNN:
>>> from pyNN.neuron import *
If we wanted to use PCSIM, we would just import pyNN.pcsim,
etc. Whichever simulator back-end we use, none of the code below
would change.
Next we set global parameters of the simulator:
>>> setup(timestep=0.1, min_delay=2.0)
Now we create two cells: an IF neuron with synapses that respond
to a spike with a step increase in synaptic conductance, which then
decays exponentially, and a “spike source”, a simple cell that emits
spikes at predetermined times but cannot receive input spikes.
>>> ifcell = create(IF_cond_exp,
… {'i_offset': 0.11,
… 'tau_refrac': 3.0,
… 'v_thresh' : -51.0})
>>> times = map(float, range(5,105,10))
>>> source = create(SpikeSourceArray,
… {'spike_times': times})
Behind the scenes, the create() function translates the standard PyNN model name, IF_cond_exp in this case, into the model
name used by the simulator, Standard_IF for NEURON, iaf_
cond_exp for NEST, for example and also translates parameter
names and units into simulator-speciﬁ c names and units. To take
one example, the i_offset parameter represents the amplitude of
a constant current injected into the cell, and is given in nanoamps.
The equivalent parameter of the NEST iaf_cond_exp model has
the name I_e and units of picoamps, so PyNN both converts the
name and multiplies the numerical value by 1000 when running
with NEST. Standard cell models and automatic translation are
discussed in more detail in the next section.
The create() function returns an ID object, which provides
access to the parameters of the cell models, e.g.:
>>> ifcell.tau_refrac
>>> ifcell.tau_m = 12.5
>>> ifcell.get_parameters()
{'tau_refrac': 3.0, 'tau_m': 12.5,
'e_rev_E': 0.0, 'i_offset': 0.11,
'cm': 1.0, 'e_rev_I': -70.0,
'v_init': -65.0, 'v_thresh': -51.0,
'tau_syn_E': 5.0, 'v_rest': -65.0,
'tau_syn_I': 5.0, 'v_reset': -65.0}
Having created the cells, we connect them with the connect()
>>> connect(source, ifcell, weight=0.006,
… synapse_type='excitatory', delay=2.0)
Now we tell the system what variable or variables to record, run
the simulation and ﬁ nish.
>>> record_v(ifcell, 'ifcell.dat')
>>> run(200.0)
The result of running the above model is shown in Figure 1,
which also shows the degree of reproducibility obtainable between
different simulators for such a simple network.
The low-level, procedural interface, using the create(),
connect() and record() functions, is useful for simple models
or when porting an existing model written in a different language
that uses the create/connect idiom. For larger, more complex networks we have found that an object-oriented approach, with a
higher-level of abstraction, is more effective, since it both clariﬁ es
the conceptual structure of the model, by hiding implementation
details, and allows behind-the-scenes optimizations.
Membrane potential (mV)
FIGURE 1 | Results of running ﬁ rst example given in the text, with
NEURON, NEST and PCSIM as back-end simulators. (A) Entire membrane
potential trace with integration time-step 0.1 ms. (B) Zoom into a smaller
region of the trace, showing small numerical differences between the results
of the different simulators. (C) Results of a simulation with integration
time-step 0.01 ms, showing greatly reduced numerical differences.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 4
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
To illustrate the high-level, object-oriented interface we turn
now from the simple example of a few neurons to a more complex
example: a network of several thousand excitatory and inhibitory
neurons that displays self-sustained activity , and reproducing the benchmark model used in Brette et al. ). This still is not a particularly complicated network, since it has only two cell types, no
spatial structure and no heterogeneity of neuronal or connection
properties, but in demonstrating how building such a network
becomes trivial using PyNN we hope to convince the reader that
building genuinely complex, structured and heterogeneous networks becomes manageable.
Again, we begin by choosing which simulator to use. We also
import some classes from PyNN’s random module.
>>> from pyNN.nest2 import *
>>> from pyNN.random import (NumpyRNG,
… RandomDistribution)
We next specify the parameters of the neuron model (the same
model and same parameters are used for both excitatory and inhibitory neurons).
>>> cell_params = {
… 'tau_m': 20.0, 'tau_syn_E': 5.0,
… 'cm': 0.2, 'tau_syn_I': 10.0,
… 'v_rest': -49.0, 'v_reset': -60.0,
… 'v_thresh': -50.0, 'tau_refrac': 5.0
Parameters with dimensions of voltage are in millivolts, time in
milliseconds and capacitance in nanofarads. The units convention
is discussed further in the next section.
We now initialize the simulation, this time accepting the default
values for the global parameters.
>>> setup()
Now, rather than creating each cell separately, we just create a
Population object for each different type of cell:
>>> pE = Population(4000, IF_cond_exp,
… cell_params,
… label="Excitatory")
>>> pI = Population(1000, IF_cond_exp,
… cell_params,
… label="Inhibitory")
By default, all cells of a given Population are created with identical parameters, but these can be changed afterwards. Here we wish
to randomize the value of the membrane potential at the start of
the simulation to values between −50 and −70 mV.
>>> unif_distr = RandomDistribution('uniform',
… [-50,-70])
>>> pE.randomInit(unif_distr)
>>> pI.randomInit(unif_distr)
randomInit() is a convenience method for randomizing the initial membrane potential. For the more general case of randomizing
any cell parameter use rset().
Just as individual neurons are encapsulated within Populations,
connections between neurons are encapsulated within Projections.
To create a Projection object, we need to specify how the neurons will
be connected, either via an algorithm or via an explicit list. Different
algorithms are encapsulated in different Connector classes, e.g.
FixedProbabilityConnector, AllToAllConnector. An explicit
list of connections can be provided via a FromListConnector or a
FromFileConnector.
>>> FPC = FixedProbabilityConnector
>>> exc_conn = FPC(0.02, weights=0.004,
… delays=0.1)
>>> inh_conn = FPC(0.02, weights=0.051,
… delays=0.1)
Note that weights are in microsiemens and delays in milliseconds. Where the delay is not speciﬁ ed, the global minimum delay
speciﬁ ed in the setup() function is used. Here we set all weights
and delays of a Projection to the same value, but it is equally
possible to pass the constructor a RandomDistribution object,
as we did above for the initial membrane potential, or an explicit
list of values.
To create a Projection, we need to specify the pre- and postsynaptic Populations, a Connector object, and a synapse type.
The standard IF cells each have two synapse types, “excitatory”
and “inhibitory”. User-deﬁ ned models can use arbitrary names,
e.g. “AMPA”, “NMDA”.
>>> e2e = Projection(pE, pE, exc_conn,
… target='excitatory')
>>> e2i = Projection(pE, pI, exc_conn,
… target='excitatory')
>>> i2e = Projection(pI, pE, inh_conn,
… target='inhibitory')
>>> i2i = Projection(pI, pI, inh_conn,
… target='inhibitory')
Having constructed the network, we now need to instrument
it, using the record() (for recording spikes) and record_v()
(membrane potential) methods of the Population objects. Here
we choose to record spikes from 1000 of the excitatory neurons
(chosen at random) and all of the inhibitory neurons, and to record
the membrane potential of two speciﬁ c excitatory neurons. We then
run the simulation for 1000 ms.
>>> pE.record(1000)
>>> pI.record()
>>> pE.record_v([pE , pE ])
>>> run(1000.0)
After running the simulation, we can access the results or write
them to ﬁ le.
>>> pI.getSpikes()[:5]
array([[ 715. , 1.5],
[ 609. , 1.6],
[ 708. , 1.7],
[ 796. , 1.7],
[ 34. , 1.8]])
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 5
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
>>> pE.get_v()[:5]
array([[ 0. , 0.1 , -55.073],
[ 1. , 0.1 , -50.163],
[ 0. , 0.2 , -55.098],
[ 1. , 0.2 , -50.212],
[ 0. , 0.3 , -55.122]])
The results of running simulations of the above network with
two different simulator back-ends are shown in Figure 2.
PRINCIPAL CONCEPTS
To achieve the goal of “write the code for a model once, run it
on any supported simulator without modiﬁ cation” requires (i) a
common interface, (ii) neuron and synapse models that are standardized across simulators, (iii) consistent handling of physical
units, (iv) consistent handling of (pseudo-)random numbers. To
achieve the twin goals of supporting a high-level of abstraction
and facilitating porting of models between simulators requires
both an object- oriented and a procedural interface. The implementation of all these requirements is described in more depth in
the following. We also illustrate the mixing of PyNN and native
simulator code, and how PyNN can support features that are found
in only a single simulator back-end, by describing support for
multi- compartmental models.
STANDARD CELL MODELS
A fundamental concept in PyNN is the cell type – a given model
of a neuron, representable by a set of equations, and comprising
sub-threshold behaviour, spiking mechanism and post-synaptic
response. The public interface of a cell type is mainly deﬁ ned by its
parameters. Different neurons of the same cell type may have very
different behaviour if they have different values of the parameters.
For example, the Izhikevich model , can reproduce a wide range of spiking patterns, from fast-spiking through
regular spiking to multiple types of bursting, depending on the
Inter-spike interval (ms)
FIGURE 2 | Results of running the second example given in the text,
with NEURON and NEST as back-end simulators. Note that the network
connectivity and initial conditions were identical in the two cases.
(A) Membrane potential traces for two excitatory neurons. Note that the
NEST and NEURON traces are very similar for the ﬁ rst 50 ms, but after that
diverge rapidly due to the effects of network activity, which ampliﬁ es the
small numerical integration differences. (B) Spiking activity of excitatory (black)
and inhibitory (green) neurons. Each dot represents a spike and each row of
dots a different neuron. All 5000 neurons are shown. (C) Distribution of
pooled inter-spike intervals (ISIs) for excitatory and inhibitory neurons.
(D) Distribution over neurons of the coefﬁ cient of variation of
the ISI [CV(ISI)].
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 6
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
parameter values chosen. A cell type is therefore a model type rather
than a biologically deﬁ ned cell type (such as “Layer V pyramidal
neuron”, for example).
When using a given simulator back-end, PyNN can work with
any cell type that is supported by that simulator. In this case, the cell
type is generally represented by a string, holding a model name that
is meaningful for that simulator, e.g. “iaf_neuron” in NEST.
Of course, such a cell type will only work with one simulator. To
create a model that will run on different simulators requires you to
use one of PyNN’s built-in, standard cell models, each represented
by a sub-class of the StandardCell class. The models provided
by PyNN include various simple IF models, the Izhikevich-like
adaptive exponential IF model , a singlecompartment neuron with Hodgkin–Huxley sodium and potassium channels, and various models that emit spikes (e.g. according
to a Poisson process) but cannot receive them.
The StandardCell class contains machinery for translating
model names, parameter names and parameter units between
PyNN standardized values and simulator-speciﬁ c values. This is
particularly useful when the underlying simulators use different
unit systems or different parameterizations of the same set of equations, e.g. when one simulator expects the membrane time constant
and another the membrane leak conductance. An example of the
translations performed by PyNN is given in Table 1.
Currently, all the standard cell types are single-compartment
or point neuron models, since PyNN currently supports only one
simulator for multi-compartmental models (NEURON). Further
details on using multi-compartmental models with PyNN’s
NEURON back-end are given below. We plan in future to allow
specifying multi-compartmental cell types using a NeuroML
description .
As is clear from the previous section, each simulator back-end has
its own convention for which units to use for which physical quantities. The exception to this is Brian, which has a system for explicitly
specifying units and for checking that equations are dimensionally
consistent. In the future, we plan to adopt Brian’s system for PyNN,
but for now we have chosen to use a convention, which is similar to
that of NEURON and NEST in that the units are those that tend to
be used by experimental physiologists. An alternative would have
been the convention used by PCSIM (and also by the GENESIS
simulator) of using pure SI units with no preﬁ xes. The advantage of
the latter convention is that there is no need for checking equations
for dimensional consistency. The disadvantage is that numerical
values in such a system are often very large or very small, and hence
the human intuition for reasonable and unreasonable parameter
values is mostly lost.
Irrespective of the relative merits of different conventions, the
most important thing is that PyNN now provides a single convention which is valid across simulators. In detail, the convention is as
follows: voltage – mV, current – nA, conductance – µS, time – ms,
capacitance – nF.
STANDARD SYNAPSE MODELS
In PyNN, the shape and time-course of the elementary post- synaptic
current or conductance change in response to a pre-synaptic spike
are considered to be a part of the post-synaptic neuron model, while
all other properties of a synaptic connection, notably its weight (the
peak current or conductance of the synaptic response), delay (for
point models, this implicitly includes axonal propagation, chemical
transmission and dendritic propagation; more morphologically
and/or biophysically detailed models may model explicitly some
or all of these sources of delay), and short- and long-term plasticity, are considered to depend on both pre- and post-synaptic
neurons, and so are encapsulated in the concept of “synapse type”
that mirrors the “cell type” discussed above.
The default type of synaptic connection in PyNN is static, with
ﬁ xed synaptic weights. To model dynamic synapses, for which the
synaptic weight (and possibly other properties, such as rise-time)
varies depending on the recent history of post- and/or pre- synaptic
activity, we use the same idea as for neurons, of standardized,
named models that have the same interface and behaviour across
simulators, even if the underlying implementation may be very
different.
Where the approach for dynamic synapses differs from that
for neurons is that we attempt a greater degree of compositionality, i.e. we decompose models into a number of components, for
Table 1 | Comparison of parameter names and units for different implementations of a leaky integrate-and-ﬁ re model with a ﬁ xed ﬁ ring threshold
and current-based, alpha-function synapses. This model is called IF_curr_alpha in PyNN, iaf_psc_alpha in NEST, LIFCurrAlphaNeuron in PCSIM
and StandardIF in NEURON (this is a model template distributed with PyNN and is not in the standard NEURON distribution). Manual conversion of names
and units is straightforward but error-prone and time-consuming. PyNN takes care of such conversions transparently.
Resting membrane potential
Reset membrane potential
Membrane capacitance
Membrane time constant
Refractory period
tau_refrac
Excitatory synaptic time constant
tau_syn_ex
Inhibitory synaptic time constant
tau_syn_in
Spike threshold
Injected current amplitude
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 7
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
example for short-term and long-term dynamics, or for the timingdependence and the weight-dependence of STDP rules, that can
then be composed in different ways.
The advantage of this is that if we have n different models for
component A and m models for component B, then we require only
n + m models rather than n × m, which had advantages in terms
of code-simplicity and in shorter model names. The disadvantage
is that not all combinations may exist, if the underlying simulator implements composite models rather than using components
itself: in this situation, PyNN checks whether a given composite
model AB exists for a given simulator and raises an Exception if
it does not. The composite approach may be extended to neuron
models in future versions of the PyNN interface depending on the
experience with composite synapse models.
Currently only a single model exists in PyNN for the short-term
plasticity component, the Tsodyks–Markram model . For long-term plasticity there is a spike-timing-dependent
plasticity STDP component, which itself is composed of separate
timing-dependence and weight-dependence components.
LOW-LEVEL, PROCEDURAL INTERFACE
We refer to the procedural interface as “low-level” because it deals
with a lower level of abstraction – individual neurons and individual synapses – than the object-oriented interface. The procedural
interface consists of the functions create(), connect(), set(),
record() (for recording spikes) and record_v() (for recording membrane potential). Each of these functions operates on, or
returns, either individual cell ID objects or lists of such objects. As
was described in the Usage Examples section, as well as being passed
around as arguments, the ID object may be used for accessing/
modifying the parameters of individual neurons, and takes care
of parameter translation using the StandardCell mechanisms
described above.
It is possible to some extent to mix the low-level and high-level
interfaces. For example, it is possible to access individual neurons
within a Population as ID objects and then use the connect()
function to connect them, instead of using a Projection object.
Why have both a low-level and high-level interface? Having
both is a potential source of confusion for users and is deﬁ nitely a
maintenance burden for developers. The main reason is to support
the use of PyNN as a porting tool. The majority of neuronal network models using existing simulators use a procedural approach,
and so conversion to PyNN is easier if PyNN supports the same
approach. In addition, when developing a PyNN interface for a
simulator, or for neuromorphic hardware, that deals primarily with
individual cells and synaptic connections, it is easier to implement
only the low-level interface, since the high-level interface can be
built upon it.
HIGH-LEVEL, OBJECT-ORIENTED INTERFACE
Object-oriented programming has been used for many years in
computer science as a method for reducing program complexity. As
the ambition and scope of large-scale, biologically detailed neuronal
network modelling increases, reducing program complexity will
become more and more critical, as the limiting factor in computational neuroscience becomes the productivity of the programmer
and not the capacity of the computer . It is for this
reason that the preferred interface in PyNN for developing new
models is an object-oriented one.
The object-oriented interface is built around three main
Population – a group of cells all with the same cell type (model
type). It is generally considered that the cells in a Population
should all represent the same biological cell type, i.e. although
parameter values may vary between cells in the group, all cells
should have qualitatively the same ﬁ ring response. This is not
enforced, but is a good guideline to follow for producing understandable code. The Population class eliminates tedious iteration over lists of neurons and enables more efﬁ cient, array-based
management of neuron properties.
Projection – the set of connections of a given synapse type
between two Populations. Creating a Projection requires specifying the pre- and post-synaptic Populations, the synapse type,
and the algorithm used to determine which neurons connect to
Connector – an encapsulation of the connection algorithm
used in creating a Projection. Simple examples of such algorithms
are “all-to-all”, “one-to-one” and “connect-each-pre-and-post-
synaptic-cell-with-a-ﬁ xed-probability”. It is also possible to provide
an explicit list of which cells are to be connected to which others.
Each algorithm is deﬁ ned within a subclass of the Connector class.
PyNN contains a number of such classes, but it is fairly straightforward for a user to deﬁ ne their own algorithms.
In future development of PyNN, we plan to extend the interface
to still higher-level abstractions, such as layers, cortical columns,
brain areas and inter-areal projections. We also aim to use the highlevel interface as a link between spiking network models and more
abstract models that do not represent individual neurons, such as
mean-ﬁ eld models.
RANDOM NUMBERS
The central nervous system contains many sources of noise, and
activity patterns are often sufﬁ ciently complex, and possibly chaotic, to make a stochastic representation a reasonable model.
This can become a problem when comparing the behaviour of a
given model run on different simulators, since random differences
might obscure real inconsistencies between implementations of the
model. Similarly, when performing distributed computations on
parallel machines, the model behaviour should not depend on the
number of processors used , and random
differences can conceal real differences between the parallel and
serial implementations.
For these reasons, it is important to be able to use identical
sequences of random numbers in different simulators, and to have
the random number used at a particular point in the program
execution be independent of which processor it is running on.
Another consideration is that simulations in most cases use only
pseudo-random sequences, and low-quality random number generators (RNGs) may have correlations between different elements of
the sequence that can signiﬁ cantly affect the qualitative behaviour
of a network. Hence it is necessary to be able to test the simulation
with different RNGs.
PyNN supports simulator-independent RNGs and use of different generators – currently any of the generators provided by
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 8
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
the numpy package or by the GNU Scientiﬁ c Library (GSL) can
This is done by wrapping the numpy and GSL RNGs in classes
with a common interface. PyNN’s random module contains the
classes NumpyRNG and GSLRNG, which both have a single method,
next(n, distribution, parameters), which returns n random numbers from a distribution of type distribution with
parameters parameters, e.g.
>>> from pyNN.random import NumpyRNG, GSLRNG
>>> rngN = NumpyRNG(seed=76847376)
>>> rngG = GSLRNG(seed=87548753)
>>> rngN.next()
0.91457981651574294
>>> rngG.next(5)
array([ 0.02518011, 0.79118205, 0.16679516,
… 0.1902914, 0.66204769])
>>> rngN.next(3, 'gamma', [2.0, 0.5])
array([ 0.48903019, 0.63129009, 0.70428452])
>>> rngG.next(distribution='uniform')
0.93618978746235371
Since all PyNN code that uses random numbers accesses the
RNG classes only through this next() method, a user can substitute their own RNG simply by deﬁ ning a wrapper class with such
Since very often one wishes to use the same random distribution
repeatedly, rather than changing distribution each time, the random
module also provides the RandomDistribution class, which is
initialized with the distribution name and parameters, and thereafter the next() method is simpliﬁ ed to take a single argument,
the number of values to draw from the distribution, e.g.
>>> from pyNN.random import (NumpyRNG,
… RandomDistribution)
>>> rng = NumpyRNG(seed=8745753)
>>> gamma_distr = RandomDistribution('gamma',
… [2.0, 0.5],
… rng=rng)
>>> gamma_distr.next(3)
array([ 0.72682412, 0.82490159, 1.03882654])
Note that NumpyRNG and GSLRNG distributions may not
have the same names, e.g. “normal” for NumpyRNG and “gaussian”
for GSLRNG, and the arguments may also differ. One of our future
plans is to extend the random module in order to harmonize names
across RNGs.
MULTI-COMPARTMENTAL MODELS
PyNN currently supports only a single simulator, NEURON, that
is suitable for many-compartment models. Given the principle
of supporting simulator-independence only for features that are
shared by at least two of the supported simulators, and given
PyNN’s focus on network modelling, PyNN does not provide an
API for specifying simulator-independent multi-compartmental
models. This is a possible future development – preliminary work
has been done on a PyNN interface to the MOOSE simulator – but a more likely path would be to make use
of the NeuroML standards for specifying multi-compartmental
models. In this scenario, the ﬁ lename of a NeuroML level 2 ﬁ le,
specifying a single cell type, would be passed as the cellclass
argument to the PyNN create() function or Population
constructor.
However, since native and PyNN code can be mixed, the
pyNN.neuron module already supports simulations with multi-
compartmental models. The pre-synaptic compartment whose
voltage is watched to trigger synaptic transmission (e.g. axon
terminal) can be speciﬁ ed using the source argument to the
Projection constructor, and the post-synaptic mechanism speci-
ﬁ ed with the target argument.
Should an error occur in a PyNN simulation, a good ﬁ rst step is to
re-run it on another simulator back-end and so narrow down the
source of the problem to one back-end in particular. Nevertheless,
it has proven to be the case that the additional layers of abstraction provided by PyNN sometimes make it harder to track down
sources of errors. To counterbalance this, PyNN traps errors coming
from the simulator core and employs Python’s introspection capabilities to provide additional information about the error context.
For example, if an invalid parameter name is provided to a neuron model, the error message lists all the valid parameter names
for that model. Furthermore, logging can be switched on via the
init_logging() function in the pyNN.utility module, causing
detailed information about what the system is doing to be written
to ﬁ le, a valuable resource for tracking down bugs.
IMPLEMENTATION
PyNN is both a deﬁ nition of a common simulator interface and
an implementation of this interface for each supported simulator.
PyNN is implemented as a Python package containing a common
module, which deﬁ nes the API and contains functionality common
to all simulator back-ends, a random module (described above),
and a module for each simulator back-end, as shown in Figure 3.
Each simulator module separately implements the API, although
it can make use of much shared code in common. In most cases,
the simulator modules have been implemented by, or in close collaboration with, the simulator developers.
PyNN currently fully supports the following simulators:
NEURON , NEST , PCSIM ( and
Brian . Support for MOOSE and for export in NeuroML format is under development.
PyNN also supports the Heidelberg neuromorphic hardware
system . This illustrates a major beneﬁ t of
the existence of a common neuronal simulation interface: novel
simulation or emulation systems do not need to develop their own
programming interface, but can beneﬁ t from an existing one that
guarantees interoperability with existing tools. Using PyNN as the
interface to neuromorphic hardware systems provides the possibility of closing the gap between the two domains of numerical
simulation and physical emulation, which have so far coexisted
rather separately.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 9
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN
LIMITATIONS ON REPRODUCIBILITY
For a given model with a given parameter set run on a given version
of a given simulator, it should be possible to exactly reproduce a
simulation result, independent of computer architecture (except
where this affects the precision of the ﬂ oating-point representation) or operating system. For parallel systems, results should also
be independent of how many threads or processes are used in the
computation, although here exact quantitative reproduction is
harder to achieve. Reproducibility across different versions of a
given simulator is not essential provided the precise version used
to generate a given result is speciﬁ ed, but it is of course highly
desirable. When running a model on different simulators, exact
reproduction is impossible to achieve, except in simple cases, due
to round-off errors in ﬂ oating point calculations. When validating
a model implementation by running it on two or more simulators,
therefore, what level of reproducibility is achievable, and how can
we tell whether any differences are due to round-off error or to
implementation errors?
To get a preliminary handle on this problem, we have compared the difference in model activity between two simulators to
the difference due to two different initial conditions with the same
simulator.
Our test case is the balanced random network, based on Vogels
and Abbott , whose implementation was shown above. The
activity pattern of this network is very sensitive to initial conditions (chaotic or near-chaotic), and so we cannot use differences in
the precise spike pattern to measure reproducibility: we are more
interested in the statistical properties of the activity, and so we
have chosen to take the distribution of inter-spike intervals (ISIs)
of excitatory neurons (see Figure 2C) as a measure of network
To measure the difference between the distributions from two
different runs we use the Kolmogorov–Smirnov two-sample test.
We ran the simulation ten times, each time with a different seed
for the RNG used to generate the initial membrane potential
distribution, with both NEURON and NEST back-ends. This gave
values for the Kolmogorov–Smirnov D-statistic between 0.008
and 0.026 (n  19000) with a mean of 0.015, with associated
p-values (probability that the two distributions are the same)
between 6.3 × 10−5 and 0.68 with mean 0.15.
We then ran the simulation twenty times just on NEURON, each
time with a different RNG seed, to give 10 pairs of distributions. In
this case the D-values were in the range 0.007–0.026, mean 0.015,
and the p-values in the range 2.8 × 10−5 to 0.77, mean 0.20.
In summary, the differences due to different simulators are in
almost exactly the same range as those due to different initial conditions, suggesting that the differences between the simulators are
indeed due to round-off errors and that there are not, therefore,
any implementation errors in this case.
It is also interesting to note that in most cases the null hypothesis
is supported, i.e. the distributions are the same, but that for some
initial conditions there are highly signiﬁ cant differences between
the ISI distributions. The ISI distribution may not therefore be the
best measure for reproducibility in this case.
DISCUSSION
In this article we have presented PyNN, a Python-based common
simulator interface, which allows simulator-independent model
speciﬁ cation. PyNN is already in use in a number of research groups,
and has been a key technology enabling improved communication
between labs in a pan-European collaborative project with a major
component of modelling and of neuromorphic hardware development (the FACETS project: 
By providing a standard simulation platform, PyNN also has
the potential to act as the foundation for other, simulator agnostic
but neuroscience-speciﬁ c, tools such as analysis, visualization and
data-management software.
PyNN is not the only project to address simulator- independent
model speciﬁ cation and simulator interoperability . neuroConstruct is a
tool to develop networks of morphologically-detailed neurons
using a graphical user interface (GUI), that can generate code
for both the NEURON and GENESIS simulators. A limitation
with respect to PyNN is that since it uses code generation rather
than a direct interface, neuroConstruct cannot receive information back from the simulator except by reading the data ﬁ les it
Simulator kernel
Native interpreter
Python interpreter
Simulator-speciﬁc
PyNN module
pynn.neuron
pynn.pcsim
facetshardware1
pynn.neuroml
pynn.moose
Direct communication
Code generation
Implemented
pynn.brian
FIGURE 3 | The architecture of PyNN.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2009 | Volume 2 | Article 11 | 10
Davison et al.
Simulator-independent modelling with PyNN