Perspective
Focus on Reproducibility
www.nature.com/laban
152     Volume 46, No. 4 | APRIL 2017
The use of animals in research is a topic many people feel strongly
about. Opinion polls in the UK show that, although the majority of
the public can accept animal experimentation (71%), this accept­
ance is on the condition that there is no alternative and no unneces­
sary suffering for the animals1. The public also place a high priority
on animal welfare: 35% think that animals should not be used in
scientific research on welfare grounds and 54% want to know
more about work to improve research animal welfare. Legislation
on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes reflects
these societal views and requires that both animal use and suffer­
ing be minimized2. Research funders too have high expectations
in terms of the use and care of animals in funded research,
which is reflected in their policies and the terms and conditions
of grant awards3,4. There is then wide acceptance of the princi­
ple that the welfare of research animals should be optimized, that
adverse effects such as pain, fear and distress should be avoided
or minimized, and that the animals should be maintained under
conditions that promote their health and well-being—this is the
refinement principle of the 3Rs5,6.
So far so good, but how well are we, the scientific community,
doing at minimizing harm to research animals? Although most
institutions that are breeding, housing and using animals in research
strive to do their best, there are substantial challenges to achieving
widespread implementation of refinement approaches7 (Table 1).
In many areas, there is a lack of understanding of the effect of sci­
entific procedures on animals and of the evidence base to sup­
port refinement and genuine improvements in welfare. Awareness
of the existing opportunities for refinement can be variable, and
in some cases there is a reluctance to question and challenge
established practices and cultures. Staff on the ground may not
have the practical tools, resources and support needed to put the
current knowledge base into practice. The consequences of failing
to address challenges such as these, and to fully implement refine­
ment, are serious, however. They concern not just ethics, the law,
and the reputation of and public confidence in animal research,
but also the quality, validity and reproducibility of the science
derived from the animal subjects.
The importance of good welfare for good quality science
“Good welfare equals good science” has become the mantra ever
since Trevor Poole first highlighted the relationship between
research animal welfare and the quality of science8, and, in the
intervening decades, the evidence base for this relationship has
been steadily growing. Animal welfare means how an animal is
coping with the conditions in which it lives. An animal is in a good
state of welfare if, as indicated by scientific evidence, it is healthy,
comfortable, well-nourished, safe, able to express innate behavior,
and if it is not suffering from unpleasant states such as pain, fear
and distress. Obviously, there are cases in research in which a high
degree of suffering may need to occur to achieve the scientific
objectives (which would be assessed case-by-case before authori­
zation is granted), but in all cases every effort should be made to
minimize unnecessary harm because animals with compromised
welfare have disturbed behavior, physiology and immunology.
This can lead to unreliable conclusions and/or unwanted variation
in scientific output, affecting both the reliability and repeatability
National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research (NC3Rs), London, UK. Correspondence should be addressed to
M.J.P. ( ).
Improving quality of science through better animal
welfare: the NC3Rs strategy
Mark J Prescott & Katie Lidster
Good animal welfare is linked to the quality of research data derived from laboratory animals, their
validity as models of human disease, the number of animals required to reach statistical significance
and the reproducibility of in vivo studies. Identifying new ways of understanding and improving animal
welfare, and promoting these in the scientific community, is therefore a key part of the work of the
National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research (NC3Rs).
Our strategy for animal welfare includes funding research to generate an evidence base to support
refinements, office-led data sharing to challenge existing practices, events and networks to raise
awareness of the evidence base, and the creation of online and other resources to support practical
implementation of refinement opportunities.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Focus on Reproducibility
Perspective
Volume 46, No. 4 | APRIL 2017     153
of experiments. Throughout this article, we give examples of this
link between animal welfare and scientific outcomes as we describe
the efforts of the NC3Rs to refine animal research.
The NC3Rs strategy for refinement
The NC3Rs is an independent scientific organization established
by the UK government to discover, develop and promote new ways
of replacing, reducing and refining the use of animals in science.
Our vision in terms of refinement and animal welfare is to sup­
port an effective pipeline of animal welfare research being put into
practice to benefit the lifetime experience of research animals and
to improve the quality of science. Our strategy to deliver this vision
consists of four pillars, detailed below, which balance scientific
discovery with implementation (Fig. 1). The approach spans the
breadth of the NC3Rs remit, across both industry and academic
use of animals, and the range of laboratory animal species and
procedures used in the biosciences.
Research funding
To date, over £8.5 million of our £50 million research investment
has been for projects aimed primarily at refinement (some awards
address more than one ‘R’). The robust peer review procedures
for our funding schemes (www.nc3rs.org.uk/funding) ensure that
the funded research is internationally competitive and focused on
priority areas, such as fields in which large numbers of animals are
used, that involve procedures causing severe suffering or that use
sensitive species. Our awards fall into one of three broad categories
(Fig. 2), with the greatest investment being in research to refine the
use of rodent models of disease and non-human primate models of
human cognition and perception. Examples of recent publications
from our refinement research portfolio are given below.
Research to develop and validate new ways of measuring
and assessing the welfare of animals and to understand the
effect of research procedures on welfare
How an animal feels is a key component of its welfare. Although
behavioral and physiological responses, such as cortisol/
corticosterone levels or heart rate, are good measures of emotional
arousal and are widely used as welfare indicators, they can lack
valence as both negative states, such as fear, and positive states, such
as pleasure, may result in the same responses regardless of the ani­
mal’s underlying emotion. The cognitive bias approach pioneered
by Mike Mendl and Liz Paul at the University of Bristol avoids this
problem9,10. The basic premise is that animals in a more negative
emotional state are more likely to be ‘pessimistic’ when presented
with an ambiguous stimulus (midway between two stimuli they
have been trained to recognize as rewarding and non-rewarding)
than animals in a more positive state, which display more oppor­
tunistic judgments. With NC3Rs funding, Mendl and Paul are
developing an automated test of affective state in mice and rats,
and other grant holders have successfully applied the cognitive bias
approach to assess the emotional state of dogs, rhesus macaques
and common marmosets11–13.
NC3Rs-funded PhD student Helen Gray and colleagues at
Newcastle University recently reported the effects on physiology,
behavior and task performance of different fluid restriction protocols
in rhesus macaques, which are commonly used to motivate monkeys
to perform behavioral and cognitive tasks in neuroscience stud­
ies14. The research suggests that fluid restriction (14–26 ml/kg/d)
has less of an effect on animal welfare than previously proposed
(although the sample size was small, only four adult males). The
macaques were able to concentrate their urine to retain fluid and
keep blood values in normal ranges. Bodyweight loss during the
working week was regained at the weekend once free access to
water was returned. However, some of the observed behavioral
changes may be indicative of reduced welfare during fluid control,
and so further research is needed on the behavioral and psychologi­
cal effect of these protocols.
Research to generate an evidence base for improvements in
husbandry, such as housing and handling
The importance of good housing and husbandry is recognized in
legislation and guidelines on the use and care of animals in science,
but empirical evidence is lacking in some areas. Laura Scullion
Hall and colleagues at the University of Stirling and AstraZeneca
have recently shown that beagles housed in a purpose-built facility
with modern home pen design and exposed to regular staff con­
tact and training demonstrate more signs of positive welfare
(for example, resting) and fewer negative signs (for example,
vigilance and stereotypies) than do beagles housed in traditional
housing15. Lottie Hosie, at the University of Chester, found that
Xenopus laevis housed in tanks with dark (ecologically relevant)
backgrounds showed fewer signs of stress (lower corticosterone
release rates in females, a small proportion of atypical locomotor
behaviors and snout abrasions in both sexes, and a smaller drop
in body mass) than those kept in tanks with white backgrounds16.
Often, this is the kind of information required by the animal
Table 1 | Information and actions required to advance
refinement within the scientific community
What we need to understand
What we need to do
The effects of research procedures
on animal welfare
Be motivated to optimize the welfare
of the animals in our care
How negative welfare states can
be avoided or alleviated
Put the evidence base into practice,
routinely and uniformly
How positive welfare states can
be encouraged
Possess the necessary information,
knowledge and skills
How welfare states, and hence
the impact of refinements, can be
reliably measured
Develop and share new ways of
measuring and improving welfare
How animal welfare impacts on
quality of science
Demonstrate publicly that welfare
improvements are being made
Figure 1 | NC3Rs strategy for refinement, balancing scientific discovery
with implementation.
Generating an
evidence base to
refinements
Office-led
data sharing
Challenging
existing practice
Events and
awareness of the
evidence base
Online and
Practical tools for
implementation
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Perspective
Focus on Reproducibility
www.nature.com/laban
154     Volume 46, No. 4 | APRIL 2017
facility senior management team to justify committing funds to
improve housing standards.
The quality of our interactions with laboratory animals is also
a key determinant of their welfare. Kelly Gouveia and her supervi­
sor Jane Hurst at the University of Liverpool have extended 3Rs
prize-winning research on non-aversive handling methods for
laboratory mice17,18. Traditional capture by the base of the tail
leads to high anxiety in mice, as assessed by a range of behavioral
measures, whereas the alternatives of using a tunnel or cupped
hands leads to voluntary approach, low anxiety and acceptance
of physical restraint. These responses generalize across different
strains and sexes of mice, and across handlers with differing levels
of experience. These now-validated refined handling techniques
are available to the scientific community to improve the welfare
of the millions of mice used worldwide (for practical guidance on
their use, see the video tutorial on the NC3Rs website, 
nc3rs.org.uk/mouse-handling-tutorial). However, what is likely to
be a driver for researchers to make greater use of the refined tech­
niques is the more recent finding of Gouveia and Hurst on the
effect of handling method on test responses. Tail-handled mice
showed impaired performance on behavioral phenotyping assays,
being much more inactive and reluctant to exploring test arenas or
novel objects. Missed observations on account of this tail-handling
anxiety could lead to false negatives.
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BBSRC) funded PhD research, examined by NC3Rs staff, further
illustrates the importance for science of refining animal handling
and restraint. During her PhD at the University of Stirling, Louisa
Tasker worked with cynomolgus macaques that were used in
regulatory toxicology studies, where the effects of drugs on cardio­
vascular and other parameters are measured19. Monkeys that had
experienced improved restraint techniques and positive sociali­
zation with humans showed reduced fear responses to care staff
during handling and cardiovascular data collection. Notably, such
animals also showed lower baseline heart rate and blood pressure
values, and reduced between-animal variation, which meant that
drug-induced changes could be identified with greater accuracy.
There were also fewer artifacts in ECG traces from these ani­
mals as a result of reduced movement, vocalization and tension,
making it easier to determine arrhythmias.
Research to develop and validate new models, procedures or
techniques that avoid or reduce pain, suffering, distress or
lasting harm
Challenging the status quo by developing more humane alterna­
tives to long-established research models and practices that carry
a high welfare and ethical burden is crucial if we are to make sub­
stantial progress in refinement. NC3Rs researchers are at the fore­
front of this effort. For instance, Michael Emerson and colleagues
at Imperial College London have developed a new approach for
studying pulmonary embolism in mice20,21. Conventional mod­
eling relies on injection of thrombogenic substances in conscious
animals that often results in paralysis and death. In contrast,
Emerson’s refined model is performed under general anesthe­
sia using radiolabeled platelets and imaging to measure platelet
function in real time during non-fatal thromboembolism. Not only
is the new in vivo model a significant refinement (from ‘severe’
to ‘unclassified’ severity) and reduction (using 90% fewer mice),
it also better mimics the physiology and biochemistry of the
condition in man and models a broader spectrum beyond the
extreme, fatal stage.
Chris Petkov and his Newcastle University colleagues have used
techniques from the treatment of cancer patients to develop a new
non-invasive means of head immobilization for macaques used
in neurobiology studies in which brain activity is monitored22.
The new approach, consisting of a custom-fitted face mask and hel­
met, provides an alternative in some studies to surgically implanted
head restraint devices, which commonly become infected and can
fail over time, leading to animals being removed from the study
and data collection being stopped.
In addition to our response-mode funding schemes, we operate
a challenge-led innovation scheme called CRACK IT Challenges
( CRACK IT funds the development
and commercialization of technologies that benefit the 3Rs and
address specific business and scientific challenges identified by
industry and academic ‘sponsors’. One such challenge, ‘Rodent
Little Brother’, sponsored by MRC Harwell, was to develop a
system for automated recording of mouse behavior in the home
cage. The solution (ActualHCA) from Actual Analytics is built
around a standard individually ventilated cage and comprises a
radiofrequency reader baseplate as well as an infrared camera and
computer. It enables continuous recording of the location, activ­
ity and behavior of individual, micro-chipped mice in established
social groups over prolonged periods of time.
The potential of this system for improving phenotyping of
genetically altered mice, monitoring of disease progression, imple­
mentation of humane endpoints and investigation of social behav­
iors is tremendous. Currently, most phenotyping studies involve
assessment on a battery of tests, conducted over short periods
in a novel environment during the inactive period of the mice
(our daytime), following their removal from the home cage by
human handlers and separation from group mates. All of these
factors can cause anxiety or stress, leading to changes in activity
Animal welfare
measures and
assessment
Refinement of
Refinement of
procedures
Amphibians
Non-human primates
Figure 2 | NC3Rs awards primarily aimed at refinement (48 awards), by
broad category and species group.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Focus on Reproducibility
Perspective
Volume 46, No. 4 | APRIL 2017     155
and behavior that may mask subtle, but important, phenotypes.
ActualHCA avoids these problems and provides an incredibly rich
data set and massive statistical power. It has already revealed unique
insights into the effects of genetic background on individual and
group behavior not previously recognized23.
Office-led data sharing
The NC3Rs runs office-led data sharing programs to challenge exist­
ing practice and identify new opportunities for refinement. Our
expert working groups are led by our team of post-doctoral scien­
tists and comprise relevant international experts with experience in
the specific areas of interest. The outputs are published in the peerreviewed literature and are promoted at major scientific conferences
and in research organizations. Working groups have focused in
areas in which refinement can have a substantial effect, including
rodent models of epilepsy24 and stroke, food and fluid restriction
in macaque behavioral neuroscience25, and toxicology studies (for
example, microsampling, social housing during cardiovascular
recordings26 and body weight loss limits for acute studies27).
The expert working group on mammalian models of epilepsy,
convened to review current practice and identify opportunities to
improve animal welfare, was instigated at the request of academ­
ics from the epilepsy research community ( 
uk/epilepsy). The strategy of the working group was multifaceted,
incorporating a review of the scientific literature, a survey of the
community, interviews with laboratory animal veterinarians and
animal care staff, and the practical experience of the working group
members. The group’s report provides background information,
practical guidance and recommendations for refinement, modelspecific advice and priorities for further research to facilitate best
practice24. The recommendations span the lifetime experience of
animals used in epilepsy research, including seizure induction,
maintenance and monitoring. Translation of research from animal
models of epilepsy and seizures into the clinic has been highlighted
as a major challenge28. Improving animal welfare and the quality
of data from animal models maximizes their use and improves the
translation of research to the clinic.
Events and networks
The NC3Rs raises awareness of opportunities for refinement by
organizing regular scientific symposia and workshops, such as our
annual meetings for users of non-human primates (Primate Welfare
Meeting) and for animal technologists (Animal Technicians’
Symposium) ( through sup­
portive networks, such as our group for Named Animal Care and
Welfare Officers (NACWOs) who work with non-human primates,
and our wiki for neuroscientists using chronic implants (http://
www.ciwiki.net); and via our social media channels. We also have
the funding capacity to sponsor events; for example, in July 2016,
we sponsored a workshop on measuring animal emotions organ­
ized by grant holders Mike Mendl and Liz Paul. The workshop
brought together experts in a range of animal emotion measures
to discuss their utility, validity, strengths and weaknesses. In 2013,
we funded an in international workshop on the welfare implica­
tions of different euthanasia methods for mice, rats and zebrafish.
The report of the workshop summarizes the current understanding
in the field and gives recommendations to help inform good prac­
tice for humane killing29.
We also have an annual 3Rs Prize (sponsored by GSK), which is
awarded to recognize and highlight original scientific and techno­
logical advances in the 3Rs published in the previous 3 years that
have an effect on the use of animals in the life sciences. Previous
winners for welfare-focused research with implications for scien­
tific outcomes have been Laura Scullion Hall and collaborators,
University of Stirling, for developing a framework for assessing
the welfare of the laboratory beagle and validating refinements to
the oral gavage dosing technique11; Brianna Gaskill and Joseph
Garner, Purdue and Stanford Universities, for their work investigat­
ing the importance of nesting material and ambient temperature
for thermoregulation in mice30; and Daniel Adams, University
of California San Francisco, for taking inspiration from human
orthopedics to develop a biocompatible, titanium head implant to
reduce infection risk and improve welfare in monkeys undergoing
brain recordings31.
Online and other resources
An extensive library of online resources is available on the NC3Rs
website to provide researchers and technical staff with the practical
tools needed to put refinement into practice ( 
org.uk/3Rs-resources). These resources are used around the world
and include information-rich websites with supporting references
(for example, on the use and care of macaques and marmosets),
high-definition video tutorials on the practical skills required to
conduct common procedures humanely (for example, blood sam­
pling, administration of substances, aseptic technique for rodent
surgery) and e-learning resources that can be integrated into staff
training in-house. The e-learning resources have been developed
by Paul Flecknell and his team at Newcastle University with NC3Rs
funding. They take a scenario-based learning approach to deliver­
ing the learning objectives of the training framework established
under Directive 2010/63/EU32, with interactive problem solving
in realistic contexts. The first three modules concern eutha­
nasia of laboratory animals, anesthesia for minor procedures,
and recognition and prevention of pain and distress.
There are ethical and legal obligations on researchers to avoid
and alleviate pain in research animals33. However, some researchers
argue that use of analgesic drugs will interfere with the variables
they wish to study, such as cardiovascular function or nerve trans­
mission. What is often not appreciated is that the animal’s pain,
and its reaction to that pain, may also confound the outcome of the
experiment. Thus, good experimental design to eliminate unneces­
sary pain, through the use of anesthesia, analgesic drugs or nonpharmacological techniques, is scientifically important.
Effective alleviation of pain depends on the ability to recognize
and assess its severity. Traditional methods of pain assessment,
such as monitoring behavior and clinical signs, are time consuming
and may not be specific to pain. Research by Jeffrey Mogil and his
team at McGill University has demonstrated that changes in facial
expression provide a reliable and rapid means of assessing pain in
mice and rats34,35. ‘Grimace scales’ have been developed based on
changes in a number of ‘facial action units’, such as narrowing of
the eyes (orbital tightening) or changes in the position and shape
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Perspective
Focus on Reproducibility
www.nature.com/laban
156     Volume 46, No. 4 | APRIL 2017
of the whiskers. With funding from the NC3Rs, Matt Leach, also
at Newcastle University, has validated the use of grimace scales for
pain assessment in mice, rats and rabbits following surgical or other
painful procedures36–38. To raise awareness about grimace scales
and their potential to be used as part of clinical assessments39, the
NC3Rs office has produced A3-sized posters of the mouse, rat and
rabbit grimace scales for display in laboratory animal facility rooms.
Over 16,000 posters in English, French and Chinese have been sent
free of charge to laboratories in 51 countries.
Conclusions
At the NC3Rs, we recognize the importance of the link between
good animal welfare and good quality science, as do many in the
scientific community, but we are also involved in funding research
that provides an evidence base for this relationship and in promot­
ing this evidence base. Implementation of the opportunities that
we have identified for refining research practices will improve not
only animal welfare, but also scientific outcomes.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Received 10 October 2016; accepted 15 December 2016
Published online at 
1. Clemence, M. & Leaman, J. Public Attitudes to Animal Research in 2016.
Ipsos MORI Social Research Institute/Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy. 
Publications/sri-public-attitudes-to-animal-research-2016.pdf .
2. Home Office. Guidance on the Operation of the Animals (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986. HMSO. 
operation-of-aspa .
3. NC3Rs, AMRC, BBSRC, Defra, EPSRC, MRC, NERC & Wellcome Trust.
Responsibility in the Use of Animals in Bioscience Research: Expectations of
the Major Research Councils and Charitable Funding Bodies .
4. Fleetwood, G. et al. Making progress and gaining momentum in global 3Rs
efforts: how the European pharmaceutical industry is contributing.
J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 54, 192–197 .
5. Russel, W.M.S. & Burch, R.L. The Principles of Humane Experimental
Technique .
6. Buchanan-Smith, H.M. et al. Harmonizing the definition of refinement.
Anim. Welf. 14, 379–384 .
7. Lloyd, M.H. et al. Refinement: promoting the three Rs in practice.
Lab. Anim. 42, 284–293 .
8. Poole, T. Happy animals make good science. Lab. Anim. 31, 116–124
9. Mendl, M. & Paul, E.S. Consciousness, emotion and animal welfare:
insights from cognitive science. Anim. Welf. 13, S17–S25 .
10. Mendl, M. et al. Cognitive bias as an indicator of animal emotion and
welfare: emerging evidence and underlying mechanism. Appl. Anim. Behav.
Sci. 118, 161–181 .
11. Hall, L.E. et al. Refining dosing by oral gavage in the dog: a protocol to
harmonise welfare. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol. Methods 72, 35–46 .
12. Bethell, E. et al. Emotion evaluation and response slowing in a nonhuman primate: new directions for cognitive bias measures of animal
emotion? Behav. Sci. 6, 2 .
13. Ash, H. & Buchanan-Smith, H.M. The long-term impact of infant rearing
background on the affective state of adult common marmosets (Callithrix
jacchus). Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 174, 128–136 .
14. Gray, H. et al. Physiological, behavioral, and scientific impact of different
fluid control protocols in the rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta). eNeuro
3 (4), 1–15 .
15. Scullion Hall, L.E.M. et al. The influence of facility and home pen design
on the welfare of the laboratory-housed dog. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol.
Methods 83, 21–29 .
16. Holmes, A.M. et al. Impact of tank background on the welfare of the
African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis (Daudin). Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 185,
131–136 .
17. Hurst, J.L. & West, R.S. Taming anxiety in laboratory mice. Nat. Methods
7, 825–826 .
18. Gouveia, K. & Hurst, J.L. Reducing mouse anxiety during handling:
effect of experience with handling tunnels. PLoS ONE 8, e66401 .
19. Tasker, L. Linking welfare and quality of scientific output in cynomolgus
macaques (Macaca fasicularis) used for regulatory toxicology. PhD thesis,
University of Stirling. 
LouTaskerThesis2012.pdf .
20. Tymvios, C. et al. Real-time measurement of non-lethal platelet
thromboembolic responses in the anaesthetized mouse. Thromb. Haemost.
99, 435–440 .
21. Moore, C. & Emerson, M. Assessment of platelet aggregation responses
in vivo in the mouse. Methods Mol. Biol. 788, 21–28 .
22. Slater, H. et al. Individually customizable non-invasive head
immobilization system for non-human primates with an option for
voluntary engagement. J. Neurosci. Methods 269, 46–60 .
23. Bains, R.S. et al. Analysis of individual mouse activity in group housed
animals of different inbred strains using a novel automated home cage
analysis system. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 10, 106 .
24. Lidster, K. et al. Opportunities for improving animal welfare in rodent
models of epilepsy and seizures. J. Neurosci. Methods 260, 2–25 .
25. Prescott, M.J. et al. Refinement of the use of food and fluid control as
motivational tools for macaques used in behavioral neuroscience research:
Report of a working group of the NC3Rs. J. Neurosci. Methods 193,
167–188 .
26. Prior, H. et al. Social housing of non-rodents during cardiovascular
recordings in safety pharmacology and toxicology studies. J. Pharmacol.
Toxicol. Methods 81, 75–87 .
27. Chapman, K. et al. A global pharmaceutical company initiative: an
evidence-based approach to define the upper limit of body weight loss in
short term toxicity studies. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 67, 27–38 .
28. Simonato, M. et al. The challenge and promise of anti-epileptic therapy
development in animal models. Lancet Neurol. 13, 949–960 .
29. Hawkins, P. et al. A good death? Report of the second Newcastle meeting
on laboratory animal euthansia. Animals 6 (9), 50 .
30. Gaskill, B.N. et al. Heat or insulation: behavioral titration of mouse
preference for warmth or access to a nest. PLoS ONE 7, e32799 .
31. Adams, D.L. et al. A watertight acrylic-free titanium recording chamber for
electrophysiology in behaving monkeys. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1581–1590
32. National Competent Authorities for the implementation of Directive
2010/63/EU on the Protection of Animals Used For Scientific Purposes.
A working document on the development of a common education and
training framework to fulfil the requirements under the Directive: replacing
consensus document of 18–19 September 2013, 
environment/chemicals/lab_animals/pdf/Endorsed_E-T.pdf .
33. Carbone, L. Pain in laboratory animals: the ethical and regulatory
imperatives. PLoS ONE 6, e21578 .
34. Langford, D.J. et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in the laboratory
mouse. Nat. Methods 7, 447–449 .
35. Sotocinal, S.G. et al. The Rat Grimace Scale: a partially automated method
for quantifying pain in the laboratory rat via facial expressions. Mol. Pain
7, 55. 10.1186/1744–8069–7-55 .
36. Leach, M.C. et al. The assessment of post-vasectomy pain in mice using
behavior and the Mouse Grimace Scale. PLoS ONE 7, e35656 .
37. Keating, S.C.J. et al. Evaluation of EMLA cream for preventing pain during
tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioral and facial
expression responses. PLoS ONE 7, e44437 .
38. Miller, A.L. et al. The influence of isoflurane anaesthesia on the Rat
Grimace Scale. PLoS ONE 11, e0166652 .
39. Leung, V. et al. Real-time application of the Rat Grimace Scale as a
welfare refinement in laboratory rats. Sci. Rep. 6, 31667 .
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.