A Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test for
Structural Models
Marcelo J. Moreira∗
January 9, 2002
This paper develops a general method for constructing similar tests
based on the conditional distribution of nonpivotal statistics in a simultaneous equations model with normal errors and known reducedform covariance matrix. The test based on the likelihood ratio statistic
is particularly simple and has good power properties. When identiﬁcation is strong, the power curve of this conditional likelihood ratio
test is essentially equal to the power envelope for similar tests. Monte
Carlo simulations also suggest that this test dominates the Anderson-
Rubin test and the score test. Dropping the restrictive assumption
of disturbances normally distributed with known covariance matrix,
approximate conditional tests are found that behave well in small samples even when identiﬁcation is weak.
JEL Classiﬁcation: C12, C31.
Keywords: instrumental variables, similar tests, Wald test, likelihood ratio
test, power envelope, conﬁdence regions, 2SLS estimator, LIML estimator.
∗c⃝2001 Copyright.
Lengthy discussions with Thomas Rothenberg were extremely
important for this work and I am deeply indebted for all his help and support. This paper
follows a suggestion by Peter Bickel. For comments and advice, I also would like to thank
Kenneth Chay, Michael Jansson, James Powell and Paul Ruud.
Introduction
When making inferences about coeﬃcients of endogenous variables in a structural equation, applied researchers often rely on asymptotic approximations.
However, as emphasized in recent work by Bound, Jaeger and Baker 
and Staiger and Stock , these approximations are not satisfactory when
instruments are weakly correlated with the regressors. In particular, if identiﬁcation can be arbitrarily weak, Dufour showed that Wald-type con-
ﬁdence intervals cannot have correct coverage probability while Wang and
Zivot showed that the standard likelihood ratio test employing chisquare critical values do not have correct size. The problem arises because
inference is based on nonpivotal statistics whose exact distributions depart
substantially from their asymptotic approximations when identiﬁcation is
This paper develops a general procedure for constructing valid tests of
structural coeﬃcients based on the conditional distribution of nonpivotal
statistics. When the reduced-form errors are normally distributed with a
known covariance matrix, this procedure yields tests that are exactly similar;
that is, their null rejection probabilities do not depend on the values of the
unknown nuisance parameters. Simple modiﬁcations of these tests are shown
to be approximately similar even when the errors are nonnormal and the
reduced-form covariance matrix is unknown.
The conditional approach is employed to ﬁnd critical value functions for
Wald and likelihood ratio tests yielding correct rejection probabilities no
matter how weak the instruments. Although the conditional Wald test has
relatively poor power in some regions of the parameter space, the conditional
likelihood ratio test has overall good power properties. Monte Carlo simulations suggest that this conditional likelihood ratio test not only has power
close to the power envelope of similar tests when identiﬁcation is good but
it also dominates the test proposed by Anderson and Rubin and the
score tests proposed by Kleibergen and Moreira when identi-
ﬁcation is weak. The conditional Wald and likelihood ratio tests can also
be used to construct conﬁdence regions centered around the 2SLS and LIML
estimators, respectively, that have correct coverage probability even when
instruments are weak and that are informative when instruments are good.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, exact results are developed for the special case of a two-equation model under the assumption
that the reduced-form disturbances are normally distributed with known covariance matrix. Sections 3 and 4 extend the results to more realistic cases,
although at the cost of introducing some asymptotic approximations. Monte
Carlo simulations suggest that these approximations are quite accurate. Section 5 compares the conﬁdence region based on the conditional likelihood
ratio test with the conﬁdence region based on a score test that is also approximately similar. Section 6 contains concluding remarks. All proofs are
given in the appendix.
Known Covariance Matrix
To simplify exposition, consider a simple model in which the structural equation of interest is
y1 = y2β + u
where y1 and y2 are n × 1 vectors of observations on two endogenous variables, u is an n × 1 unobserved disturbance vector, and β is an unknown
scalar parameter. This equation is assumed to be part of a larger linear simultaneous equations model which implies that y2 is correlated with u. The
complete system contains exogenous variables which can be used as instruments for conducting inference on β.
Speciﬁcally, it is assumed that the
reduced form for Y = [y1, y2] can be written as
where Z is an n × k matrix of exogenous variables having full column rank
k and π is a k × 1 vector; the n rows of the n × 2 matrix of reduced form
errors V = [v1, v2] are i.i.d. normally distributed with mean zero and 2 ×
2 nonsingular covariance matrix Ω= [ωi,j]. It is assumed that k > 1 so
the structural equation is “overidentiﬁed.” The goal here is to test the null
hypothesis H0 : β = β0 against the alternative H1 : β ̸= β0.
Commonly used tests reject the null hypothesis when a test statistic T
takes on a value greater than a speciﬁed critical value c. The test is said to
have size α if, when the null hypothesis is true,
Prob(T > c) ≤α
for all admissible values of the nuisance parameters π and Ω. Since π and
Ωare unknown, ﬁnding a test with correct size is nontrivial. Of course, if
the null distribution of T does not depend on the nuisance parameters, the
1 −α quantile of T can be used for c and the null rejection probability will
be identically equal to α. In that case, T is said to be pivotal and the test is
said to be similar.
Although structural coeﬃcient tests based on pivotal statistics have been
proposed in the literature ,
Kleibergen , and Moreira ), they sometimes have poor power
properties. On the other hand, the Wald and likelihood ratio statistics most
commonly employed in practice are not pivotal. However, under regularity
conditions, these test statistics are asymptotically chi-square with one degree
of freedom and tests using the 1 −α chi-square quantile for c are asymptotically similar with size α. Unfortunately, if π cannot be bounded away from
zero, their actual size can diﬀer substantially from α since the asymptotic
approximation will be very poor when the instruments are weakly correlated
One possible solution to the size problems that result when using nonpivotal statistics is to replace the chi-square critical value with some larger,
conservative value guaranteeing that the null rejection probability is no larger
than α. This is the approach taken by Wang and Zivot for the likelihood ratio test and the Hessian-based score test. Unfortunately, when π is
not near the origin, these tests have null rejection probabilities much lower
than α and waste power unnecessarily. Moreover, this approach is useless for
statistics that are not boundedly pivotal. Here we will develop an alternative
method to construct similar tests based on nonpivotal statistics under the
assumption Ωis known.
Similar Tests Based on Nonpivotal Statistics
When Ωis known and the errors are normal, the probability model is a member of the curved exponential family and the k × 2 matrix Z′Y is a suﬃcient
statistic for the unknown parameters (β, π). Hence, any test depends on the
data only through Z′Y. However, for any known nonsingular, nonrandom
2×2 matrix D, the k ×2 matrix Z′Y D is also suﬃcient. A convenient choice
is the matrix D = [b, Ω−1a], where b = (1, −β0)′ and a = (β0, 1)′ . Then the
suﬃcient statistic can be represented by the pair of k × 1 vectors
S = Z′Y b = Z′(y1 −y2β0)
T = Z′Y Ω−1a.
The vector S is normally distributed with mean Z′Zπ(β −β0) and covariance
matrix (b′Ωb)Z′Z; T is independent of S and normally distributed with mean
(a′Ω−1a)Z′Zπ and covariance matrix (a′Ω−1a)Z′Z, where a = (β, 1). Thus
we have partitioned the suﬃcient statistic into two independent, normally
distributed vectors, T having a null distribution depending on π and S having
a null distribution not depending on π.
Any test statistic that depends only on S will be pivotal and can be used
to form a similar test. Likewise, as discussed in Moreira , similar tests
can be constructed from pivotal statistics of the form g (T)′ S/
g (T)′ Z′Zg (T)
where g is any (measurable) k-dimensional vector depending on T. The goal
here instead is to ﬁnd a similar test at level α based on a nonpivotal test
statistic ψ (S, T, β0). The following approach is suggested by the analysis
in Lehmann .
Although the marginal distribution of ψ
depends on π, the conditional null distribution of ψ given that T takes on
the value t does not depend on π. As long as this distribution is continuous,
its quantiles can be computed and used to construct a similar test.
following proposition follows immediately:
Proposition 1: Suppose that ψ (S, t, β0) is a continuous random variable under H0 for every t. Deﬁne c(t, β0, α) to be the 1 −α quantile of the
null distribution of ψ (S, t, β0). Then the test that rejects H0 if ψ (S, T, β0) >
c (T, β0, α) is similar at level α ∈(0, 1).
Moreira shows that T = a′Ω−1a · Z′Zbπ, where bπ is the maximum
likelihood estimator of π when β is constrained to take the null value β0
and Ωis known.
Therefore, this method of ﬁnding similar tests can be
interpreted as adjusting the critical value based on a preliminary estimate of
π. Alternatively, this approach may be thought of as replacing the nonpivotal
statistic ψ (S, T, β0) by the statistic ψ (S, T, β0) −c(T, β0, α) which yields a
test of correct size no matter what the value of π.
Although Proposition 1 can be applied to any continuously distributed
test statistic depending on S and T, the details will be worked out here only
for two special cases: the Wald test statistic based on the two-stage least
squares estimator and the likelihood ratio test statistic.
A Conditional Wald Test
Let NZ = Z(Z′Z)−1Z′. Consider the Wald statistic centered around the
2SLS estimator:
W0 = (b2SLS −β0)2 y′
where b2SLS = (y′
2NZy2)−1y′
2NZy1 and ˆσ2 = [1 −b2SLS]Ω[1 −b2SLS]′. Here,
the nonstandard structural error variance estimate exploits the fact that
Ωis known. Since W0 depends on the data only through Z′Y, it can be
written as a function of S, T and β0. Although in principle the critical value
function cW(t, β0, α) can be derived from the known distribution of S, a
simple analytical expression seems out of reach. A Monte Carlo simulation
from the null distribution of S is much simpler. Indeed, the applied researcher
need only do a simulation for the actual value of T observed in the sample
and for the particular β0 being tested; there is no need to derive the whole
function cW(t, β0, α).
Although a simple algebraic expression for the critical value function
cW(t, β0, α) is not available, some of its properties are known. For any positive integer r, let qα(r) denote the 1 −α quantile of a chi-square distribution
with r degrees of freedom. Let ρ0 be the correlation coeﬃcient between an
element of y1 −y2β0 and the corresponding element of y2. Then,
Proposition 2: The critical value function for the conditional W0 test
cW(t, β0, α)
qα(1) as t′t →∞
cW(t, β0, α)
Note that T is normal with a mean that is proportional to π. When π is
far from the origin, T ′T will take on large values with very high probability;
the relevant critical value for W0 is then the standard chi-square-one quantile.
When π is near the origin, T ′T is likely to be small and the relevant critical
value for W0 may be very large if ρ2
0 is near one.
The Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test
When Ωis known, the likelihood ratio statistic, deﬁned to be two times the
log of the likelihood ratio, is given by:
LR0 = ¯λmax −a′Ω−1Y ′NY Ω−1a
where ¯λmax is the largest eigenvalue of Ω−1/2Y ′NY Ω−1/2. This statistic can
be written as a function of the suﬃcient statistics S and T. However, the
expression is somewhat simpler when written in terms of the standardized
statistics
¯S = (Z′Z)−1/2 S
¯T = (Z′Z)−1/2 T
having covariance matrices equal to the identity matrix.
Under the null
hypothesis, ¯S has mean zero so ¯S′ ¯S is distributed as chi square with k degrees
of freedom. The statistic ¯T ′ ¯T is distributed as noncentral chi square with
noncentrality proportional to π′Z′Zπ; it can be viewed as a natural statistic
for testing the hypothesis that π = 0 under the assumption that β = β0.
In Appendix B, the following expression for the likelihood ratio statistic
is derived:
¯S′ ¯S −¯T ′ ¯T +
[ ¯S ¯S + ¯T ′ ¯T]2 −4[ ¯S′ ¯S · ¯T ′ ¯T −( ¯S′ ¯T)2]
When k = 1, ¯S and ¯T are scalars and the LR0 statistic collapses to the pivotal
statistic ¯S′ ¯S. In the overidentiﬁed case the LR0 statistic depends also on ¯T ′ ¯T
and is no longer pivotal. Nevertheless, a similar test can be found by applying
Proposition 1. Again, an analytic expression for the critical value function
for the conditional LR0 statistic is not available but the needed values can be
computed by simulation. Some general properties of the function are known.
Proposition 3: The critical value function for the conditional LR0 test
depends only on α, k, and ¯t′¯t. It satisﬁes
cLR(¯t′¯t, k, α)
qα(1) as ¯t′¯t →∞
cLR(¯t′¯t, k, α)
qα(k) as ¯t′¯t →0
Table 1 presents the critical value function calculated from 10,000 Monte
Carlo replications for the signiﬁcance level of 5%. When k = 1, the true
critical value function is a constant equal to 3.84 at level 5%. The slight
variation in the ﬁrst column of Table 1 is due to simulation error. For each
k, the critical value function has approximately an exponential shape, decreasing from qα(k) at ¯t′¯t = 0 to qα(1) as ¯t′¯t tends to inﬁnity. For example,
when k = 4, the approximation c(¯t′¯t, 4, 0.05) = 3.84+5.65 exp(−¯t′¯t/7) seems
to ﬁt reasonably well.
The shape of the critical value function explains why the method proposed
by Wang and Zivot leads to a test with low power. Their proposed
critical value of a chi-square-k quantile is the upper bound for the true critical
value function. The method proposed here can also be seen as a reﬁnement
of the method proposed by Zivot, Startz and Nelson that selects for
the critical value either qα(k) or qα(1) depending on a preliminary test of the
hypothesis π = 0. The conditional approach has the advantage that it is not
ad hoc and the ﬁnal test has correct size without unnecessarily wasting power.
Figure 1 illustrates each method, sketching its respective critical values1 for
diﬀerent values of ¯t′¯t when the number of instruments equals four.
Monte Carlo Simulations
To evaluate the power of the conditional W0 and LR0 tests, a 1,000 replication experiment was performed based on design I of Staiger and Stock
 . The hypothesized value β0 is zero. The elements of the 100 × 4
matrix Z are drawn as independent standard normal and then held ﬁxed
over the replications. Two diﬀerent values of the π vector are used so that
the “population” ﬁrst-stage F-statistic (in the notation of Staiger and Stock)
λ′λ/k = π′Z′Zπ/(ω22k) takes the values 1 (weak instruments) and 10 (good
instruments). The rows of (u, v2) are i.i.d. normal random vectors with unit
variances and correlation ρ.
Results are reported for ρ taking the values
0.00, 0.50 and 0.99. The critical values for the conditional likelihood ratio
and Wald tests were based on 1,000 replications.
In addition to the two conditional tests, denoted as LR∗
other similar tests were evaluated: the Anderson-Rubin test based on the
statistic AR0 = ¯S′ ¯S (modiﬁed to take into account that Ωis known) and
the score test based on the statistic LM0 =
¢2 / ¯T ¯T. The latter test
is described in Kleibergen and Moreira . Figures 2-3 graph,
for a ﬁxed value of π and ρ, the rejection probabilities of the AR0, LM0,
conditional LR0 and conditional W0 tests as functions of the true value β.2
The power envelope for similar tests is also included. In each ﬁgure, all four
power curves are at approximately the 5% level when β equals β0.
reﬂects the fact that each test is similar.
As expected, the power curves
become steeper as the quality of instruments improve.
1The pre-testing procedure proposed by Zivot, Nelson and Startz is based on
the OLS estimator for π. Instead, ﬁgure 1 sketches the critical value function based on a
pre-testing on the constrained maximum likelihood estimator for π.
2As β varies, ω11 and ω12 change to keep the structural error variance and the correlation between u and v2 constant.
As expected, the AR0 test has power considerably lower than the envelope
power. The LM0 test has relative low power either for the weak-instrument
case or for some alternatives β for the good-instrument case. Figures 2-3
also suggest that the conditional W0 test has poor power for some parts of
the parameter space. These poor power properties are not shared by the
conditional LR0 test. The conditional likelihood ratio test not only seems to
dominate the Anderson-Rubin test and the score test, but it also has power
essentially equal to the power envelope for similar tests3 when identiﬁcation
is strong.
The good performance of the conditional LR0 test is not surprising. Various authors have noticed that, in curved exponential models, the likelihood
ratio test performs well for a wide range of alternatives. Van Garderen 
addresses this issue in the case the nuisance parameter is present only under
the alternative.
Unknown Covariance Matrix
In practice, of course, the reduced-form covariance matrix Ωis not known
and must be treated as an additional nuisance parameter. Under normality,
the probability model remains curved exponential, but the suﬃcient statistic expands to (Z′Y, Y ′Y ). However, the conditional approach developed in
Section 2 cannot be easily applied in this context. Nevertheless, it seem plausible that the conditional tests can still be used after replacing the unknown
Ωby some estimate since Ωcan be well estimated regardless of the quality
of the instruments. Furthermore, although motivated by the normal model,
under relatively weak regularity conditions, the test statistics have limiting
distributions that do not depend on the error distribution. Thus, modiﬁed
versions of the tests developed under the restrictive assumptions of normal
errors with known reduced form covariance matrix can be expected to behave
3Other tests that have been proposed in the literature such as the Wald test based on
the LIML estimator and the GMM0 test proposed by Wang and Zivot were also
considered. However, Monte Carlo simulations suggest that their conditional counterparts
have power no larger than the conditional likelihood ratio test.
well under much weaker assumptions.
A Conditional Wald Test
The OLS estimator of Ωis given by bΩ= Y ′MZY/(n −k) where MZ =
I −Z(Z′Z)−1Z′. It is natural then to consider the test statistic
W = (b2SLS −β0)2 y′
where ˜σ2 = [1 −b2SLS]bΩ[1 −b2SLS]′. The critical value function derived for
W0 can then be applied here, but with eT = Z′Y bΩ−1a instead of T. That is,
when Ωis unknown, one would reject the null hypothesis that β = β0 if
W −cW( eT, β0, α) > 0.
The Likelihood Ratio Test
Likewise, the LR0 test statistic also depends on Ωand, therefore, cannot
be used when the covariance matrix of the reduced form disturbances is
unknown. Again, a natural modiﬁcation is to replace Ωby its OLS estimator:
LR1 = λmax −a′ ˆΩ−1Y ′NZY ˆΩ−1a
where λmax is the largest eigenvalue of bΩ−1/2Y ′NZY bΩ−1/2. Alternatively, one
could use the likelihood ratio statistic for the case Ωis unknown:
1 + b′Y ′NZY b
b′Y ′MZY b
where λmin is the smallest eigenvalue of bΩ−1/2Y ′NY bΩ−1/2.
Even for relatively small samples, the LR1 and LR statistics are close
to the LR0 statistic. Therefore, the critical values in Table 1 can be used
for the conditional LR1 and LR tests as well, after replacing Ωby ˆΩin the
expression for T.
Monte Carlo Simulations
Although the modiﬁed conditional tests are not exactly similar, they appear
to have good size properties even when the instruments may be weak. To
evaluate the rejection probability under H0, the design used in Section 2.3
is once more replicated. Results are reported for the same parameter values
except for sample size.
Tables II and III present rejection probabilities for the following tests:
Anderson-Rubin4 (AR), the Hessian-based score test (LM) described by
Zivot, Startz and Nelson , the information-based score test (LM2)
described in Moreira , the likelihood ratio test (LR), the conditional
likelihood ratio test (LR∗), the Wald test centered around the 2SLS estimator (W), and the conditional Wald test (W ∗). The AR, LM2, LR∗, and W ∗
tests are approximately similar, whereas the LM, LR, and W test are not.
Although the LM test does not present good size properties, the LM2
test does. Likewise, the LR and W tests present worse size properties than
the conditional LR∗and W ∗tests. The null rejection probabilities of the
LR test range from 0.048-0.220 and those of the W test range from 0.002-
0.992 when the number of observations is 80. The null rejection probabilities
of their conditional counterparts range from 0.046-0.075 and 0.030-0.072,
respectively.
Results for non-normal disturbances are analogous5. Tables IV and V
show the rejection probabilities of some 5% tests when Staiger and Stock’s
design II is used. The structural disturbances, u and v2, are serially uncorrelated with ut = (ξ2
2 and v2t = (ξ2
2 where ξ1t and ξ2t
are normal with unit variance and correlation √ρ. The k instruments are
indicator variables with equal number of observations in each cell. When the
number of observations is 80, the rejection probabilities under H0 of the LR∗
and W ∗tests are still close to 5% for all values of λ′λ/k and ρ.
Finally, Tables VI and VII compare the power of the conditional LR∗
4For the AR test, a χ2(k) critical value was used.
5Once more, the critical value function is based on 1,000 Monte Carlo simulations as
if the disturbances were normally distributed with known variance Ω.
(Ωknown) with that of the conditional LR∗test (Ωunknown) when Staiger
and Stock’s design I with 100 observations is used. The diﬀerence between
the two power curves is small, which suggests that the power comparison in
Section 2.3 for the LR∗
0 test is also valid for the LR∗test. Tables VIII and IX
show that the same conclusion holds for the conditional W ∗
0 and W ∗tests.
Extensions
The previous theory can easily be extended to a structural equation with
more than two endogenous variables and with additional exogenous variables
as long as inference is to be conducted on all the endogenous coeﬃcients.
Consider the structural equation
y1 = Y2β + Xγ + u
where Y2 is the n×l matrix of observations on the l explanatory endogenous
variable and X is the n × r matrix of observations on r exogenous variables.
This equation is part of a larger linear system containing the additional
exogenous variables Z. The reduced form for Y = [y1, Y2] is
ZΠβ + Xδ + v1
ZΠ + XΓ + V2
where δ = Γβ + γ. The rows of V = [v1, V2] are i.i.d. normal random vectors
with mean zero and covariance matrix Ω. It is assumed that X and Z have
full column rank. The problem is to test the vector hypothesis H0 : β = β0
treating Π, Γ, δ as nuisance parameters.
The unknown parameters associated with X can be eliminated by taking orthogonal projections. Deﬁne the l + 1 component column vector b =
0)′. Let A be any (l + 1) × l matrix whose columns are orthogonal to
b. Then, if MX = I −X(X′X)−1X′, the statistics
S = Z′MXY b
T = Z′MXY Ω−1A
are independent and normally distributed. For a nonpivotal statistic ψ(S, T, β0),
the critical value can be found computing the 1 −α quantile of the distribution of ψ conditioned on T = t. Again, Ωcan be replaced with a consistent
estimate and the normality assumption dropped without aﬀecting the results
signiﬁcantly.
Conﬁdence Regions
Conﬁdence regions for β with approximately correct coverage probability
can be constructed by inverting approximately similar tests. Although Dufour showed that Wald-type conﬁdence intervals are not valid, the
conﬁdence regions based on the conditional Wald test has correct coverage
probability in large samples no matter how weak the instruments. Likewise,
if the LM2 test or the conditional LR test is used, the resulting conﬁdence
regions have approximately correct level. Moreover, the regions based on the
conditional Wald test necessarily contain the 2SLS estimator of β while the
ones based on the conditional likelihood ratio test or on the LM2 test are
centered around the limited-information maximum likelihood estimator of β.
Therefore, conﬁdence regions based on these tests can be used as evidence of
the accuracy of their respective estimators.
To illustrate how informative the conﬁdence regions based on the conditional LR test are compared with the ones based on the LM2 test, design I
of Staiger and Stock is once more used. One sample was drawn where
the true value of β is zero. Figures 4-6 plots the LR and LM2 statistics and
their respective critical value functions at signiﬁcance level of 5% against
β06. The region in which each statistic is below its critical value curve is the
corresponding conﬁdence set.
When the instruments are invalid (Figure 4), the conﬁdence regions cover
the real line. This is expected to happen about 95% of time since the conﬁdence regions have correct coverage probability and β is unidentiﬁed. As the
quality of the instruments increases, the conﬁdence regions become narrower.
6The approximate critical value function c(t) = 3.84 + 5.65 exp(−¯t′¯t/7) was used.
Moreover, LR conﬁdence regions are signiﬁcantly smaller than the LM2 ones,
as a result of better power properties of the conditional likelihood ratio test.
For example, when λ′λ/k = 10 and ρ = 0, the LR conﬁdence region is the
set [0.0, 0.6] while the LM conﬁdence region is the set [−4.1, −2.3]∪[0.0, 0.6]
(Figure 6). This illustrates that the score test fails to reject values very far
from the true value, whereas the conditional likelihood ratio test does not.
Conclusions
Monte Carlo simulations suggest that the conditional likelihood ratio test
has good size and power properties. If identiﬁcation is good, this test has
power curve essentially equal to the upper bound power curve for similar
Monte Carlo simulations also suggest that this test dominates the
test proposed by Anderson and Rubin and the score tests studied
by Kleibergen and Moreira .
This test can also be used to
construct informative conﬁdence regions with correct coverage probability
centered around the limited-information maximum likelihood estimator.
The conditional approach used in this paper for ﬁnding similar tests based
on nonpivotal statistics can be applied to other statistical problems involving nuisance parameters. Improved inference should be possible whenever
a subset of the statistics employed to form a test statistic has a nuisanceparameter free distribution and is independent of the remaining statistics
under the null hypothesis.
Department of Economics, University of California at Berkeley, 549 Evans
Hall #3880, Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 USA; ;