Psychological Bulletin
1991, Vol. 109, No. 2,163-203
Copyright 1991 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-2909/91/$3.00
Haifa Century of Research on the Stroop Effect: An Integrative Review
Colin M. MacLeod
Division of Life Sciences
University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus
Scarborough, Ontario, Canada
The literature on interference in the Stroop Color-Word Task, covering over 50 years and some 400
studies, is organized and reviewed. In so doing, a set of 18 reliable empirical findings is isolated that
must be captured by any successful theory of the Stroop effect. Existing theoretical positions are
summarized and evaluated in view of this critical evidence and the 2 major candidate theories—relative speed of processing and automaticity of reading—are found to be wanting. It is concluded that
recent theories placing the explanatory weight on parallel processing of the irrelevant and the
relevant dimensions are likely to be more successful than are earlier theories attempting to locate a
single bottleneck in attention.
In 1935, J. R. Stroop published his landmark article on attention and interference, an article more influential now than it
was then. Why has the Stroop task continued to fascinate us?
Perhaps the task is seen as tapping into the primitive operations
of cognition, offering clues to the fundamental process of attention. Perhaps the robustness of the phenomenon provides a
special challenge to decipher. Together these are powerful attractions in a field of complex phenomena where the most subtle variation may exert a dramatic effect.
In writing this article, I have two primary intentions. The
first is to create a taxonomy of the empirical work on the Stroop
task and its analogs. At least 70% of the more than 700 Strooprelated articles in the literature have been published since the
reviews by Dyer and Jensen and Rohwer . Furthermore, Dyer's theoretical framework now seems in need of reconsideration, so that his review no longer provides the optimal
organization. The second aim, then, is to survey existing theories, showing the critical weaknesses in the standard explanations and dispelling some myths that have arisen. I argue for a
new theoretical framework for the Stroop effect, informed by
contemporary cognitive psychology. This framework is more
comprehensive than many earlier experiment-specific hypotheses, and suggests directions in which future research might
profitably proceed.
This research was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Grant A7459.1 am grateful to the Ontario
Science Centre for providing testing facilities and to their staif for
assistance. I owe a considerable debt to P. J. Lootsteen, who did the
bulk of the initial work locating articles for me. I thank Jonathan
Cohen, Kevin Dunbar, and Gordon Logan for their careful readings of
the theoretical section. I am especially grateful to John Flowers and an
anonymous reviewer for their yeoman work as reviewers.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Colin M. MacLeod, Division of Life Sciences, University of Toronto,
Scarborough Campus, Scarborough, Ontario Canada MIC 1A4. Electronic mail may be sent to .
Colors, Words, and Interference:
Research From 1886 to 1935
The Half-Century Before Stroop
The roots of Stroop's research are evident 50 years earlier in
the work of James McKeen Cattell (1886). In a doctoral project
supervised by Wilhelm Wundt, Cattell reported that objects
(and colors) took longer to name aloud than the corresponding
words took to read aloud. Saying "red" to a patch of color was
slower than saying "red" to the word red. His explanation is
strikingly modern: "This is because, in the case of words and
letters, the association between the idea and name has taken
place so often that the process has become automatic, whereas
in the case of colors and pictures we must by a voluntary effort
choose the name" (1886, p. 65). CattelTs automatic/voluntary
distinction strongly influenced psychologists then (e.g., James,
1890, p. 559; Quantz, 1897) and continues to do so .
Most early research tested the intuitive differential-practice account for Cattell's observation (cf. Quantz, 1897, p. 10). I will
focus only on the few most relevant to Stroop's work. Brown
 predicted that ink-color naming would benefit from extended practice more than would color word reading because
color naming was initially the less practiced skill. Instead, he
found that the ratio of the two times remained quite constant
with practice. He concluded that differential practice could not
explain Cattell's findings.1
Lund disagreed with Brown, and held that the differential practice hypothesis was quite viable. Lund found that
1 In Experiment 2, Brown printed congruent words or parts of words
on color backgrounds. Contrary to his expectation, such "assistance"
was actually detrimental to color naming. On this basis, Brown argued
that the two processes—reading words and naming colors—did not
overlap. This is the first published instance where color and word cooccurred, and where the word interfered with naming the color.
Strangely, the interference appeared in the congruent condition.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
children younger than reading age were faster on color naming
than on word reading, even with careful assurance that they
knew the stimulus words. Furthermore, for one 5-year-old
child, 4 weeks of alternating practice on the two tasks suggested
a common asymptote. However, a larger scale developmental
study conducted by Ligon again questioned the differential-practice concept. Both color-naming and color word-reading times improved across Grades 1 through 9, yet the difference between the skills remained unchanged. Ligon contended
that a "common factor" improved—perhaps time to articulate
the response—but that the tasks were otherwise independent.
In the same year as his classic article, Stroop demonstrated that Ligon's data did show differential improvement
with age, perfectly in accord with the differential-practice idea.
Stroop also faulted Ligon's correlational analysis on statistical
grounds. Given Lund's criticism of Brown, Stroop advocated the differential-practice hypothesis, as indeed did Dyer
 four decades later.
Other studies offered alternative views of Cattell's well-replicated observation. Hollingworth suggested
that word reading required only articulation, but that color
naming demanded articulation plus association. Brown 
and Ligon maintained that both tasks involved two processes but with a different association element for each test.
Garrett and Lemmon held that color naming was longer
because of an interference factor, which they failed to specify.
Perhaps they had in mind what Peterson, Lanier, and Walker
 suggested: that many responses might be conditioned to
a single color, but only one response was conditioned to a single
word. Telford , a student of Peterson's, also adopted this
interpretation. An earlier variation on this was put forth by
Woodworth and Wells , who argued that the few
color names typically used in these experiments "all are equally
ready and get in one another's way"
It is difficult to believe that no one thought to combine colors
and words until Stroop .2 It may help to place Stroop's
insight in context to realize that he developed his color-word
task less from an interest in stimulus-naming time—the motivation for most prior research—than from an interest in interference between conflicting processes.
Stroop's Classic Article
Elsewhere (MacLeod, in press) I have written a biographical
sketch of John Ridley Stroop; I do not recapitulate that here.
However, before discussing the vast literature fostered by
Stroop's dissertation, I will briefly outline his lead article in the
December 1935 issue of the Journal of Experimental Psychology. His basic conclusion is correctly reported and widely understood, but what he actually did has been somewhat transformed in secondary sources. Stroop's contemporary, Bartlett
 , would probably not be surprised by the transformation.
I simply wish to refresh our memories with the original study.
Stroop was concerned with how best to explain interference.
With Peterson, his dissertation supervisor, Stroop had been
engaged in studies of color naming versus word reading, and hit
upon the idea of a compound stimulus where the word was
incongruent with the ink color. His two major questions were
what effect each dimension of the compound stimulus would
have on trying to name the other dimension, and what effect
practice would have on the observed interference.
Experiment 1 examined the effect of incompatible ink colors
on reading words aloud. Stroop used five words and their
matching ink colors: red, blue, green, brown, and purple. For
the experimental condition, each ink color appeared twice in
each row and column of a 10 X 10 stimulus card. Each word
appeared twice on every line, equally often in each of the other
four ink colors. The stimuli appeared in reverse order on a
second card. The control-condition cards were each identical to
one of the experimental cards but in black ink only. After a
10-item practice card, all 70 subjects were tested on all four
cards, half in the order of Control 1, Experimental 2, Experimental 1, Control 2, and half in the reverse order. Subjects were
to read the words aloud as quickly as possible, leaving no errors
unconnected.
The top row of Table 1 presents the data from Experiment 1.
Although subjects averaged 2.3 s longer to read the 100 words
on the experimental cards, this 5.6% increase was far from significant. I recently replicated this experiment: My data for 50
subjects appear in the bottom row of Table 1, and are remarkably consistent with Stroop's data. There was no interference
from incongruent colors in reading words, F(l, 49) = 1.86,
M%=2.45, p=.\7.
In Experiment 2, the task was switched to naming the colors
aloud. The control cards had the ink colors in the same order as
the experimental cards; solid color squares were substituted for
words.3 The experimental cards and the procedure were identical to Experiment 1, except that twice the average response time
per item was added to a subject's total for every uncorrected
error, a procedure Stroop admitted was "arbitrary" The data of
the 100 subjects in this experiment are presented in the top row
of Table 2.
Subjects averaged 47 s longer to name ink colors of incongruent words than solid-color squares. Stroop described this
74% increase as a "marked interference effect"; 99% of the times
on experimental cards exceeded those on control cards. I also
replicated this experiment using 40 subjects. My data, in the
bottom row of Table 2, again duplicate those of Stroop; my
slightly lower values are perhaps due to my not using the arbitrary correction for errors. There was highly significant interference from incongruent words in naming colors, F(l, 39) =
363.65, A/$= 99.36, p<. 001.
Stroop's little-known third experiment was more complicated. Thirty-two subjects named the ink colors of incompatible words for 8 days. Over days, color-naming times decreased
16.8 s from 49.6 s to 32.8 s (for a card of 50 words). Thus,
interference from incompatible words appeared to decrease
2 According to Jensen and Rohwer , Jaensch was the
first to combine the word and color stimuli in a potentially conflicting
situation. Perhaps, then, Jaensch should receive at least partial credit,
but the "Jaensch-Stroop effect" is an extremely unwieldy label.
3 Stroop changed the color-naming control-condition cards from Experiment 2 to Experiment 3. The solid-color squares were replaced by a
nonalphanumeric character, which, in Stroop's view, was more like a
letter in appearance and more easily colored to match the shades of the
letters on the experimental cards. The stimulus Stroop chose was the
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
Experiment 1: Mean Times (in Seconds With Standard
Deviations fSDJ) for Reading Color Words in the Experimental
Condition (Incompatible Colored Inks) and in the Control
Condition (Black Ink Only)
Experimental:
words in color
words in black
Experiment
Sample size
Stroop 
MacLeod 
with practice. However, there may be a general practice or learning-to-learn effect here: Ink color-naming baselines were not
collected each day.
Experiment 3 also explored the impact of practicing color
naming on the development of interference in word reading.
Comparison of a pretest and a posttest where subjects read
words in incongruent colors showed that the intervening 8 days
of practice introduced interference into word reading (from
19.4 s before to 34.8 s after), but that this newly developed interference quickly disappeared in a second posttest (22.0 s). This
was the first report of what is now called the "reverse Stroop
Overall, Stroop took his experiments to show that differential
practice did offer a reasonable account of the asymmetrical
interference pattern he obtained, and accepted the Peterson et
al. explanation that words evoked a single reading response, whereas colors evoked multiple responses, thereby
making naming colors slower than reading words. Indeed, in
his 1938 article, Stroop directly tested this idea and reported
support for it.
The misconceptions about Stroop's work are subtle but noteworthy. People often talk as if there was a single experiment
contrasting four conditions; in fact, he performed two separate
experiments. Frequently, too, his word-reading data (Experiment 1) go unmentioned. I have even heard Stroop credited
with a compatible condition—color words in congruent ink
colors—which he never used. He also never timed single stimuli; his experiments used only lists of stimuli. On the other
hand, he did observe reverse Stroop interference first. Although
his theoretical account did not mention automaticity, it did rely
on a primitive type of response competition.
In summary, Stroop's article was a careful treatment of an
interference phenomenon. His scholarly acknowledgment of
his intellectual precursors, his succinct data analysis, and his
clear writing all contributed to the article's influence. The reliability, size, and apparent simplicity of the effect also no doubt
captured the interest of later investigators. I now consider what
these investigators have found out about the Stroop effect since
his dissertation.
Investigating the Stroop Effect:
Research From 1935 to 1989
The set of articles on the Stroop effect numbers in excess of
700. At least 300 of these feature Stroop interference as a measure of attention in studying individual differences, drug effects, and the like. Some of these may assist theory building in
other domains, but they are not particularly relevant to a theoretical account of the Stroop effect. I shall omit these "applied"
studies, leaving them for another reviewer. Even with such
pruning, however, it would still not be reasonable to discuss all
of the remaining articles in equal detail. Thus, I will describe
pivotal studies on a topic in detail and then provide reference
pointers to other pertinent work as appropriate. The review is
selective, but the bibliography is comprehensive.
The studies are divided into five sections. The first section
examines the various versions of the Stroop task, now actually a
family of tasks. Next are two sections on stimulus manipulations: first those conducted on individual trials and then those
involving experiment-wide variables. The fourth section summarizes manipulations pertaining to the subject's response,
and the fifth section surveys subject-related variables. Each section is in turn subdivided in terms of the sorts of manipulations
involved to allow a particular facet of the work to be located
easily. Appendix A outlines this organization and serves as an
^nations on the Stroop Procedure
The Stroop Color-Word Interference Test
The standard Stroop Color-Word Test, sometimes called the
Serial Color-Word Test, is the procedure Stroop used in
his Experiment 2. Typically, subjects are tested only on naming
colors of incompatible words and of control patches. Interference is expressed as the difference between the times on these
two types of cards. Total time per card divided by number of
stimuli on the card occasionally is used to estimate time per
stimulus. Jensen and Rohwer detailed many of the subtle
shadings of this standard procedure, focusing particularly on
the Thurstone version.
It is surprising how few studies investigating interference
have been concerned at all with Stroop's Experiment 1: reading
words in black versus incongruent colors. I agree with Smekal
and Dvoracek that more attention should be given to this
second measure if only to reduce misinterpretation of the standard interference measure. This may be especially crucial in
clinical settings and individual-differences studies, where more
convergence would be helpful.
Experiment 2: Mean Times (in Seconds with Standard
Deviations [SD]) for Naming Ink Colors in the Experimental
Condition (Incompatible Color Words) and in the Control
Condition (Solid Color Squares)
Experimental:
words in color
squares in
Experiment
Sample size
Stroop 
MacLeod 
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
How should the standard color-word test be scored? Jensen
and Rohwer discussed many approaches, but
the most prevalent is to calculate a difference score (interference card time - pure color card time) following Stroop
 .4 Various more complicated scoring systems have been
proposed , but their use is nowhere near as widespread as the
straightforward difference score. The same applies to attempts
to deal with errors on the task was pessimistic about the reliability and validity of the Stroop Color-Word Test based on his
regression analyses of various clinical populations, others have
been more optimistic. Smith and Nyman and Schubo
and Hentschel argued that reliability was actually
quite good. Santos and Montgomery directly examined
reliability, finding it to be good and uninfluenced by events
interpolated between test and retest. Uechi also reported
high reliability. In the most comprehensive study, Jensen 
concluded that, with multiple administrations, the Stroop test
was probably more reliable than any other psychometric test.
Of course, many studies have centered on methodological
issues in the Stroop task. Zajano, Hoyceanyls, and Ouellette
 pointed out that ink color and shape change repeatedly
on the standard interference card, but only ink color changes on
the standard control card. Changing shapes on the control card
to correct this confound did not alter the basic effect, however.
Sichel and Chandler argued that variation over stimuli
was too great in the standard test; their procedure using pairs of
stimuli and tighter controls on hue, brightness, and so forth also
left the basic pattern intact.
Modifications only modestly affect its magnitude, not its qualitative form. McCown and Arnoult printed the stimuli
vertically versus horizontally using either the entire color word
or just its first three letters, and reported equivalent interference in all cases. Regan found interference even using
only the first letter of a conflicting color word (e.g., the letter B
in red ink). Nor do instructional manipulations have much impact. For example, Peretti found that varying the degree
of competitiveness in instructions to subjects affected their performance, but substantial interference appeared in both instructional conditions.
Group versions of the color-word test originated with Kipnis
and Glickman . They had subject
groups view cards containing 150 stimuli and then write down
the first letter of each ink color, scoring the number of items
correctly identified in a 3-min interval. Similar schemes were
developed by Uhlmann and by Podell . Unfortunately, as Kipnis and Glickman noted, these tests actually measured clerical speed more than anything else.
Golden had subjects in a group silently read as many
items as they could on both experimental and control cards in
45 s. (Although he claimed that performance was equivalent to
the same task done aloud, I do not recommend switching from
overt to covert naming.) Work by Harbeson and her colleagues
 including a group Stroop test found individual card times to be reasonably reliable, but not the derived
difference scores. Thus far, then, use of group tests has been
infrequent and the results not very compelling.
On the whole, the Stroop Color-Word Test as a psychometric
tool appears to have reasonable reliability and validity (although the appropriateness of any given criterion of validity
could be questioned). Coupled with its ease of administration,
this has made the test a widely used diagnostic instrument in its
standard form. Not surprisingly, then, many variations on the
test have been developed and tested.
The Individual Stimulus Version of the Color-Word Task
Researchers interested in studying interference wanted a
more analytic methodology whereby individual stimuli could
be presented and timed. Although Dyer credited
Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr with first using this procedure, Tecce and Dimartino used it a year earlier to
study shock effects and response competition. However,
Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr's concern was with the
procedural modification itself, and they found it acceptable.
They did note, though, that the standard color-word test introduced list-structure effects in addition to item-specific interference.
By the time of Dyer's review, quite a few studies had
used this procedure; it has certainly become predominant in
laboratories since then . Indeed, it was not enough to isolate a single Stroop stimulus; investigators then began to modify the format of that stimulus. For example, Kamlet and Egeth embossed color
words in white letters on colored plastic tape and had subjects
name the tape color. They observed interference virtually identical to that in the integrated, word-in-color standard procedure.
To examine laterality and stimulus-integrality effects, Dyer
 separated word from color, placing one on each side of
the fixation point. In like manner, Kahneman and Chajczyk
 placed a word above or below a color patch in their
studies of automaticity. Both studies obtained robust interference. Dyer and Severance also separated word and color,
presenting an incompatible color word 0,25,50 or 100 ms before a color patch. Although they observed interference in every
case, it was about half that of the normal integrated stimulus.
Their procedure has now become conventional for the investigation of stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) (see later discussion). Indeed, all of these innovations are now firmly ensconced, and the single-trial (or single-response) procedure
dominates the field.
Sorting and Matching Versions of the Color-Word Task
Rather than naming or reading stimuli aloud, subjects can be
asked to sort stimuli into categories. The originators of this
procedure, Tecce and Happ , showed that sorting coloronly cards was much faster than sorting incongruent color-
4Saunders suggested the use of the logarithm of this difference score on the curious grounds that willingness to take part in
psychological experiments, especially Stroop studies, seems to correlate with this measure.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
word cards into categories identified by color patches. Dyer
 wondered what would have happened had the piles
been labeled with color words instead. The answer came when
Chmiel labeled the bins both ways (in separate conditions), and observed both normal Stroop interference and reverse Stroop interference. Martin also obtained a reverse
Stroop effect using the card-sorting procedure.
Treisman and Fearnley had subjects sort cards containing two words, two colors, or a word and a color into one of
two piles identified by whether the two stimuli on a given card
were the same or different. When both stimuli were words or
both were colors, sorting was rapid. When the stimuli were a
word and a color, sorting was slower, especially when one of the
two was an incongruent stimulus.
The sorting task continues to appear periodically in the literature , sometimes
using materials others than colors and words . Because some of these findings suggest that the sorting
task may not be perfectly analogous to the standard Stroop
task, it will be necessary to compare results from the different
procedures directly .
Although a common cognitive task, most notably in the work
of Posner , matching has seen limited use in the Stroop
situation. Flowers first used the technique to examine
time to match sequentially presented color words to color
patches. If printed in an incongruent ink color, time to match
the word with the color patch was slowed (relative to the congruent or control cases). Compton and Flowers replicated and extended this observation. Others have used matching to study interference in
Stroop analogs, but only rarely. There appears to be room for
more research using matching, particularly in attempting to
determine the role of response modality in interference (see
Response Modality: Oral Versus Manual).
The Picture-Word Interference Task
Cattell (1886) emphasized the naming of colors and pictures
being slower than the reading aloud of corresponding words
 . So it is surprising that the picture-word
interference task did not appear until after Dyer's review. Hentschel embedded words inside line drawings
and required subjects to name the pictures. Although uncertain
whether the two tests measured precisely the same phenomenon, he validated the resulting interference against the standard Stroop test.
Hentschel used the multiple-stimulus form; more prevalent
today is the individual-stimulus version, originating with Lassen in an unpublished dissertation. He observed the largest interference when the word preceded the picture by 100 ms.
(Note that his parallel study of word reading with incongruent
pictures also demonstrated some interference, although this
was unaffected by SOA.)
The task quickly caught on. Rosinski, Golinkoff, and Kukish
 demonstrated that incongruent words printed inside
pictures interfered substantially with picture naming, but that
incongruent pictures had only small effects on word reading.
As in the color-word task, this asymmetry has come to be the
expected pattern . Golinkoff and Rosinski showed that pictureword interference was unaffected by reading-comprehension
ability. Rosinski reported that same-category words interfered more with picture naming than did unrelated words or
nonsense trigram control items. These studies set the stage for
subsequent work on picture-word interference.
The major advantage of the picture-word task is its greater
flexibility in allowing many manipulations not possible with
the restricted set of colors in the color-word task. In comparison to pictures-only, rows of Xs, or other controls (e.g., *#@?%),
incongruent words consistently interfere with picture naming.
Also congruent words speed responding . Nonwords cause less interference than words ,
and unpronounceable nonwords cause less interference than
pronounceable nonwords .
More intriguing, perhaps, are the findings unique to the picture-word task. Consider first the semantic domain. Given the
numerous demonstrations of semantic facilitation as a result of
association , it is puzzling
that an associated word printed on a picture (e.g., the word
cheese on a picture of a mouse) does not produce more interference in picture naming than does an unassociated word
 . "Vet a member of the same semantic category
(e.g, the word ankle on a picture of a hand) does produce more
interference than an unrelated word , regardless of exposure duration . Furthermore, although category typicality has
no influence on interference , category centrality
apparently does . Obviously, this is a complicated issue.
There is now a large data base of studies manipulating semantic relations between word and picture . Many of these
are discussed later in more detail. Although a quick glance
might suggest that increasing the semantic similarity between
the word and the picture increases the interference in picture
naming, this comforting summary is flawed. For example, it
does not capture the difference just noted between categorically and associatively related words. A complete account
awaits further research.
A smaller subset of picture-word studies has been concerned
with nonsemantic relations. Ehri demonstrated that picture-naming latencies showed less interference as the words
changed from nouns to adjectives to functors, and that functors
did not differ from control nonsense syllables. Thus, syntactic
function (or meaningfulness, or both) plays a role roughly in
line with intuition. However, most variations have centered on
the phonemic, graphemic, or orthographic characteristics of
words. The basic message is that these variations influence interference, but not as much as semantic manipulations . As
one example of a nonsemantic effect, Rayner and Posnansky
 found that nonwords that resembled words graphemically (e.g., leuf for leaf) assisted naming of the corresponding
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
picture when presented very briefly (35 ms). With increased
exposure duration, this facilitation gradually became interference, although interference was never as great for these lookalikes as for dissimilar nonwords. To complicate matters, they
observed that phonemically related nonwords (e.g., lefe for leaf)
led to increased facilitation with exposure duration, in opposition to the graphemic effect.
Posnansky and Rayner established that first-letter coincidence of the word and the picture exerted its effect through
the graphemic rather than the phonemic route. Like Rayner
and Posnansky , Lupker and Underwood and
Briggs showed that the graphemic similarity effect was
due to letters appearing in the correct location, and that they
did not have to overlap in the first position (e.g., the word bomb
on a picture of a comb produced the effect). 
What do these studies tell us? Lupker suggests that graphemic effects are a consequence of easier word retrieval, and are unrelated to the response-competition factors underlying the basic interference
effect. Rayner and Springer showed that graphemic similarity between the picture and the word actually reduced the
size of the semantic-category effect. They maintained that the
bulk of the interference in the picture-word task stems from
semantic evaluation, not response competition. Investigators
seem to agree that there is more than one factor involved in
picture-word interference, but what the factors are and how
fundamental each is remain to be worked out.
A critical question is how directly the picture-word and
color-word findings relate to each other. Given the quite similar
patterns outlined, I will discuss them together in the rest of this
article. However, the essential work of ascertaining empirically
just how similar the two tasks are remains to be performed.
This is not a straightforward problem given the different sorts of
questions being addressed in the two domains. One way to
make some inroads would be through an individual-differences
study examining the correlation between interference in the
two tasks. The greater the comparability of results in the two
tasks over the same individuals, the more confident we will be
that they measure the same cognitive processes.
Auditory Analogs of the Stroop Task '
If people could selectively filter by modality , then there ought not be much cross-modality
interference. A number of studies called this prediction into
question , so creation of an auditory
Stroop task was only a matter of time. Credit goes to Hamers
 in her dissertation . Her
compatible condition required subjects to say "low" to the word
low presented at a low pitch (110 Hz) and "high" to the word
high presented at a high pitch (175 Hz). In the incompatible
condition, the word at 110 Hz was high and the word at 175 Hz
was low. Examining only her monolingual condition, she reported strong interference: The incompatible case (1,169 ms)
took 138 ms longer than the compatible case (1,031 ms) on
Unfortunately, as Dyer pointed out, we cannot be sure
how much of this difference truly is interference caused by incongruent words and how much is facilitation resulting from
congruent words because there was no neutral-word control
condition. This omission is all too frequent in studies of interference and facilitation, complicating interpretation. Without
such a control, all that can be examined is the difference between the congruent condition and the incongruent condition
—the sum of facilitation and interference, each in unknown
amounts. A second problem is closely related: What is the appropriate neutral control? I return to this thorny issue later ; for now, let us continue examining auditory Stroop analogs.
Dyer described an unpublished experiment by Dyer
and Mosko wherein subjects had to report the name of the
speaker. Some words spoken were neutral, some were compatible (the speaker's name), and some were incompatible (the other
speaker's name). They found no interference or facilitation, apparently in conflict with Hamers . However, the Hamers
result has been replicated .
In fact, Shor obtained interference in both directions, although
the word interfered more with identifying the pitch than vice
versa. Bidirectional interference is rarely reported (partly because subjects are rarely required to name both dimensions of
the stimulus), yet it has serious ramifications for interpreting
the Stroop effect.
In an extension of Hamers's task, McClain contrasted
time to identify the pitch with time to identify the word using
three response modes: verbal, buttonpress, or pitched hum.
Interference occurred only when the to-be-reported dimension
and the reporting mode differed (pitch-verbal, pitch-button,
word-hum), and not when they were compatible (word-verbal,
word-button, pitch-hum). She implicated response modality as
crucial in interference, an issue discussed under Response Modality: Oral Versus Manual.
Other auditory procedures have been reported as well.
Pieters used the auditory words left or right to the left or
right of the subject, and obtained interference in reporting the
spatial location of a conflicting word. Green and Barber obtained an auditory Stroop effect when subjects had to
judge a speaker's gender in conflict versus no-conflict situations. Hatta and Kirsner reported a similar result, which
also held with a buttonpress rather than a vocal response. Apparently, the Dyer and Mosko finding is the outlier.
Most recently, Zakay and Glicksohn used musical
notes or the names of those notes printed at congruent or incongruent locations on the staff. Subjects responded either orally or
on a piano keyboard. Zakay and Glicksohn implicated both
stimulus-response compatibility and the relation between the
dimensions as important, suggesting in fact that these effects
were additive.
All of these authors explicitly or implicitly argue for a close
analogy between their task and the Stroop task. As with picture-word interference, though, this connection has not been
firmly established. Indeed, it may be somewhat less clear-cut
here. Still the effects are generally qualitatively similar, suggesting generalizability of the interference phenomenon.
Other Analogs of the Stroop Task
These variants only hint at the ingenuity of investigators in
creating interference tasks. Many of the others involve two (or
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
more) verbal stimuli on the same trial (or on successive trials),
where one is the target and the other is the distractor. These
tend to be thought of in the literature more as priming studies,
outside the domain of this review. As one illustration, though, a
widely used procedure is the "flanker" task in which irrelevant letters or words are presented adjacent
to the target.
Eriksen and Eriksen showed that, for two response
sets of letters (H and K vs. S and C), irrelevant flankers from the
wrong set interfered with making the response. This seems to
be an attentional-selection problem, because presenting the
flankers in a different color reduced the interference . Hatta, Hatae, and Kirsner contrasted
English monolinguals to English-Japanese bilinguals in identifying English letters, and found that flanker characters from
either language interfered for the bilinguals, but not for the
monolinguals.
Other investigators adapted this procedure for studying word
rather than letter processing. Dallas and Merikle showed
that presence of a distractor word influenced time to name the
target word, with slower naming when the distractor was unassociated. Shaffer and LaBerge replicated the Eriksen and
Eriksen pattern using categorized words instead of letters. Guttentag, Haith, Goodman, and Hauch used the
technique with bilinguals to show that flanker words interfered
even when they were not in the same language as the target,
contrasting somewhat with the Hatta et al. result for
letters, perhaps because of the semantic element. The bilingual
Stroop situation is treated in more depth under Language Differences: The Case of the Bilingual.
The growing literature on the flanker task has been extended
to the color-word and picture-word situations by Kahneman
and Chajczyk and Glaser and Glaser . Several studies also have investigated aspects of meaning using a priming
procedure in a Stroop-like task , but these are all saved for the more
extensive discussion of semantic variation later.
Most relevant interference experiments have used words as
one dimension of the two-dimensional stimulus, such as when
Warren and Lasher had subjects identify the type fonts of
words that were in either the congruent or the incongruent font
(e.g., the word bold typed in modern, nonbold font), obtaining
the expected interference pattern. However, shapes have been
used occasionally in an effort to eliminate words altogether . Thus, Hentschel developed a figure-word interference test in the
same article in which he introduced the picture-word task.
When geometrical shapes surrounded incongruent words (e.g.,
a square around the word circle), interference occurred for naming the shape.
Compton and Flowers had subjects match words to
geometric shapes presented shortly after the words. Matching
speed was slowed by incongruent shapes being present at the
time of word presentation, but this was primarily true at short
SOAs (100 ms or less). They took this interference to be visual,
unlike the verbal interference in the standard Stroop task.
MacLeod and Dunbar assigned color names to random
polygons, and trained subjects in giving the new color name to
each shape, monitoring the development of interference with
practice. The advantage of studies using shapes is that they step
free of words and reading, which dominate this literature.
Few studies have used naturally colored objects, although
Cramer and Arochova did develop an objectbased test for use with children. When Menard-Buteau and
Cavanagh had subjects name the color of an incongruously colored object, such as a blue banana, as opposed to a
neutral object, such as a blue book, they found interference.
However, practice in the word version of the same task did not
transfer to the object version, so they took these to be independent types of interference, the object-related one being due to a
more perceptual process. This also relates to the semantic manipulations (discussed under Semantic Variation) and to the relation between the picture-word and color-word tasks.
Arrows have been moderately popular stimuli. In the first
such study, Shor embedded the words left, right, up,
and down in arrows pointing in directions other than the one
named by the word. The control condition omitted the words.
Shor observed interference in naming the direction of the
arrow, but smaller in magnitude than common in the colorword task. This interference decreased as the semantic overlap
between the embedded word and the arrow declined . Shor, Hatch, Hudson, Landrigan, and
Shaffer demonstrated that extensive training (30-50
days) in naming such incongruent stimuli did not eliminate the
interference observed.
Shor's task is analogous to the picture-word task in that the
two dimensions are not integrated, unlike the standard Stroop
task. To integrate the two dimensions more, Dyer used a
moving display in which the same four directional words (or the
control stimulus XXXX) could be moved either in the named
direction (congruent) or in another direction (incongruent). He
observed both interference and facilitation for naming direction, but the interference was again small relative to the standard Stroop task. Two other similar studies produced the same
results. Clark and Brownell had subjects judge whether
an arrow was pointing up or down inside a rectangle; White
 used the words north, south, east, and west inside a rectangle, and had subjects name the word's position. Both studies
reported small but reliable interference.
A related series of studies began with the work of Seymour
 . He presented the words above, below, left, and
right, and required subjects to name the location of the word
relative to a dot. Subjects showed both facilitation and interference. Palef and Olson followed up this work, presenting
the words above and below either above or below the fixation
point. When spatial location was processed faster, responses to
word meaning showed interference from incongruent locations; when word meaning was processed faster, responses to
spatial location showed interference from incongruent words.
This has become a hallmark finding in support of the idea that
interference is a direct consequence of the speed of processing
each dimension. Palef then complicated the stimulus,
adding an asterisk so that subjects could respond to relative or
absolute position as well as to the word itself. She argued that
the effects of the two potentially interfering dimensions were
additive. Logan and Zbrodoff ex-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
tended this work by manipulating the frequency of trial types
(see Probability of Various Trial Types). More recently, Harvey
 examined SOA effects using the words hi and lo in compatible versus incompatible positions.
Another perennial favorite is numerosity. Windes first
showed that counting is interfered with if the stimuli being
counted are incompatible numerals. Shor and Fox et al.
 reported similar interference effects with numbers. Morton also obtained reliable interference from the presence
of irrelevant digits in counting small sets of stimuli. In a more
complicated study, Flowers, Warner, and Polansky demonstrated that there was also a major contribution of response
modality to the likelihood of observing interference in a numerosity task.
Since Navon's and Stirling and Coltheart's articles on global versus local features in perception, this task has
become popular as well. Here subjects saw a large letter composed of small letters (e.g, the letter H formed from small Hs vs.
small 5s). When required to respond to the large letter, the
small ones had little impact. When required to respond to the
small letters, the large one interfered. A similar effect was obtained using shapes: The global feature again overrode the local
feature. Later studies pursued the role of attention in this remarkably good
Stroop analog. Martin suggested that global features
dominate for a multiple-element display, whereas local features
take over for a few-element display.
Egeth, Blecker, and Kamlet found no interference
when subjects indicated whether the word and its ink color
matched using the responses "same" and "different," but reliable interference when the words were switched to the stimuli
same and diff. Thus, words can get through even in a comparison task, but they must relate to the response. Francolini and
Egeth found Stroop-like interference only when manipulations of the relevant, to-be-named stimuli were undertaken in
a color-numerosity task. Virzi and Egeth used a version
of the Stroop task in the perceptual domain to examine the
phenomenon of illusory conjunctions, finding that subjects
have difficulty discriminating whether information came from
a color patch or a word.
Daniel tried several variations to
heighten interference in the standard color-word task. He
printed the color words in color and added a differently colored
background, or he had a tape recorder spewing out color words
while subjects attempted to name the ink colors of incongruent
words. Interference increased, but overall response rate also
slowed down. Others also altered the standard color-word task
 . Sometimes more than one of the
dimensions have been combined, as in the case of the colordigit interference task devised by Wolitzky, Hofer, and Shapiro
The recent past has seen extensions of the Stroop effect even
farther afield to domains such as affect and
even arachnophobia . How equivalent are all of these tasks that superficially
resemble the Stroop task? Even for the very prevalent alternatives, such as the picture-word task, we do not know. Correlational studies are one way to find out, but few have been performed. Obviously, though, it is of theoretical importance to
know whether similar processes are invoked in these many variations, but we have insufficient evidence at present.
From here on, the sections end with empirical generalizations where warranted. These are collected in Appendix B to
form the basic findings that must be accommodated by any
viable theory of the Stroop effect. Then, under Theoretical Accounts of the Stroop Effect, the existing theories are considered
in view of this fundamental evidence. Here, then, is the first
such summary statement: The Stroop effect is observed with lists
of stimuli, with single stimuli, and with many variations on the
response required. Similar data patterns are evident in numerous
Stroop analogs, such as the picture-word task. I now consider
what has been learned about the causes of Stroop interference
from the hundreds of studies over the past five decades.
Manipulations of Information on Critical Trials
From here on, empirical studies are grouped as to whether
their manipulations pertain to individual trials, the overall approach to the whole task, the response demands, or qualities of
the individual subject. Such divisions are common in cognitive
psychology and serve a useful organizational function here.
Hue Variation
Most manipulations in the Stroop task have centered on the
to-be-ignored verbal dimension. Only a few have examined the
hues of the to-be-named inks .
Dyer showed that subjects named achromatic color
patches slightly faster than chromatic patches. When the
patches were replaced with incongruent color words, interference was greater for the chromatic than for the achromatic version. Dyer argued that interference enhanced basic processingtime differences.
The only other approach to varying hue was that of Flowers
and his colleagues . Flowers and Blair had subjects classify six colors into two
categories, and found that a "natural" split of adjacent hues
(red, orange, and yellow vs. green, blue, and purple) caused
interference only if blocks of nonadjacent hues were included
(red, yellow, and blue vs. orange, green, and purple). However,
interference was always present when using the nonadjacent
classification. Flowers and Dutch replicated this, and argued
that nonadjacent categorization required access to names, not
just to perceptual qualities of the colors, perhaps because the
nonnatural set members had to be constantly rehearsed.
Most Stroop studies use from two to six hues, usually highly
differentiable, prototypical colors. \et variations in number,
saturation, similarity, or other features of the color dimension
could be used to manipulate processing on that dimension, and
would be relevant to the explanations discussed under Theoretical Accounts of the Stroop Effect. With so few relevant experiments, however, it is premature to offer an empirical generalization now.
Acoustic Variation
A common introspection attributes interference to the articulatory-phonemic-acoustic dimension. Before it can be pre-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
vented, the wrong response is begun, and its sound conflicts
with producing the right response. Hollingworth suggested a version of this idea, which is quite consistent with the
hypothesis that Stroop interference occurs at a response stage
late in processing after at least part
of the word has been identified.
Bakan and Alperson found increasing interference with increasing pronounceability of nonsense syllables in the color-word task.
However, pronounceability was not the whole story: Words
equated with nonsense syllables for pronounceability produced
still more interference. Thus, meaning also matters, as discussed under Semantic Variation. Still their study suggested
some role for nonsemantic factors.
Shortly afterward, Dalrymple-Alford pursued
pronunciation effects. In addition to color words, he used three
types of noncolor words: same initial sound (e.g., run for red and
grown for green), same terminal sound (e.g., fed for red and clean
for green), or unrelated acoustically (e.g., cat for red and flown
for green, an unfortunate choice given the common final phoneme). Color words caused the most interference (177 ms), but
both types of acoustic relation—initial sound (62 ms) and terminal sound (49 ms)—also caused interference. Dalrymple-Alford
proposed that a competing color name could be primed semantically or acoustically .
Singer, Lappin, and Moore contrasted the effect on
ink-color naming of the first, middle, or last two letters of a
color word versus the full color word. First letters interfered
more than later letters, but not as much as the whole word.
Adding unrelated letters to the first letters did not alter interference, leading Singer et al. to speculate that the interference
stemmed from activation of a motor program to articulate the
beginning of a word. Regan confirmed this initial-letter
effect, also showing that the first letter could produce facilitation in the congruent case. She took this as evidence for automatic processing of letters and words.
Underwood, Briggs, and Underwood manipulated the
phonemic or graphemic relation of a word or a nonword to the
ink-color name. For both good and poor 9- to 11 -year-old
readers, congruent items generated facilitation and incongruent items generated interference. So far all of these studies
show at least an orthographic/graphemic effect: Common letters, especially beginning a word, have an influence. However,
it is harder to tell whether there was any acoustic/phonemic
effect demonstrated that
acoustic/phonemic effects are indeed present. They compared
color words with pseudohomophones (e.g., blue vs. bloo) and
found similar interference. Furthermore, this was not due just
to their common initial letters because the baseline was a nonword matched for visual similarity and sharing the initial letters
(e.g., blir). Interestingly, though, real color words led to facilitation on congruent trials but pseudohomophones did not. This
is just one of many situations where facilitation and interference come decoupled.
In presenting a prime word before a Stroop trial, Tanenhaus,
Flanigan, and Seidenberg found that if the prime was
related orthographically or phonologically, or both, to the irrelevant word on the Stroop trial, interference with color naming
was greater than if the prime and irrelevant words were unrelated. This occurred for both auditorily and visually presented
primes, generalizing the phonological effect in Stroop interference.
What about facilitation? Eftler reported reduced interference when the irrelevant word was
acoustically similar to its to-be-named ink color. The effect also
obtained when the relation was between the ink color of item n
and the word in item n + 1, but not vice versa. Apparently,
having both dimensions converge on a common-sounding
name speeds responding. Sequential effects like these are discussed more extensively under Trial Sequence.
Four studies have tried to tie up the articulatory system to
determine what consequences this would have in the Stroop
task. All used the card-sorting paradigm. Martin reported reduced interference in sorting by color when subjects
had to say "blah, blah" concurrently. However, Besner, Davies,
and Daniels reported no reduction in the same task.
Martin found that simultaneous irrelevant articulation
had no effect on the reverse Stroop interference she observed.
Chmiel confirmed all three of these results, implicating
the labeling of the sorting bins as critical. When labeled with
color patches, interference was reduced during articulatory
suppression; when labeled with words, there was no reduction.
Using the "large letter composed of little letters" task, Stirling
and Coltheart argued against an acoustic effect. Making
the small letters easier to confuse visually with the large letter
increased interference, but making them easier to confuse
acoustically had no impact. Possibly, this result reflects different processes in the two tasks. For example, letter-shape analysis seems to be more critical in this task than in the Stroop task.
Investigation of response modality (e.g., vocal vs. buttonpress)
might help elucidate such task differences.
In the picture-word task, Ehri demonstrated that
nouns interfered more than adjectives or functors. Ehri took
this to mean that interference was not phonologically based, or
all word types should have caused similar interference. However, using nonsense syllables as a baseline does present problems , as Ehri acknowledged.
Lupker obtained results more like Effler's : Orthographic and phonemic similarity between the word and the
picture's name led to facilitation relative to a nonword (but not
to a picture alone). Lupker attributed this benefit to decreased
name-retrieval time for the picture, an effect he saw as separable from the basic response-competition source of interference.
At least for the standard color-word task, then, the visual or
acoustic characteristics, or both, of the irrelevant word appear
to exert an influence. Much of this hinges on the compatibility
of the ink name and the first letter or two of the word, although
later parts of the word can also have some effect. To summarize,
both orthographic and particularly acoustic/articulatoryrelations
between the irrelevant word (or part of the word) and the to-benamed ink color contribute to the interference.
As a final note, one useful study would combine the articulatory-suppression technique of Martin , Chmiel
 , and Besner et al. with the letter manipulations of
Dalrymple-Alford and Singer et al. . Would incompatible letters interfere as much if they could not be articu-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
lated? Regardless, nonsemantic features of the words do contribute to interference, supporting the intuitions—and the articulatory stumbles—of subjects in Stroop experiments.
Semantic Variation
Since Klein's benchmark study, how word meaning
influences color naming has been attacked from a host of different angles. Indeed, the enterprise has come full circle: The
Stroop task has become a common tool in understanding how
we draw meaning from words. In this section, I begin with
studies manipulating the meaning of a single irrelevant word,
and then turn to studies involving priming with words or
Semantic variation and the irrelevant word. The classic study
is that of Klein . His goal was to understand the sources of the word's interfering effect in color naming and the processes involved in that interference. To do this,
he manipulated the relation of four words to four ink colors
(red, green, yellow, and blue). All subjects performed the control, "colors-alone" card, averaging about 44 s for the card, and
then performed one of six interference cards. As always, the
standard incongruent condition (where red, green, yellow, and
blue are the words) showed large interference: an increase of
about 37.5 s. When four other color words were used (tan, purple, gray, and black), interference was cut to 18 s. Interference
decreased further to 15.5 s for color-related words (fire, grass,
lemon, and sky). Substituting common, unassociated words
(put, heart, take, and friend) or rare words (sol, helot, eft, and
abjure) dropped interference to 12 s and 7.5 s, respectively. Finally, unpronounceable, nonsense syllables (hjh, evgjc, bhdr,
and gsxra) produced only 5 s of interference.
Although some of Klein's items were not ideal (e.g., bhdr,
gsxrq, and especially grass, which share initial letters with target
color names), his basic point was sound: The more meaningful
the irrelevant word, the more interference it caused. This was
particularly true for color-related words, but even noncolor
words produced some interference. Klein's experiment opened
the floodgates for numerous studies of how word meaning affects color naming.
Dalrymple-Alford extended Klein's
procedure. Dalrymple-Alford found that, compared
with unrelated control words, color words interfered more than
color-related words (red, 131 ms vs. blood, 43 ms), but both
caused reliable interference, replicating Klein. More novel,
both also caused reliable facilitation on congruent trials (red, 63
ms, and blood, 42 ms). Dalrymple-Alford discounted a purely
articulatory explanation because words like sky and snow (for
blue and white) caused just as large effects as words like grass
(for green) even without shared letters.
As Stroop knew, choosing the appropriate control stimulus is
not trivial and warrants an aside here. Some studies use an
unrelated word, some a nonword, some a row of Xs or other
redundant character, and some a color patch. For example,
Dalrymple-Alford's study also included a XXXX control. If XXXX rather than the unrelated word is used as the
baseline, interference estimates for the incongruent cases increase by 65 ms, and there is no facilitation for the congruent
cases. A nonword control might have produced yet another
baseline value.
In general, using any characters in the control condition
stands to be distracting and to increase the time to respond to
the color, but substantial changes in interference typically require some connection to the concept of color (or some kind of
priming). Thus, although Hintzman et al. obtained reliable interference and facilitation for color words relative to a
nonword control, words unrelated to color did not differ from
the control. A similar result was reported by Redding and Gerjets , who also found that scrambled color words were
equivalent to noncolor words. Using unrelated words versus
nonwords, then, makes little difference, but the switch to color
patches or XXXX-type controls may have more effect.
Scheibe, Shaver, and Carrier found that amount of
interference in color naming was a direct function of amount of
color association for the irrelevant words, and argued that word
frequency was critical.5 Langlois reported that a direct
manipulation of word frequency influenced amount of interference, but he failed to separate response-set membership from
the frequency manipulation, a common problem in Stroop research. Effler has also reported frequency
Proctor pointed out that strength of association and
frequency were typically confounded with response-set membership. He broke this confounding and showed that responseset members still interfered more than nonmembers. For color
words not in the response set, interference was a direct function
of the strength of association of the words to the concept of
color, a conclusion in accord with that of Fox et al. .
Alperson trained subjects on paired associates where
the response terms were either connected or unconnected to
the color-naming task. When the stimulus terms were made the
irrelevant materials in the color-naming task, semantic relatedness of the response terms had a considerable effect, even with
these newly learned pairs. To bolster the conclusion that meaning was the key, Bakan and Alperson demonstrated that
words interfered more than did nonsense syllables equated for
pronounceability.
Using the same approach, Pritchatt had subjects associate nonsense syllables with colors, and observed interference
when the nonsense syllables appeared later as the irrelevant
dimension in a color-naming task. Analogously, Stirling 
required subjects to learn to respond to color patches with letter
names. When these letters became the incongruent dimension
in color naming, interference resulted. Similar procedures have
been used elsewhere . Of course, whether these studies speak to the
role of meaning in interference depends upon the representation underlying such paired-associate learning.
More in keeping with Klein's procedure, White had
subjects identify color versus direction attributes in the presence of incongruent attribute names. The more semantically
similar the incongruent attribute name, the more interference
5 A set of norms for colors and color words has since been constructed and could be used in a detailed investigation of association
 .
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
was obtained, particularly for the color dimension. Fox et al.
 showed semantic gradients of interference on several
Stroop analogs, including spatial direction and numerosity, and
strongly supported Klein's arguments.
Murray, Mastronardi, and Duncan also supported
Klein in showing that subjects named the colors of color words
more slowly than those of animal words. However, when subjects were required to sort items on the basis of whether the
words or the ink colors were the same or different, colors were
sorted faster than words. The nature of the task can completely
determine the form of the interference observed. Similar points
have been made in the picture-word work and in the priming work .
In an often-cited study, Keele argued that interference
must occur after the memory-retrieval stage. When subjects
pressed buttons to indicate their responses (rather than speaking them), only color words interfered; noncolor words and
scrambled color words did not differ from his control (letterlike Gibson forms). The scrambled-condition result is surprising, though; every stimulus began with the same letter as its
corresponding word (rde, gnere, ywoloe, and belu), which ordinarily causes interference (see Acoustic Variation).6 Possibly
Keele's use of manual responses, known to decrease interference overall, is responsible practiced subjects on color-related versus color-unrelated words and reported a decreased difference in interference with practice.
Also Ridley, Johnson, and Braisted 
presented evidence that semantic-differential ratings of noncolor words predicted color-naming times. In sum, the many
manipulations of meaning of the irrelevant word on a single
Stroop trial all converge on this empirical generalization: Compared with naming the ink color alone, irrelevant verbal stimuli
unrelated to the concept of color interfere only minimally with
color naming. However, as the word's semantic association to the
concept of color increases, so does its potential to interfere.
Semantic variation induced by priming. Since the early
1970s, the semantic-priming technique has had increasing contact with the Stroop literature. Probably the two most widely
known members of this set are the dissertations of Warren
 and Conrad . Discussing
these in detail will both introduce the method and set the stage
for the variations that have succeeded them.
Warren's basic idea was that the irrelevant word on a
Stroop trial should interfere more if it had just been activated
by a preceding event. Preceding each critical color-word trial,
he placed a priming event. On control trials, this event consisted of the phrase "No list this trial." On priming trials, the
event consisted of a list of three words from a single semantic
category: aunt, uncle, cousin or dog, cat, horse, for example.
Then the critical color-naming trial occurred, with either the
category name (relatives), a repeated category member (aunt), an
unrelated word (doctor), or a row of Xs as the "word."
What Warren observed was increased interference in naming
the ink color when the irrelevant word was primed. For the
words aunt or relatives in red ink, subjects were slower to say
"red" if they had just seen relevant primes; the effect was somewhat larger for aunt. In later experiments, Warren established
that this activation persisted over at least five intervening items
when subjects had to remember earlier words for a final test,
but only a bit over one intervening item (30 s) when this requirement was dropped. This was true whether the critical irrelevant
word was the category name or a repeated category member. He
did not test nonstudied category members.
In his 1974 follow-up study, Warren varied the associative
strength between an auditory prime word and the irrelevant
visual word on the critical color-naming trial. The relation
could be high (king-queen), medium (bath-clean), or low fyvishdream). Subtracting the control times for unrelated auditory
primes (e.g., food, law, or hand), there was significant interference for high (95 ms) and medium (50 ms) but not for low (20
ms) items. Thus, interference declined systematically with associative strength. Warren then demonstrated that this occurred
only for forward associates, not backward associates, strongly
suggesting that the prime activates the irrelevant word (rather
than the reverse) on the critical trial.
Conrad's thesis used Warren's as a springboard, extending the priming domain from words to sentences. When
the sentence context came before the ambiguous word (e.g.,
"The toy costs a nickel"), there was considerable interference in
color naming for the ambiguous word itself (nickel, 100 ms), the
appropriate category (money, 106 ms), and even the inappropriate category (metal, 64 ms), relative to a control sentence (e.g,
"The craftsman made the chair"). Apparently, both senses of
nickel were activated by the sentence despite its clear meaning.
Interestingly, when the sentence context came after the ambiguous word (e.g., "That nickel is from her coin collection"), interference in the three conditions virtually disappeared (19,2, and
35 ms, respectively). Conrad took this to indicate either decay of
activation or interference from succeeding words. The critical
result, though, was the context-before condition. She went on to
show that the interfering capability of an ambiguous word was
no greater in an ambiguous sentence: Both senses of the word
were activated regardless of how it was used in the sentence.
Oden and Spira confirmed that both senses of an ambiguous word were indeed activated, but that their extent of activation was affected by context. All candidates were activated, and
then further processing narrowed the possibilities.
Many studies sprang from those of Warren and Conrad.
McClain attempted to link their logic with Klein's
 . She manipulated both the prime word and the irrelevant word on the color-naming trial using incongruent combinations only. There were four critical relations: (a) prime-red,
irrelevant-blood, (b) prime-apple, irrelevant-^re, (c) prime-apple, irrelevant-apple, and (d) prime-Ma//, irrelevant-«a/7. Because Condition (a) explicitly activates color and Condition (b)
repeats the irrelevant but color-related word, she predicted that
these two conditions would produce more interference, which
Merrill, Sperber, and McCauley pursued the influence
6 Furthermore, Michael Masson and I have data showing that scrambled color words with no letters in the correct position still cause interference in an oral response.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
of context on semantic interpretation. On a critical trial, a target word such as claw appeared in a color to be named. Before
the critical trial, either an appropriate ("The girl fought the
cat"), an inappropriate ("The girl touched the cat"), or a neutral
("The man fixed the car") sentence or word (cat vs. car) was
displayed. Poor and good comprehenders showed equivalent
interference when the prime was an appropriate or inappropriate word. However, when the prime was a sentence, poor comprehenders again showed interference for both types of primes,
but good comprehenders showed interference only for appropriate primes. Merrill et al. concluded that good comprehenders encode words with reference to an entire sentence's
meaning, whereas poor comprehenders encode the words as
distinct units.
Dosher and Corbett examined whether sentences like
"The man swept the floor" activated relevant instruments (e.g.,
brooni). If so, then broom should interfere with naming its color
of print. There was no evidence for such activation, relative to
an unrelated prior sentence, except if subjects were explicitly
told to think of the instrument. Interestingly, such an instruction led to facilitation, not interference, contrary to the other
studies in this section . Perhaps if a
primed irrelevant word is processed especially quickly, it is
dealt with before it can exert a negative effect. This idea merits
further exploration; it may represent a potentially useful tool in
psycholinguistic research.
In a series of studies, Whitney and his colleagues examined lexical access using the Stroop task.
Initially, Whitney and Kellas presented sentences that
biased a typical member of a category (e.g., "The guest saw the
bird that landed on the branch"—robin) or an atypical member
(e.g., "The guest saw the bird that roasted on the grill"—
chicken), or that were neutral (e.g., "The guest saw the towels
that hung in the bathroom"). Regardless of the prime sentence,
the typical word always caused interference, whereas the atypical word did not. Yet typical words were better retrieval cues for
typical sentences, and atypical words were better retrieval cues
for atypical sentences. They concluded that category referents
are not necessarily instantiated for single sentences.
On the basis of manipulations of item dominance and delay
before testing, Whitney et al. confirmed the findings of
Conrad and of Oden and Spira that initial semantic access is independent of context both for ambiguous and
unambiguous nouns. Whitney's dissertation extended
this work to anaphoric reference. Priming with atypically biasing sentences led to interference in color naming for atypical
words, whereas priming with typically biasing sentences led to
facilitation for typical words, the latter reminiscent of Dosher
and Corbett's finding. Clearly, word meaning matters;
even noncolor words can produce (or increase) interference—or
even facilitation—under suitable priming conditions.
Also important is the subject's strategy. Henik et al. 
demonstrated that when subjects named primes before the
color-naming trial, normal interference was observed. However, when subjects examined the primes for specified target
letters, very little interference was observed. A corresponding
pattern occurred for facilitation in lexical decision. Again
meaning matters: Diverting the subject from thinking of the
meaning of the prime word virtually eliminated the usual effects.
Much of the research on word meaning has been in the picture-word task, where the meaning of both the picture and the
word—and their relation—can be varied. Probably the best
known work using this task was by Lupker . In his 1979 paper, he confirmed Rosinski's
 finding that same-category words magnified interference relative to either unrelated words or pronounceable nonwords, which caused equivalent interference. Categorical relations have a similar effect in the "flanker" task where both
stimuli are words .
Lupker went on to show that association between the picture
and the word did not increase interference, nor did instance
typicality modulate the extra interference as a result of shared
category. Thus, some semantic variables are not potent. Word
imageability was a critical determinant in Lupker's study, which
led him to suggest that the word's relevance to response demands was crucial, as in the color-word task. Lupker went so far as to maintain that the two tasks were "nothing
more than two sides of the same coin."
Smith and Magee demonstrated
that although incongruent words interfere with picture naming,
incongruent pictures interfere with word categorization. They
argued that pictures gain access to semantic information more
readily than to name information, but the reverse is true for
words. Glaser and Glaser took this argument considerably farther, building a model for naming versus categorizing.
These studies, like that of Henik et al. with the colorword task, highlight the point that the task required of the subject when faced with a multidimensional stimulus is a crucial
determinant of the pattern of interference observed.
The empirical generalization is straightforward: A colorunrelated word can be made to cause greater interference (or facilitation, or both) with color naming if its meaning is activated by a
related word or phrase shortly before the color-naming trial. Related words and primed words are hard to ignore. Certainly,
questions remain to be addressed here (e.g., the time course of
such priming effects), but the basic result is well established.
Congruency Effects
So far this review has focused on Stroop interference. However, there is another side to the coin: Stroop facilitation. If the
wrong word can slow ink-naming performance, then intuitively
the right word ought to speed performance. Curiously, the congruent case (e.g., red in red ink, respond "red") was not investigated until the advent of the individual-trial version of the
Stroop task. Although Langer and Rosenberg had a congruent condition of sorts in their study, the first actual use of
color-word congruent trials was by Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr . Their inclusion of congruent items among incongruent ones on Stroop cards made little difference in overall
response time.
Shortly thereafter, Sichel and Chandler used the individual-item procedure, and reported that color naming was in
fact faster for congruent items (645 ms) than for incongruent
items (777 ms), but that both showed interference relative to a
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
XXXX-ty pe control (541 ms). Thus, it is more reasonable to say
that there was reduced interference rather than true facilitation
for the congruent condition. Perhaps the extent of apparent
facilitation depends on the choice of control condition; recall
that Dalrymple-Alford observed no facilitation relative
to a XXXX control but reliable facilitation relative to an unrelated-word control.
Although there were reports of interference in the congruent
condition , more often some
degree of facilitation was reported . One
complication was whether congruent and incongruent items
were mixed or separated (blocked), as indicated in the exchange
between Smith and Kalkofen . Indeed, using a
spatial analog, Logan and Zbrodoff showed that the proportion of congruent trials over the entire task affects processing time (see Probability of Various Trial Types). A further complication is that congruence of word and color across successive
trials can also have an impact .
Dyer presented word and color on different sides of
the fixation point and observed 26 ms of facilitation for the
congruent case (compared with a XXXX control). Interference
was 48 ms in the incongruent case. In a same-different analog
also using the XXXX control, Dyer found significant
interference (179 ms) and facilitation (55 ms). Recalling
Dalrymple-Alford's findings of 131 ms of interference
and 63 ms of facilitation, it is clear that there is usually much
less facilitation than interference .
Hintzman et al. reported 42 ms of facilitation relative
to a scrambled color-word control or a "neutral" control, both
retaining the first letters of color words. My concerns are that (a)
such controls would themselves be expected to interfere, so the
facilitation might disappear with a more standard control, and
(b) the claim that neutral words do not interfere in the individual-trial version of the task (contrary to Klein's finding that
they do in the list version) is suspect given their choice of control condition. Strengthening my suspicions, Redding and Gerjets found facilitation in the congruent condition relative
to scrambled color words and neutral words, but not relative to
nonword controls.
In her dissertation, Regan obtained facilitation for
congruent words and interference for neutral words; she also
obtained facilitation using just the first letter of the correct
color name . Yet turning the words upside
down and backward to slow reading, Dunbar and MacLeod
 obtained little facilitation in the congruent condition
despite huge interference in the incongruent condition. In fact,
the congruent condition was almost identical to the XXXX
control condition across our experiments.
Glaser and Glaser obtained 16 ms of facilitation and
72 ms of interference, relative to a XXXX-type control, when
the color and word were simultaneous and the task was color
naming. Thomas's dissertation presents similar data.
This asymmetry is by now the expected pattern: Facilitation is
not a necessary concomitant of interference, although this may
have more to do with measurement than with a true theoretical
decoupling.
With a neutral word as the control condition, Duncan-Johnson and Kopell found reliable facilitation in the
congruent condition (and strong interference in the incongruent condition). However, they observed no change in P300
latency, an event-related brain potential assumed to be a "pure"
measure of stimulus processing. On this basis, they favored a
response-competition account of the Stroop effect, as did
Warren and Marsh in a similar study.
Rayner and Posnansky obtained facilitation for pseudohomophones (e.g., bloo) in the picture-word task, but their
use of blocked trial types allowed a strategy of responding by
reading the words. Mixing trial types, Dennis and Newstead
 obtained facilitation for color words but not pseudohomophones, although both produced interference. This suggests
that the slow-to-read pseudohomophones could not be processed sufficiently quickly to assist color naming in accord with
a relative speed-of-processing account.
There have also been demonstrations of facilitation in Stroop
analogs. Certainly, this is evident in the picture-word task . For
example, Ehri reported facilitation in picture naming for
congruent pictures and words using a picture-only control.
More recently, Glaser and Dtingelhoff showed reliable
facilitation for the correct name of a picture relative to a
XXXX control, although the facilitation of 44 ms was substantially less than the interference of 131 ms caused by a different
member of the same category.
Using color naming of season-appropriate or inappropriate
words, Seymour obtained facilitation plus interference.
Using the arrows task, Clark and Brownell found subjects to be faster to identify which way an arrow was pointing
(up or down) if it was located in the appropriate place in space
(top or bottom, respectively). For letter identification in the presence of irrelevant letters, Taylor observed reliable facilitation as well. Of course, facilitation is very well known in the
word-priming domain.
To summarize, here is the general conclusion: Congruence
between the irrelevant word and the to-be-named ink color often
produces facilitation. However, this facilitation is much less than
the corresponding interference in the incongruent condition, and
the choice of control condition may be crucial. Partly, this is a
consequence of the relatively smaller amount of facilitation
usually obtained, itself no doubt resulting partly from the problem of trying to speed up an already rapid naming response.
It would be interesting to perform a color-word study along
the lines of the recent work by La Heij and Vermeij ,
which showed that, whether reading words or naming pictures,
interference decreases and facilitation increases as a function of
increasing target set size. The small facilitation we have come to
expect may be at least partly a consequence of the small set size
usually used in Stroop experiments.7
Integration of the Two Dimensions
So far in this section, I have considered studies focusing on
the relevant dimension (color) and on the irrelevant dimension
(word). The only aspect of the single trial that remains to be
7 Note, however, that Marina Vanayan and I have data from the picture-word task showing an increase in interference with increasing set
size, so this matter is not resolved as yet.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
dealt with is the relation between the two dimensions. On a
given trial, the two dimensions of the stimulus can be more or
less perceptually integrated. We know that stimulus integration
can be a powerful determiner of performance in many tasks
 ; how much does it influence the Stroop effect?
Despite relatively little published work, this issue must be
addressed if we are to compare various versions of the Stroop
task meaningfully. For instance, the word is not integrated into
the picture in the picture-word task to the same extent that it is
integrated into the color in the standard color-word task. Furthermore, if color/picture and word are separated, as in SOA
studies 
or in the bar-above-word procedure , do results from these modifications translate readily
back to the original task?
There were some hints as to the importance of integration
even 30 years ago . More recently, though, Flowers and Stoup observed that interference persisted virtually unchanged over four
practice sessions in a card-sorting task where word and color
were integrated (i.e., the word red printed in green ink), but
vanished with the same amount of practice when they were not
integrated (i.e., the word red inside a green-outlined rectangle).
Moreover, interference was greater in the integrated case.
Although there is no doubt that nonintegrated Stroop stimuli
can show interference and facilitation , this does not mean that (all
of) the same mechanisms are involved. As Kahneman and
Henik demonstrated, if the incompatible word and color
patch appear in the same attended location, there is more interference (202 ms) than if they appear in adjacent locations, only
one of which is the focus of attention (50 ms). Kahneman and
Henik also observed that compatible words facilitated color
naming if the words were in the attended location (48 ms), but
interfered if they were nonattended (38 ms).
Bradlyn and Rollins obtained interference in the integrated version but not in a nonintegrated one (the word in black
ink above a color patch); however, this result appears not to
generalize. Thus, Gatti and Egeth observed a decrease in
interference from 90 to 40 ms as the word moved farther from
the to-be-named color patch (from one to five degrees), but all
cases produced Reliable interference. The integrated version of
the Stroop task is harder, but both versions produce interference.
Although it seems that nonintegrated stimuli do produce interference fairly reliably, the amount is relatively small, apparently falling off as separation increases. Using the picture-word
task, Underwood argued that locational uncertainty
with respect to the two dimensions of the task was very influential. When subjects knew where to expect the relevant picture
versus the irrelevant word, they showed a small amount of interference from the competing word. When they did not know
where to expect picture versus word, interference was considerably greater. Apparently, not being able to prepare for where to
direct attention makes the separated case more analogous to the
integrated case.
What is needed is a systematic parametric comparison of the
two versions of the task, perhaps manipulating practice as in
the Flowers and Stoup study. Until such time, the extent
of importance of dimensional integration is difficult to ascertain. Certainly, though, it seems to matter, so here is my somewhat tentative general conclusion: If the to-be-named color and
the to-be-ignored word are presented in separate spatial locations,
interference will be reduced (but not eliminated) relative to the
standard, integrated version of the task. Locational uncertainty
makes an important contribution in nonintegrated situations.
We have seen what happens when the dimensions of a single
Stroop trial are varied; let us now examine what happens with
manipulations intended to affect the entire task.
Experiment-Wide Manipulations of Information
This section focuses on variables affecting more than one
trial in a Stroop experiment. Some of these variables—such as
the presence or probability of certain trial types—only exist
with reference to more than one trial. Others—such as SOA—
occur at the level of a single trial, but have broader implications.
These variables all may be thought of as affecting how the subject approaches the task as a whole.
Probability of Various Trial Types
Probably the most straightforward way to set up a Stroop
experiment is Stroop's . He used four conditions, each in
an independent block of trials: incongruent color naming, control color naming, incongruent word reading, and control word
reading. At first glance, this might also appear to be the "safest"
way, reducing the likelihood of subjects adopting special strategies to deal with a mixture of trial types. Does blocking conditions minimize strategy use or does it promote creating a special strategy for this special case? The most reassuring results
are those that hold up under both mixed and blocked conditions. No doubt, too, the composition of the entire set of trials
influences the subject's strategy. In the limit, if all trials in a
block were congruent and the task was to name the ink colors,
clever subjects could decrease their response time by reading
the words instead. Such a strategy would not work if all of the
trials were incongruent. The question, then, is what happens at
intermediate values.
I have already mentioned that Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr
 found no change in interference when some congruent
trials were added to a card made up largely of incongruent
trials, but they did not systematically manipulate the frequency
of trial types. Zajano and Gorman showed that total
color-naming time per card decreased as more congruent trials
were added to the card. Shor used Hamers's highlow auditory analog and found more interference when half of
the trials were congruent and half incongruent than when all of
the trials were incongruent. This counterintuitive result might
be a consequence of subjects listening to the word and saying its
opposite in the incongruent case, a strategy that could be eliminated by using more than two responses. My guess is that Shor's
result would reverse itself with such a modification.
Logan and Zbrodoff used the above/below spatial analog of the Stroop task where subjects are to read the word and
ignore its spatial location. (Note that in this task interference
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
occurs in reading the word, unlike in the Stroop task.) As the
frequency of incongruent trials increased from 10% to 90% over
experiments, response times shifted from congruent trials being faster to incongruent trials being faster. Logan and Zbrodoff were careful to point out that low error rates indicated
subjects were not simply "cheating" by attending to the supposedly unattended dimension. Apparently, subjects adopted a
strategy of dividing attention over the two dimensions.
Still it would be better to use a larger set of items to preclude
the strategies possible with only two stimuli. Lowe and Mitterer
 used three ink colors (red, blue, and green), the three
corresponding color words, and three neutral words (far, most,
and slant). On each trial, two words were presented. The target
was always a neutral word in color, and the subject was to name
the ink color. The other word was always printed in black ink,
but could be a color word or neutral word. When this irrelevant
word was a color word, it could either be congruent or incongruent with the target ink color.
Lowe and Mitterer manipulated the proportion of congruent
stimuli in steps of .25 from 0 to .75. Relative to the neutral
control, interference increased from 35 ms with 0% congruent
trials to 66 ms with 75% congruent trials; however, facilitation
hardly changed (12 to 17 ms). This was taken as evidence of
automatic word encoding in both conditions, but with a further
conflict-resolution process in the incongruent case following
Taylor's arguments. Note, too, the different effects on
facilitation and interference.
Although there are limited data, it seems that the composition of the entire set of trials does matter. As the proportion of
congruent trials increases, the "irrelevant" word becomes progressively more relevant. Here, then, is the general conclusion:
The presence of congruent trials among the incongruent and control trials will tend to invoke the tactic of splitting attention over the
two dimensions, thereby increasing interference on incongruent
trials. For this reason, it is probably best to conduct novel experiments initially without a congruent condition, and then to add
that condition and observe whether its presence changes interference fundamentally. Thus far very few experiments have
taken this tack. We should also determine the extent to which
this attention-splitting strategy is under subject control, perhaps through a manipulation of instructions or payoffs.
Stimulus Set Size
There is typically quite a small set of stimuli in the colorword task and quite a large set in the picture-word task. Probably this is because creating large, differentiate sets of items is
easier with pictures than with colors. Indeed, the bulk of the
color-word studies use from two to five stimuli. We know that
increases in stimulus set size increase time to name but have
little impact on time to read . Consequently, some investigators adopted setsize manipulations as one way to attack interference.
An illustration of how few colors are typically used in the
Stroop task comes from a study of set-size effects by Golden
 ; he found that using three, four, or five different colors
made little difference in interference. Other research supports
his conclusion. Gholson and Hohle found that, in a
choice reaction-time version of the Stroop task, increasing set
size from two to four increased overall response time but not
interference. Essentially the same result was obtained for set
sizes three to five by Ray and for set sizes two to five by
McClain . Although this is the usual range, I am reluctant to infer from such small variations that set size is not a
Until recently, the only discordant Stroop study was that of
Williams , who used the largest variation: from 2 to 8.
She found that both interference and facilitation increased as
set size increased. The picture becomes even more complicated
as soon as we step beyond the color-word task. In the increasingly common two-word analog, several studies have consistently found decreases in interference coupled with increases in
facilitation as set size increased. Taylor obtained this
result in moving from 2 to 4 alternatives; La Heij, Van der
Heijden, and Schreuder obtained it in moving from 2 to
12 alternatives. How are we to bring these disparate findings
La Heij and Vermeij recently tried to answer this question. Varying set size from two to eight in both a letter-reading
and a picture-naming task (in separate experiments), they
found that interference decreased and facilitation increased for
both types of materials relative to a XXXX-type control. Although they claim (p. 359) that it would be difficult to replicate
this experiment using the color-word task, I am not convinced:
Their pattern is evident even between set sizes two and four.
Partly because their findings conflict with those just reviewed,
a replication would be useful. Results with the color-word task
that corresponded to those of La Heij and Vermeij would
further strengthen the argument that all of these superficially
different interference tasks in fact tap a common element.
A general conclusion here, given the conflict in the data base,
is risky. Furthermore, there is the issue of response set size yet to
be discussed (see Response Set Size and Composition). So I simply note that stimulus set size may influence the Stroop effect.
Part of my caution stems from some data that Marina Vanayan
and I have collected: Increasing set size in the picture-word task
from 4 to 12 increased interference in our study. This disagrees
with La Heij and Vermeij, and we are pursuing possible reasons
for the difference. Until such discrepancies are resolved, it
would be premature to offer a firm statement about stimulus
set-size effects.
Trial Sequence
People often feel particularly tongue tied when the to-be-ignored word on one trial turns out to be the to-be-named color
on the next trial (e.g., green in red ink precedes blue in green
ink). Having just suppressed the response "green" seems to
make it harder to say it on the next trial: There are sequential
effects in the Stroop task. Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr 
first pointed out that interference in the list version of the
Stroop task was greatest if each ink color was that named by the
immediately preceding word.
The most detailed investigations in this area are those of
Neill and EfBer . Effler 
reported a "serial interference": When the irrelevant word on
trial « was acoustically similar to the ink color on trial n + 1,
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
interference was enhanced. Conversely, when the ink color on
trial n was that of the irrelevant word on trial n 4-1, interference
was reduced . He then confirmed and extended
these results in a variety of ways .
The first of these findings makes sense if it is assumed that
the word on trial n must be suppressed, and then has to be given
additional activation to become the response on trial n +1. The
second result can be explained as an instance where having just
made a particular response on the last trial makes it easier to
discard that as a possible response on this trial. Of course, such
explanations are easier after having seen the data.
Neill extended the Dalrymple-Alford and Budayr
 observation to the individual-trial version of the Stroop
task, finding the same result that they and Effler found:
greater interference if the word on trial n matched the ink color
on trial n +1. Neill labeled the phenomenon the distractor-suppression effect. We now know that the phenomenon is fairly
general , and extends to letter naming
 
and picture naming . In the
case of pictures, even nonidentical members of the same category can produce the distractor-suppression effect.
Neill observed that when the word on trial n + 1
matched the ink color just named on trial n, there was facilitation, this time replicating Effler . He took this as evidence that the set of highly activated competing responses was
made smaller by the overlap, hence reducing response competition, as opposed to the suggestion I offered in discussing
Effler's study.
Lowe first obtained this successive-trials effect
when consecutive items were not all incongruent items of the
standard type used by Neill, thereby increasing its generalization. He then manipulated the proportion of trials of various
types in subsequent experiments, showing that the distractorsuppression effect could be eliminated or even turned into facilitation. This clearly implicates subject strategies in the phenomenon, and Lowe was unconvinced of the need to propose an
inhibitory mechanism of the sort favored by Neill or Tipper. He
.suggested that subjects may have been trying to match successive stimuli, thereby not treating trials as independent, but later
1 rescinded this argument . Efforts to make successive stimuli less matchable, by using different cases and by varying list composition and SOA, did not noticeably alter the distractor-suppression effect. Still resisting an inhibition argument, Lowe maintained that the problem was in coordinating
the color and word codes.
More recently, Neill and Westberry manipulated
speed-accuracy instructions and intertrial interval. Underaccuracy instructions, subjects showed the effect, but it disappeared
as emphasis on speed increased. As well, the effect persisted
with up to a 1-s intertrial interval, but dissipated between 1 and
2 s. Neill and Westberry interpreted these findings as consistent
with a selective-inhibition account: After broad activation, selective inhibition is used to restrict processing to just the relevant information, an idea very much in accord with the work
on priming of ambiguous words discussed under Semantic Variation .
The work on the distractor-suppression effect suggests a generalization beyond the Stroop effect. In addition to activation,
there may well be an inhibitory process that helps to constrain
the information selected for more extensive processing. For the
present, this is seen as an active strategy of inhibition. Whether
the facilitation from successive trials has to do with a functional
shrinking of the set of competing responses or a suppression of
responses recently uttered is less clear. My own bias, in opposition to Neill , is to invoke a suppression idea so that the
facilitation and interference effects as a result of item sequence
have a common grounding.
As a footnote, it is interesting to contrast these results with
those involving a slightly different variation. Thomas 
repeated the word component over successive pairs of colorword stimuli, and found that word repetition decreased both
interference and facilitation. Effler confirmed the interference decrease, both when the word named an ink color in the
response set and when the word named an ink color not in the
response set. However, there were no repetition effects for noncolor words. Subsequently, Effler tried to determine
whether amount of repetition over trials was important, but his
odd nonmonotonic pattern provides little insight.
Ellison and Lambert took a rather different tack. They
had subjects repeat the color words continuously before performing the interference trials, with the goal of reducing the
meaning of the words and hence their potential for interference.
Although performance on the interference card sped up, they
could not determine whether this was due to "semantic satiation." A number of additional controls would have been desirable in this work. Still their basic finding is in line with Effler's
These two different outcomes having to do with the relation
of the word on trial n — 1 to the critical stimulus on trial n
actually fit together quite nicely, so I offer the following conclusion: When the irrelevant word on trial n— 1 is the name of the
target ink color on trial n, interference with color naming will be
enhanced temporarily; when the ink color on trial n- 1 matches
the word on trial n, there will be some facilitation of color naming
on trial n. If the word on trial n — 1 is repeated on trial n, then the
word is already suppressed and will cause less interference in
naming a different ink color on trial n. An interesting study
would be to mix these two types of repetition effects in the same
experiment, directly comparing their size.
Pretrial Cues
Very closely related to studies of the effects of one trial on the
next are studies of the effects of a cue just before a Stroop trial.
Nealis tackled this problem by presenting color words in
colored ink before a to-be-read word. He was able to produce a
reverse Stroop effect in that there was interference evident in
reading the target word. Hinton found that prior presentation of the word whose ink color was to be named on the
upcoming target trial tended to decrease color-naming time
(but see Trial Sequence for conflicting results). However, when
that word had to be rehearsed for later recall, response time to
its ink color increased. Hinton took the facilitation effect as
evidence of reduced competition for entry into a response
buffer; the increased interference effect was held to be the result
of increased problems in response selection.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
Neill used the precue as a sort of "warning," the most
prevalent use of this procedure. The target was a standard incongruent color-word combination. Neill observed roughly
equivalent response times after a neutral cue or the relevant
color word. However, interference was increased by cueing either the wrong ink-color name or the irrelevant color word.
According to Neill, the number of competing responses and
their strength determined interference. The results were inconsistent with the idea that increasing a response's availability
could make it easier to reject.
Using the hi-lo analog, Harvey varied the interval by
which a warning preceded the critical stimulus. The warning
stimulus signaled the subject whether to respond to the word's
meaning or its position. Oddly, only word reading showed interference, which declined as the time between warning and critical stimulus increased. Harvey took this as evidence that when
subjects could better focus their attention on the appropriate
dimension because they were warned, they were better able to
cope with incompatible dimensions. This idea seems worthy of
further study.
Logan and Zbrodoff , in their spatial analog of the
Stroop task, also used the precue technique. When the cue provided advance information about whether the upcoming trial
was compatible or incompatible, response time on cued trials
was faster than on uncued trials. When only one cue could
appear, its benefit was greater than when two cues could appear. Practice with cues permitted subjects to benefit from
them even with shorter warnings, but did not increase the benefit. Overall, these results were taken to reflect successful subject-initiated construction and use of strategies. Because the
Stroop task is often seen as a hallmark index of automaticity,
such demonstrations of the role of strategic control are important.
Logan, ZbrodofF, and Williamson pursued this using
the color-word task. By making the ink color predictable from
the word and then providing advance knowledge of the word,
they found that subjects could perform the color-naming task
more rapidly with two ink colors but not with four. Their result
with only two responses is reminiscent of Shor's ; the fact
that the advantage of the cue dissipated with four responses
suggests that the strategy could not handle the greater uncertainty with more stimuli.
Probably the most provocative recent results are those of
Marcel on unconscious perceptual processing. He first determined the interval required between a
stimulus and a pattern mask such that a subject could not discriminate a word from a blank. Then he ran blocks of trials in
which a cue word was either masked with this interval, to prevent conscious perception, or masked with a very long interval,
so that it would be easily seen. He included congruent, incongruent, neutral (e.g., the word water), and no-word control trials,
and also varied over blocks whether the word was presented
simultaneously with the color patch or 400 ms earlier. Marcel
found that performance in the no-word control and the neutral
control was essentially identical. Although facilitation and interference effects were a little larger if the subject was aware—particularly when the word preceded the color by 400 ms—both
were present even when the subject could not report whether a
word cue had been present. Marcel argued against the view that
interference arose in response production.
As Marcel pointed out, his was not the first study of "subliminal perception" in the Stroop task. Severance and Dyer 
tried but did not obtain a subliminal Stroop effect. Although
similar to Marcel's in some ways, their study used extremely
brief word exposures followed by a bright blank field to obtain
chance performance in pretesting. Marcel argued that their energy masking has its effect much more peripherally than does
his pattern masking, so the difference in results is not that surprising.
Cheesman and Merikle examined Marcel's subliminal
Stroop effect using a more stringent forced-choice method for
obtaining the optimal threshold of awareness of the cue word.
Then, using four colors, they varied the cue-word detectability
from 25% (chance) to 100% (unmasked prime). At 25%, there
was no effect of the cue word; as cue-word detectability increased, so did facilitation and interference. They claimed that
their findings refuted Marcel's claim of unconscious perception
in the Stroop task.
Cheesman and Merikle went on to demonstrate that
they could obtain effects of the cue at several SOAs when they
used a subjective threshold in which subjects claimed not to see
the cue word. Subsequently, Cheesman and Merikle demonstrated that subjective thresholds did convey some information about processing. First, they showed that the cue word had
an effect whether it was above or below subjective threshold (so
long as it was above objective threshold). They then varied the
proportion of trials in which the cue and target were congruent,
and discovered that subjects could use this variation to assist
their processing, but only if the cue word was above subjective
threshold. In other words, a strategy could be implemented only
when subjects were aware of the primes, extending the conclusions of Logan and Zbrodoff .
Although there is not a massive amount of evidence here, I
will dignify the clear picture with a conclusion: Advance cues
conveying information about the upcoming Stroop trial can be
used to establish processing strategies that improve performance
if these cues are above the level of subjective awareness and if a
very small set of cues is used consistently. The major implication
of the work in this section is that foreknowledge can permit
subjects to construct a beneficial, task-wide strategy. Attentional-allocation policy is a critical element in the Stroop task.
Stimulus Onset Asynchrony (SOA)
Many explanations of Stroop interference have relied on the
relative speed of processing of the two competing stimulus dimensions. Intuitively, if a subject processes two dimensions simultaneously, one could interfere with the other, especially if
the dimension that is processed faster is the one that is supposed to be ignored . Logically, then, giving
the slower color dimension a head start should reduce the impact of the ordinarily faster word processing, thereby decreasing interference (and facilitation). With the individual-trial procedure, such studies can be performed by manipulating the
SOA between the word and color.
The first study to vary SOA was by Dyer (197 Ic). He used a
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
large SOA range (0-500 ms) because he thought it possible that
short SOAs would lead to increased interference but longer
SOAs would lead to decreased interference. With four common
colors and an XXXX-type control, he explored both incongruent and congruent combinations by having a word appear in
black at 1 of 10 intervals before that same word appeared in
color. The subject's task was to name the ink color.
Dyer found facilitation for congruent trials (26 ms)
and interference for incongruent trials (75 ms), relative to the
control, at all word-preexposure intervals. However, the time by
which the word preceded the ink color also mattered. Interference was about 90 ms with a 0-ms SOA, increased to 118 ms at a
40-ms SOA, fell to 68 ms at a 200-ms SOA, and then further
decreased to 32 ms at a 500-ms SOA. Although a nonmonotonicity is suggested, in fact Dyer's data only allowed the conclusion that interference decreased with SOA. Nevertheless, Dyer
claimed that interference peaked in the neighborhood of a 50ms preexposure of the word. He also noted that facilitation
increased somewhat from the 0-ms to the 200-ms SOA.
Rather than preexposing a color word in black and then
showing that color word in an ink color, Dyer and Severance
 preexposed a color word in black and then showed a
XXXX-type stimulus in an ink color. Thus, the color and word
were now not integrated. Relative to the earlier study, this cut
interference almost in half and eliminated facilitation. Furthermore, varying SOA from 0 to 100 ms had no effect on interference. When Severance and Dyer tried to replicate these
findings with a "subliminal" preexposure of the irrelevant
word, they found no interference.
In 1974, Dyer tried using much longer SOAs between the
word and the ink color. Interference decreased to a minimal
level with a 2-s SOA, but then increased again as SOA grew
beyond 2 s. Facilitation looked to follow the same pattern but
with diminished magnitude. Relative to randomized SOAs,
blocking SOA produced faster color naming at short SOAs, but
the effect on interference was minimal. Taken together, all of
Dyer's SOA results suggest an elongated S-shaped time course
in the Stroop effect: Interference initially increased with greater
SOA, then decreased, and finally increased again at very long
SOAs. Such a pattern is not easily reconciled with any simple
relative speed-of-processing interpretation.
In a thesis modeled after Dyer's work, Thomas varied
SOA from the ink color leading the word by 300 ms to the word
leading the ink color by 300 ms. Interference with color naming
was greater for shorter SOAs. This result was also extended to
facilitation and confirmed by Neumann , Goolkasian
 , and Long and Lyman . Precisely the same pattern
was reported by Flowers in a sorting version of the colorword task; Flowers and Wilcox extended this to the
flanker procedure using two letters or digits. In Thomas's study,
facilitation occurred whenever the word preceded or even when
it closely followed the corresponding ink color (up to 50 ms
after). Overall, the evidence was not consistent with a simple
differential rate-of-processing model.
Lassen extended SOA studies to the picture-word
task. Interference with picture naming peaked when the incongruent word led the picture by about 100 ms. On the other
hand, although pictures did cause a small amount of interference with word reading, manipulation of SOA had no effect on
reading words. These results are reminiscent of the data found
in the standard Stroop task, as are Magee's data on SOA
manipulations in the picture-word task.
The definitive pair of studies on the relation between SOA
and interference has been reported quite recently. Glaser and
Glaser used the color-word task and included incongruent, control, and congruent trials. When the
task was to read the word, there was no interference or facilitation regardless of whether ink color or word was presented up to
400 ms earlier: SOA had no effect on word reading. However,
SOA had a powerful effect on ink-color naming. If the word was
presented before or even as late as 100 ms after the ink color,
both interference and facilitation occurred. Interference was
maximal in a 100-ms window around simultaneous, consistent
with Dyer's results.
In other experiments, Glaser and Glaser showed that
increasing the frequency of congruent trials could lead to a
reverse Stroop effect (ink color interferes with word reading),
with both interference and facilitation in word reading when
the word preceded the ink color by 200 ms or more. They argued that the high probability of the "irrelevant" word also
being the name of the ink color led subjects to prepare the word
for output. However, their main conclusion was that the SOA
pattern did not readily fit a simple speed-of-processing model.
They maintained that there was a fast, strong inhibition plus
slower facilitation and inhibition deriving from response bias.
Glaser and Diingelhoff varied SOA in the pictureword task. The pattern was very similar to that in the colorword task: Word-reading time was unaffected by SOAs of up to
400 ms in either direction, whereas picture naming showed a
strong influence. Again, when the word appeared within 100
ms of the picture, both interference and facilitation were evident in picture naming. When the word appeared more than
100 ms before the picture, there was considerable facilitation
but little interference, as Thomas reported for the colorword task. Differing patterns of facilitation and interference in
response to SOA manipulation have also been reported in the
flanker task .
Basically, the SOA pattern seems quite consistent in both the
color-word and picture-word tasks. This permits the following
generalization to be made: When the color (or picture) is to be
named, maximal impact of a congruent or incongruent word will
be observed when the two dimensions begin within 100 ms of each
other. Facilitation may extend to longer SOAs than interference
when the word comes first. Manipulating SOA has virtually no
impact on word reading unless a very high proportion of congruent trials biases use of the color to initiate response production.
The major significance of the SOA studies is that they call into
question the idea that interference is due simply to words being
processed faster than ink colors. If that were true, there ought to
be a point at which an ink color presented sufficiently before a
word would cause reverse Stroop interference (and facilitation).
Concerted empirical efforts have failed to find any evidence of
such a point.
The Reverse Stroop
If a word normally interferes with naming a color or a picture, but a situation is created wherein the color or picture inter-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
feres with reading the word, this is an instance of a reverse
Stroop effect. Such findings are of theoretical interest because
they relate to the idea that interference depends on the relative
speed of processing of each of the two dimensions.
The first report of a reverse Stroop effect was by Stroop
 himself in the seminal article. This effect
arose only after considerable training and was quite transient.
Since then, others have been more successful in creating stable
reverse Stroop situations, but their success has usually relied on
substantially changing the task, making it difficult to compare
their results to the standard Stroop situation. Still the existence
of the reverse Stroop effect is now widely accepted.
As an illustration, Palef and Olson had subjects respond either to the meanings of the words
above and below or to their spatial locations on the screen. In
Experiment 1, spatial position was made easier (and hence
faster) to process than word meaning. In this case, incongruent
spatial position interfered with a keypress decision about word
meaning, but incongruent word meaning did not interfere with
a keypress decision about spatial position. In Experiment 2,
where spatial position was made harder to process, the pattern
of interference reversed. In general, the faster dimension interfered with the slower one but not vice versa.
Quite a number of other studies have demonstrated reverse
Stroop effects as well . Many of
these studies used nonverbal responses, although it is not clear
how crucial response mode was because the stimuli generally
were rather different from the basic Stroop task as well.
The two studies generally cited as illustrative of reverse
Stroop interference are those of Gumenik and Glass and
Dyer and Severance . Both involved reducing the readability of the words by partial obliteration. Both found a reverse
Stroop effect in that ink colors influenced word reading for
hard-to-read words. Unfortunately, like many of the others in
the list, these two did not examine interference in both "directions" in the same experiment.
It seems possible, then, to have interference occur from dimension A on dimension B and vice versa. However, many of
these experiments are quite far removed from the standard
task. Cases where exactly the same stimuli and responses were
used with only an instructional difference are rare, leaving
room for more work in this area. \fet interference can occur in
both directions when the only change is from naming colors to
reading words , conflicting
with the belief that the faster process interferes with the slower
one, and not vice versa. For this reason, the following conclusion is added to the list, although it must remain a little vague at
this point: A reverse Stroop effect (i.e., interference with word reading caused by an incompatible, irrelevant ink color) appears to be
possible, but this effect is not simply a consequence of the relative
speeds of processing each dimension.
An obvious and theoretically critical question is: Does the
Stroop effect change as a consequence of (type of) practice at
the task? If so, how does it change, and what does this tell us
about the cause of the phenomenon? Stroop and his predecessors realized the importance of this factor; now I will examine
what has been found out since then in studies manipulating
On the view that words interfere with color naming because
of our extensive reading experience, Stroop interference is a
direct consequence of differential practice. Thus, variation in
practice should have direct impact on the task. Stroop recognized this, although he thought that considerable practice might be needed to modify existing response
tendencies. It is unfortunate, then, that the relevant studies often involve very little practice . It is hardly surprising that such studies
conclude that practice is not a particularly critical variable. Perhaps the Jensen and Rohwer claim that almost all practice effects occur within the first 5 trials is responsible for this. I
believe they were wrong.
Intuitively, extended practice with the Stroop task should lead
to reduced interference as subjects develop a strategy for coping
more successfully with the task. This result has indeed been
observed , but not always . Furthermore, this is not the whole story. As one illustration of how
much more complex the situation is, the stimuli and responses
chosen are also important in training studies. Flowers and
Stoup found that interference dissipated with practice for
nonintegrated stimuli when the task was sorting, but not when
it was oral naming. Nielsen found initially greater interference for a vocal than for a manual response, but then found a
greater decline in interference over practice for the manual than
for the vocal response. The results of Roe, Wilsoncraft, and
Griffiths confirm that manual responding is affected
more quickly by practice, which is interesting given that manual
responding is faster to begin with and therefore closer to a "performance floor."
It also seems that there is a good deal of specificity to practice
effects. Menard-Buteau and Cavanagh found that, for
items like "blue banana," there was interference in saying
"blue" to the word or the picture in color. However, extended
practice on the word version did not transfer to the picture
version. They argued that the semantic element of interference
did not coincide in the two tasks, and that interference might be
more at the encoding stage for pictures and the response stage
for words. This seems worth pursuing, particularly because it
suggests that the common assumption of process identity in
these two tasks may be at least partly incorrect.
In contrast to Menard-Buteau and Cavanagh , Reisberg, Baron, and Kemler did obtain transfer along semantic lines. They used the counting task where the items to be
counted are themselves digits. With practice, interference declined but in a very specific way. Subjects who had practiced
with the digits 2 and 4 to be ignored showed no benefit on a
counting test where the digits 1 and 3 or the words to and for
were to be ignored. However, there was good transfer when the
words two and four were to be ignored. Thus, meaning appears
to be involved.
Regan compared a well-practiced to an unpracticed
task. She had English-speaking subjects learn the names of Ar-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
menian letters. She then composed large English and Armenian letters out of small English and Armenian letters, and required subjects to name the small letters while ignoring the
large letters, using the Navon procedure. Interference
was equivalent for the very familiar set and for the newly
learned set. This result speaks to what is meant by "automatic"
processing: Although such processing appears to be involuntary, it apparently does not require extensive practice.
Reasoning that a novel orientation would slow down word
processing, Liu had subjects rotate their Stroop cards
upside down and then name the ink colors. Interference was
reduced compared with normally oriented words. However, using several unique word orientations, Dunbar and MacLeod
 failed to confirm Liu's result. In fact, we found equivalent interference regardless of the word's orientation, so that
previous practice differences could not be the critical factor.
Most recently, MacLeod and Dunbar took on the practice issue directly. We had subjects learn to call each of four
unique shapes by a different color name (green, pink, orange, or
blue). We could then present each shape in a neutral color
(white), a congruent color, or an incongruent color, and require
subjects to name the shape or the ink color. With a small
amount of shape-naming practice, ink color interfered with
shape naming but shape name did not interfere with ink-color
naming. With moderate practice, interference was equivalent in
both directions. With extensive practice, only shape names interfered with ink-color naming and not vice versa. Practice had
a systematic impact, interestingly in a task with no "word" dimension at all and where shape naming never became faster
than ink-color naming.
Practice warrants further investigation. Along the way, variables such as intertrial interval could also be
examined. In our work , we manipulated practice on one dimension, leaving the other in its "natural state"; it would be informative to covary practice on the two
dimensions, a project that Diane Williams and I have under
way in my laboratory. For the present, my general conclusion
about practice is probably too general: Degree of practice in
processing each of the dimensions of a multidimensional stimulus is influential in determining the extent of interference from one
dimension on another. The greater the practice in processing a
dimension, the more capable that dimension is of influencing the
processing of another dimension. Practice may turn out to be
one of the most effective manipulations for disentangling theories of the Stroop effect.
This ends the section on manipulations over multiple trials.
Of course, there are isolated articles examining more esoteric
effects. One example is studies in which feedback is manipulated, as when vocal feedback is minimized or delayed or when response feedback is varied in some other way . Another is the case of manipulation of effort in the task
 . However,
the main findings are those outlined previously. I now shift the
focus from stimulus manipulations to those concentrating on
the response side of the task.
Response-Related Manipulations
Under the view that interference derives from a logjam at a
limited-capacity response buffer because the irrelevant word
has entered before the relevant ink color , the locus of interference is placed
squarely in the response stage. Thus, manipulations affecting
how or when the response is made, or how many responses
might possibly be made, become very important in testing such
Order of Response
Few studies have required subjects to make two responses to
the same stimulus as, for example, when consecutive responses
to the ink color and the word (or vice versa) are required. The
prototype work in this domain is that of Schweickert , who argued that only one decision can be made at a time
in the Stroop task. As illustrations, he cited several studies , all involving only one response. To demonstrate that at
least some of the processing of the word and the ink color is
concurrent, he cited Greenwald . Here subjects saw an
arrow pointing left or right and heard the word left or right
simultaneously. They had to respond orally to one dimension
and manually to the other. Greenwald varied whether one or
both arrows or words could occur in a block of trials, and
whether there was conflict between the dimensions. His data
showed clear evidence of interaction among these variables.
Schweickert's experiment used a colored rectangle
above a color word. There were 2 subjects. One was to press a
key indicating the color of the rectangle before reading the
word aloud; her data suggested that she decided about the ink
color first. The other subject was to press a key for the word and
then name the ink color aloud; her data suggested that she
decided about the word first. This outcome is difficult to handle under a differential speed-of-processing account, which explains the usual asymmetry as being due to the decision about
the word preceding the decision about the ink color. This appears to be true when the subject names the ink color. However,
the decision order is reversed when the word must be read, so
why is there an asymmetry in the standard Stroop task?
Work involving two responses may help to explain how the various processes
are scheduled. Of course, as Schweickert was well aware, the
danger is that scheduling is influenced by whether one or more
than one response is required. This may also be reflected in
memory. Corballis and Luthe presented subjects with
three incongruent Stroop items in rapid succession, and varied
whether subjects had to recall on an item by item basis (i.e., the
ink color and word for each item) or dimensionally (i.e., all three
ink colors and then all three words). When words were reported
before colors, dimensional recall was better than item-based
recall. When colors were reported before words, the pattern
reversed. Again scheduling of processes apparently was driven
by task demands. We need to know more about how sequencing
is governed.
Response Modality: Oral Versus Manual
If interference occurs at or near response output, it seems
reasonable to examine the form of response. The critical contrast has been between vocal-response output—naming—and
manual-response output—a keypress. The question is whether
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
interference differs over mode of response in the Stroop task. In
particular, does the compatibility of the verbal response and
the irrelevant word account for some or all of the interference,
as studies such as those of Gholson and Hohle and
Beller might suggest?
Pritchatt suggested that the Stroop effect was a consequence of verbal output because the effect was reduced when a
matching response was used. However, White was the
first to make the explicit comparison of verbal and nonverbal
responses. For the standard Stroop task, he reported less interference with the nonverbal keypress response than with the oral
response. Unfortunately, he used as his dependent variable the
ratio of incongruent time to control time, so it is difficult to tell
exactly what the pattern looked like in the individual conditions.
One of the best known response-related studies was by Keele
 , although he used only manual responses. He reasoned
that if interference arises during memory retrieval, then any
word should interfere with naming ink color be it a noncolor
word or a color word. In contrast, if noncolor words do not
interfere but color words do, then the retrieval stage cannot be
the locus of interference. His results supported the latter prediction, leading him to a late-selection
theory of attention. In fact, though, the Keele study does
not directly address the issue of response modality; his study is
more a replication of Klein's logic using keypresses instead of oral responses.8
More crucial are studies where the two response modes are
directly compared in the same experiment. Nielsen varied the irrelevant stimulus from control Xs to color words,
roughly following Klein . Interference much like Klein's
was observed for both vocal and keypress responses, although
interference was greater for vocal responses. Even with practice,
vocal-response interference exceeded manual-response interference. Using similar logic, Majeres had subjects either say
or write their response (only the first letter had to be written).
There was a clear gradient of interference for both response
modes, but less interference when writing than when saying the
Redding and Gerjets demonstrated that incongruent
words produced 177 ms of interference when the response to
ink color was oral and only 98 ms when the response was manual; congruent words produced 23 ms of facilitation for oral
responses and 67 ms for manual responses. Curiously, there
appeared to be less interference but more facilitation when the
response was manual compared with oral. Whether this generalizes remains to be seen.
Perhaps the pivotal question is whether interference consistently appears when responding is manual. In general, the answer appears to be "yes." Several articles have confirmed interference with a manual response . Some, such as that of Roe et al. , even found
no overall differences between the two response modes. The
only case where there was no interference with a manual response appears to be the experiment by McClain described shortly.
A feature of any task that contributes to its difficulty is the
degree to which the responses map readily onto the various
dimensions of the stimulus. Fitts and Posner referred to
this as the stimulus-response compatibility issue. Treisman
and Fearnley stressed this in their account of the Stroop
effect. Put simply, does the word interfere with naming the color
because the verbal nature of the word matches that of the response?
McClain manipulated compatibility in both the standard
Stroop task and its auditory analog. In the color-word task
 , interference in color naming declined as the
response moved from oral to pressing buttons labeled with
color names to pressing buttons labeled with color patches. In
fact, interference was not significant in the last condition, but
such complete absence of interference is an unusual result.9 In
the auditory experiment , subjects had to
identify either the pitch (high or low) or the word (high or low).
When pitch was to be identified, interference occurred for an
oral or a keypress response, but not for a hummed response.
When the word was to be identified, the pattern reversed.
Although Morton and Chambers questioned the role
of stimulus-response compatibility, it seems to matter . Of course, comparing response times across oral and
manual responses can be a thorny interpretive problem . Recall that Neill 
showed that if the irrelevant word on trial n — 1 named the
relevant ink color on trial n, this slowed oral responding (relative to unrelated items). \et when response modality was manual, the same sequential relation actually speeded responding.
Why? Neill argued that suppression occurred only when the
response had to be spoken, whereas activation in the manual
task helped eliminate the word faster from contention as a possible response. Simon and Sudalaimuthu reported a related effect obtained within single trials.
Such results are puzzling. Nevertheless, there is sufficient
convergence to permit the following conclusion: Although still
significant, interference (but perhaps not facilitation) is reduced
when response modality is switched from oral to manual. Stimulus-response compatibility matters; if the normal processing of
the irrelevant dimension leads to a response in the mode designated for the relevant dimension, interference is likely to be
heightened. However, neither response mode alone nor the interaction of stimulus and response modes can account for the
Stroop effect. The effect is due to more than a queuing problem
at the finish line.
Response Set Size and Composition
It frequently is argued that people read the irrelevant word in
Stroop variations because it usually is an eligible response . If interfer-
* It should be noted that Keele did report substantial interference when comparing incongruent stimuli to control stimuli despite
the manual response mode.
9 McClain used the difference between incongruent and congruent
times as her measure of interference, which unfortunately combines
interference and facilitation. Wheeler found no difference between color naming and word reading in the incongruent condition
using a manual response, but this is a very unconventional way to
contrast response modes.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
ence occurs in responding, then manipulations of the set of
responses might be expected to have some effect.
Both Klein and Scheibe et al. reported twice as
much interference when the color word was the name of another possible ink color in the set. Even controlling for word
frequency and association, Proctor still found 24 to 30
ms more interference when the words and ink colors coincided.
Other studies support this conclusion in the color-word task
 and in the picture-word task . Lupker and Katz found more interference when
irrelevant words named the categories of possible picture
names than when they did not. Dunbar provided an
extensive discussion of the relevant picture-word literature,
and La Heij reported careful studies showing that response-set members produce heightened interference. Studies
using the flanker task also found that a
target word suffers more when a nearby word is a potential
response than when it is not.
There are two logical possibilities for what should happen as
set size increases. First, interference might increase because
more potential responses are vying for output, making managing the contents of working memory more effortful. Second,
interference might decrease because the probability that any
particular response is actually in working memory would decrease with larger response set size. Nielsen found that
interference increased with increasing set size, Ray 
found that it was unaffected, and La Heij et al. found that
it decreased. There are other studies that could be aligned with
each of these findings (see also Stimulus Set Size). The manipulation of response set size seems so straightforward that these
conflicting findings are frustrating. Thus, the recent emphasis
on this issue in the work of La Heij and colleagues is timely.
The findings on response set are clear with respect to the
overlap of the two dimensions, but not with respect to the effect
of set-size variation. This is captured in the following conclusion: When the irrelevant dimension of a set of stimuli includes
names that are eligible responses for the relevant dimension,
more interference results than when the sets are nonoverlapping.
Although variations in response set size might be expected to
affect interference, existing results are unclear.
Individual
Differences
A great many articles have examined the relation between
Stroop interference and some individual differences parameter.
The purpose of most of these clearly is not to explain the Stroop
effect, so for this reason I omit many of these studies. Instead, I
select only a few dimensions of individual variation to review
here. As Kareev illustrated, certain analyses at the level
of the individual have considerable potential in helping us to
understand the Stroop effect.
Differences
The most obvious difference between individuals is sex, so
much effort has been directed to exploring sex differences . The Stroop task has not escaped:
There are now over a dozen studies of how men and women
differ in degree of interference. Even before Stroop, Ligon
 noted that girls named colors faster
than did boys, although there was no difference in word-reading speed. Stroop confirmed this, but critically showed
that men and women did not display differential interference.
This result has been replicated often , yet investigators still
pursue the matter .
Naish suggested that men may encode irrelevant
words both orthographically and phonemically when sorting
the colors in which they are written, whereas women encode
only phonemically. However, he also suggested that this strategy difference might be unique to certain Stroop-like situations
and not evident in normal reading.
Several studies have examined the relation between Stroop
interference and some test of interest, with sex differences as a
subsidiary analysis. In a factor-analytic study of extraversion
and field dependence, loadings on a Stroop factor were higher
for men than for women . In a study of
the relation between a test of matching familiar figures and the
Stroop test , errors on the two tests
were positively correlated for men but not for women, which the
authors took as an indication of distractibility and impulsivity
being related in men.
Jorgenson and her colleagues have been especially interested in hemispheric differences and sex differences in the Stroop task. In
brief, sex differences in both grade-school and college students
did not appear to account for much of the variance in Stroop
performance in their studies.
In grade-school children, girls have been shown to be generally faster but not better at color recognition and not different in
terms of interference, the most interesting measure theoretically . Bettner, Jarvik, and Blum 
studied an aged population and found poorer Stroop performance in men than in women (average age of 84 years).
On the whole, research has failed to find much difference in
Stroop interference between men and women at any age. Although women may be somewhat faster, especially in naming
colors, this relates to general response speed ,
not to the derived measure of interference. Here is a summary
statement: There are no sex differences in Stroop interference at
any age. Perhaps this is too strong, but I remain to be convinced.
Differences
The development of color and word-form processing with
age was of interest before the Stroop task was created . Basically, more recent studies make similar points. Thus, Cramer supported Ligon's
claim that form processing dominates over color processing,
although preschoolers may show the reverse preference , having not yet learned to recognize letter forms
very well.
Interest in development with regard to the Stroop task itself
did not arise until the mid-1960s. There are some three dozen
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
pertinent studies, the first being a life-span study by Comalli,
Wapner, and Werner . Testing
subjects from ages 7 to 80 years, they observed greatest interference in the young children; interference declined into adulthood and then increased again with advanced age. They saw
young children and older adults as having relatively more difficulty in screening out interfering stimuli. Ehri and Wilce 
produced an experimental analog of this result by training first
and second graders on a set of words to be used in the pictureword task. Initially, as the subjects were learning to read the
words, interference increased; however, once the words were
learned and further training simply improved response speed
to the words, interference decreased.
Schiller helped to clarify the nonmonotonicity in interference with age in children. Interference was minimal for children in Grade 1, younger than the youngest subjects in the
Comalli et al. study. Interference then became maximal
in Grades 2 and 3 (Comalli et al.'s youngest subjects), and declined thereafter. The strong suggestion is that this early rise
and then fall in interference reflects the onset of reading skills.
Dash and Dash confirmed Schiller's result . Using the picture-word task, Ehri 
showed a similar pattern, except that poor readers in the second
grade did not show interference, behaving rather like normal
first graders in the other studies. Attempts to create Stroop-like
situations for younger, prereading children have not been very
informative . Furthermore, attempts to categorize subgroups
of development in the task have not been successful .
The decrease in interference through adulthood and before
the age of 60 that Comalli et al. observed has been confirmed , as has the increase
in interference for adults older than 60 years . There
may be exceptions , but even studies of
aging twins reveal the increased interference with age greater
than 60 years , together with the suggestion that identical twins show
more similar interference than do fraternal twins. Attempts at
remediation of the exaggerated interference shown by older
adults have not been notably successful .
Many of the developmental Stroop studies focus on reading
skill . The
Corbitt dissertation provides a good example. He showed
that reading ability and interference were closely related: Intermediate and good readers read words faster than they named
colors, and showed a Stroop effect without a reverse Stroop
effect. Poor readers named colors faster than they could read
words and showed the opposite pattern.
How about reading comprehension? Using the picture-word
task, Golinkoff and Rosinski showed that good versus
poor comprehenders in Grades 3 and 5 did not differ in the
degree of interference shown in naming pictures containing
single words. Similar findings were reported by Ehri and
Underwood et al. . Rosinski showed that the semantic gradient for words that differentially relate to colors was
also consistent from Grade 2 through college. Merrill et al.
 went on to show that, with sentence contexts, good comprehenders in Grade 5 displayed interference only for targets
appropriate to the context, whereas poor comprehenders
showed interference regardless of context appropriateness. A
study by Kareev further investigated development of sentence encoding in children using the color-word task.
Interestingly, children with reading disabilities often show
robust Stroop interference , as do autistic children
 , hyperactive children ,
aphasics , and retardates . Recent
work by Ellis, Woodley-Zanthos, Dulaney, and Palmer 
suggests that automatic word reading may be even harder for
retardates to control than it is for normals, causing greater interference in retardates. Das reported a similar result, although the pattern reversed when very poor readers were included in the retarded group .
The overall picture of development, then, can be summarized fairly concisely by the Comalli et al. result. Here is
the conclusion: Interference begins early in the school years, rising to its highest level around Grades 2 to 3 as reading skill develops. With continued development of reading, interference declines through the adult years until approximately age 60, at
which point it begins to increase again. Virtually everyone who
can read shows a robust Stroop effect from an early age.
Hemispheric
Differences
A number of investigators have examined laterality in the
Stroop task, using Dyer's study as a springboard. Basically, he showed that presenting the word and the color separately to the left and right of fixation did not destroy the Stroop
effect: Both interference and facilitation were still evident. Furthermore, the effect does not seem to be altered by presenting
the words vertically , although it
may be somewhat reduced in the periphery as opposed to foveally . Such findings opened the door for
hemispheric-differences research.
Schmit and Davis tested subjects with Stroop stimuli
displayed in only the left or right visual field using a buttonpress
response. They observed greater interference in the left hemisphere, consistent with that hemisphere's dominant role in verbal processing. Guiard corroborated this using a manual-response task. The finding was also confirmed in the standard oral-response procedure by Tsao, Feustel, and Soseos
 , although only in their error data . However, not all investigators have agreed: Warren and
Marsh found equivalent interference for the two hemispheres using color-word stimuli, whereas Long and Lyman
 found greater interference when the word was processed
in the right hemisphere (with the color presented foveally).
Tsao, Wu, and Feustel showed that the Schmit and
Davis pattern was reversed for Chinese speakers, consistent
with the idea that both logographs and colors are handled by
the right hemisphere. Analogously, Morikawa showed
that idiographic Kanji characters produced greater right-hemisphere interference in Japanese subjects. Hatta confirmed the result for Kanji,
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
but found no hemispheric difference for orthographic Kana.
Interestingly, Morikawa emphasized the overall reduced size of
interference effects with Japanese subjects, itself a result worth
Cohen and Martin presented auditory stimuli to the
left or right ear using the Hamers high/low procedure.
Again, the Stroop effect was larger in the left hemisphere, and
was accentuated by simultaneous irrelevant distraction in the
other ear . Alivisatos and Wilding used
the global/local-letters task (with a manual response) to show
that the local level of a foveally presented first stimulus interfered with processing a second stimulus in the right hemisphere
but not in the left. The global aspect of the first stimulus interfered with the second stimulus in both hemispheres, with a
tendency to more interference in the right hemisphere.
Toma and Tsao obtained greater interference in the
left hemisphere for the picture-word task. Using the same task,
Lupker and Sanders hypothesized that the verbal-response competition in the left hemisphere gave way to a perceptual type of interference in the right hemisphere, a hypothesis
worthy of further investigation. In particular, though, more
work is needed where the two dimensions are presented separately to the two hemispheres rather than together to the same
hemisphere. SOA studies might also be informative by controlling which hemisphere is stimulated first and by which dimension of the stimulus.
Evoked (event-related) potentials are part of a new technology
for studying the Stroop effect. Scott, Hoffman, and Bickford
 were pioneers in this area, demonstrating that lambda
waves in the parietal-occipital region showed increased amplitude in the interference condition, although they admitted that
this could relate to muscle potentials as easily as to mental activity. The technology has advanced a great deal since then . More in the current mold of such
studies, Warren and Marsh took their neural-activity
measurements to suggest that standard Stroop interference was
due to response-selection processes, but that the reverse Stroop
effect was due to complex encoding interactions.
Duncan-Johnson and Kopell used oral response
time together with P300 latency in the
discrete-trials version of the Stroop task with congruent, incongruent, and neutral words and two ink colors. Blocks of trials
required word reading or ink-color naming. The usual pattern
was observed in the response times, but P300 was unaffected by
experimental condition. Because P300 is taken to be an index
of encoding, the conclusion was that interference must stem
from response competition.
Aine and Barter adapted the study of evoked
potentials to examining hemispheric differences in the Stroop
task. Basically, they claimed that the activity associated with
interference occurs in the left hemisphere, converging on the
response time and error-rate measures already described. Taking all of this evidence together, the following conclusion is
offered: The left hemisphere generally shows more interference
than the right. A study by Posner, Walker, Friedrich, and Rafal
 suggests that the left parietal lobe may be particularly
involved in disengaging attention, although the left frontal lobe
may also play a role . Undoubtedly, we will see
more work on the topic of localization in the near future.
Language Differences: The Case of the Bilingual
If Stroop interference stems from an irresistible urge to read
the word, what would happen if you were naming ink colors in
one language but the words were in another language? About
two dozen studies have been directed at this question. This
work began with Dalrymple-Alford , but his items were
either incongruent items in the same language or congruent
items in different languages, a confound that does not permit us
to obtain a clear picture of the Stroop effect within versus between languages. For this, we must examine studies by Preston
and Lambert and by Dyer (197la).
Preston and Lambert found substantial interference
whether the ink colors were to be named in the same language
as the distracting words appeared or in the other language. English-Hungarian bilinguals showed roughly 68% of the interference across languages that they showed within a single language; for English-French bilinguals, the overlap was 95%. Preston and Lambert concluded that interference between
languages could be as great as that within languages, but that it
depended on relative familiarity with the two languages in question.
Dyer showed that English monolinguals naming colors in English displayed maximal interference when the words
were in English and declining interference as the similarity of
the irrelevant words to English decreased. Using Spanish-English bilinguals in his second experiment, Dyer found maximal
interference when the naming and distracting languages coincided, but there was also substantial interference when the languages did not coincide. Roughly, the different-language conditions showed about 63% of the interference seen in the samelanguage conditions.
Shortly after Dyer's study, Hamers used her auditory Stroop analog with French-English bilinguals and reached the same conclusion: The differentlanguage condition produced about 76% of the interference
seen in the same-language condition. This pattern recurs for
Spanish-English bilinguals in the picture-word task , French-English bilinguals in the flanker-word task
 , and diverse languages in the color-word
task . Fang et al. 
also confirmed that the ratio of between-language to withinlanguage interference declines as language similarity decreases.
Complicating matters, the weightings of interference within
and between languages are also affected by relative proficiency
in the two languages. Magiste observed a changing
pattern with the development of the individual's second language. Initially, her subjects were German dominant and
showed more interference when responding in German regardless of whether the words were Swedish or German. Gradually,
as their experience with Swedish increased, they reached a
point of equivalence; then, as Swedish came to dominate, they
showed most interference when naming in Swedish. Chen and
Ho , using Chinese-English bilinguals, suggested that
within-language interference was always greater for their Chi-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
nese-dominant subjects, but that the pattern when naming in
English shifts with increased English-language experience.
From initially greater between-language interference, their subjects moved to finally greater within-language interference.
There is also evidence to suggest that this difference in interference depends on the dominance of the naming language. If the
naming language is the nondominant one, interference between and within languages tends to be close to identical .
Furthermore, certain languages, such as Chinese, may be
more vulnerable to interference than others. Biederman and
Tsao 
showed much greater interference for Chinese students naming
the ink colors of logographic characters than for English students naming the ink colors of words. They concluded that the
processes involved in reading Chinese are more similar to those
involved in naming colors than are those involved in reading
English. Tsao et al. provided some support for this claim by showing
that more interference occurred in the right hemisphere for
Chinese speakers, unlike the usual pattern of maximal interference in the left hemisphere for speakers of romance languages.
However, Smith and Kirsner obtained more symmetrical data using Chinese-English and French-English bilinguals,
so this issue has yet to be resolved.
What can we conclude about Stroop interference in bilinguals for the present? Interference between the two languages of a
bilingual, although not as great as that within either one of the
languages, is very robust: Between-language interference typically is about 7 5% of within-language interference. Furthermore,
a dominant language has more potential for interfering than does
a nondominant one. There may also be differences in the processing of orthographic and idiographic languages. Overall, the
cross-language semantic contribution to Stroop interference is
substantial.
Theoretical Accounts of the Stroop Effect
It seems only appropriate to preface discussion of current
theories with a comment on how Stroop himself interpreted his
data. Here is what he concluded over a half-century ago:
The associations that have been formed between the word stimuli
and the reading response are evidently more effective than those
that have been formed between the color stimuli and the naming
response. Since these associations are products of training, and
since the difference in their strength corresponds roughly to the
difference in training in reading words and naming colors, it
seems reasonable to conclude that the difference in speed in reading names of colors and in naming colors may be satisfactorily
accounted for by the difference in training in the two activities.
 
Stroop's general view corresponded closely to
one of the two prevalent accounts of the Stroop effect—the
relative speed-of-processing view—and was compatible with
the other one—the automaticity view. Because of their preeminence in the literature, and because they are conceptually close
cousins, these two explanations are examined first.
Relative Speed of Processing
In its simplest form, the relative speed-of-processing view
begins with the fact that words are read faster than colors are
named . This speed difference
is seen as particularly critical when two potential responses (e.g.,
one from a word and one from an ink color) compete to be the
response actually produced. The time cost of this competition
is "interference." This general interpretation is referred to as
response competition occurring at the end of a horse race, because the two codes are seen as racing to control final output.
A quarter of a century ago, Klein saw interference as
resulting from the need to "restimulate" with the ink color to
overcome the strong tendency to produce the word, although
the mechanism of restimulation was not specified. Klein's view
was not altogether inconsistent with Stroop's, and it characterized earlier attempts to explain the Stroop effect in terms of
"habit strength" and related associationistic ideas of learning.
Today most psychologists think of the Stroop task as a hallmark
measure of attention, not learning. Thus, Treisman saw
the problem as difficulty in deciding whether to attend to the
ink color or to the word analyzers when they led to different
potential responses, an idea Dyer adopted in his review.
Ideas like Treisman's underlie what came to be the best
known realizations of response competition: those of Morton
 and Posner and Snyder
 . It was this general response-competition idea that Dyer
 endorsed in his review. In the words of Morton and
Chambers ,
The various stimulus analyzers [for word and ink color] are supposed to operate in parallel and will each give rise to an appropriate naming response. If multiple responses are available they
will compete for entry into the single channel exit from the Logogen System... the crucial variable is the relative speed of naming
the various attributes of the stimuli, (p. 388)
This is a very clear statement of the relative speed-of-processing
view, including its response-competition element.
Very similar ideas are contained in the account offered by
Posner and Snyder :
First, the usual Stroop effect arises because of response competition between vocal responses to the printed word and the ink
color.. . . Second, the direction of interference depends upon the
time relations involved. Words are read faster than colors can be
named, thus a color naming response receives stronger interference from the word than the reverse.. . .Third, words often facilitate the vocal output to colors with which they share a common
name.. . .These three results suggest that color naming and reading go on in parallel and without interference until close to the
output, (p. 57)
Again, the elements of relative speed and interference at the
stage of response output are highlighted. These are the two
essential elements of the relative speed-of-processing account
of the Stroop effect. Appendix B summarizes the 18 major results that must be handled by any successful theory. Let us
consider now how this evidence accords with this account.
Certainly, the relative speed-of-processing idea allows for numerous analogs of the task (Result 1); all that is required is
differential processing time for two competing stimuli. Regarding the effects of nonsemantic relations (Result 2), this view
holds that greater similarity between the names of two competing responses should make it harder to select the correct one at
the response-production stage. Regarding semantic effects (Re-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
suit 3), disambiguation at the response stage should also be
more difficult for more highly related responses.
Posner and Snyder pointed out that words more highly
related to the concept of color would be primed by processing
of the ink-color names, increasing the likelihood of those words
reaching the response stage first. This logic explains the fact
that overlap of response set for the relevant and irrelevant dimensions influences interference (Result 14); the two dimensions are priming each other. Priming also explains why noncolor words preceded by related words cause more interference
in color naming (Result 4). Basically, words are processed faster
when primed and hence are more likely to win the race to the
response stage and to interfere with color naming. Of course,
the priming mechanism is not fundamental to the relativespeed hypothesis per se. It must be grafted on, and represents an
additional element to this explanation.
Facilitatory congruence effects (Result 5) should occur because the response to both dimensions is the same, so production can be based on whichever arrives first at the response
stage. Indeed, they probably even prime each other. Increased
interference from mixing congruent with incongruent trials
(Result 7) might be thought of as being due to greater uncertainty at the response stage regarding which dimension (on incongruent trials) is to provide the output. Of course, this requires an additional assumption beyond the two main ones
mentioned earlier, but it seems a reasonable one.
Although the fact that integrated stimuli result in more interference than nonintegrated stimuli (Result 6) is not a direct
prediction from the relative speed-of-processing view, it can be
handled. Assume that it is easier to ascertain which potential
response derived from which stimulus dimension when the dimensions are more easily separated. Dealing with the fact that
manual responding displays less interference than oral responding (Result 13) is even more straightforward. Simply assume that there are different response-output routines (or
buffers) for different modalities, which also fits with effects of
stimulus-response compatibility.
Pretrial cues should assist processing (Result 9) because they
can be used to "tune" the response-output system. These cues
help in deciding which dimension is salient and perhaps also
what value to expect on that dimension. However, too many
so-called cues would probably lead the subject to ignore them,
as has been found. What about sequential trial effects (Result
8)? Two problems arise in the system. First, there may be some
trace of the two potential responses from the previous trial still
resident in the response buffer when the subsequent trial begins. Second, there is probably priming of the responses on trial
n by the responses on trial n — 1. With some jockeying, this
horse race can be made sensitive to neighboring trials.
Although silent on sex differences (Result 15), the relative
speed view would predict greater left hemisphere involvement
(Result 17) because of the importance of reading. Both the developmental pattern (Result 16) and the bilingual pattern (Result 18) make sense under this view because both development
and language proficiency ought to affect word processing
So far, so good. Fifteen of the 18 results are comfortably accommodated. However, the remaining three—without doubt
the most direct predictions of the relative speed-of-processing
view—appear to be wrong. The most obvious prediction is that
the relative speed of processing each of the two dimensions of
the compound stimulus should determine interference. The
naive intuition is that the faster dimension should interfere with
the slower one and not vice versa; interference should always be
completely asymmetrical. Of course, this extreme position need
not be true, in fact, because we are dealing with distributions of
processing times over trials, and any overlap in those distributions could produce interference. Figure 1 portrays this point; it
is apparent that orderly patterns of interference are predicted.
In fact, though, interference is not an orderly function of
relative speed of processing: The careful SOA studies of Glaser
and Glaser and Glaser and Diingelhoff convincingly make this point (see SOA). Previewing the slower dimension does not lead to the clear reversal of the direction of interference expected, thereby violating two major results (Results
10 and 11). Also relevant are the studies conducted by Kevin
Dunbar and myself : Direct manipulation of the speed of processing
of a dimension through reorientation or practice (Result 12)
does not produce results consistent with this theoretical perspective.
The relative speed-of-processing hypothesis contains three
key assumptions. First, there is assumed to be parallel processing of the two dimensions of the stimulus at differential speeds.
Second, there is a limited-capacity response channel into which
only one of the two potential responses can be admitted at a
time; priority is determined by speed. Third, there is potential
for priming of possible responses from several sources, including preceding trials and other response-set elements. This is
actually quite a powerful set of assumptions. Together they are
capable of accommodating 15 of the 18 critical findings in Appendix B, although some corollary assumptions were introduced along the way. However, they fail in the face of the most
direct test of the view: explicit manipulations of relative speed
of processing by SOA or by practice. On this basis, I contend
that the relative speed-of-processing hypothesis must be rejected.
Automaticity
The second prevalent explanation is the automaticity account, which was rooted in Cattell's (1886) work over a century
ago. Here the basic idea is that processing of one dimension
requires much more attention than does processing of the other
dimension. Thus, naming the ink color draws more heavily on
attentional resources than does reading the irrelevant word.
Moreover, reading the word is seen as obligatory, whereas naming the ink color is not. Presumably, this imbalance derives
from our extensive history of reading words as opposed to naming ink colors. Under this view, the asymmetry that is the fundamental characteristic of the Stroop task must occur. Words
are read very automatically; colors require considerably more
attention to be named.
This description is based on the theorizing of LaBerge and
Samuels , Posner and Snyder , Shiffrin and
Schneider , and Logan among others . Contrary to the all-or-none view of
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
LATENCY DISTRIBUTIONS
DIMENSION A
DIMENSION B
A interferes with B;
B does not interfere
DIMENSION A
DIMENSION B
A interferes more
with B than B
does with A
DIMENSION A
DIMENSION B
A and B interfere
with each other to
the same extent
DIMENSION B
DIMENSION A
B interferes more
with A than A does
DIMENSION B
DIMENSION A
B interferes with A;
A does not interfere
Figure 1. Relative speed of processing and interference. As the latency distributions for the processing of
the two dimensions shift, so should the patterns of interference.
automaticity popular in secondary sources, all of these investigators saw automaticity as a gradient that developed with learning. Thus, word reading was very automatic, and color (or picture) naming was much less automatic. More automatic processing could then interfere with less automatic processing, but not
vice versa. The Stroop task is an interesting case expressly because the two dimensions differ so much in how automatically
they are processed.
Let us consider how such a view comes to grips with the 18
key results in Appendix B. Certainly whenever the irrelevant
dimension of a two-dimensional stimulus is a word, the potential for interference exists. Thus, many analogs of the Stroop
color-word task (Result 1) are expected. Although an all-ornone version of automaticity would have trouble handling interference in situations where neither dimension was a word, this
would not be the case for the continuum version .
The real strength of automaticity theories lies in their ability
to capture priming situations. Recall that priming required an
additional assumption for the speed-of-processing account. In
contrast, it is at the very heart of the automaticity explanation,
as is evident in reading Posner and Snyder , for example.
Priming occurs through the automatic spread of activation, essentially the same mechanism used to explain interference.
Thus, orthographic/acoustic effects (Result 2) should result
from automatic activation of parts of the relevant and irrelevant
response words. In like manner, semantic effects should be evident, particularly given that Posner and Snyder aimed to explain lexical facilitation with the same mechanism as Stroop
interference . As the
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
irrelevant words become more color related, they automatically
activate more common features with the relevant ink colors,
resulting in interference (Result 3). Primes should be able to
accomplish this in a prime-target procedure (Result 4), and
previous trials should be able to do it in a continuous-trials
procedure (Result 8). Set overlap should also influence the extent of automatic activation of competing features on any given
trial through priming (Result 14). Finally, facilitation from congruent dimensions ought to occur (Result 5). In sum, automatic
priming is the most "natural" consequence of the automaticity
Also a straightforward outgrowth of the automaticity account is the fact that practice affects interference (Results 12).
Practice can also be seen as encompassing the changes that
occur with the development of reading skill (Result 16) and with
increasing language proficiency in bilinguals (Result 18). Automatic processes (e.g., reading words) have to be learned; the
more automatic a process becomes with practice, the more it is
capable of causing interference with a less automatic process.
This also helps to explain apparent instances of reversed Stroop
interference (Result 11): When a normally more automatic process associated with one stimulus dimension is altered by an
experimental manipulation, the normally less automatic process associated with the other dimension may become relatively
more automatic. In such an instance, the direction of interference reverses.
The modality effect—that interference is reduced when the
response mode is switched from oral to manual (Result 13)—
makes sense because, although it may be quite automatic to
process a word for oral output, it may be less automatic when
the required response is in some other modality. Of course, this
is an additional assumption, but not an unreasonable one.
The effects of SOA (Result 10) are much less nettlesome for
the automaticity view, which does not hinge on processing
speed. Indeed, the fact that SOA manipulation has little impact
on word reading fits with the automaticity view. Unfortunately,
this advantage is offset by the fact that tests of automaticity are
less direct than tests of speed. Probably for this reason, Stroop
researchers have not measured the automaticity of the two dimensions directly .
Like the speed of processing view, the automaticity account
would predict a greater role for the left hemisphere (Result 17),
because reading is what is becoming automated. There is also
nothing in this account that predicts sex differences (Result 15).
The remaining three results in Appendix B pose more serious
threats to the automaticity account. First, as long as both dimensions of a display are perceivable simultaneously, it might
seem that whether they are separate or integrated should not
matter very much. In either event, once seen, a word would be
processed automatically. Yet integration versus separation does
matter (Result 6); generally interference effects are substantially
larger in the integrated version of the task .
Because automatic processes do not require attention, strategies should have little effect on their execution. Yet particular
mixtures of congruent and incongruent trials alter the degree of
interference (Result 7), as can cues about what to expect on an
upcoming trial (Result 9). These straightforward attentional-allocation effects run against the grain of the automaticity idea.
Perhaps the best illustration of this is the study by Kahneman
and Chajczyk in which they observed diluted Stroop
effects when irrelevant additional words occurred in the display.
How could reading a word, which is claimed to require no resources, draw resources away from color naming? Why should
an extra, unrelated word draw away further resources?
These questions are not resolved by the automaticity
hypothesis.
It seems, then, that automaticity fails to provide a comprehensive account of the Stroop effect. However, this failure may
apply only to the strong, all-or-none view of automaticity. Kahneman and Chajczyk described a process as strongly
automatic if it is unaffected by attentional-allocation strategy. A
process is partly automatic if it can occur largely without attention, but nevertheless is affected by attention. They suggested
that the partly automatic designation is more appropriate for
the Stroop situation, leaving room for attentional-allocation
strategies to exert some influence.
MacLeod and Dunbar reemphasized the view of automaticity as a continuum, not a dichotomy. This position harks
back to earlier explanations of the Stroop effect by reinstating
learning history as a critical element in interference. Better
learned processes will be more automatic and will lead to such
consequences as interference. Although response-speed improvements may also be an outgrowth of practice or experience,
speed per se will not be the important factor. A well-learned but
slow process could interfere with a less well-learned but faster
process because interference arises throughout the course of
processing, not just at some late response stage.
Unfortunately, Stroop experiments rarely have provided any
independent measure of automaticity. The specificity of the relative speed-of-processing view allowed it to be put to stringent
test (and to fail). To provide a reasonable test of automaticity
views, we must be able to identify a priori which processes are
more automatic so that conclusions about interference asymmetries are not entirely ad hoc. Studies carefully controlling
learning history and using methodologies such as the secondary-task procedure hold promise in this regard. At present, automaticity accounts remain potentially viable, but in need of
greater specification and more stringent test.
Perceptual Encoding
As Dyer noted, "Most of these explanations
have considered the phenomenon in terms of response competition." Such views are often referred to as "late selection" accounts, in that the conflict occurs late in processing at a response stage as opposed to "early selection" at encoding, for
example. Preference for late-selection accounts has been consistent throughout the history of Stroop research; relative speed
and automaticity are just the two most prevalent examples.
However, it is worthwhile to consider the early selection idea.
The best known version of early selection was put forward by
Hock and Egeth : the perceptual-encoding account. The
basic idea is that perceptual encoding of ink-color information
is slowed by incompatible information from a color word as
opposed to a neutral control. Hock and Egeth presented
evidence from a short-term memory scanning task, which they
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
saw as incompatible with a late, response-conflict account. Using oral yes-no responses (to avoid a semantic relation with the
printed words), they suggested that color-related words are recognized earlier and thereby more likely to distract from encoding ink color.
However, Dalrymple-Alford and Azkoul and Dyer
 questioned their interpretation, arguing that Hock and
Egeth failed to distinguish between identification and
covert naming, and that their conclusions rested on accepting
the null hypothesis. The only other finding consistent with the
Hock and Egeth position—that of Tecce and Dimartino
 that words spoken at the time of ink-color encoding can
either facilitate or inhibit that encoding—was also criticized by
Dyer as relying on a questionable assumption about the rates of processing word versus color information. The perceptual encoding account has not been very prominent since then. At any rate, it would have trouble with several
of the key results in Appendix B (e.g., Results 7 and 14 among
others). Processing subsequent to encoding definitely seems to
matter to the Stroop effect.
Parallel Models: Accruing Evidence Toward a Decision
Virtually all earlier theories of the Stroop task were sequential. Information was encoded from each dimension and then
analyzed, and then a response was produced, perhaps with an
additional disambiguation stage. Processing at one stage had to
be complete (or very close to complete) before the next stage
could begin. Even if parallel processing did appear in a model,
it was limited to occurring within a stage; stage transitions were
sequential. Thus, Morton and Chambers saw processing
within the identification stage as parallel, but transition to the
response stage as sequential. Interference occurred at the entry
to the response stage.
In recent years, models have begun to relax this strict sequential emphasis, discarding the idea of a limited-capacity response stage . Capacity limitations seen as system-resource limits lead to quite different conceptions than did
limitations seen as stage-specific bottlenecks cast his model of the Stroop effect
as a decision process gathering evidence. Evidence accumulates
over time until a response threshold is reached; evidence from
each dimension is processed at a rate governed by its weight.
Two weights determine each dimension's contribution to the
decision (in terms of evidence): a stable, automatic weight and a
flexible, strategic attentional weight. Total evidence at threshold is the sum of all evidence from all dimensions. If the evidence from other dimensions is consistent with the desired dimension, this reduces the threshold and hence the processing
time for the desired dimension. However, if irrelevant dimensions provide evidence conflicting with the desired dimension,
response speed will be slowed. The extent of intrusion of another dimension will be a function of its weights; those with
larger weights will have a greater impact on the composite decision process.
Logan's model provides a reasonable prototype for such parallel models. In general, evidence is accrued for a response without requiring a "response stage." Instead, interference arises
because of the amount of priming received by competing responses (i.e., the amount of evidence accrued for them). This
interference occurs during the gathering of evidence, a continuous process. Some models assume independent evidence gathering along the dimensions, but many allow interaction , greatly increasing the ability of these models to capture data.
Nevertheless, two problems arise in Logan's model (and presumably in similar parallel models). First, the model appears to
predict symmetrical facilitation and interference; Logan certainly portrayed the model that way in 1980.10 Yet facilitation is
virtually always substantially smaller than interference. Logan's
model can accommodate this by assuming that equal changes
in activation for the congruent and incongruent conditions, represented geometrically as equal angles of departure from the
neutral condition, intersect the response threshold at different
angles because the point of origin is not perpendicular to the
response threshold .
Note that such a model still must predict that the same manipulations will affect the magnitudes of both facilitation and interference, a prediction definitely worthy of empirical test.
The second problem with Logan's model is familiar: Asymmetrical interference for color naming versus word reading is
explained by differential time of availability of the evidence
from the two dimensions. As Logan put it,
"sources available sooner can influence (speeded) decisions
about sources that become available later, but not vice versa."
This is tantamount to a relative speed-of-processing assumption, which I have already argued against. How serious a problem is this for this class of models?
As it turns out, this is not a necessary consequence of such
models, particularly those allowing interaction across dimensions. To illustrate with the bulletin-board metaphor, the provisional evidence from every dimension is continuously updated
on a bulletin board visible to all processors and studied by the
decision maker. Although the desired dimension may be closer
to complete processing on a given trial, partial evidence still
will be present from other dimensions and will contribute to
the composite decision. Thus, even the "early returns" from a
dimension being processed more slowly can influence output
based on a dimension processed relatively quickly. There is still
a speed element in this account (e.g., a very slow process might
not return any evidence early enough to have any effect), but the
strict speed of processing assumption need not hold. Indeed,
the variability in finishing times inherent in this stochastic representation also permits deviations from strict speed of processing predictions.
Logan's model handles the major data in Appendix B quite
well. He would expect many analogs of the Stroop effect when
multiple dimensions are being processed in parallel (Result 1).
Because evidence would be collected at different levels of analysis, both orthographic (Result 2) and semantic (Result 3) influ-
10 Jonathan Cohen, Kevin Dunbar, and Gordon Logan all independently pointed this out to me. The possible solution offered here was
provided in a letter from Gordon Logan.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
COLIN M. MACLEOD
ences should make their presence known. This implicates a
greater role for the linguistic processing of the left hemisphere
(Result 17), but without any anticipated sex differences (Result 15).
Prior activation of some information should provide a head
start to the evidence-gathering process, increasing the weight of
that dimension (Result 4). Facilitation follows naturally: Evidence collected from different dimensions points to the same
response and makes the decision easier (Result 5). Perceptual
integration should make it difficult to assign differential
weights to dimensions, whereas separation should make it easier (Result 6). Mixing congruent and incongruent trials (Result
7) should also disrupt the assigning of weights from trial to trial
because sometimes it will be helpful to incorporate information from other dimensions and sometimes it will be a hindrance. The logic is similar for successive trial effects (Result 8)
and for advance cueing (Result 9), both of which will cause
temporary adjustments of dimensional weights.
A reverse Stroop effect (Result 11) occurs when some manipulation of the usual situation changes the direction of interference. In Logan's model, the relative weights of the two dimensions would also shift, as might the speed of gathering evidence
for each. Practice (Result 12) should also affect the priority of
each dimension and hence its weight. Once again, the development of reading (Result 16) and of language ability (Result 18)
can be seen as instances of naturally occurring practice. Because evidence is being gathered for one of a set of possible
responses, the overlap of this set across the two or more dimensions would be important (Result 14).
Only the SOA and the response modality effects do not flow
easily from the Logan model, although they can be handled.
The word-reading task might not be affected by SOA (Result 10)
because it is difficult to alter the weight of the evidence drawn
from the word; it is already highly weighted in the standard
Stroop task. Apparent perceptual integration may also play a
role in the largest interference being seen at the shortest SOAs.
As for response mode (Result 13), less evidence may be required
for a manual response than for an oral one, although this speculation should be tested.
With some fine tuning, Logan's model can encompass the
existing data. However, parallel models expressed only at the
conceptual level tend to have more "free parameters" than do
sequential models, which may be part of why they appear to be
more successful. What is required is a parallel model expressed
formally, so that its predictions can be tested and evaluated.
A Parallel Distributed Processing Model
The most exciting recent development in models of cognition
is the parallel distributed processing framework . Cohen,
Dunbar, and McClelland used this framework to build a
model of the Stroop effect. It incorporates many of the virtues
of automaticity and relative speed of processing but few of the
liabilities. Furthermore, it is quite a natural extension of the
kinds of ideas embodied in the parallel models just described.
At the core of the Cohen et al. model is the idea that
processing occurs in the system through activation moving
along pathways of different strength. Consequently, relative
speed-of-processing predictions need not always hold; it is
strength, not speed, that is basic. Nor is strong automaticity
appropriate; a gradient of automaticity makes sense wherein degree of automaticity is a function of the strength of each pathway.
Processing is performed in a system comprised of interconnected modules. Within each module are continuously operating elementary processing units responsible for accepting inputs from other units and providing output. Knowledge is represented as a pattern of activation over units, which can change
with time in a continuous, nonlinear manner. Processing occurs by the spread of activation along connections that exist
both within modules and between modules. For simplification,
Cohen et al. assumed that information flows in one direction—bottom up—from input to output.
When the model is instructed to perform a task, it selects a
pathway that includes some or all of the units in one or more
modules. The set of connections in this pathway specifies its
strength, and the choice of pathway therefore determines both
the speed and accuracy of processing. Individual units can be
members of more than one pathway, allowing interactions between processes when their pathways intersect. Thus, if two
pathways are active simultaneously and produce conflicting activation at their intersection, interference results; if they produce coinciding activation, facilitation results. Such intersections can occur anywhere in processing, and there can be multiple intersections. This realizes the essential details of the Logan
model. An important difference from Logan's model is the nonlinearity of the processing units, permitting asymmetry between facilitation and interference.
One of the nice features of this model is its incorporation of a
clear role for attention. Attention tunes, or modulates, the operation of processing units in a pathway. However, attention accomplishes this tuning simply as another source of information
would; it has no privileged status. This can be seen in Figure 2,
which presents a minimalist view of the model.
In this simple case, there are two pathways—one for ink-color
information and one for word information—that share a re-
Output Units
Hidden Units
Input Units
greenColor
INK COLOR N—frig Reading
TASK DEMANDS
Figure 2. A parallel distributed processing model of the Stroop effect
 .
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
THE STROOP EFFECT
sponse mechanism. Each pathway has a set of input units, each
of which connects to every intermediate unit. In turn, each
intermediate unit connects to all output units. Processing begins with the input units and feeds upward to the response
units, one of which will eventually accrue sufficient activation
to exceed threshold and produce a response. The only other
element is the task-specific attentional units attached to the
task-appropriate intermediate units and capable of tuning attention by gating information flow.
Cohen et al. represented each potential input and output as a single unit in the model, although they pointed out that
this one-to-one mapping is not essential. Like Logan's, the
model works by accruing evidence forward through the system,
and the level of activation of a unit is a weighted sum of the
inputs reaching it. Learning occurs by changing connection
strengths based on minimizing mismatch between the desired
response and the actual response produced. Successive cycles,
or trials, allow these strength adjustments to occur. In this way,
the network can be trained to produce particular responses
under particular sets of circumstances. Furthermore, their
learning algorithm shows the power function widely seen in
automaticity research.
A response occurs when a particular output unit's threshold
is exceeded. A unit's response strength is the ratio of its activation to total activation. Attention, also a pattern of activation
over some set of units, picks the pathway that determines the
response, based on task instructions. Ordinarily, intermediate
units rest near zero activation, but relevant attentional connections (stemming from task demands) push these units toward a
higher resting state, where they are more responsive to inputs. It
is through this kind of priming that attention tunes pathways.
Cohen et al. simulated a number of key results, including not only the basic Stroop asymmetry, but also the fact that
interference usually exceeds facilitation , the SOA effects of Glaser and Glaser , the
practice effects of MacLeod and Dunbar , the responseset effects of Klein , and other more general patterns such
as the power law with practice and a reasonable response-time distribution . Although there
are problems (e.g., when the word precedes the color and the
task is to name the color, the word locks in and produces massive interference regardless of SOA), the model fares very well.
What is particularly compelling is that they set out to deal primarily with the MacLeod and Dunbar training studies, yet the
model does a fine job of reproducing a diverse group of results,
even in instances where speed of processing and strong automaticity have made incorrect predictions.
The Cohen et al. model provides a promising avenue
for testing ideas about attention, and is eminently testable in its
own right. As with the Logan model, all 18 of the results in
Appendix B are readily accommodated. All that is required are
the notions of relative strength and attentional tuning of
strength of connections between units in various pathways,
coupled with nonlinearity of processing units. That it is a functioning model that makes explicit the underlying assumptions
is surely a mark in its favor. Of course, it would be most convincing to simulate all 18 critical results and to derive novel (and
correct) predictions, but the model's initial success is still impressive. No doubt it will be put to more extensive test.
How different is the parallel distributed processing model
from earlier explanations? My impression is that it amalgamates the speed-of-processing and continuum-of-automaticity
ideas. Like Logan's account, it rests on parallel processing, but
defeats the speed problem by emphasizing strength of connections. It also makes clear that strength determines the extent of
automaticity of a process. Finally, it recognizes the importance
of response processes in the Stroop task without requiring a
limited-capacity response channel. In this way, the model successfully retains the powerful ideas of earlier explanations without being saddled with their flaws."
The Final Word
The first five sections set out the data base to be explained.
Then the final section surveyed existing theories, evaluating
them against this evidence. The two predominant ones—relative speed of processing and automaticity—were seen as inadequate. Ultimately, a new theoretical framework relying on parallel processing was considered. This is a rather different perspective than the one put forth by Dyer that is still widely
accepted. It will be interesting to see how such theories fare
when put to empirical test in upcoming years. I strongly suspect that the Stroop effect will continue to be a challenging
phenomenon for cognitive psychologists to explain for many
years to come. For now, I look forward to the progress that will
be examined in the subsequent review of the Stroop literature
some time early in the next millennium.
" Another connectionist model appeared subsequent to the final
version of this review. Phaf, van der Heijden, and Hudson use an
architectural property—direct connections between compatible stimuli and responses—instead of the differential weights favored by Cohen et al. to explain the Stroop effect.