PacketScore: Statistics-based Overload Control
against Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks
Yoohwan Kim* Wing Cheong Lau* Mooi Choo Chuah** H. Jonathan Chao
EECS Department Bell Labs CSE Department ECE Department
Case Western Reserve University Lucent Technologies Lehigh University Polytechnic University
Cleveland, OH Holmdel, NJ Bethlehem, PA Brooklyn, NY
Abstract— Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is a
critical threat to the Internet. Currently, most ISPs merely rely
on manual detection of DDoS attacks after which offline finegrain traffic analysis is performed and new filtering rules are
installed manually to the routers. The need of human
intervention results in poor response time and fails to protect the
victim before severe damages are realized. The expressiveness of
existing filtering rules is also too limited and rigid when
compared to the ever-evolving characteristics of the attacking
packets. Recently, we have proposed a DDoS defense architecture
that supports distributed detection and automated on-line attack
characterization. In this paper, we will focus on the design and
evaluation of the automated attack characterization, selective
packet discarding and overload control portion of the proposed
architecture. Our key idea is to prioritize packets based on a perpacket score which estimates the legitimacy of a packet given the
attribute values it carries. Special considerations are made to
ensure that the scheme is amenable to high-speed hardware
implementation. Once the score of a packet is computed, we
perform score-based selective packet discarding where the
dropping threshold is dynamically adjusted based on (1) the score
distribution of recent incoming packets and (2) the current level
of overload of the system.
Keywords - System design, Simulations, Denial-of-Service
Attack, Security, Overload Control, Selective Packet Discarding,
Traffic characterization
MOTIVATION
One of the major threats to cyber security is Distributed
Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack in which the victim network
element(s) are bombarded with high volume of fictitious,
attacking packets originated from a large number of machines.
The aim of the attack is to overload the victim and render it
incapable of performing normal transactions. DDoS attacks
can be categorized into end-point attacks and infrastructure
attacks. In an end-point attack, the victim can be an individual
end-host or, more typically, an entire customer stub-network
served by an Internet Service Provider (ISP). In an
infrastructure attack, high volume of attacking packets are
forced through a port of an ISP router to create one or more
choke-points within the ISP infrastructure based on the
knowledge of the routing pattern within the domain. Currently,
most ISPs merely rely on manual detection of DDoS attacks.
Once an attack is reported, an offline fine-grain traffic analysis
is performed by a subject-matter expert to identify and
characterize the attacking packets. New filtering rules/ access
control list are then constructed and installed manually to the
routers according to the outcome of attack characterization.
The need of human intervention results in poor response time
and fails to protect the victim before severe damages are
realized. This procedure also lacks adaptability and renders the
system vulnerable towards fast-varying DDoS attacks. Further,
the expressiveness of existing rule-based filtering is too
limited as it requires an explicit specification of all types of
packets to be discarded. As the difference between legitimate
and attacking packets become increasingly subtle, the number
of required filtering rules as well as the number of packet
attributes included in each rule explode. Increase in rule-set
complexity also poses serious scalability problems for highspeed implementation of rule-based filtering.
Recently, the DDoS problem has attracted much attention
from the research community. So far, the focus has been on
the design of traffic marking and traceback protocols [Be01,
Pa01, Sa01, Sn01] which enable downstream routers to
determine and notify the upstream routers of the attacking
packets. Most of the work emphasizes the backward
compatibility of protocol support for traceback under the
existing Internet infrastructure. Once the upstream sources of
identified,
mechanisms [Io02, Ya02] are used to contain the damage of
the attack. However, the effectiveness of such an approach is
contingent upon the ability to extract a precise characterization
of the attacking packets. Without such characterization, the
legitimate traffic within the suspicious flows will be equally
affected by the pushback mechanism. While there has been
recent work by the data-mining research community to
recognize intrusion patterns using offline machine-learning
approaches [Le98, Ma99], these schemes are mostly offlineoriented. An exception to this trend is the D-WARD approach
[Mi02], which does perform limited statistical traffic profiling
at the edge of the networks to perform online detection of new
types of DDoS attacks. By monitoring the nominal perdestination type traffic arrival and departure rate of TCP,
UDP, ICMP packets, as well as any abnormal asymmetrical
behavior of the two-way traffic at the edge router connecting
to a stub-network, D-WARD aims at stopping DDoS attacks
near their sources, i.e., the ingress routers. While such "sourceside" tackling approach is attractive in terms of having less
demanding operating-speed and scalability requirements, its
* Corresponding Authors: , 
** The work was done while Professor Chuah was with Bell Labs.
viability hinges on the voluntary cooperation of majority of
ingress network administrators Internet-wide. In theory, one
can circumvent this deployment problem by applying the D-
WARD approach to the backbone network. However, in order
to realize such a backbone approach, one must address the key
scalability issues such as the large number of targets required
to be protected and the high operating speed within the
backbone network. This is indeed the emphasis of our
proposed scheme. There are also a small set of commercial
products [Mazu, Rive] which advertise limited support of
statistics-based adaptive filtering techniques. However, most
of these solutions do not fully automate packet differentiation
or filter enforcement. Instead, they only recommend a set of
binary filter rules to the network administrator to be installed
in their routers or firewalls. The recommended rule set is often
too complex to be comprehensible, let alone to be debugged or
modified. The technical details of their statistics-based
adaptive filtering schemes are not available to the public. The
performance of the schemes, especially in terms of scalability
and impact on legitimate traffic is not clear either. The
situation is well summarized by a quote from a recent article
on anti-DoS device review [Fo01]:
"In the end, we felt as though we were left playing Russian
roulette when it came to installing the recommended filters."
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section
II, we provide an overview of the entire PacketScore DDoS
defense architecture. In Section III, we focus on the design and
implementation of the intelligent packet differentiation,
selective discarding and overload control portion of our
proposal, which is the main subject of this paper. In
particular, we will concentrate on a standalone implementation
of these schemes, which is directly applicable for protecting
infrastructure DDoS attacks. Due to limited space, the details
of their distributed implementation are beyond the scope of
this paper, and will be the subject of a sequel of this paper. In
Section IV, we evaluate the performance of the standalone
packet differentiation/ discarding scheme. The paper is
concluded in Section V with a list of future investigation
directions.
OVERVIEW OF THE PACKETSCORE APPROACH
Recently, we have proposed a defense scheme based on
distributed
characterization [La03]. The proposed scheme consists of the
following 3 phases:
Detect the onset of an attack and identify the victim by
monitoring four key traffic statistics of each protected
target while keeping minimum per-target states.
Differentiate between legitimate and attacking packets
destined towards the victim based on a readilycomputed, Bayesian-theoretic metric of each packet.
The metric is the so-called "Conditional Legitimate
Probability" (CLP).
Discard packets selectively by comparing the CLP of
each packet with a dynamic threshold. The threshold is
adjusted according to (1) the distribution of CLP of all
suspicious packets and (2) the congestion level of the
We name our scheme the PacketScore approach because
CLP can be viewed as a score which estimates the legitimacy
of a suspicious packet. By taking a score-based filtering
approach, we avoid the problems of conventional binary rulebased filtering discussed in Section I. The score-based
approach also enables the prioritization of different types of
suspicious packets. It is much more difficult, if not impossible,
for rule-based filtering to support such prioritization. The
ability to prioritize becomes even more important when a full
characterization of the attacking packets becomes infeasible.
By linking the CLP discard threshold to the congestion level of
the victim, our approach allows the victim system to
opportunistically accept more potentially legitimate traffic as
its capacity permits. In contrast, once a rule-based filtering
scheme is configured to discard a specific type of packets, it
does so regardless of the victim utilization.
For end-point attacks, we employ a scalable, distributed
attack detection process using Bloom filter/ leaky bucket
arrays (BFLBA) similar to those proposed by [Fe01, Es02] to
monitor key traffic statistics of each protected target. The
BFLBA's allow us to simultaneously monitor such statistics
for a large number of protected targets while keeping minimal
per-target state information. Distributed attack detection is
realized via a DDoS control server (DCS) which correlates
and consolidates possible incidents reported by routers
residing along a security perimeter. We refer such routers as
Detecting-Differentiating-Discarding routers (3D-R). Once an
attack victim is identified, the 3D-Rs collaborate with the DCS
to perform a distributed, online characterization of the
attacking traffic by comparing the fine-grain characteristics of
the suspicious traffic with a nominal traffic profile of the
victim. The result enables each 3D-R to compute a "score",
i.e., the CLP, for each suspicious packet at wire-speed which
ranks the likelihood of the packet being an attacking packet,
given the attribute values it carries, using a Bayesian-theoretic
approach. Based on a dynamic thresholding mechanism
against such score, the 3D-Rs perform selective packet
discarding and overload control for the victim in a distributed
manner. The DCS coordinates this distributed overload
control process by adjusting the threshold dynamically based
on the arrival rate of suspicious traffic and score distributions
reported by different 3D-Rs. Fig. 1 depicts the support of
distributed detection and overload control by a set of 3D-Rs
implementation of the intelligent packet differentiation,
selective discarding and overload control portion of our
proposal, which is the main subject of this paper. In
particular, we will concentrate on a standalone implementation
of these schemes, which is directly applicable for protecting
infrastructure DDoS attacks.
3D-R : Detection, Differenciation, Discard Router
DCS : DDos Control Server
R: Regular Routers
ISP Security
Victim's Stub Network
Stub Network 1
DDoS Attack
DDoS Attack
DDoS Control
Information
Figure 1: Deployment of 3D-Rs and DCSs to tackle DDoS
DETAILED PACKETSCORE METHODOLOGIES
In this section, we first discuss the design issues as well as
implementation details related to the packet differentiation,
selective packet discarding and overload control the proposed
A. Packet Differentiation via Fine-grain Traffic Profile
Comparison
Once a DDoS attack is detected, the next step is to
distinguish the attacking packets from the legitimate ones
amongst the suspicious traffic. Our approach is to perform
online profiling of the suspicious traffic and compare the
findings with the nominal traffic profile of the victim. The
viability of this approach is based on the premise that there are
some traffic characteristics that are inherently stable during
normal network operations of a target network, in the absence
of DDoS attacks.
A disproportional increase in the relative frequency of a
particular packet attribute value is an indication that the
attacking packets also share the same value for that particular
attribute. The greater the disproportional increase, the stronger
the indication. The more "abnormal" attribute values a packet
possesses, the higher the probability that the packet is an
attacking packet. For example, if it is found via that the
suspicious packets contain abnormally high percentage of (1)
UDP packets and (2) packets of size S and (3) packets with
TTL value T, then UDP packets of size S and TTL value T
destined to the DDoS victim should be treated as prime
suspects and given lower priority upon selective packet
discarding during overload.
Candidate packet attributes considered to be used for
traffic profiling include: the marginal distributions of the
fraction1 of recently arrived packets having various (1) IP
1 Profiling against relative frequency of different attribute values
(instead of absolute packet arrival rates) helps to alleviate the
difficulties caused by the expected fluctuation of nominal traffic
arrival rates due to time-of-the-day and day-of-the-week behavior.
protocol-type values, (2) packet size, (3) server2 port numbers,
(4) source/ destination IP prefixes3, (5) Time-to-Live (TTL)
values, (6) IP/TCP header length4, (7) TCP flag patterns. We
are also interested in the fraction of packets which (8) use IP
fragmentation and (9) bear incorrect IP/TCP/UDP checksums.
It is worthwhile to consider the joint distribution of the
fraction of packets having various combinations of (10)
packet-size and protocol-type, (11) server port number and
protocol-type, as well as (12) source IP prefix and TTL value.
To validate our claim of the relatively “invariant” nature of
the distribution of the above packet attributes, we have
conducted extensive statistical analysis on real-life Internet
traces collected from the traffic archive of the WIDE-project
[WIDE]. Fig. 2(a)-(d) show the time variation of the
distribution of various packet attributes values observed from a
moderately loaded wide area network link. For each attribute,
the relative frequency of its values are computed every 10
minutes for the period between May 10, 1999 8:00pm and May
11, 2:00pm for a total of 108 non-overlapping periods. Fig. 2(a)
shows the time-variation of the distribution of TTL values. In
particular, the ends of the error-bar correspond to the maximum
and minimum fraction observed for the given TTL value over
the aforementioned 18-hour interval and the black-dot
represents the average. The corresponding time-varying
distributions for protocol-type, packet-size, TCP-flag pattern,
server port number and 16-bit source IP prefix are shown in
Fig. 2 (b)-(f) respectively. Notice from Fig. 2 that while the
fraction of an attribute value does vary over the 18-hour period,
the variation is always within a few percentage of the total
number of packets arrived over a 10-minute window. Due to
the overwhelming volume of DDoS attack packets compared to
normal ones, the formers are expected to increase the fraction
of particular attribute values they carry by more than a few
percentage and change the overall distribution substantially.
Furthermore, the variability of nominal attribute value
distribution can be substantially reduced if hourly time-of-theday profiles are used.
One may argue that it is relatively straightforward for a
sophisticated attacker to learn the approximated distribution of
some attributes, e.g. protocol-type, TCP-flag pattern and
packet-size, based on publicly available data on Internet traffic
characteristics, and thus be able to generate the attribute
distributions for the attacking packets accordingly to
circumvent our profile-based differentiation scheme.
2 We employ the heuristics of taking the server port number to be
the minimum of the source and destination port numbers carried by
the packet. This eliminate the need of identifying whether the packet
is client-bound or server-bound. Also, since client port number is
usually selected in random by the client operating system, it does not
meet the “invariant” criteria to be used for profiling.
3 In our study, we have used the 16-bit IP prefix as an
approximation of the IP subnet. In practice, we can extract the actual
prefix-length of the subnet from routing tables and/or route-server
databases.
4 This is to detect possible abuse of IP/TCP options.
Figure 2 (a): Time variation of TTL value distribution
9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73 77 81 85 89
Protocol Type
Figure 2 (b): Time variation of Protocol Type distribution
Packet Size/10 (bytes)
Figure 2 (c): Time variation of Packet-size distribution
Value of 6-bit TCP flag pattern
Figure 2 (d): Time variation of 6-bit TCP flag pattern distribution
(e.g. SYN = 000010 = 2 ; ACK = 010000 = 16)
Server Port
Figure 2 (e): Server Port distribution
16-bit IP prefix
Figure 2 (f): Source IP prefix distribution
Figure 2: Time Variation of Packet Attribute Values Distribution
Note however that distributions of other attributes such as
TTL and source IP-prefixes, and to a lesser extent, server-port
distribution, are expected to be site-dependent (or link/port
dependent) and thus more difficult for an outside attacker to
collect such information. For instance, it is quite difficult for
an outsider to determine the joint-distribution of source-IPprefix and the TTL value for a given site. As long as there
exists profiling information which is known only to the
site/network-operator but not to the attacker, our scheme can
use it as the information edge to differentiate among attacking
and legitimate packets.
1) Conditional Legitimate Probability
In this section, we formalize the notion of conditional
legitimate probability of a suspicious packet which measures
the likelihood of the packet being a legitimate (instead of an
attacking) one given the attribute values it possesses. Consider
all the packets destined towards a DDoS attack target. Each
discrete-valued
attributes
A, B, C, .... For example, A can be the protocol-type, B can
be the packet-size, C
can be the TTL values etc.
JP A B C L be the joint probability mass function of
attribute values under normal operations. The probability of a
legitimate
(attacking)
a, b, c, ... for attributes A, B, C,..., is given by
respectively). Similarly, we use
A B C L to denote the
joint probability mass function of packet attributes measured
during an attack. Define the conditional legitimate probability
(CLP) of packet p as:
Prob( is a legitmate packet |
Attributes , , ,... of packet are equal to
,respectively)
Assume that there are
N packets in total within a
measurement interval among which
N are from legitimate
N are attacking ones. Using standard Bayesian
argument, we have:
.......................
N JP A a B
N JP A a B
N JP A a B
N JP A a B
..................
ρ ) is the nominal (currently measured)
utilization of the system, respectively. Here we have used
ρ to estimate
N . Observe that, since
constant for all packets within the same observation period,
one can even ignore its contribution when comparing and
prioritizing packets based on their CLP values as long as the
packets arrive within the same observation period. If we
assume the attributes to be independent of each other, Eq.(1)
can be rewritten as,
............
P X ) is the marginal probability mass
function of packet attribute X under nominal (currently
measured) traffic conditions, respectively. To achieve a
compromise between profile storage requirement and the need
to capture important inter-attribute dependency, we use joint
distribution(s) for the strongly-correlated attributes while
using marginal distribution(s) for the remaining ones. The
CLP is therefore expressed in the form of a product of
marginal and joint probability mass function values. In Section
IV, we will compare the performance impact and storage
requirements for different combinations of marginal/ joint
distributions.
2) Variation of Nominal Profiles
In the above formulation, we have assumed that the
nominal profiles, i.e.,
JP A B C L and
nP X 's are
constant for ease of illustration. In general, the nominal traffic
profile is a function of time which exhibits periodical time-ofthe-day, e.g., diurnal, day-of-the-week variations as well as
long term trend changes. While long-term profile changes can
be handled via periodical re-calibration using standard timeseries forecast and extrapolation techniques [Br00], the daily
or weekly variation between successive re-calibration may
require time-of-the-day, day-of-the-week specific traffic
profiles. To reduce storage and maintenance requirement of a
large set of time-specific nominal profiles, our approach is to
use a high percentile, say 95-percentile, of the fraction of each
attribute value observed amongst the multiple time-of-the-day
nominal profiles as the corresponding reference value. In
Section IV, we will investigate the performance impact due to
inherent variation of nominal traffic profile.
3) Managing Nominal Traffic Profiles using Iceberg-style
Histograms
We expect that a nominal traffic profile of each target to be
consisted of a set of marginal and joint distributions of various
packet attributes. This profiling information will be stored in
the form of normalized histograms of one or higher
dimensions. Due to the number of attributes to be
incorporated in profile (in the order of ten or more) and the
large number of possible values of each attribute (as much as
tens of thousands or more, e.g., in the case of possible source
IP prefixes), an efficient data structure is required to
implement such histograms. This is particularly important for
the case of distributed overload control because traffic profiles
have to be exchanged between the 3D-Rs and the DCS.
Towards this end, we propose to use iceberg-style histograms
[Ba02]. By "iceberg-style", it means that the histogram only
includes those entries in the population which appear more
frequently than a preset percentage threshold, say x%. This
guarantees that there are no more than 100/x entries in the
histogram. For entries which are absent from the iceberg-style
histogram, we will use the upper bound, i.e., x% as their
relative frequency. Due to the vast dimensions of joint
distribution functions, an iceberg-style implementation is
particularly important. With iceberg-style histograms, a finegrain per-target profile can be kept to a manageable size. As
we will demonstrate in Section IV, in practice, most packet
attributes are dominated by a small set of attribute values. As
such, the actual number of non-null values, the so-called
number of icebergs, in the corresponding iceberg histograms
are much smaller than the maximum bound given above. More
importantly, one-pass iceberg-style histogram maintainance/
updates can be implemented efficiently in hardware, e.g. by
applying a two-stage pipelined approximation of the scheme
proposed in [Ka03]. Tradeoffs between iceberg-threshold,
histogram storage requirement and packet differentiation
performance are discussed Section IV.
To handle infrastructure attacks, each 3D-R stores and
maintains the nominal traffic profile of each of its egress ports.
Since there is a limited number of ports per 3D-R, this should
not be an excessive burden. For the case of end-point attacks,
a large number of nominal profiles, namely, one per protected
target, has to be stored and maintained. By having a DCS to
coordinate
distributed
fine-grain
profiling,
maintenance of per-target nominal profiles is offloaded to the
DCS. Upon the detection of an end-point attack, each 3D-R
simply measures the fine-grain profile of traffic destined
towards the victim and forwards the local measurements to the
DCS for aggregation and comparison with their nominal
counterparts. In fact, the same distributed measurement and
aggregation mechanism is used to establish the nominal traffic
profile of each end-point target at during initial and periodical
calibrations5. The management of nominal profiles of different
target end-points within a domain can be further partitioned
among multiple DCSs for enhanced scalability.
4) Real-time Traffic Profiling and Per-packet CLP
Computation
According to Eqs. (1) and (2), the real-time per-packet
processing of a naive implementation of the CLP computation
seems formidable: The current packet attribute distributions
have to be updated as a result of the arriving packet. The CLP
for the incoming packet can be computed only after the packet
attribute distributions have been updated. To make wire-speed
per-packet CLP computation possible, we decouple the update
of packet attribute distribution from that of CLP computation
to allow CLP computation and packet attribute distribution to
be conducted in parallel, but at different time-scales. With
such decoupling, the CLP computation is based on a snapshot
of "recently" measured histograms while every packet arrival
(unless additional sampling is employed) will incur changes to
the current packet attribute histograms. To be more specific, a
frozen set of recent histograms is used to generate a set of
"scorebooks" which maps a specific combination of attribute
values to its corresponding "score". The scorebooks are
updated periodically in a time-scale longer than the per-packet
arrival time-scale, or upon detection of significant change of
independence and using the logarithmic version of Eq. (2) as
shown below,
5 In practice, an ISP may choose to perform comprehensive
nominal traffic profiling for the set of "premium-paying" stubnetworks only. For the rest of the end-points, the ISP may choose
their profiles from a set of standard templates based on their business
nature, ingress access speed as well as their size.
we can construct a scorebook for each attribute that maps
different values of the attribute to a specific partial score. For
instance, the partial score of a packet with attribute A equal to
a is given by [log(
According to Eq.(3), we can sum up the partial scores of
different attributes to yield the logarithm of the overall CLP of
the packet. This scorebook approach enables hardware-based
computation of per-packet CLP by replacing numerous
floating-point multiplications and divisions in Eq.(2) with
simple additions and table lookups. This scorebook approach
can be readily extended to handle nominal profiles which
contain of a mixture of marginal and joint packet attribute
distributions. Of course, the scorebook for a multiple-attribute
joint-distribution will be larger. The size of the scorebook can
be further reduced by adjusting (1) the iceberg threshold and
(2) quantization steps of the score.
B. Selective Packet Discarding and Overload Control
Once the CLP is computed for each suspicious packet via
fine-grain
profiling,
discarding and overload control can be conducted using CLP
as the differentiating metric. The key idea is to prioritize
packets based on their CLP values. Since an exact
prioritization would require offline, multiple-pass operations,
e.g., sorting, we take the following alternative approach to
realize an online, one-pass operation: First, we maintain the
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the CLP of all
suspicious
computation techniques described in [Ch00,Gr01]6. We then
discard a suspicious packet if its CLP value is below a
dynamically adjusted threshold7. If there is a need to
guarantee certain minimum throughput for particular types of
packets, we can incorporate such "immunity" rules by
artificially boosting the scores of a given portion of these
specific types of packets.
Fig. 3 depicts the integrated operation between CLP
computation and the determination of dynamic discarding
threshold for CLP. First, a load-shedding algorithm, such as
those described in [Ka01], is used to determine the fraction
(Φ ) of arriving suspicious packets required to be discarded in
order to control the utilization of the victim to be below a
target value. Typical inputs to a load-shedding algorithm
include: current utilization of the victim, maximum (target)
utilization allowed for the victim as well as the current
aggregated arrival rate of suspicious traffic. (See Appendix I
for a description of the actual load-shedding algorithm used in
PacketScore.)
6 Comparing to a score CDF representation using constant width
score-buckets, a 100-quantile score CDF representation works much
better due to the unpredictable spacing of packet scores in advance.
Also, a 1% resolution in system utilization is already fine enough for
overload control purpose.
7 For practical implementation, we actually keep the CDF of log
(CLP) of all suspicious packets and apply the discarding threshold
against log (CLP). This is to eliminate the need of performing realtime inverse logarithm after the partial scores of various attributes are
summed up according to Eq. (3).
Real-Time Traffic Profiling
Score Assignment for the
Packet p (based on log(CLP))
Scorebooks
(periodically
substantial
Iceberg-style
Histograms
(for suspicious
traffic profile)
Update CDF of Scores
score of packet
discard the
Arriving Packet
(p) Destined to
pass the packet
per-packet
Per-attribute
Scorebooks
Current Aggregate
Arrival Rate of
Suspicious Packets
Current Victim
Utilization
Target Victim
Utilization
(= Fraction of suspicious
packets to be discarded)
Update periodically or upon
substantial CDF changes
Update upon scorebook changes
CDF of Scores
Figure 3: Packet Differentiation and Overload Control
Once the required packet-discarding percentage, Φ , is
determined, the corresponding CLP discarding threshold, Thd,
is looked up from a recent snapshot of the CDF of the CLP
values of all suspicious packets. The use of a snapshot version
of the CDF (instead of the most up-to-date one) eliminates
possible race-conditions between discarding threshold updates
and CDF changes upon new packet arrivals. The snapshot is
updated periodically or upon significant changes of the packet
score distribution. The adjustment of the CLP discarding
threshold, as well as the load-shedding algorithm, are expected
to operate at a time-scale which is considerably longer than the
packet arrival time-scale.
When a suspicious packet8 arrives, the following tasks are
performed in parallel:
(1) The aggregate arrival rate towards the victim is
adjusted. This, in turn, changes the input of the loadshedding algorithm.
(2) The packet attribute values are used for updating
the fine-grain traffic profile, i.e. measured histograms, of
the suspicious traffic.
(3) The CLP-based score is computed for the arriving
packet using frozen scorebooks generated from a recent
snapshot of suspicious traffic profile.
Once the score of an arriving packet is computed, the score
CDF is updated. The packet is then discarded if its score is
below the current discarding threshold, Thd. Notice that the
use of frozen scorebooks is essential for the parallelization of
8 For endpoint attacks, the suspicious packets are the ones which
destinate to the victim subnet. For infrastructure attacks, all the
packets passing through the victim choke-point are considered to be
suspicious.
tasks (2) and (3). It is also important to re-emphasize that,
while CLP-computation is always performed for each
incoming packet, selective packet discarding only happens
when the system is operating beyond its safe (target)
utilization level
. Otherwise, the overload control
scheme will set Φ to zero.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we will evaluate the performance of the
proposed CLP-based packet-discarding scheme in a standalone setting via simulation. Unless stated otherwise, the
default settings for the simulation is summarized in Table 1.
Attack Type
Generic attack in Section IV A
Scorebook/
Every 60 seconds
Baseline Profile
Five 10-minute windows of traffic, collected
between 8:00pm to 8:10pm, Monday through
Friday, in the week of May 10, 1999, by the
WIDE project [WIDE].
Set to the maximum incoming load of the
baseline profile observed over any 10-minute
period. This corresponds to 1660 pps for the
default baseline profile.
Legitimate
Use a trace of the same link, collected between
8:00pm to 10:00pm, Tue, May 11, 1999. Its
average arrival rate is 900pps.
Attack Intensity
10 times the nominal arrival rate
Option 5 in Section IV D
Iceberg Thd
90%-adaptive-coverage scheme in Section IV E
Table 1: Default Simulation Settings
Performance Criteria: First, we examine the differences in
the score distribution for attack and legitimate packets. Such
differences are quantified using 2 metrics, namely, RA and RL
as illustrated in Fig. 4.
P ac ket S co re
L eg itim a te P ac ket
S co re D is trib ution
A ttack Pa cke t
S core D istribu tio n
Figure 4: Characterizing difference in Score Distribution between
legitimate and attacking packets
Let MinL (MaxA ) be the lowest (highest) score observed
for the incoming legitimate (attacking) packets. Define RA
(RL) to be the fraction of attacking (legitimate) packets which
have a score below MinL (above MaxA). The closer of the
values of RA and RL to 100%, the better the scoredifferentiation power. In practice, the score distributions
usually have long but thin tails due to very few outliner
packets with extreme scores. To avoid the masking effect of
such outliers, we have taken MinL (MaxA) to be the 1st (99th)
percentile of the score distribution of legitimate (attacking)
packets. A typical set of score distributions for the attacking
and legitimate packets are shown in Fig 5.
Attack PDF
Legitimate PDF
Figure 5: Sample Score Distributions
While RA and RL can quantify the score differentiation
power, the final outcome of selective discarding also depends
on the dynamics of the threshold update mechanisms. We
therefore also measure the false positive (i.e., fraction of
legitimate packets got falsely discarded), and false negative
(i.e., fraction of attacking packets got falsely admitted) ratios
of the proposed scheme. To check the effectiveness of the
overload control scheme, we compare the actual output
utilization
against the target maximum utilization
set by the scheme.
A. Different Attack Types
We have evaluated the performance of PacketScore in
defending against the following types of attacks:
Generic attack: all attribute values of the attacking
randomized
corresponding allowable ranges.
TCP-SYN Flood attack
SQL Slammer Worm attack
Nominal attack: all attacking packets resemble the
most dominant type of legitimate packets observed in
practice, i.e. 1500-byte TCP packets with server-port
80 and TCP-flag set to ACK, with uniformly random
source IP addresses.
Mixed attack: equally combines the above 4 types of
attacks while keeping the overall attack rate to the 10
times of that of the target rate
Changing attack: Similar to the Mixed attack except
that the different types of attacks take turns. An attack
type is randomly selected and continues for an
exponentially distributed period.
The corresponding results are depicted in Table 2. In
general, the proposed packet scoring scheme can successfully
distinguish between attacking and legitimate packets. In all
cases except the Changing attacks, RA and RL are above 99%.
It is noteworthy that the false positive probability for the TCP-
SYN flood attack is kept at a very low level (0 and 0.39%).
Although the signature of the TCP-SYN flood packets can
easily be derived by the PacketScore scheme, the ability of
PacketScore to prioritize legitimate TCP-SYN packets over
attacking ones based on other packet attributes, e.g. source IP
prefix and TTL, is an essential feature. Without such
priorization, e.g. in the case of stateless rule/signature-based
filtering, all TCP-SYN packets would have been discarded and
thus ensure the success of the DDoS attack towards the victim.
Changing attacks are more challenging due to their
complex/ time-varying attacking packet characteristics. When
the average change-period of the attack is much longer than
the measurement/ scorebook generation interval (300 sec vs.
60 sec in our case), the change in attacking packet
characteristics can readily be tracked. However, when such
changes occur at the same (or shorter) time-scale of the
measurement update interval, the PacketScore scheme can be
misled to defend against some no-longer-exist attack packets.
A possible remedy is to shorten the measurement update
interval or apply more sophisticated change-detection
techniques [Ke93] on the current profile measurements to
trigger and speed up scorebooks/ CDF updates9. However,
even in the worst case, the proposed scheme can still
successfully discard more than 94% of the attacking packets
(together with about 11% legitimate ones). This is
substantially better than random packet dropping as the
aggregate arrival rate is more than 10 times of the target load
of the system. Furthermore,
is successfully kept close to
its target value in all cases.
PDF Separation
Attack Type
Changing (Ave. ON
period = 60 sec)
Changing (Ave. ON
period = 300 sec)
legitimate
, based on the
PDF Separation
Attack Type
Changing (Ave. ON
period = 60 sec)
Changing (Ave. ON
period = 300 sec)
legitimate
, based on a
Table 2: Performance against various Attack Types under
different target maximum system utilization
9 However, there is a limit on the minimum number of packets to
be observed before valid histogram statistics can be derived.
The differences between Table 2a and 2b illustrate the
suspicious
opportunistically by raising
beyond the legitimate traffic
legitimate
is increased from 110% to 185%
legitimate
, the fraction of falsely discarded legitimate
packets is reduced at the expense of the admission of more
attacking traffic. Conversely, this indicates that the 4-5% false
negative rate in Table 2a is mainly due to the gap between
legitimate
, i.e. the extra system capacity left over by
the legitimate packets allows some attacking packets to slip
B. Increasing Attack Intensity
Fig. 6 shows the proposed scheme can effectively provide
overload control as attack intensifies. Even when the volume of
attacking packets increases from one time to 25 times of the
nominal load, the scheme still consistently allow more than
99.5% of legitimate packets to pass through unaffected. The
attacking packets are admitted only due to the gap between
legitimate
as discussed before.
By design, the differentiation power of PacketScore
improves as the DDoS attack intensifies. This is because as
attack traffic volume increases, the difference between the
current traffic profile and the nominal one also increases.
Attack Intensity
packets per second
Outgoing Legitimate PPS
Incoming Attack PPS
Outgoing Attack PPS
Figure 6: Effect of Increasing Attack Intensity
Conversely, this reveals a limitation of the PacketScore
approach: it is designed to protect against DDoS attacks which
create their damage by overloading the victim with their sheervolume of traffic. PacketScore is not effective against attacks
which are based on very-low traffic volume, e.g. in Tear-Drop
or Ping-of-Death attacks where a single carefully crafted
packet is used to crash the entire system. Signature-based
filtering would be more appropriate for such types of attacks.
C. Nominal Profile Sensitivity
In this subsection, we study the effect of the choice of
nominal profile.
Separation
Table 3: Mon 1-hour profile applied to other days of the week
Separation
Table 4: Weekly profile applied to weekdays of the week
In the first case, we build the nominal profile based on an
hourly trace collected in during Monday, May 10, 8:00PM—
9:00 pm, 1999. This is then used as the baseline for scoring 5
different 2-hour long traces (including itself), with attacking
packets added, collected at the same hours but different days of
the same week. The results are depicted in Table 3.
Observed from Table 3 that while the false negative
probability is always maintained at a very low level (at most
1.65%), the false positive probability for Thursday and Friday
1-hour traces using the Monday profile is unacceptably high (>
38%). Upon further examination of the data, we find that this is
an artifact of our default setting of
according to the
maximum traffic rate of the baseline profile observed over any
10-minute window (which is about 1100pps for the Monday
trace). Since the incoming traffic rate for the Thursday and
Friday traces are significantly greater than the Monday one,
such default choice of
inadvertently forces the system to
discard a significant portion of legitimate packets. As shown in
Table 4, the poor performance due to the mismatch among
different daily legitimate traffic profile and
overcome by using the default weekly profile as described in
D. Different Scoring Strategies
In this subsection, we explore the trade-offs of using
different combinations of marginal and joint attribute
distributions in establishing the nominal profile. Table 5
profile/scorebook
generation. Fig. 7 shows the differentiation performance and
storage requirements of these five scoring options. As
expected, among the five options, (5) yields the best scoring/
differentiation performance at the expense of increased storage
size for baseline-profile and scorebook, while (1) has the
baseline-profile/
footprint.
performance improvement of (2) over (1), (as well as (4) over
(3)) is due to the exploit of dependency among packet-size,
protocol-type and server-port number.
Description
Assume independence between each attribute and
include the marginal distributions of packet-size,
protocol-type, server-port number, TCP-flag pattern,
TTL value in the nominal profile generation while
excluding the source IP prefix distribution.
Same as (1) except using the 3-dimensional jointdistribution of packet-size, protocol-type and serverport number to replace their corresponding marginal
distributions.
Same as (1) except including the marginal distribution
of 16-bit source IP prefixes during baseline profiling.
Same as (2) except including the marginal distribution
of 16-bit source IP prefixes during baseline profiling.
Same as (4) except using the 2-dimensional jointdistribution of 16-bit source IP prefixe and TTL value to
replace their corresponding marginal distributions.
Table 5: Different Options of Scoring Strategies
Scoring Strategies
Score PDF Separation
Normalized. Storage
Requirement
Storage Requirements
Figure 7: Comparison of scoring strategies
The improvement of (3) over (1) (as well as (4) over (2))
reflects the information value of source IP prefixes, even at a
very coarse 16-bit granularity. The advantage of (5) over (4)
illustrates the value of dependency information between
source IP prefix and TTL value, which, to a large extent,
captures the nominal “distance” between the source and the
site/port/link to be protected.
E. Setting the Iceberg Thresholds
In this subsection, we investigate the impact of iceberg
threshold value on packet differentiation performance and
profile/ scorebook storage requirements. We have considered
two different iceberg threshold setting strategies. Under the
static strategy, we fix the iceberg thresholds for all single
distributions,
2-dimensional
3dimensional joint distributions at 0.01, 0.001 and 0.0001
respectively. Under the adaptive strategy, the iceberg threshold
value is determined separately for each marginal/ joint
distribution of interest so that 90%, 95% or 99% of the overall
entries observed in the baseline trace are covered by the
corresponding iceberg histograms.
Separation
Normalized
Storage Req.
(13.6 Kbyte)
(76 Kbyte)
(127.8 Kbyte)
(288.3 Kbyte)
Table 6: Performance results against different thresholding methods
Table 6 summarizes the results of these various approaches.
As shown in Table 6, there is no significant difference in the
differentiation power of all the approaches. However, since the
adaptive iceberg-threshold setting strategy should be more
robust against possible changes in nominal profile traces, it is
recommended over the static strategy. Among different
coverage of the adaptive strategy, the 90%-coverage produces
requirement
differentiation performance. It also shows that with iceberg
histograms, each nominal profile (as well as its corresponding
set of scorebooks) requires less than 100Kbyte of memory.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have outlined an architecture using a set of
collaborating 3D-Rs and DCSs to defend against DDoS attacks.
The proposed scheme leverages hardware implementation of
advanced data-stream processing techniques, including onepass operations of iceberg-style histograms and quantile (CDF)
computations, to enable scalable, high-speed fine-grain traffic
profiling and per-packet scoring. We have studied the
performance and design tradeoffs of the proposed packet
scoring scheme in the context of a stand-alone implementation.
Such scheme can tackle never-seen-before DDoS attack types
by providing a statistical-based adaptive differentiation
between attacking and legitimate packets to drive selective
packet discarding and overload control at high-speed.
In a sequel of this paper, we will study the performance of a
distributed implementation of the proposed scheme. In
particular, we will investigate the effects of update and
feedback delays, as well as the impact of profile and score CDF
resolutions
performance
distributed
implementation. We will also study the ability and possible
enhancements of the proposed scheme for defending against
more sophisticated DDoS attacks. Another investigation topic
is on how the time-scale of updates of the scorebooks, score
CDF, and dynamic discarding threshold, will impact the
response time and decision error of the proposed selective
packet discarding scheme when subject to more orchestrated
synchronized DDoS attacks. While the current CLP-based
packet differentiation is theoretically attractive due to its
Bayesian roots, it is conceivable to use a surrogate packet
differentiating metric to replace CLP and design an even more
hardware-amenable scheme based on a rudimentary perattribute scoring mechanism, e.g. using an array of leakybuckets. We intend to study the performance and complexity
trade-offs of such alternatives for hardware implementation