Publisher’s version / Version de l'éditeur:
Proceedings of the Second IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for
Security and Defence Applications 2009, 2009-07-10
READ THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE USING THIS WEBSITE.
 
Vous avez des questions? Nous pouvons vous aider. Pour communiquer directement avec un auteur, consultez la
première page de la revue dans laquelle son article a été publié afin de trouver ses coordonnées. Si vous n’arrivez
pas à les repérer, communiquez avec nous à .
Questions? Contact the NRC Publications Archive team at
 . If you wish to email the authors directly, please see the
first page of the publication for their contact information.
NRC Publications Archive
Archives des publications du CNRC
This publication could be one of several versions: author’s original, accepted manuscript or the publisher’s version. /
La version de cette publication peut être l’une des suivantes : la version prépublication de l’auteur, la version
acceptée du manuscrit ou la version de l’éditeur.
Access and use of this website and the material on it are subject to the Terms and Conditions set forth at
A Detailed Analysis of the KDD CUP 99 Data Set
Tavallaee, Mahbod; Bagheri, Ebrahim; Lu, Wei; Ghorbani, Ali-A.
 
L’accès à ce site Web et l’utilisation de son contenu sont assujettis aux conditions présentées dans le site
LISEZ CES CONDITIONS ATTENTIVEMENT AVANT D’UTILISER CE SITE WEB.
NRC Publications Record / Notice d'Archives des publications de CNRC:
 
 
A Detailed Analysis of the KDD CUP 99 Data Set
Mahbod Tavallaee, Ebrahim Bagheri, Wei Lu, and Ali A. Ghorbani
Abstract— During the last decade, anomaly detection has
attracted the attention of many researchers to overcome the
weakness of signature-based IDSs in detecting novel attacks,
and KDDCUP’99 is the mostly widely used data set for the
evaluation of these systems. Having conducted an statistical
analysis on this data set, we found two important issues which
highly affects the performance of evaluated systems, and results
in a very poor evaluation of anomaly detection approaches. To
solve these issues, we have proposed a new data set, NSL-KDD,
which consists of selected records of the complete KDD data
set and does not suffer from any of mentioned shortcomings.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the enormous growth of computer networks usage
and the huge increase in the number of applications running
on top of it, network security is becoming increasingly
more important. As it is shown in , all the computer
systems suffer from security vulnerabilities which are both
technically difﬁcult and economically costly to be solved by
the manufacturers. Therefore, the role of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs), as special-purpose devices to detect
anomalies and attacks in the network, is becoming more
important. The research in the intrusion detection ﬁeld has
been mostly focused on anomaly-based and misuse-based
detection techniques for a long time. While misuse-based
detection is generally favored in commercial products due
to its predictability and high accuracy, in academic research
anomaly detection is typically conceived as a more powerful
method due to its theoretical potential for addressing novel
Conducting a thorough analysis of the recent research
trend in anomaly detection, one will encounter several machine learning methods reported to have a very high detection
rate of 98% while keeping the false alarm rate at 1% .
However, when we look at the state of the art IDS solutions
and commercial tools, there is no evidence of using anomaly
detection approaches, and practitioners still think that it is
an immature technology. To ﬁnd the reason of this contrast,
we studied the details of the research done in anomaly
detection and considered various aspects such as learning
and detection approaches, training data sets, testing data sets,
and evaluation methods. Our study shows that there are some
inherent problems in the KDDCUP’99 data set , which is
widely used as one of the few publicly available data sets
for network-based anomaly detection systems.
Mahbod Tavallaee, Wei Lu, and Ali A. Ghorbani are with the Faculty of
Computer Science, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada
(email: {m.tavallaee, wlu, ghorbani}@unb.ca), and Ebrahim Bagheri is with
the Institute for Information Technology, National Research Council Canada
(email: )
This work was supported by the funding from the Atlantic Canada
Opportunity Agency (ACOA) through the Atlantic Innovation Fund (AIF)
to Dr. Ali Ghorbani.
The ﬁrst important deﬁciency in the KDD data set is the
huge number of redundant records. Analyzing KDD train and
test sets, we found that about 78% and 75% of the records
are duplicated in the train and test set, respectively. This
large amount of redundant records in the train set will cause
learning algorithms to be biased towards the more frequent
records, and thus prevent it from learning unfrequent records
which are usually more harmful to networks such as U2R
attacks. The existence of these repeated records in the test
set, on the other hand, will cause the evaluation results to be
biased by the methods which have better detection rates on
the frequent records.
In addition, to analyze the difﬁculty level of the records in
KDD data set, we employed 21 learned machines (7 learners,
each trained 3 times with different train sets) to label the
records of the entire KDD train and test sets, which provides
us with 21 predicted labels for each record. Surprisingly,
about 98% of the records in the train set and 86% of the
records in the test set were correctly classiﬁed with all the
21 learners. The reason we got these statistics on both KDD
train and test sets is that in many papers, random parts of
the KDD train set are used as test sets. As a result, they
achieve about 98% classiﬁcation rate applying very simple
machine learning methods. Even applying the KDD test set
will result in having a minimum classiﬁcation rate of 86%,
which makes the comparison of IDSs quite difﬁcult since
they all vary in the range of 86% to 100%.
In this paper, we have provided a solution to solve the
two mentioned issues, resulting in new train and test sets
which consist of selected records of the complete KDD data
set. The provided data set does not suffer from any of the
mentioned problems. Furthermore, the number of records
in the train and test sets are reasonable. This advantage
makes it affordable to run the experiments on the complete
set without the need to randomly select a small portion.
Consequently, evaluation results of different research work
will be consistent and comparable.
The new version of KDD data set, NSL-KDD is publicly
available for researchers through our website1. Although, the
data set still suffers from some of the problems discussed
by McHugh and may not be a perfect representative of
existing real networks, because of the lack of public data sets
for network-based IDSs, we believe it still can be applied as
an effective benchmark data set to help researchers compare
different intrusion detection methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the KDDCUP99 data set which is wildly used in
anomaly detection. In Section III, we ﬁrst review the issues
1 
in DARPA’98 and then discuss the possible existence of
those problems in KDD’99. The statistical observations of
the KDD data set will be explained in Section IV. Section
V provides some solutions for the existing problems in the
KDD data set. Finally, in Section VI we draw conclusion.
II. KDD CUP 99 DATA SET DESCRIPTION
Since 1999, KDD’99 has been the most wildly used
data set for the evaluation of anomaly detection methods.
This data set is prepared by Stolfo et al. and is built
based on the data captured in DARPA’98 IDS evaluation
program . DARPA’98 is about 4 gigabytes of compressed
raw (binary) tcpdump data of 7 weeks of network trafﬁc,
which can be processed into about 5 million connection
records, each with about 100 bytes. The two weeks of
test data have around 2 million connection records. KDD
training dataset consists of approximately 4,900,000 single
connection vectors each of which contains 41 features and
is labeled as either normal or an attack, with exactly one
speciﬁc attack type. The simulated attacks fall in one of the
following four categories:
1) Denial of Service Attack (DoS): is an attack in
which the attacker makes some computing or memory
resource too busy or too full to handle legitimate requests, or denies legitimate users access to a machine.
2) User to Root Attack (U2R): is a class of exploit in
which the attacker starts out with access to a normal
user account on the system (perhaps gained by snifﬁng
passwords, a dictionary attack, or social engineering)
and is able to exploit some vulnerability to gain root
access to the system.
3) Remote to Local Attack (R2L): occurs when an
attacker who has the ability to send packets to a
machine over a network but who does not have an
account on that machine exploits some vulnerability to
gain local access as a user of that machine.
4) Probing Attack: is an attempt to gather information
about a network of computers for the apparent purpose
of circumventing its security controls.
It is important to note that the test data is not from the same
probability distribution as the training data, and it includes
speciﬁc attack types not in the training data which make the
task more realistic. Some intrusion experts believe that most
novel attacks are variants of known attacks and the signature
of known attacks can be sufﬁcient to catch novel variants.
The datasets contain a total number of 24 training attack
types, with an additional 14 types in the test data only. The
name and detail description of the training attack types are
listed in .
KDD’99 features can be classiﬁed into three groups:
1) Basic features:
this category encapsulates all the
attributes that can be extracted from a TCP/IP connection. Most of these features leading to an implicit
delay in detection.
2) Trafﬁc features: this category includes features that
are computed with respect to a window interval and is
divided into two groups:
a) “same host” features:
examine only the connections in the past 2 seconds that have the same
destination host as the current connection, and
calculate statistics related to protocol behavior,
service, etc.
b) “same service” features:
examine only the
connections in the past 2 seconds that have the
same service as the current connection.
The two aforementioned types of “trafﬁc” features are
called time-based. However, there are several slow
probing attacks that scan the hosts (or ports) using a
much larger time interval than 2 seconds, for example,
one in every minute. As a result, these attacks do not
produce intrusion patterns with a time window of 2
seconds. To solve this problem, the “same host” and
“same service” features are re-calculated but based on
the connection window of 100 connections rather than
a time window of 2 seconds. These features are called
connection-based trafﬁc features.
3) Content features: unlike most of the DoS and Probing
attacks, the R2L and U2R attacks don’t have any
intrusion frequent sequential patterns. This is because
the DoS and Probing attacks involve many connections
to some host(s) in a very short period of time; however
the R2L and U2R attacks are embedded in the data
portions of the packets, and normally involves only a
single connection. To detect these kinds of attacks, we
need some features to be able to look for suspicious behavior in the data portion, e.g., number of failed login
attempts. These features are called content features.
III. INHERENT PROBLEMS OF KDD’99 DATA SET
As it is mentioned in the previous section, KDD’99 is built
based on the data captured in DARPA’98 which has been
criticized by McHugh , mainly because of the characteristics of the synthetic data. As a result, some of the existing
problems in DARPA’98 remain in KDD’99. However, there
are some deliberate or unintentional improvements, along
with additional problems. In the following we ﬁrst review the
issues in DARPA’98 and then discuss the possible existence
of those problems in KDD’99. Finally, we discuss new issues
observed in the KDD data set.
1) For the sake of privacy, the experiments chose to
synthesize both the background and the attack data,
and the data is claimed to be similar to that observed
during several month of sampling data from a number
of Air Force bases. However, neither analytical nor
experimental validation of the data’s false alarm characteristics were undertaken. Furthermore, the workload
of the synthesized data does not seem to be similar to
the trafﬁc in real networks.
2) Trafﬁc collectors such as TCPdump, which is used in
DARPA’98, are very likely to become overloaded and
drop packets in heavy trafﬁc load. However, there was
no examination to check the possibility of the dropped
3) There is no exact deﬁnition of the attacks. For example,
probing is not necessarily an attack type unless the
number of iterations exceeds an speciﬁc threshold.
Similarly, a packet that causes a buffer overﬂow is not
always representative of an attack. Under such conditions, there should be an agreement on the deﬁnitions
between the evaluator and evaluated. In DARPA’98,
however, there is no speciﬁc deﬁnitions of the network
In addition, there are some critiques of attack taxonomies
and performance measures. However, these issues are not
of much interest in this paper since most of the anomaly
detection systems work with binary labels, i.e., anomalous
and normal, rather than identifying the detailed information
of the attacks. Besides, the performance measure applied
in DARPA’98 Evaluation, ROC Curves, has been widely
criticized, and since then many researchers have proposed
new measures to overcome the existing deﬁciencies , ,
 , , .
While McHugh’s critique was mainly based on the procedure to generate the data set rather than analysis of the
data, Mahoney and Chan analyzed DARPA background
network trafﬁc and found evidence of simulation artifacts
that could result in an overestimation of the performance of
some anomaly detection techniques. In their paper, authors
mentioned ﬁve types of anomalies leading to attack detection.
However, analysis of the attacks in the DARPA data set revealed that many did not ﬁt into any of these categories which
are likely caused by simulation artifacts. As an example, the
TTL (time to live) values of 126 and 253 appear only in
hostile trafﬁc, whereas in most background trafﬁc the value
is 127 and 254. Similarly, some attacks can be identiﬁed
by anomalous source IP addresses or anomalies in the TCP
window size ﬁeld.
Fortunately the aforementioned simulation artifacts do not
affect the KDD data set since the 41 features used in KDD
are not related to any of the weaknesses mentioned in .
However, KDD suffers from additional problems not existing
in the DARPA data set.
In , Portnoy et al. partitioned the KDD data set into ten
subsets, each containing approximately 490,000 instances or
10% of the data. However, they observed that the distribution
of the attacks in the KDD data set is very uneven which
made cross-validation very difﬁcult. Many of these subsets
contained instances of only a single type. For example, the
4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th, 10% portions of the full data set
contained only smurf attacks, and the data instances in the
8th subset were almost entirely neptune intrusions.
Similarly, same problem with smurf and neptune attacks
in the KDD training data set is reported in . The authors
have mentioned two problems caused by including these
attacks in the data set. First, these two types of DoS attacks
constitute over 71% of the testing data set which completely
affects the evaluation. Secondly, since they generate large
STATISTICS OF REDUNDANT RECORDS IN THE KDD TRAIN SET
Original Records
Distinct Records
Reduction Rate
STATISTICS OF REDUNDANT RECORDS IN THE KDD TEST SET
Original Records
Distinct Records
Reduction Rate
volumes of trafﬁc, they are easily detectable by other means
and there is no need of using anomaly detection systems to
ﬁnd these attacks.
IV. STATISTICAL OBSERVATIONS
As was mentioned earlier, there are some problems in the
KDD data set which cause the evaluation results on this
data set to be unreliable. In this section we perform a set
of experiments to show the existing deﬁciencies in KDD.
A. Redundant Records
One of the most important deﬁciencies in the KDD data set
is the huge number of redundant records, which causes the
learning algorithms to be biased towards the frequent records,
and thus prevent them from learning unfrequent records
which are usually more harmful to networks such as U2R
and R2L attacks. In addition, the existence of these repeated
records in the test set will cause the evaluation results to be
biased by the methods which have better detection rates on
the frequent records.
To solve this issue, we removed all the repeated records
in the entire KDD train and test set, and kept only one copy
of each record. Tables I and II illustrate the statistics of the
reduction of repeated records in the KDD train and test sets,
respectively.
While doing this process, we encountered two invalid
records in the KDD test set, number 136,489 and 136,497.
These two records contain an invalid value, ICMP, as their
service feature. Therefore, we removed them from the KDD
B. Level of Difﬁculty
The typical approach for performing anomaly detection
using the KDD data set is to employ a customized machine
learning algorithm to learn the general behavior of the data
set in order to be able to differentiate between normal and
malicious activities. For this purpose, the data set is divided
into test and training segments, where the learner is trained
using the training portion of the data set and is then evaluated
The distribution of #successfulPrediction values for the
KDD data set records
for its efﬁciency on the test portion. Many researchers within
the general ﬁeld of machine learning have attempted to
devise complex learners to optimize accuracy and detection
rate over the KDD’99 data set. In a similar approach, we have
selected seven widely used machine learning techniques,
namely J48 decision tree learning , Naive Bayes ,
NBTree , Random Forest , Random Tree , Multilayer Perceptron , and Support Vector Machine (SVM)
 from the Weka collection to learn the overall
behavior of the KDD’99 data set. For the experiments, we
applied Weka’s default values as the input parameters of
these methods.
Investigating the existing papers on the anomaly detection
which have used the KDD data set, we found that there
are two common approaches to apply KDD. In the ﬁrst,
KDD’99 training portion is employed for sampling both the
train and test sets. However, in the second approach, the
training samples are randomly collected from the KDD train
set, while the samples for testing are arbitrarily selected from
the KDD test set.
In order to perform our experiments, we randomly created
three smaller subsets of the KDD train set each of which
included ﬁfty thousand records of information. Each of the
learners where trained over the created train sets. We then
employed the 21 learned machines (7 learners, each trained
3 times) to label the records of the entire KDD train and test
sets, which provides us with 21 predicated labels for each
record. Further, we annotated each record of the data set with
a #successfulPrediction value, which was initialized
to zero. Now, since the KDD data set provides the correct label for each record, we compared the predicated label of each
record given by a speciﬁc learner with the actual label, where
we incremented #successfulPrediction by one if a
match was found. Through this process, we calculated the
number of learners that were able to correctly label that given
record. The highest value for #successfulPrediction
is 21, which conveys the fact that all learners were able to
correctly predict the label of that record. Figure 1 and 2
illustrate the distribution of #successfulPrediction
values for the KDD train and test sets, respectively.
It can be clearly seen from Figure 1 and 2 that 97.97%
and 86.64% of the records in the KDD train and test sets
have been correctly labeled by all 21 classiﬁers. The obvious
observation from these ﬁgures is that the application of
The distribution of #successfulPrediction values for the
KDD data set records
STATISTICS OF RANDOMLY SELECTED RECORDS FROM KDD TRAIN SET
Distinct Records
Percentage
Selected Records
typical learning machines to this data set would result in
high accuracy rates. This shows that evaluating methods on
the basis of accuracy, detection rate and false positive rate
on the KDD data set is not an appropriate option.
V. OUR SOLUTION
To solve the issues mentioned in the previous section, we
ﬁrst removed all the redundant records in both train and test
sets. Furthermore, to create a more challenging subset of
the KDD data set, we randomly sampled records from the
#successfulPrediction value groups shown in Figure
1 and 2 in such a way that the number of records selected
from each group is inversely proportional to the percentage
of records in the original #successfulPrediction
value groups. For instance, the number of records in the 0-
5 #successfulPrediction value group of the KDD
train set constitutes 0.04% of the original records, therefore,
99.96% of the records in this group are included in the
generated sample. Tables III and IV show the detailed
statistics of randomly selected records.
The generated data sets, KDDTrain+ and KDDTest+,
STATISTICS OF RANDOMLY SELECTED RECORDS FROM KDD TEST SET
Distinct Records
Percentage
Selected Records
The performance of the selected learning machines on KDDTest
The performance of the selected learning machines on KDDTest+
The performance of the selected learning machines on KDDTest−21
included 125,973 and 22,544 records, respectively. Furthermore, one more test set was generated that did not include
any of the records that had been correctly classiﬁed by all 21
learners, KDDTest−21, which incorporated 11,850 records.
For experimental purposes, we employed the ﬁrst 20% of
the records in KDDTrain+ as the train set, having trained
the learning methods, we applied the learned models on
three test sets, namely KDDTest (original KDD test set),
KDDTest+ and KDDTest−21. The result of the evaluation
of the learners on these data sets are shown in Figures 3, 4
and 5, respectively.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the accuracy rate of the
classiﬁers on KDDTest is relatively high. This shows that
the original KDD test set is skewed and unproportionately
distributed, which makes it unsuitable for testing networkbased anomaly detection classiﬁers. The results of the accuracy and performance of learning machines on the KDD’99
data set are hence unreliable and cannot be used as good
indicators of the ability of the classiﬁer to serve as a
discriminative tool in network-based anomaly detection. On
the contrary, KDDTest+ and KDDTest−21 test set provide
more accurate information about the capability of the classiﬁers. As an example, classiﬁcation of SVM on KDDTest
is 65.01% which is quite poor compared to other learning
approaches. However, SVM is the only learning technique
whose performance is improved on KDDTest+. Analyzing
both test sets, we found that SVM wrongly detects one of the
most frequent records in KDDTest, which highly affects its
detection performance. In contrast, in KDDTest+ since this
record is only occurred once, it does not have any effects on
the classiﬁcation rate of SVM, and provides better evaluation
of learning methods.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we statistically analyzed the entire KDD
data set. The analysis showed that there are two important
issues in the data set which highly affects the performance
of evaluated systems, and results in a very poor evaluation of
anomaly detection approaches. To solve these issues, we have
proposed a new data set, NSL-KDD , which consists of
selected records of the complete KDD data set. This data set
is publicly available for researchers through our website and
has the following advantages over the original KDD data set:
• It does not include redundant records in the train set, so
the classiﬁers will not be biased towards more frequent
• There is no duplicate records in the proposed test sets;
therefore, the performance of the learners are not biased
by the methods which have better detection rates on the
frequent records.
• The number of selected records from each difﬁcultylevel group is inversely proportional to the percentage
of records in the original KDD data set. As a result, the
classiﬁcation rates of distinct machine learning methods
vary in a wider range, which makes it more efﬁcient
to have an accurate evaluation of different learning
techniques.
• The number of records in the train and test sets are
reasonable, which makes it affordable to run the experiments on the complete set without the need to randomly
select a small portion. Consequently, evaluation results
of different research works will be consistent and comparable.
Although, the proposed data set still suffers from some
of the problems discussed by McHugh and may not be
a perfect representative of existing real networks, because
of the lack of public data sets for network-based IDSs, we
believe it still can be applied as an effective benchmark data
set to help researchers compare different intrusion detection