Outer Product-based Neural Collaborative Filtering
Xiangnan He1, Xiaoyu Du1,2, Xiang Wang1, Feng Tian3, Jinhui Tang4 and Tat-Seng Chua1
1 National University of Singapore
2 Chengdu University of Information Technology
3 Northeast Petroleum University
4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{xiangnanhe, duxy.me}@gmail.com, , 
In this work, we contribute a new multi-layer neural
network architecture named ONCF to perform collaborative ﬁltering. The idea is to use an outer product to explicitly model the pairwise correlations
between the dimensions of the embedding space.
In contrast to existing neural recommender models
that combine user embedding and item embedding
via a simple concatenation or element-wise product, our proposal of using outer product above the
embedding layer results in a two-dimensional interaction map that is more expressive and semantically plausible. Above the interaction map obtained by outer product, we propose to employ a
convolutional neural network to learn high-order
correlations among embedding dimensions. Extensive experiments on two public implicit feedback
data demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
ONCF framework, in particular, the positive effect
of using outer product to model the correlations between embedding dimensions in the low level of
multi-layer neural recommender model. 1
Introduction
To facilitate the information seeking process for users in the
age of data deluge, various information retrieval (IR) technologies have been widely deployed [Garcia-Molina et al.,
2011]. As a typical paradigm of information push, recommender systems have become a core service and a major monetization method for many customer-oriented systems [Wang
et al., 2018b]. Collaborative ﬁltering (CF) is a key technique
to build a personalized recommender system, which infers a
user’s preference not only from her behavior data but also
the behavior data of other users.
Among the various CF
methods, model-based CF, more speciﬁcally, matrix factorization based methods [Rendle et al., 2009; He et al., 2016b;
Zhang et al., 2016] are known to provide superior performance over others and have become the mainstream of recommendation research.
1Work appeared in IJCAI 2018. The experiment codes are available at: 
The key to design a CF model is in 1) how to represent a
user and an item, and 2) how to model their interaction based
on the representation. As a dominant model in CF, matrix factorization (MF) represents a user (or an item) as a vector of latent factors (also termed as embedding), and models an interaction as the inner product between the user embedding and
item embedding. Many extensions have been developed for
MF from both the modeling perspective [Wang et al., 2015;
Yu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018a] and learning perspective [Rendle et al., 2009; Bayer et al., 2017; He et al., 2018].
For example, DeepMF [Xue et al., 2017] extends MF by
learning embeddings with deep neural networks, BPR [Rendle et al., 2009] learns MF from implicit feedback with a pairwise ranking objective, and the recently proposed adversarial
personalized ranking (APR) [He et al., 2018] employs an adversarial training procedure to learn MF.
Despite its effectiveness and many subsequent developments, we point out that MF has an inherent limitation in
its model design.
Speciﬁcally, it uses a ﬁxed and dataindependent function — i.e., the inner product — as the interaction function [He et al., 2017]. As a result, it essentially assumes that the embedding dimensions (i.e., dimensions of the embedding space) are independent with each
other and contribute equally for the prediction of all data
This assumption is impractical, since the embedding dimensions could be interpreted as certain properties
of items [Zhang et al., 2014], which are not necessarily to
be independent.
Moreover, this assumption has shown to
be sub-optimal for learning from real-world feedback data
that has rich yet complicated patterns, since several recent
efforts on neural recommender models [Tay et al., 2018;
Bai et al., 2017] have demonstrated that better recommendation performance can be obtained by learning the interaction
function from data.
Among the neural network models for CF, neural matrix
factorization (NeuMF) [He et al., 2017] provides state-of-theart performance by complementing the inner product with an
adaptable multiple-layer perceptron (MLP) in learning the interaction function. Later on, using multiple nonlinear layers
above the embedding layer has become a prevalent choice to
learn the interaction function. Speciﬁcally, two common designs are placing a MLP above the concatenation [He et al.,
 
2017; Bai et al., 2017] and the element-wise product [Zhang
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017] of user embedding and item
embedding. We argue that a potential limitation of such two
designs is that there are few correlations between embedding
dimensions being modeled.
Although the following MLP
is theoretically capable of learning any continuous function
according to the universal approximation theorem [Hornik,
1991], there is no practical guarantee that the dimension correlations can be effectively captured with current optimization techniques.
In this work, we propose a new architecture for neural collaborative ﬁltering (NCF) by integrating the correlations between embedding dimensions into modeling. Speciﬁcally, we
propose to use an outer product operation above the embedding layer, explicitly capturing the pairwise correlations between embedding dimensions. We term the correlation matrix
obtained by outer product as the interaction map, which is a
K × K matrix where K denotes the embedding size. The
interaction map is rather suitable for the CF task, since it not
only subsumes the interaction signal used in MF (its diagonal
elements correspond to the intermediate results of inner product), but also includes all other pairwise correlations. Such
rich semantics in the interaction map facilitate the following
non-linear layers to learn possible high-order dimension correlations. Moreover, the matrix form of the interaction map
makes it feasible to learn the interaction function with the effective convolutional neural network (CNN), which is known
to generalize better and is more easily to go deep than the
fully connected MLP.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We propose a new neural network framework ONCF,
which supercharges NCF modeling with an outer product
operation to model pairwise correlations between embedding dimensions.
• We propose a novel model named ConvNCF under the
ONCF framework, which leverages CNN to learn highorder correlations among embedding dimensions from locally to globally in a hierarchical way.
• We conduct extensive experiments on two public implicit
feedback data, which demonstrate the effectiveness and rationality of ONCF methods.
• This is the ﬁrst work that uses CNN to learn the interaction
function between user embedding and item embedding.
It opens new doors of exploring the advanced and fastly
evovling CNN methods for recommendation research.
Proposed Methods
We ﬁrst present the Outer product based Neural Collaborative
Filtering (ONCF) framework. We then elaborate our proposed Convolutional NCF (ConvNCF) model, an instantiation of ONCF that uses CNN to learn the interaction function
based on the interaction map. Before delving into the technical details, we ﬁrst introduce some basic notations.
Throughout the paper, we use bold uppercase letter (e.g.,
P) to denote a matrix, bold lowercase letter to denote a vector
(e.g., pu), and calligraphic uppercase letter to denote a tensor
(e.g., S). Moreover, scalar pu,k denotes the (u, k)-th element
Input Layer
User Embedding
Item Embedding
Interaction
Interaction Features
Prediction
Figure 1: Outer Product-based NCF framework
of matrix P, and vector pu denotes the u-th row vector in P.
Let S be 3D tensor, then scalar sa,b,c denotes the (a, b, c)-th
element of tensor S, and vector sa,b denotes the slice of S at
the element (a, b).
ONCF framework
Figure 1 illustrates the ONCF framework. The target of modeling is to estimate the matching score between user u and
item i, i.e., ˆyui; and then we can generate a personalized recommendation list of items for a user based on the scores.
Input and Embedding Layer.
Given a user u and an item
i and their features (e.g., ID, user gender, item category etc.),
we ﬁrst employ one-hot encoding on their features. Let vU
i be the feature vector for user u and item i, respectively,
we can obtain their embeddings pu and qi via
pu = PT vU
qi = QT vI
where P ∈RM×K and Q ∈RN×K are the embedding matrix
for user features and item features, respectively; K, M, and
N denote the embedding size, number of user features, and
number of item features, respectively. Note that in the pure
CF case, only the ID feature will be used to describe a user
and an item [He et al., 2017], and thus M and N are the
number of users and number of items, respectively.
Interaction Map.
Above the embedding layer, we propose
to use an outer product operation on pu and qi to obtain the
interaction map:
E = pu ⊗qi = puqT
where E is a K × K matrix, in which each element is evaluated as: ek1,k2 = pu,k1qi,k2.
This is the core design of our ONCF framework to ensure the effectiveness of ONCF for the recommendation task.
Compared to existing recommender systems [He et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2017], we argue that using outer product is
more advantageous in threefold: 1) it subsumes matrix factorization (MF) — the dominant method for CF — which
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
Feature Map 1
Feature Map 2
Feature Map 32
Feature Map 3
Interaction Map
Prediction
Figure 2: An example of the architecture of our ConvNCF model that has 6 convolution layers with embedding size 64.
considers only diagonal elements in our interaction map; 2)
it encodes more signal than MF by accounting for the correlations between different embedding dimensions; and 3)
it is more meaningful than the simple concatenation operation, which only retains the original information in embeddings without modeling any correlation.
Moreover, it has
been recently shown that, modeling the interaction of feature embeddings explicitly is particularly useful for a deep
learning model to generalize well on sparse data, whereas
using concatenation is sub-optimal [He and Chua, 2017;
Beutel et al., 2018].
Lastly, another potential beneﬁt of the interaction map lies
in its 2D matrix format — which is the same as an image. In
this respect, the pairwise correlations encoded in the interaction map can be seen as the local features of an “image”. As
we all know, deep learning methods achieve the most success
in computer vision domain, and many powerful deep models especially the ones based on CNN have been developed for learning from 2D image data. Building a 2D interaction map allows these powerful CNN models to be also
applied to learn the interaction function for the recommendation task.
Hidden Layers.
Above the interaction map is a stack of
hidden layers, which targets at extracting useful signal from
the interaction map. It is subjected to design and can be abstracted as g = fΘ(E), where fΘ denotes the model of hidden
layers that has parameters Θ, and g is the output vector to be
used for the ﬁnal prediction. Technically speaking, fΘ can
be designed as any function that takes a matrix as input and
outputs a vector. In Section 2.2, we elaborate how CNN can
be employed to extract signal from the interaction map.
Prediction Layer.
The prediction layer takes in vector g
and outputs the prediction score as:
ˆyui = wT g, where
vector w re-weights the interaction signal in g.
To summarize, the model parameters of our ONCF framework are
∆= {P, Q, Θ, w}.
Learning ONCF for Personalized Ranking
Recommendation is a personalized ranking task. To this end,
we consider learning parameters of ONCF with a rankingaware objective. In the NCF paper [He et al., 2017], the authors advocate the use of a pointwise classiﬁcation loss to
learn models from implicit feedback. However, another more
reasonable assumption is that observed interactions should be
ranked higher than the unobserved ones. To implement this
idea, [Rendle et al., 2009] proposed a Bayesian Personalized
Ranking (BPR) objective function as follows:
−ln σ(ˆyui −ˆyuj) + λ∆||∆||2,
where λ∆are parameter speciﬁc regularization hyperparameters to prevent overﬁtting, and D denotes the set of training
instances: D := {(u, i, j)|i ∈Y+
u }, where Y+
u denotes the set of items that has been consumed by user u. By
minimizing the BPR loss, we tailor the ONCF framework for
correctly predicting the relative orders between interactions,
rather than their absolute scores as optimized in pointwise
loss [He et al., 2017; 2016b]. This can be more beneﬁcial for
addressing the personalized ranking task.
It is worth pointing out that in our ONCF framework, the
weight vector w can control the magnitude of the value of ˆyui
for all predictions. As a result, scaling up w can increase the
margin ˆyui −ˆyuj for all training instances and thus decrease
the training loss. To avoid such trivial solution in optimizing
ONCF, it is crucial to enforce L2 regularization or the maxnorm constraint on w. Moreover, we are aware of other pairwise objectives have also been widely used for personalized
ranking, such as the L2 square loss [Wang et al., 2017]. We
leave this exploration for ONCF as future work, as our initial experiments show that optimizing ONCF with the BPR
objective leads to good top-k recommendation performance.
Convolutional NCF
Motivation: Drawback of MLP.
In ONCF, the choice of
hidden layers has a large impact on its performance.
straightforward solution is to use the MLP network as proposed in NCF [He et al., 2017]; note that to apply MLP on the
2D interaction matrix E ∈RK×K, we can ﬂat E to a vector of
size K2. Despite that MLP is theoretically guaranteed to have
a strong representation ability [Hornik, 1991], its main drawback of having a large number of parameters can not be ignored. As an example, assuming we set the embedding size of
a ONCF model as 64 (i.e., K = 64) and follow the common
practice of the half-size tower structure. In this case, even a 1layer MLP has 8, 388, 608 (i.e., 4, 096 × 2, 048) parameters,
not to mention the use of more layers. We argue that such
a large number of parameters makes MLP prohibitive to be
used in ONCF because of three reasons: 1) It requires powerful machines with large memories to store the model; and 2) It
needs a large number of training data to learn the model well;
and 3) It needs to be carefully tuned on the regularization of
each layer to ensure good generalization performance2.
The ConvNCF Model.
To address the drawback of MLP,
we propose to employ CNN above the interaction map to extract signals. As CNN stacks layers in a locally connected
manner, it utilizes much fewer parameters than MLP. This
allows us to build deeper models than MLP easily, and bene-
ﬁts the learning of high-order correlations among embedding
dimensions. Figure 2 shows an illustrative example of our
ConvNCF model. Note that due to the complicated concepts
behind CNN (e.g., stride, padding etc.), we are not ambitious to give a systematic formulation of our ConvNCF model
here. Instead, without loss of generality, we explain ConvNCF of this speciﬁc setting, since it has empirically shown
good performance in our experiments. Technically speaking,
any structure of CNN and parameter setting can be employed
in our ConvNCF model. First, in Figure 2, the size of input
interaction map is 64×64, and the model has 6 hidden layers,
where each hidden layer has 32 feature maps. A feature map
c in hidden layer l is represented as a 2D matrix Elc; since we
set the stride to 2, the size of Elc is half of its previous layer
l−1, e.g. E1c ∈R32×32 and E2c ∈R16×16. All feature maps
of Layer l can be represented as a 3D tensor El.
Given the input interaction map E, we can ﬁrst get the feature maps of Layer 1 as follows:
i,j,c]32×32×32,
i,j,c = ReLU(b1 +
e2i+a,2j+b · t1
convolution ﬁlter
where b1 denotes the bias term for Layer 1, and T 1 =
a,b,c]2×2×32 is a 3D tensor denoting the convolution ﬁlter
for generating feature maps of Layer 1. We use the rectifer
unit as activation function, a common choice in CNN to build
deep models. Following the similar convolution operation,
we can get the feature maps for the following layers. The
only difference is that from Layer 1 on, the input to the next
layer l + 1 becomes a 3D tensor El:
El+1 = [el+1
i,j,c]s×s×32,
where 1 ≤l ≤5, s =
i,j,c = ReLU(bl+1 +
2i+a,2j+b · tl+1
1−a,1−b,c),
where bl+1 denotes the bias term for Layer l +1, and T l+1 =
a,b,c,d]2×2×32×32 denote the 4D convolution ﬁlter for Layer
l + 1. The output of the last layer is a tensor of dimension
1 × 1 × 32, which can be seen as a vector and is projected to
the ﬁnal prediction score with a weight vector w.
Note that convolution ﬁlter can be seen as the “locally connected weight matrix” for a layer, since it is shared in generating all entries of the feature maps of the layer. This significantly reduces the number of parameters of a convolutional
2In fact, another empirical evidence is that most papers used
MLP with at most 3 hidden layers, and the performance only improves slightly (or even degrades) with more layers [He et al., 2017;
Covington et al., 2016; He and Chua, 2017]
layer compared to that of a fully connected layer. Speciﬁcally,
in contrast to the 1-layer MLP that has over 8 millions parameters, the above 6-layer CNN has only about 20 thousands parameters, which are several magnitudes smaller. This makes
our ConvNCF more stable and generalizable than MLP.
Rationality of ConvNCF.
Here we give some intuitions on
how ConvNCF can capture high-order correlations among
embedding dimensions. In the interaction map E, each entry
eij encodes the second-order correlation between the dimension i and j. Next, each hidden layer l captures the correlations of a 2 × 2 local area3 of its previous layer l −1. As an
example, the entry e1
x,y,c in Layer 1 is dependent on four elements [e2x,2y; e2x,2y+1; e2x+1,2y; e2x+1,2y+1], which means
that it captures the 4-order correlations among the embedding
dimensions [2x; 2x + 1; 2y; 2y + 1]. Following the same reasoning process, each entry in hidden layer l can be seen as
capturing the correlations in a local area of size 2l in the interaction map E. As such, an entry in the last hidden layer
encodes the correlations among all dimensions. Through this
way of stacking multiple convolutional layers, we allow ConvNCF to learn high-order correlations among embedding dimensions from locally to globally, based on the 2D interaction map.
Training Details
We optimize ConvNCF with the BPR objective with minibatch Adagrad [Duchi et al., 2011].
Speciﬁcally, in each
epoch, we ﬁrst shufﬂe all observed interactions, and then get
a mini-batch in a sequential way; given the mini-batch of observed interactions, we then generate negative examples on
the ﬂy to get the training triplets. The negative examples are
randomly sampled from a uniform distribution; while recent
efforts show that a better negative sampler can further improve the performance [Ding et al., 2018], we leave this exploration as future work. We pre-train the embedding layer
with MF. After pre-training, considering that other parameters of ConvNCF are randomly initialized and the overall
model is in a underﬁtting state, we train ConvNCF for 1 epoch
ﬁrst without any regularization. For the following epochs,
we enforce regularization on ConvNCF, including L2 regularization on the embedding layer, convolution layers, and
the output layer, respectively. Note that the regularization coefﬁcients (especially for the output layer) have a very large
impact on model performance.
Experiments
To comprehensively evaluate our proposed method, we conduct experiments to answer the following research questions:
Can our proposed ConvNCF outperform the state-ofthe-art recommendation methods?
RQ2 Are the proposed outer product operation and the CNN
layer helpful for learning from user-item interaction data
and improving the recommendation performance?
RQ3 How do the key hyperparameter in CNN (i.e., number
of feature maps) affect ConvNCF’s performance?
3The size of the local area is determined by our setting of the
ﬁlter size, which is subjected to change with different settings.
Table 1: Top-k recommendation performance where k ∈{5, 10, 20}. RI indicates the average improvement of ConvNCF over the baseline.
∗indicates that the improvements over all other methods are statistically signiﬁcant for p < 0.05.
Experimental Settings
Data Descriptions.
We conduct experiments on two publicly accessible datasets: Yelp4 and Gowalla5.
Yelp. This is the Yelp Challenge data for user ratings on
businesses.
We ﬁlter the dataset following by [He et al.,
2016b]. Moreover, we merge the repetitive ratings at different
timestamps to the earliest one, so as to study the performance
of recommending novel items to a user. The ﬁnal dataset obtains 25,815 users, 25,677 items, and 730,791 ratings.
Gowalla. This is the check-in dataset from Gowalla, a
location-based social network, constructed by [Liang et al.,
2016] for item recommendation. To ensure the quality of the
dataset, we perform a modest ﬁltering on the data, retaining
users with at least two interactions and items with at least ten
interactions. The ﬁnal dataset contains 54,156 users, 52,400
items, and 1,249,703 interactions.
Evaluation Protocols.
For each user in the dataset, we
holdout the latest one interaction as the testing positive sample, and then pair it with 999 items that the user did not rate
before as the negative samples. Each method then generates
predictions for these 1, 000 user-item interactions. To evaluate the results, we adopt two metrics Hit Ratio (HR) and
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), same as
[He et al., 2017]. HR@k is a recall-based metric, measuring whether the testing item is in the top-k position (1 for yes
and 0 otherwise). NDCG@k assigns the higher scores to the
items within the top k positions of the ranking list. To eliminate the effect of random oscillation, we report the average
scores of the last ten epochs after convergence.
Baselines.
To justify the effectiveness of our proposed ConvNCF, we study the performance of the following methods:
ItemPop ranks the items based on their popularity,
which is calculated by the number of interactions. It is always taken as a benchmark for recommender algorithms.
2. MF-BPR [Rendle et al., 2009] optimizes the standard
MF model with the pairwise BPR ranking loss.
3. MLP [He et al., 2017] is a NCF method that concatenates user embedding and item embedding to feed to the standard MLP for learning the interaction function.
4. JRL [Zhang et al., 2017] is a NCF method that places a
MLP above the element-wise product of user embedding and
item embedding. Its difference with GMF [He et al., 2017] is
4 
5 pro.zip
that JRL uses multiple hidden layers above the element-wise
product, while GMF directly outputs the prediction score.
5. NeuMF [He et al., 2017] is the state-of-the-art method
for item recommendation, which combines hidden layer of
GMF and MLP to learn the user-item interaction function.
Parameter Settings.
We implement our methods with
Tensorﬂow, which is available at: We randomly holdout 1 training interaction
for each user as the validation set to tune hyperparameters.
We evaluate ConvNCF of the speciﬁc setting as illustrated in
Figure 2. The regularization coefﬁcients are separately tuned
for the embedding layer, convolution layers, and output layer
in the range of [10−3, 10−2, ..., 102]. For a fair comparison,
we set the embedding size as 64 for all models and optimize
them with the same BPR loss using mini-batch Adagrad (the
learning rate is 0.05). For MLP, JRL and NeuMF that have
multiple fully connected layers, we tuned the number of layers from 1 to 3 following the tower structure of [He et al.,
2017]. For all models besides MF-BPR, we pre-train their
embedding layers using the MF-BPR, and the L2 regularization for each method has been fairly tuned.
Performance Comparison (RQ1)
Table 1 shows the Top-k recommendation performance on
both datasets where k is set to 5, 10, and 20. We have the
following key observations:
• ConvNCF achieves the best performance in general, and
obtains high improvements over the state-of-the-art methods. This justiﬁes the utility of ONCF framework that uses
outer product to obtain the 2D interaction map, and the ef-
ﬁcacy of CNN in learning high-order correlations among
embedding dimensions.
• JRL consistently outperforms MLP by a large margin on
both datasets. This indicates that, explicitly modeling the
correlations of embedding dimensions is rather helpful for
the learning of the following hidden layers, even for simple correlations that assume dimensions are independent of
each other. Meanwhile, it reveals the practical difﬁculties
to train MLP well, although it has strong representation
ability in principle [Hornik, 1991].
Efﬁcacy of Outer Product and CNN (RQ2)
Due to space limitation, for the blow two studies, we only
show the results of NDCG, and the results of HR admit the
same trend thus they are omitted.
Figure 3: NDCG@10 of applying different operations above the embedding layer in each epoch (GMF and JRL use element-wise product, MLP uses concatenation, and ConvNCF uses outer product).
Figure 4: NDCG@10 of using different hidden layers for ONCF
(ConvNCF uses a 6-layer CNN and ONCF-mlp uses a 3-layer MLP
above the interaction map).
Efﬁcacy of Outer Product.
To show the effect of outer
product, we replace it with the two common choices in existing solutions — concatenation (i.e., MLP) and element-wise
product (i.e., GMF and JRL). We compare their performance
with ConvNCF in each epoch in Figure 3. We observe that
ConvNCF outperforms other methods by a large margin on
both datasets, verifying the positive effect of using outer product above the embedding layer. Speciﬁcally, the improvements over GMF and JRL demonstrate that explicitly modeling the correlations between different embedding dimensions
are useful. Lastly, the rather weak and unstable performance
of MLP imply the difﬁculties to train MLP well, especially
when the low-level has fewer semantics about the feature interactions. This is consistent with the recent ﬁnding of [He
and Chua, 2017] in using MLP for sparse data prediction. .
Efﬁcacy of CNN.
To make a fair comparison between CNN
and MLP under our ONCF framework, we use MLP to learn
from the same interaction map generated by outer product.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst ﬂatten the interaction as a K2 dimensional vector, and then place a 3-layer MLP above it. We
term this method as ONCF-mlp. Figure 4 compares its performance with ConvNCF in each epoch. We can see that ONCFmlp performs much worse than ConvNCF, in spite of the fact
that it uses much more parameters (3 magnitudes) than ConvNCF. Another drawback of using such many parameters in
ONCF-mlp is that it makes the model rather unstable, which
is evidenced by its large variance in epoch. In contrast, our
ConvNCF achieves much better and stable performance by
using the locally connected CNN. These empirical evidence
provide support for our motivation of designing ConvNCF
and our discussion of MLP’s drawbacks in Section 2.2.
100 300 500 700 900 1100 1300
100 300 500 700 900 1100 1300
Figure 5: Performance of ConvNCF w.r.t. different numbers of feature maps per convolutional layer (denoted by C) in each epoch on
Hyperparameter Study (RQ3)
Impact of Feature Map Number.
The number of feature
maps in each CNN layer affects the representation ability of
our ConvNCF. Figure 5 shows the performance of ConvNCF
with respect to different numbers of feature maps. We can see
that all the curves increase steadily and ﬁnally achieve similar
performance, though there are some slight differences on the
convergence curve. This reﬂects the strong expressiveness
and generalization of using CNN under the ONCF framework
since dramatically increasing the number of parameters of a
neural network does not lead to overﬁtting. Consequently,
our model is very suitable for practical use.
Conclusion
We presented a new neural network framework for collaborative ﬁltering, named ONCF. The special design of ONCF
is the use of an outer product operation above the embedding layer, which results in a semantic-rich interaction map
that encodes pairwise correlations between embedding dimensions. This facilitates the following deep layers learning high-order correlations among embedding dimensions.
To demonstrate this utility, we proposed a new model under
the ONCF framework, named ConvNCF, which uses multiple convolution layers above the interaction map. Extensive
experiments on two real-world datasets show that ConvNCF
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in top-k recommendation. In future, we will explore more advanced CNN models
such as ResNet [He et al., 2016a] and DenseNet [Huang et al.,
2017] to further explore the potentials of our ONCF framework. Moreover, we will extend ONCF to content-based recommendation scenarios [Chen et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018],
where the item features have richer semantics than just an ID.
Particularly, we are interested in building recommender systems for multimedia items like images and videos, and textual
items like news.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation,
Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce, Singapore under its IRC@SG Funding Initiative, by the 973 Program of China under Project
No.: 2014CB347600, by the Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No.: 61732007, 61702300, 61501063,
61502094, and 61501064, by the Scientiﬁc Research Foundation of Science and Technology Department of Sichuan
Province under Grant No. 2016JY0240, and by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China
(No.F2016002). Jinhui Tang is the corresponding author.