IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Supporting Process Model Validation through
Natural Language Generation
Henrik Leopold, Jan Mendling, and Artem Polyvyanyy
Abstract—The design and development of process-aware information systems is often supported by specifying requirements
as business process models. Although this approach is generally accepted as an effective strategy, it remains a fundamental
challenge to adequately validate these models given the diverging skill set of domain experts and system analysts. As domain
experts often do not feel conﬁdent in judging the correctness and completeness of process models that system analysts create, the
validation often has to regress to a discourse using natural language. In order to support such a discourse appropriately, so-called
verbalization techniques have been deﬁned for different types of conceptual models. However, there is currently no sophisticated
technique available that is capable of generating natural-looking text from process models. In this paper, we address this research
gap and propose a technique for generating natural language texts from business process models. A comparison with manually
created process descriptions demonstrates that the generated texts are superior in terms of completeness, structure, and linguistic
complexity. An evaluation with users further demonstrates that the texts are very understandable and effectively allow the reader
to infer the process model semantics. Hence, the generated texts represent a useful input for process model validation.
Index Terms—Business Process Model Validation, Natural Language Text Generation, Verbalization
INTRODUCTION
HE adequate transformation of business requirements into a formal system speciﬁcation is a crucial step in any business-related software development
project. Indeed, business process models have proven
to be an effective means of speciﬁcation . However,
to avoid problems in later stages, it is of paramount
importance to extensively validate the created models
already in the beginning of the development project
One of the general challenges in this context is the
communication gap between the domain expert and
the system analyst . As business professionals often
do not feel conﬁdent in understanding and interpreting
process models, the validation of these models frequently has to rely on a discourse in natural language.
For data modeling, verbalization techniques have been
deﬁned to provide for a direct mapping from model
to natural language , . This verbalization concept
has been emphasized as an important advantage for
the discourse between system analysts and domain
experts in the context of requirements engineering .
In contrast to data modeling, there are no sophisticated verbalization techniques available for process
models. While lists of elements and arcs could be
easily transformed into statements like “Activity A
• H. Leopold is with the WU Vienna, Austria.
E-mail: 
• J. Mendling is with the WU Vienna, Austria.
E-mail: 
• A. Polyvyanyy is with the Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia.
E-mail: 
is followed by Activity B”, this is hardly the way
a domain expert would describe and think about a
process. The technical challenge here is to create a
textual description that captures the full meaning of
the process, yet also to organize the text in a way
that is intuitive to the reader. The reason why a
proper process model verbalization technique is still
missing might be a result of the difﬁculty to meet this
challenge. A process model verbalization technique has
to serialize the non-sequential structure of a process
model into sequential, yet execution-order preserving,
text. In addition, it must be capable of analyzing the
short and grammatically varying labels of process
model elements and of annotating them with their
semantic components like action or business object.
Furthermore, the verbalization technique needs to
handle optionality of certain pieces of information.
In this paper, we follow up on a proposal of adapting
the idea of natural language text generation to business
process models . To this end, we deﬁne a technique
that automatically transforms process models into
intuitive natural language texts. Our technique can
deal with the short and grammatically varying process
model element labels as well as with complex process
models of arbitrary structure. For demonstrating the
capabilities of the proposed technique, we conduct a
two-step evaluation. First, we utilize a test collection
of model-text pairs from and a set of text metrics
to investigate in how far the generated texts are
comparable to manually created texts. Second, we ask
users to translate the generated texts back into process
models. In this way, we investigate whether humans
can successfully make sense of the generated texts.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Section 2 summarizes research on model validation
and challenges of text generation from process models.
Section 3 provides formal foundations. Section 4
introduces our technique for generating text from
process models. Section 5 presents the results of the
model-text pair comparison and of the user evaluation.
Section 6 discusses the necessary steps for adapting
the technique to languages other than English. Finally,
Section 7 closes the paper.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we ﬁrst clarify the role of natural
language in process validation to illustrate the need
for text generation from process models. Afterwards,
we investigate the challenges that are associated with
generating text from process models.
Role of Process Models in Requirements Engineering
The setting of specifying requirements using business
process models can be described in terms of a system
modeling life cycle including the four stages of elicitation, organization, veriﬁcation, and validation .
First, the system analyst interacts with domain experts to elicit process-relevant information. Traditional
approaches for the elicitation of requirements include
interviews, focus groups, and protocol analysis .
More advanced tools use natural language processing
for identifying concepts in documents to support the
system analyst in an unknown domain . Also tools
for automatically inferring requirements from large
information sources and for automatically deriving
models from natural language documents exist .
Second, the system analyst organizes this information
by modeling parts of the process. The organization
of the information in the context of a process model
requires the system analyst to adequately formalize
the elicited requirements. Various business process
modeling languages exist for supporting this task.
Also several quality frameworks and modeling guidelines have been deﬁned including the Seven Process
Modeling Guidelines (7PMG) , the Guidelines of
Modeling , and the Sequal framework . The
modeling itself is supported by many professional
modeling tools like ARIS or Signavio1. Third,
the system analyst conducts a veriﬁcation step on the
model with the aim to resolve inconsistencies. This
step is largely supported by automated techniques.
Petri-net concepts permit the veriﬁcation of control
ﬂow properties such as soundness , , . Also
the correctness of the data ﬂow , , and the
satisﬁability of resource constraints , , can
be checked. All these ﬁrst three steps are rather well
covered in related research with viable solutions being
available.
1. www.signavio.com
Overview of Model Validation Approaches
Prototyping
Transformational Prototyping
Lindland & Krogstie 
Semantic Prototyping
Loucopoulos et al. 
Abstraction and Filtering
Speciﬁcation Abstraction
de Caso et al. 
Hierarchical Goal Organization
Breaux et al. 
Scenario-Based RE
Sutcliffe et al. 
Scenario-Based Validation
Heymans & Dubois 
Speciﬁcation Visualization
Visualisation for Validation
Lalioti & Loucopoulos 
Requirements Animation
Mashkoor & Matoussi 
Property Checking
Validation against Ontology
Kof et al. 
Validation against Plans
Costal et al. 
Validation against Questions
Queralt & Teniente 
Rule-based Consistency Checking
Egyed 
Language Generation
Verheijen & Bekkum 
Nijssen & Halpin 
UML Verbalization
Meziane et al. 
Object Model Verbalization
Lavoie et al. 
Conceptual Model Verbalization
Dalianis 
Process Model Verbalization
Malik & Bajwa ,
Cos¸kunc¸ay 
The situation differs for the fourth task of validation.
Here, the system analyst shows the model to the
domain expert, explains the content, and tries to get
feedback to check the validity. Such domain experts are
typically familiar with the details of the process, but
have limited understanding of business process modeling techniques . The system analyst, in contrast,
has elaborate methodological skills, but has to rely on
the information provided by the domain expert on how
the business process works in practice. Ignoring this
knowledge gap between domain expert and system
analyst has been identiﬁed as a major pitfall of process
modeling . As domain experts often lack conﬁdence
in reading process models, the validation discourse
frequently has to rely on natural language. In general,
various techniques have been deﬁned for supporting
the validation of conceptual models. They can be
subdivided into ﬁve groups including prototyping,
abstraction and ﬁltering, speciﬁcation visualization,
property checking, and natural language generation.
Table 1 gives an overview of existing approaches.
Approaches that validate models through prototyping use an implementation of the modeled system
in order to collect early feedback from domain experts. For instance, Lindland and Krogstie as well as
Loucopoulos et al. deﬁne methods for systematically
transforming requirement models into prototypes ,
 . Approaches for abstraction and ﬁltering aim at
reducing the information content that is provided to
the user. For example, de Caso et al. deﬁne an
approach for automatically obtaining abstractions for
validation purposes. The approach from Breaux et al.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
 allows for using natural language queries to obtain
a goal specialization hierarchy. An alternative ﬁltering
technique is the generation of scenarios. By generating
a set of scenarios from the considered model, domain
experts can more easily reﬂect upon the coverage of
their requirements . Building on such scenarios,
there are also approaches that visualize requirements.
This may include the simple visualization of scenarios
in terms of a graphical model or even the animation of scenarios . An alternative validation strategy
is pursued by approaches that compare models against
a formal property speciﬁcation. Such formal speciﬁcations
may include domain ontologies , user questions
 , predeﬁned property sets , and consistency
rules . The last validation strategy is the generation
of natural language from conceptual models in order
to ease the communication between system analysts
and domain experts. The ﬁrst methods that supported
text generation for conceptual models were Object-
Role Modeling (ORM) and its predecessor the Natural
language Information Analysis Methodology (NIAM)
 , . A key feature of ORM is a direct mapping
from data models to natural language text called
verbalization. Other authors introduced natural language generation for UML class diagrams , object
models , and conceptual models in general .
First attempts for verbalizing process models have
been undertaken in , . However, both works
rely on transformation templates and neither properly
address control ﬂow structures such as splits, joins,
and unstructured process parts, nor do they consider
linguistic variations in the process model. As a result,
the generated texts are simple and incomplete. All
in all, only a few approaches for generating natural
language texts from conceptual models are available.
In fact, to the best of our knowledge, there is currently
no technique for supporting the validation of process
models via natural language generation.
However, given a situation where process models
are chosen for representing requirements, verbalization
would be associated with many beneﬁts. Empirical
research has demonstrated that verbalization can
signiﬁcantly improve the level of domain understanding in the context of requirements engineering .
Moreover, verbalization does not require much effort.
If a generation technique is available, a text can be
generated with a single click. So, it is the objective of
this paper to close the research gap on natural language
generation from process models. In the following, we
discuss speciﬁc challenges that need to be addressed
to achieve this goal.
Challenges of Text Generation from Process
There are a number of challenges for the automatic
generation of text from process models. To illustrate
these challenges, we use the exemplary process model
depicted in Figure 1. It shows a business process
from a hotel using the Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN). The process comprises four roles
and is, hence, subdivided into four lanes. The process
begins with a start event, which is denoted by the
circle in the upper left corner. It continues with the
activity Take down order. The subsequent diamondshaped symbol containing a cross is referred to as
xor-gateway and denotes a decision point, i.e., only
one of the outgoing branches can be followed. Hence,
the subsequent steps depend on the status and the
solvency of the customer. If the customer has the status
premium or is considered as solvent, the room-service
manager approves the order without debit. Otherwise,
the guest’s account is debited directly. Note that an xorgateway with multiple incoming arcs waits until one of
the incoming branches was completed. The subsequent
gateway containing a plus symbol denotes an and-split,
i.e., all outgoing branches will be executed. Hence, this
gateway indicates that the process is split into two
concurrent streams of action: First, the order ticket
is submitted to the kitchen and a meal is prepared.
Second, beverages are prepared if they were ordered.
Note that the gateway containing a circle is denoting an
inclusive or-decision, i.e., either one or both outgoing
branches can be executed. Once the two concurrent
streams of action have been completed, the order is
delivered to the customer and the process is ﬁnished.
In order to develop a proper understanding of the
challenges that are associated with generating text
from process models, we investigated the respective
literature on natural language generation systems. The
challenges can be assigned to one of four different
categories including text planning, sentence planning,
surface realization, and ﬂexibility. Table 2 provides an
overview of the identiﬁed challenges (bold font) and
the according approaches addressing them (standard
The text planning phase is associated with three
main challenges. First, we have to adequately infer
the linguistic information from the process model
elements. For instance, the activity Take down order
must be automatically split up into the action take
down and the business object order. Without this
separation, it would be unclear which of the two
words deﬁnes the verb. As discussed in , this
is complicated by the shortness of process model
labels and the ambiguity of the English language. The
second challenge is the linearization of the process
model to a sequence of sentences. The problem in
this context is that process models rarely consist of a
plain sequence of tasks. Typically, they include nonsequential behaviour represented by decision points
and concurrent branches. To address this problem,
one can use a Reﬁned Process Structure Tree (RPST).
The concept of an RPST was introduced by Vanhatalo
et al. and Polyvyanyy et al. , and facilitates
the linearization of a process model. Nevertheless, as
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Deliver to
Room- Service Manager
Room- Service Manager
Alocoholic beverages
Fig. 1. Exemplary BPMN Process
this is not the primary purpose of the tree, we need
to adapt the technique to successfully employ it for
generating text. In this context, it should be noted that
the verbalization of concurrency is not addressed by
existing natural language generation techniques. The
third challenge is to decide how techniques of text
structuring and formatting such as paragraphs and
bullet points should be applied. To adequately address
this problem, a lot of research has been conducted in
the ﬁeld of natural language generation (see e.g. ,
 , ). However, these approaches do solely work
on the text and do not include information from related
resources like process models.
The sentence planning phase entails the tasks of
lexicalization and message reﬁnement. The aspect of
lexicalization refers to the mapping from BPMN constructs to speciﬁc words. Particularly in the context of
natural language generation without natural language
input, the choice of words represents a considerable
challenge , , . However, for process models
this problem does not occur to the same degree. Due
to the extensive natural language input, the lexical
choice is reduced to the proper integration of the
linguistic information from the process model such
that the process is described in an understandable
manner. The aspect of message reﬁnement refers to
the construction of texts. It includes the aggregation
of messages, the introduction of referring expressions
such as pronouns, and also the insertion of discourse
markers such as afterwards and subsequently. In order
to suitably consolidate sentences, the option of aggregation must ﬁrst be identiﬁed and then it has to be
decided where it can be applied to improve the text
quality. As these problems represent one of the core
tasks of natural language generation, they have been
extensively discussed in literature. For instance, Hovy
investigates the general role of aggregation in language
 . Reape and Mellish as well as Dalianis 
present a variety of concrete aggregation approaches.
However, these approaches also abstract from the
existence of related resources like process models.
The introduction of referring expressions requires the
automatic recognition of entity types. For instance, the
role kitchen must be referenced with it, while the role
waiter must be referenced with he or she. The decision
on where to apply referring expressions is, for instance,
discussed in . The insertion of discourse markers
should further increase the readability and variability
of the text. Hence, varying markers must be inserted
at suitable positions.
In the context of the surface realization, the actual
generation of a grammatically correct sentence is performed. This requires the determination of a suitable
word order, the inﬂection of words, the introduction
of function words (e.g., articles), and tasks such as
punctuation and capitalization. Up until now, many
components for surface realization have been introduced , , , , . They are based on
different theoretical concepts such as the Meaning Text
Theory , functional grammar , or the simple
frame language , and, hence, ask for different input
Besides the core natural language generation tasks,
we consider ﬂexibility to be an important feature. As
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Challenges for Generating Text from Process Models
Challenges
Applicable Concepts
Text Planning
Linguistic Information Extraction
Linguistic Label Analysis
Leopold et al. 
Model Linearization
Computation of RPST
Vanhatalo et al. 
Computation and Generalization
Polyvyanyy et al. 
Text Structuring
Multi-paragraph Text Segmentation Heinonen 
Efﬁcient Text Planning
Meteer , 
Sentence Planning
Lexicalization
Corpus-based Lexical Choice
Bangalore & Owen 
Lexical Choice Criteria
Stede , 
Message Reﬁnement
Role of Aggregation in Language
Role and Deﬁnition of Aggregation Reape & Mellish 
Redundancy Reducing Aggregation Dalianis 
Framework for Pronominalisation
Kibble & Power 
Surface Realization
Fast and Portable Realizer
Lavoie & Rambow 
Integrated Surface Realization
Busemann 
Plug-in Realization Component
Michael & Robin 
Real-time Realization for Dialogues McRoy et al. 
Flexibility
Varying Input
Summaries from Multiple Articles
McKeown & Radev 
Multiple On-line Sources
Radev & McKeown 
Output Adaptation
Stylistically Varying Texts
Multi-lingual Generation
Goldberg et al. 
Multi-lingual Generation
Bateman 
Language and Graphics
Wahlster et al. 
we do not expect the input models to adhere to
certain conventions, we have to deal with considerably
differing characteristics of the input models. The issue
of varying input was also discussed for other natural language generation systems , . Although
the general problem is similar, these works mainly
deal with textual inputs. As natural language only
represents one of many dimensions that is subject to
variation, we also need to address further aspects. For
instance, if a model provides a role description, the
sentence can be presented in active voice (e.g. The roomservice manager takes down the order). If it is unknown
who performs the considered task, the description
must be presented in passive voice (The order is taken
down). As a result, template-based approaches, which
simply ﬁll the gaps of a predeﬁned sentence, are not
appropriate . An example for a ﬂexible generation
technique is deﬁned in . It generates stylistically
varying texts. Other examples include the generation
of multiple languages , or the generation of
graphics and text . All these approaches have in
common that they do not work with text templates, but
use linguistic representations to maintain the required
level of ﬂexibility. The typical architecture of such
approaches has been intensively studied by Reiter .
Against the background of these challenges, we propose a technique for generating natural language text
from process models. To properly deﬁne this technique,
the next section introduces formal preliminaries.
FORMAL PRELIMINARIES
This section discusses the formal preliminaries of our
work. In particular, we provide a formal description
of BPMN process models as they represent the input
for the presented generation technique.
The Business Process Model and Notation is a standardized modeling language for graphically specifying
business processes . It has been initially developed
by the Business Process Management Initiative (BPMI)
and is now maintained by the Object Management
Group (OMG). BPMN was designed to support both
IT and business users, yet providing the means for
representing complex real-world semantics [76, p. 13].
As of today, it is available in version 2.0. A comprehensive (yet incomplete) formalization of BPMN has
been proposed by Dijkman . Due to the extensive
symbol set, a complete formalization of BPMN would
introduce unnecessary complexity. Hence, we adapt
the formalization from , and focus on frequently
employed elements. Moreover, we respectively include
the aspects of labeling.
Deﬁnition 3.1. (BPMN Process Model). A BPMN
process model PBP MN = (A, E, G, F, R, P, L, ρ,
π, λ, γ, ϵ, τ) consists of six ﬁnite sets A, E, G, R,
P, L, a binary relation F ⊆(A ∪E ∪G) × (A ∪
E ∪G), a surjective function ρ : (A ∪E) →R, a
surjective function π : R →P, a partial function
λ : (A ∪E ∪G ∪F ∪R ∪F)
7→L, a function
γ : G →{andS, andJ, orS, orJ, xorD
S , xorJ},
a function ϵ : E →{plain, timer, message, error}, and
a function τ : E →A such that
- A is a ﬁnite non-empty set of activities.
- E is a ﬁnite set of events.
- G is a ﬁnite set of gateways.
- We write N = A ∪E ∪G for all nodes of the BPMN
- F is a set of sequence ﬂows. Each sequence ﬂow
f ∈F represents a directed edge between two nodes.
- R is a ﬁnite set of roles.
- P is a ﬁnite set of pools.
- We write U = N ∪R ∪P ∪F for all units of the
BPMN model which can carry a label.
- L is a ﬁnite set of text labels.
- The surjective function ρ speciﬁes the assignment of
a role r ∈R to activities and events A ∪E. Hence,
every activity and every event can be associated with
exactly one role.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
- The surjective function π speciﬁes the assignment of
a role r ∈R to a pool p ∈P. Hence, a pool represents
a group of roles.
- The partial function λ deﬁnes the assignment of a
label l ∈L to a process model unit u ∈U.
- The function γ speciﬁes the type of a gateway
g ∈G as andS, andJ, orS, orJ, xorD
The subscript S denotes a gateway that splits the
sequence ﬂow into multiple branches, the subscript
J denotes a Gateways that joins multiple sequence
ﬂows into one, and the superscripts D and E denote
whether a split is based on data (D) or the occurrence
of an event (E).
- The function ϵ speciﬁes the type of an event e ∈E
as plain, timer, message, or error. The type of the event
speciﬁes the condition which is associated with it.
While a plain event is not associated with a speciﬁc
condition, a timer event is connected with a temporal
condition, a message event is associated with the
receipt of a message, and an error event is associated
with the occurrence of an error.2
- The function τ assigns an event e ∈E to an
activity (attached event). If such an event occurs, the
execution of the respective activity is interrupted.
To precisely address the required features of a process model for formally describing our text generation
technique, we deﬁne the set of predecessors and
successors and the set of labeled elements.
(Predecessors
Successors
Nodes). Let N be a set of nodes and F ⊆N × N
a binary relation over N representing the sequence
ﬂows. For each node n ∈N, we deﬁne the set of
preceding nodes •n with {x ∈N | (x,n) ∈F} and the
set of successing nodes n• accordingly with {x ∈N |
(n,x) ∈F}.
Deﬁnition 3.3. (Labeled Elements). Let U be a set of
units, L a set of text labels, and λ a partial function
assigning units to labels. Accordingly, the set of labeled
units Uλ is given by dom(λ).
Building on these deﬁnitions, we deﬁne a technique
for generating natural language texts from process
models in the next section.
TEXT GENERATION APPROACH
This section deﬁnes our approach to natural language
generation from business process models3. Section
4.1 gives an overview of the architecture and its
components. Sections 4.2 through 4.7 introduce each
component in detail.
2. Note that this does not reﬂect the entire event symbol set of
BPMN. In this paper, we use the most common event types for
illustrating how events can be treated in the context of natural
language generation.
3. The source code can be obtained from
 
The architecture of our text generation technique is
building on the traditional pipeline concept from
natural language generation systems . The basic
rationale of the technique is to utilize the existing
information from the model to generate a text. In
order to derive a sequence of sentences, we linearize
the model via the creation of a tree structure. In
particular, the text generation technique comprises six
components (see Figure 2):
1) Linguistic Information Extraction: Extraction of
linguistic components from the process model
element labels.
2) Annotated RPST Generation: Linearization of process model through the generation of a tree
structure. In addition, each node is annotated with
the linguistic information from the previous step.
3) Text Structuring: Application of text structuring
techniques, such as the insertion of paragraphs
and bullet points, based on the computed tree
structure.
4) DSynT-Message Generation: Generation of an intermediate linguistic message structure for each
node of the tree. This component represents the
core of the generation technique.
5) Message Reﬁnement: Reﬁnement of the generated
messages through aggregation or the introduction
of referring expressions and discourse markers.
6) RealPro-Realizer: Transformation of intermediate
message structures to grammatically correct sentences.
In the following sections, we introduce and explain
each of these components in detail.
Linguistic Information Extraction
The goal of this component is the adequate inference of
linguistic information from all labeled process model
elements. To this end, we employ the parsing and
annotation techniques deﬁned in to annotate
activities, events, and gateways.
For instance, the activity Take down order is decomposed into the action take down and the business object
order. Analogously, events and gateways are analyzed
and enriched with the according component annotation. For example, the gateway Alcoholic Beverages
Ordered? is annotated with the action order and the
business object alcoholic beverages. Note that gateways
represent an important source of information in the
context of text generation. As they deﬁne decision
points, they are transformed into conditional sentences
describing alternative behavior in the process. Once the
annotation has been conducted for all labeled process
model elements, the annotation records are handed
over to the next component.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Linguistic
Information
Extraction
Generation
Structuring
Generation
Refinement
Text Planning
Sentence Planning
Realization
Fig. 2. Architecture of our Natural Language Generation System
Annotated RPST Generation
The RPST Generation component derives a tree representation for every pool of the input model. In
particular, we compute a Reﬁned Process Structure
Tree, which is a parse tree containing a hierarchy
of sub graphs derived from the original model ,
 . The RPST is based on the observation that every
workﬂow graph can be decomposed into a hierarchy
of logically independent sub graphs having a single
entry and single exit. Such sub graphs are referred to
as fragments. In an RPST, any two of these fragments
are either nested or disjoint. The resulting hierarchy
can be shown as a tree where the root is the entire tree
and the leaves are fragments composed of a single arc.
Every RPST fragment belongs to one of four structured classes: trivial fragments (T), bonds (B), polygons
(P), or rigids (R). Trivial fragments consist of two
nodes connected with a single arc. As an example,
consider the connection between the start event and
the activity Take down order from the example process
in Figure 1. A bond represents a set of fragments
sharing two common nodes. In BPMN process models,
this generally applies to regions between split and
join gateways, including more complex split and join
structures such as loops. As an example, consider the
region of the example process in Figure 1 which is
conﬁned by the or-split and the or-join. This fragment
containing the two activities Fetch wine from cellar and
Prepare alcoholic beverages represents a bond. Polygons
capture sequences of other fragments. Hence, any
sequence in a process model is reﬂected by a respective polygon fragment. As an example, consider the
connection between the and-split, the activity Submit
order ticket to kitchen, and the activity Prepare meal from
the example process. The individual connections are
trivial fragments, while the entire path is a polygon.
In case a fragment cannot be classiﬁed as trivial, bond,
or polygon, it is categorized as a rigid. As an example
for a rigid, consider the region of the example process
in Figure 1 between the ﬁrst xor-split (labeled with
Premium customer?) and the xor-join before the andsplit. Due to the combination of multiple decisions and
activities that cannot be represented by trivial, bond,
or polygon fragments, this model region is classiﬁed
as a rigid.
Figure 3 illustrates the previously discussed concepts
using an abstracted version of the hotel process and
its corresponding RPST. To adapt the original RPST
generation algorithm to the speciﬁc requirements of
text generation, we extend it with three additional features: automatic ordering of the fragments, processing
of models with multiple entries and exits, and the
annotation of the nodes with the extracted linguistic
information.
Since the existing RPST algorithms by , do
not explicitly deﬁne an order of the fragments, we adapt
the RPST computation in a suitable way. For each level
in the RPST, we determine the order by arranging
the fragments according to their appearance in the
process model. Hence, the ﬁrst level starts with trivial
fragment a1, connecting the start event and vertex V1.
Respectively, trivial fragment a2, rigid fragment R1, etc.
are following. If the order is not deﬁned, as for instance
in case of parallel branches, an objective criterion such
as the path length is employed for determining an
order that is conducive for text generation purposes.
As rigids deﬁne behavior that cannot be represented by
sequences of RPST nodes, the ordering is not applied
to rigids.
To generate RPSTs from process models with multiple
entries and exits, we use the algorithm described in ,
 . In particular, we augment process models with
multiple start events with an additional start node and
add an arc from this new node to each of the original
start events. Respectively, a model with multiple end
events is augmented with an additional end node
and an arc from each original end event to the newly
introduced end node. At the end of the structuring
process, we remove the additionally introduced nodes.
As a result, the RPST can also be computed for process
models with multiple start and end events.
In addition to these amendments, we also annotate
the RPST with the linguistic information from the
extraction phase and with additional meta information.
For instance, vertex V1 from trivial fragment a1 is
annotated with the action take down, the business object
order, and the role room-service manager. Bond B1 is
annotated with the action order, the business object
beverages, and the adjective alcoholic. Furthermore, the
bond is tagged as an xor-gateway with Yes/No-arcs
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
a12 a13 a14
Fig. 3. Abstract Version of Figure 1 and its RPST
of the type skip. The latter aspect is derived from the
fact that one branch is directly ﬂowing into the join
gateway and hence provides an option to skip the
activities on the alternative branch.
Text Structuring
The question of how to optimally structure natural
texts using paragraphs has been widely discussed in
prior research. Many methods employ a similarity
metric such as the semantic relatedness between words
to compute the lexical cohesion between the sentences
of a text , , . Based on the resulting similarity
distribution, a text can be heuristically subdivided into
multiple paragraphs. More sophisticated approaches
try to use the similarity distribution for identifying the
optimal fragment boundaries . However, while the
cohesion in standard natural language texts must be
completely derived from its semantics, a text generated
from a process model can be also structured by
building on the features of the model.
Against this background, we introduce two approaches for obtaining a manageable and well readable
text. First, we use bullet points to properly communicate the branches of splits. As a result, the text
is partitioned into semantically related paragraphs.
Moreover, parallel as well as alternative branches are
clearly explicated in the text. In case of nested splits,
the bullet points are indented respectively. That enables
the reader to easily keep track of nested structures. In
addition to bullet points, we partition the text using
multiple paragraphs. A particular problem in this
context is that there is no consensus concerning the
optimal number of sentences or words per paragraph.
Nevertheless, experiments demonstrated that paragraphs containing more than 100 words are already
less understandable than paragraphs with fewer words
 . Building on this insight, we include an editable
parameter for deﬁning the size of a paragraph and
predeﬁne this parameter with a value of 75 words.
Once this threshold is reached, we use a change of the
performing role or an intermediate event as indicator
for semantic cohesion and respectively introduce a
new paragraph.
DSynT-Message Generation
This section introduces the message generation component. It transforms the annotated RPST into a list of intermediate messages. Therefore, it recursively traverses
the annotated RPST and derives an intermediate message structure for each RPST node. In the beginning
of this section, we introduce the Deep-Syntactic Tree as
format of the generated messages. Then, we provide
a detailed explanation of the transformation of the
process model elements. Finally, we discuss how the
sub steps are integrated into the overall transformation
technique.
Deep-Syntactic Trees
Each message derived from the annotated RPST is
stored in a so-called deep-syntactic tree (DSynT). A
deep-syntactic tree is a dependency representation that
was introduced in the context of the Meaning Text Theory , . It is used to represent the most signiﬁcant
aspects of the syntactic structure of a sentence. The
advantage of such trees is the rich yet manageable
representation. Furthermore, there exist several off-theshelf surface realizers which directly transform deepsyntactic trees into grammatically correct sentences
(see e.g. , , , ). Hence, we decided to
design an algorithm that maps the given RPST into a
list of DSynT-based messages.
In a deep-syntactic tree, each node carries a semantically full lexeme, meaning that words such as
conjunctions or auxiliary verbs are excluded. Moreover,
each lexeme in a deep-syntactic tree is enriched with
grammatical meta information, so-called grammemes.
Grammemes, for instance, include the voice and tense
of verbs or the number and deﬁniteness of nouns. The
egdes of the DSynT deﬁne the relationship between
two nodes. The set of possible relations is rather small.
For the purpose of text generation from process models,
we employ two actantial4 relations (denoted with I
and II). The ﬁrst relation speciﬁes the subject and the
second relation determines the object of the referenced
verb. In addition, we make use of an attributive
4. An actant is a linguistic term for denoting a noun phrase that
is functioning as the agent of the main verb.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
take down!
class: verb!
room-service
class: proper_noun!
article: def!
class: common_noun!
article: def!
Room-service
“The room-service manager takes
down the order.”
(a) Simple DSynT
room-service
class: proper_noun!
article: def!
class: common_noun!
article: def!
class: verb!
voice: pass!
starting_point: +!
beverages"
class: proper_noun!
article: def!
alcoholic"
class: adjective!
class: verb!
sommelier"
class: common_noun!
article: def!
Alcoholic beverages
“If alcoholic beverages are ordered, the room-service manager
gives the order to the sommelier.”
Room-service
(b) DSynT Resulting in Conditional Sentence
Fig. 4. Two Examples for Deep-Syntactic Trees and their Transformation
relation (ATTR) and a relation for conjoining elements
Figure 4 illustrates the DSynT concept by showing
two example trees, the respective process model fragments as well as the natural language text they are
associated with. As stated, Figure 4(a) represents the
sentence The room-service manager takes down the order
and Figure 4(b) captures the conditional sentence If
alcoholic beverages are ordered, the room-service manager
gives the order to the sommelier. The two examples
illustrate that the root of a deep-syntactic tree is always
formed by the main verb of the sentence and the
actantial relations are used to specify subject and object.
The ATTR relation is applied in two ways. First, to
append adjectives to nouns, and second, to append
a conditional sentence to the main sentence. The
grammemes of the depicted trees essentially include
the word class and the deﬁniteness of articles. In addition,
the lexeme order carries the grammeme starting point
specifying the position of the conditional clause. As a
result, the deep-syntactic trees contain all information
that is required for constructing proper sentences.
Traversing the Annotated RPST
Starting point for the transformation of the annotated RPST into a set of intermediate messages is
the traversing of the tree. Based on the type of the
considered RPST node, the respective algorithm for the
transformation is triggered. Algorithm 1 formalizes
this procedure at the highest abstraction level. The
algorithm requires an RPST node as input and returns
an ordered list of DSynT messages. Note that the input
Algorithm 1: transformRPSTNode(RPSTNode n)
1: List msgs = new List();
2: Global List passedMsgs = new List();
3: for all RPSTNode child ∈n.getChildren() do
if child.getNodeType() = TRIVIAL then
if child.getEntry().getElemType() = ACTIVITY then
msgs.add(transformActivity(child.getEntry()));
else if child.getEntry().getElemType() = EVENT then
msgs.add(transformEvent(child.getEntry()));
else if child.getNodeType() = BOND then
msgs.add(transformBond(child));
else if child.getNodeType() = RIGID then
msgs.add(transformRigid(child));
else if child.getNodeType() = POLYGON then
msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(child));
17: end for
18: return msgs;
node may represent the root or any other node of the
In the beginning, a list for the DSynT messages
and a global list for passed massages is created (line
1-2). The latter list serves as a stack for messages that
need to be incorporated into the text at a later point of
time. It is particularly important for the transformation
of bonds. In the following loop, each child node
of the current RPST node is analyzed (lines 3-17).
If the child is a trivial node, it is further checked
whether it is representing an activity or an event.
As an RPST node always consists of a connection
of two vertices, each representing a process model
element, this is done by deriving the data from the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
entry element of the RPST node. Since the exit element
is accordingly included as an entry element in the
subsequent RPST node, this procedure avoids that a
single process element is considered twice. If the node
entry represents an activity, the respective function for
transforming activities is triggered (line 6). Otherwise,
if the node entry is an event, the event transformation
function is executed (line 8). The return value of these
functions is a set of DSynT messages which have been
created for conveying the semantics of the respective
process model element. For the RPST node types bond
and rigid, the algorithm proceeds analogously. If the
considered child node represents a bond or a rigid,
the respective transformation function is called (lines
11 and 13). Polygon nodes are treated differently. As
they represent a sequence of RPST nodes, the algorithm transformRPSTNode is recursively triggered for
a polygon (line 15). As a result, the comprised nodes
are transformed in the underlying iterations. Note that
bonds and rigids also contain further RPST nodes. The
called transformation functions make equally use of
transformRPSTNode to convert the subsumed elements
into DSynT messages. Finally, after all nodes have
been transformed into intermediate messages, the list
of messages is returned (line 18).
In the following subsections, we discuss the speciﬁc
steps for the transformation of trivial fragments, bonds,
and rigids.
Transformation of Trivial RPST Nodes
As trivial fragments are always leaves of the RPST,
they either represent activities or events. Thus, every
activity and every event is transformed into a single
sentence. This is accomplished by properly representing the activity or event as a deep-syntactic tree. Due
to the annotation, all required information is readily
available. In total, four pieces of information must be
properly organized in a DSynT: action, business object,
additional information, and the role.
Algorithm 2 illustrates the required steps for activities. It requires an RPST node pointing to an activity
as input and returns a deep-syntactic tree representing
the resulting sentence.
The algorithm starts with deriving the activity from
the RPST node (line 1). As previously discussed, an
RPST node always consists of a connection of two
vertices, each representing a process model element.
In order to avoid that an element is considered twice,
we always extract the entry vertex from the given RPST
node. After the activity object has been obtained, a
new DSynT and a DSynT node for the action is created
(lines 2-3). The class of the action node is speciﬁed with
verb, and the lemma is determined with the annotated
inﬁnitive of the action (lines 4-5). Subsequently, the
node is added to the deep-syntactic tree representation
(line 6). As the action node represents the root of the
tree, the relation attribute is not further speciﬁed.
Algorithm 2: transformActivity(RPSTNode n)
1: Activity a = n.getEntry();
2: DSynT dsynt = new DSynT();
3: DSynTNode actionNode = new DSynTNode();
4: actionNode.setClass(’verb’);
5: actionNode.setLemma(a.getAnnotation().getAction());
6: dsynt.addNode(actionNode);
7: if a.getAnnotation().getObject().isEmpty() = false then
DSynTNode boNode = new DSynTNode();
boNode.setClass(’noun’);
boNode.setLemma(a.getAnnotation().getObject());
boNode.setRelationType(’II’);
actionNode.addNode(boNode);
13: end if
14: if a.getAnnotation().getAdd().isEmpty() = false then
DSynTNode prepNode = new DSynTNode();
prepNode.setClass(’preposition’);
String preposition = a.getAnnotation().getAddPrep();
prepNode.setLemma(preposition);
prepNode.setRelationType(’ATTR’);
DSynTNode addNode = new DSynTNode();
addNode.setClass(’noun’);
String addition = a.getAnnotation().getAdd();
prepNode.setLemma(addition);
addNode.setRelationType(’II’);
prepNode.addNode(addNode);
actionNode.addNode(prepNode);
27: end if
28: if a.getAnnotation().getRole().isEmpty() = false then
DSynTNode roleNode = new DSynTNode();
roleNode.setClass(’noun’);
roleNode.setLemma(a.getAnnotation().getRole());
roleNode.setRelationType(’I’);
verbNode.addNode(roleNode);
actionNode.setVoice(’passive’);
36: end if
37: if passedMsgs.getSize() > 0 then
dsynt = mergeSentences(dsynt, passedFragments);
39: end if
40: return dsynt;
If the considered activity contains a business object,
a respective node is created. Therefore, the class of
the node is determined with noun and the relation is
speciﬁed with type II. Then, the business object node is
appended to the action node as a child (lines 8-12). As
a result, the business object plays the grammatical role
of an object. Considering the represented sentence,
this means that the business object is positioned
after the verb. For the incorporation of the additional
fragment, the insertion of two nodes is required. The
ﬁrst captures the preposition introducing the addition.
The second node contains the additional fragment itself.
In case the considered activity includes an addition,
a node of the class preposition with the relation type
ATTR is created (lines 14-19). Then, a node for the
addition belonging to the class noun and the relation
type II is introduced. The incorporation of the nodes
into the DSynT is realized by appending the addition
node to the preposition node and the preposition node
to the action node (lines 25-26). Afterwards, the role
insertion is handled.
If a role description is available, a respective node
is created (line 29). As the role plays the grammatical
role of a subject, the relation is speciﬁed with type
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
I (line 32). In case no role description is available,
the voice attribute of the verb is set to passive (line
35). As a result, a missing role description causes a
passive sentence, i.e., the activity Prepare Meal would
be transformed into The meal is prepared.
In case there are passed messages from prior transformation steps, such as conditions from splits and
joins, these messages are incorporated into the activity
(lines 37-39). Finally, the created DSynT object dsynt is
returned (line 40). Due to complexity, the presented
algorithm only discusses the main steps. Exceptional
cases and further modiﬁcations such as the number of
nouns or the speciﬁcation of articles are not covered.
Based on the circumstances, the generation algorithm
automatically decides about these features. The details
are implemented in a rule system.
Since the transformation steps for events are very
similar to the activity transformation, we do not provide a formal description of the event transformation
function transformEvent. The key difference is that
events are enriched with additional meta information.
For example, we provide an XML DSynT template
for intermediate timer events that communicate that
a certain time condition must be met before the
process can continue. In a similar way, message, error,
and other event types are transformed into natural
language text. For attached events, we implemented
a special treatment. As they typically lead to an
alternative path in the model, they often result in
a rigid. In order to communicate attached events in
the most intuitive fashion, we create an extra RPST for
each attached event and the respective alternative path.
By linking this RPST to the source activity, attached
events are transformed into text without using the
transformation algorithm for rigids.
Transformation of Bonds
We previously deﬁned a bond as a set of RPST
fragments sharing two common nodes. In addition, we
pointed out that this applies to block-structured splits
and joins. In order to adequately transform bonds into
natural language, it is necessary to investigate which
particular bond types we may encounter in process
Table 3 gives an overview of the main bond types in
BPMN process models and how they are transformed
into text. It illustrates that there are ﬁve main process
model structures that are captured by bonds. Each of
them is conveying semantics that need to be addressed
slightly differently in terms of natural language generation. Bonds containing an xor-split (types 1-3) may
capture three different scenarios. First, an xor-split
can be used for indicating a choice between different
activities. Second, it can be employed for providing
the possibility to skip one or more activities. Such a
construction is characterized by an empty arc from
the xor-split to the xor-join. Third, an xor-split might
be used to implement a loop. A loop construction
is characterized by an arc that is ﬂowing back into
the xor-split. Besides the three xor-based structures,
bonds may also consist of an and-split and an andjoin (type 4), or of an or-split and an or-join (type
5). They consequently represent the opportunity to
express concurrent behavior or a choice between one
or more options. It is quite intuitive that each of
these bond types requires a slightly different textual
representation.
The essential idea for transforming bonds into text
is to complement the sentences that are generated
for activities with additional explanations. Such an
explanation sentence may either stand separately or
may be incorporated into an activity sentence. Table 3
provides an overview of the basic sentence templates
for each bond type. The table distinguishes between
labeled and unlabeled gateways and the scope of the
sentence. The choice about one of the options depends
on three parameters:
• The Existence of a Gateway Label: If a gateway
carries a label (which is generally only the case
for xor and or-splits), we use this label to create a
sentence that explains the condition of the split. If
a considered gateway is unlabeled, we use a set
of predeﬁned sentences to explain the semantics.
Note that the predeﬁned sentences are stored as
DSynTs in external XML ﬁles. Hence, the set can
be easily complemented or adapted to the speciﬁc
needs of the user.
• The Gateway Type: As an and-split must be communicated differently than an xor-split, we use
differing sentences for each of the previously
introduced bond types. If a gateway is labeled, the
gateway annotation is accordingly incorporated.
Nevertheless, the way a given label is employed
is still depending on the bond type. As a result,
the generated text for a skip construction varies
from the text generated for a general xor-split.
• The Number of Outgoing Arcs: As our goal is
to communicate the semantics of the model as
naturally as possible, we also consider the number
of outgoing arcs. Rather simple splits consisting
of two arcs do not necessarily require additional
meta sentences in the text. For example, an xorsplit with two outgoing arcs is transformed into
the sentence If <cond.> then <1. branch>, otherwise
<2. branch>. Hence, we differentiate between
splits with exactly two outgoing arcs and splits
with more than two outgoing arcs. In the former
case, we use an integrated sentence template that
incorporates the activities. In the latter case, we
employ an isolated sentence such as If <cond.>
then one of the following branches is executed to
explain the model semantics. Nevertheless, if
the considered gateway does not carry a label,
we abstract from the number of outgoing arcs
and employ an isolated sentence to convey the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Algorithm 3: transformBond(RPSTNode n)
1: List msgs = new List();
2: Gateway g = n.getEntry();
3: DSynT splitSen = new DSynT();
4: DSynT joinSen = new DSynT();
5: if | g• |> 2 then
if g ∈Gλ then
splitSen = deriveFromGatewayLabel(g, ’separate’);
splitSen = loadSplitSentence(g.getType(), ’separate’);
joinSen = loadJoinSentence(g.getType(), ’integrated’);
if passedMsgs.getSize() > 0 then
splitMsg = mergeSentences(splitMsg,
passedFragments);
msgs.add(splitSen);
for all RPSTNode child ∈n.getChildren() do
msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(child));
passedMsgs.add(joinSen);
20: else if | g• |= 2 then
if g ∈Gλ then
splitSen = deriveFromGatewayLabel(g, ’integrated’);
splitSen = loadSplitSentence(g.getType(), ’separate’);
joinSen = loadJoinSentence(g.getType(), ’integrated’);
passedMsgs.add(splitSen);
msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(n.getChildren().get(1)));
passedMsgs.add(joinSen);
msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(n.getChildren().get(2)));
31: end if
32: return msgs;
behavior of the model.
To illustrate this procedure, consider the bonds B2
and B3 from the example process in Figure 1. Bond
B2 contains an xor-gateway with two outgoing arcs
and the label Alcoholic Beverages Ordered. Accordingly,
we use the annotation of the gateway to derive the
sentence fragment If alcoholic beverages are ordered. This
clause is then passed to the ﬁrst activity of the yes-arc,
where the condition and the main clause are combined.
As a result, we obtain a DSynT representing the
sentence If alcoholic beverages are ordered, the room-service
manager gives the order to the sommelier. The respective
DSynT is depicted in Figure 4(b). Similarly, we can
accomplish the transformation of the join-gateway. The
join-condition clause is analogously passed to the ﬁrst
activity after the bond (Deliver to Guest’s Room) and
incorporated into the sentence. As opposed to bond
B2, the gateway in bond B3 does not carry a label.
Hence, we use the predeﬁned sentence one or both
of the following branches are executed to describe the
or-split although it only has two outgoing arcs. This
procedure is used to handle bonds of different size and
type. Within the bond, the recursive transformation
from Algorithm 1 is executed accordingly.
Algorithm 3 formalizes this procedure. In the beginning, a new list for the generated messages is created,
and the gateway object is extracted from the RPST node
(lines 1-2). Then, two new DSynTs for the split and the
join sentences are created. If the considered gateway
has more than two outgoing arcs, it is handled by the
lines 6-19. In case the gateway is labeled, the sentence
explaining the split is extracted from the gateway (line
7). Otherwise, it is loaded from the external XML ﬁles
(line 9). In either case, a separate sentence is constructed
as the bond consists of more than two branches. As
the split sentence was created as a separate sentence,
it can be directly added to the message list. If there
exist passed messages that need to be incorporated, the
split sentence is ﬁrst merged with the passed messages
(lines 12-14). A scenario where such a situation occurs
is the direct succession of a join gateway by a split
gateway. Technically, the combination of two or more
messages is trivial. Each DSynT of a passed message
is added to the main DSynT using the ATTR or
COORD relation. In the following loop, the RPST main
transformation algorithm is executed for each child
fragment of the bond (lines 16-18). Afterwards, the join
sentence is added to the global set of passedFragments
(line 19). Hence, the sentence is incorporated into
the next activity of the process model. The handling
of gateways with exactly two outgoing branches is
implemented by the lines 20-31. The key difference is
that a labeled gateway is transformed into an integrated
split sentence (line 22), and that the join sentence is
passed to the ﬁrst activity of the second branch (line
29). Finally, the message list is returned (line 32).
Transformation of Rigids
As discussed earlier, a rigid is a region of a process
model that captures arbitrarily structured behavior
and hence cannot be characterized by the means of
nested bonds, polygons, or trivial fragments. Thus, the
previously deﬁned transformation techniques are not
sufﬁcient for textualizing the behavior of rigids. In
order to properly communicate the behavior of rigids,
we explain the different execution options to the reader.
More speciﬁcally, we discuss one particular execution
sequence through the rigid from start to end and
then explain the possible deviations from this path. To
automatically derive such an execution sequence and
its deviations, we transform the rigid into a Petri Net.
From this Petri Net we then compute a set of concurrent
runs covering all activities of the original rigid , .
Figure 5 shows an abstract version of the rigid from
Figure 1 and the corresponding Petri Net. The BPMN
to Petri Net transformation can be accomplished using
standard transformation algorithms , , . As
we use element identiﬁers to link transitions and places
to the respective BPMN elements, we do not lose any
semantics of the BPMN model. After the execution
sequences have been computed, we can still associate
the places and transitions of the Petri Net with the
respective BPMN elements.
Building on the deﬁnitions from , , we
designed an algorithm to automatically construct concurrent runs from the derived Petri Net. The rationale
behind this approach is to start with the root of the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Sentence Templates for Transforming Bonds
Appearance
Sentence Template
If <cond.> then one of the following branches is executed.
Once one of the alternative branches was executed ...
If <cond.> then <1. branch>, otherwise <2. branch>
One of the following branches is executed.
Once one of the alternative branches was executed ...
If <cond.> then ...
In any case ...
If required ...
In any case ...
As long as <cond.> the <role> repeats the latter steps and
continues with ... Once <cond.> ...
If required <role> repeats the latter steps and continues with....
Once the loop is ﬁnished ...
Parallelism
The process is split into <no.> parallel branches.
Once all <no.> branches were executed ...
The process is split into <no.> parallel branches.
Once all <no.> branches were executed ...
If <cond.> then one or more of the following branches is executed
Once all desired branches were executed ...
One or more of the following branches is executed
Once all desired branches were executed ...
(b) Petri Net Representation
Fig. 5. Rigid from Fig. 1 and the Corresponding Petri Net Representation
spanning tree and to ﬁrst determine the longest path.
This path is determined as the main run. The unvisited
branches accordingly represent the deviations and are
extracted analogously.
Figure 6 shows the result of the run computation.
It illustrates that the considered rigid can be covered
using three runs. The ﬁrst run captures the case that
the customer has no premium status and is hence
debited directly. The second run represents the case of a
premium customer. In that case, the order is approved
without debit. The third run clariﬁes that the solvency
check may also lead to a positive decision. In this case,
the execution continues with place p5. These runs
demonstrate that the pursued strategy is well-suited
for properly describing the possible behavior of a rigid.
While the ﬁrst run shows one possible path through
the rigid, the remaining runs describe the possible
deviations. In particular, the second run describes an
alternative after the beginning of the rigid, and the
third run represents an alternative after the execution
of activity v2.
Using the concept of the concurrent run generation,
the verbalization of a rigid can be accomplished with
the previously introduced transformation techniques.
As every run represents a Petri Net process model,
the introduced algorithms can be applied in a straight-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Fig. 6. Runs Computed from the Petri Net Representation
Algorithm 4: transformRigid(RPSTNode rigid)
1: List msgs = new List();
2: DSynT rigidIntroSentence = loadRigidIntroSentence();
3: DSynT rigidDeviationSentence = loadRigidDevSentence();
4: PetriNet p = transformToPetriNet(rigid);
5: List runs = generateConcurrentRuns(p);
6: PetriNet mainRun = runs.get(1);
7: msgs.add(rigidIntroSentence);
8: msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(mainRun.getAnnoRPST()));
9: msgs.add(rigidDeviationSentence);
10: runs.remove(1);
11: for all PetriNet run ∈runs do
msgs.add(transformRPSTNode(run.getAnnoRPST()));
13: end for
14: return msgs;
forward manner. Algorithm 4 formalizes the required
steps. It requires an RPST node representing a rigid
as input and returns a list of deep-syntactic trees
representing the resulting text.
Algorithm 4 starts by deﬁning a list and two meta
sentences for describing the behavior of the rigid (lines
1-3). The rigidIntroSentence is used for communicating
that a rigid captures several execution sequences and
how the following text describes its behavior. The
rigidDeviationSentence is inserted for introducing the
list of possible deviations. After deﬁning the required
variables, a Petri Net is derived from the given rigid
(line 4). Then, a list of concurrent runs is computed
from the Petri Net. In order to present the main run
separately, the ﬁrst run is extracted and transformed
into text (lines 6-8). As Petri Nets can be easily mapped
to BPMN process models, the textualization of Petri
Nets can be accomplished without further adaptations
of the text generation algorithm. After transforming
the main run, the remaining runs are paraphrased
accordingly (lines 11-13). Once all runs have been
transformed, the list of messages is returned (line 14).
Note that Algorithm 4, for the purpose of maintaining
a well-readable presentation, does not cover the case of
rigid runs. If a run represents a rigid itself, we employ
the concept of behavioral proﬁles for pair-wise
explaining the order of tasks. Given two activities A
and B that are part of a rigid run, behavioral proﬁles
enable us to infer whether A and B are exclusive
to each other, whether A and B must be executed
in parallel, or whether there is a particular order
between A and B. Depending on the result, we explain
the relationship between the task pair to the reader.
Although the technical implementation of this step is
trivial, it ensures that our approach can handle rigids
of arbitrary complexity.
Message Reﬁnement
Within the message reﬁnement component, we take
care of message aggregation, referring expression
generation, and discourse marker insertion. At this
stage, the entire RPST has been transformed to a list of
DSynT-based sentences. The resulting list of messages
serves as input for the reﬁnement component.
The need for message aggregation usually arises
when the considered process contains long sequences.
In such cases, we make use of three aggregation
techniques:
• Role Aggregation: If two successive activities are
performed by the same role, the messages are
merged to a single sentence. Instead of generating
the two sentences The waiter serves the customer
and The waiter issues the invoice, we merge the
sentences to The waiter serves the customer and issues
the invoice.
• Business Object Aggregation: Neighbouring activities sharing a common business object are aggregated in a similar fashion. For example, the two
sentences The bill is created and The bill is sent are
aggregated to The bill is created and sent.
• Action Aggregation: Analogously to activities sharing a common business object, we use identical
actions two merge sentences. For instance, the sentences The manager is informed and the The customer
is informed are consolidated to The manager and the
customer are informed.
Note that aggregation may also include more than
two activities. The minimum and maximum number
of aggregations can be ﬂexibly conﬁgured. The overall
goal is to generate text that is as natural as possible.
If there are still adjacent messages with the same role
after the aggregation, the role description in the second
message is replaced with a referring expression. We use
WordNet for replacing a role with a suitable personal
pronoun. More speciﬁcally, we infer all hypernyms of
the word associated with the considered role. As a
result, we obtain a set of more abstract words which
semantically include the role description. If we, for
instance, look up the role waiter, we can identify
the hypernym person indicating that this role should
be replaced with he or she. By contrast, the set of
hypernyms of kitchen only contains words like artifact
or physical entity and no link to a human being. Hence,
the role kitchen is referenced with it.
For the discourse marker introduction, we identify
messages appearing in a strict sequence. Using an
extendible set of connectors such as then, afterwards,
and subsequently, we randomly insert a suitable word.
In this way, we obtain a well readable text with
sufﬁcient variety. As the technical implementation of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
the discourse marker introduction is trivial, we do not
provide a detailed algorithm.
Surface Realization
As already pointed out in Section 2.2, the complexity
of the surface realization task led to the development
of publicly available realizers such as TG/2 or
RealPro . Considering aspects as the manageability
of the intermediate structure, license costs, generation
speed, and Java compatibility, we decided to utilize the
DSynT-based realizer RealPro from CoGenTex. RealPro
requires a deep-syntactic tree as input and returns a
grammatically correct sentence.
Building on the RealPro realizer, the technical implementation of the realization task is trivial. In a loop,
each DSynT is passed to the realizer. The resulting
natural language text is then added to the ﬁnal output
text. After all DSyntT-based messages have been
transformed, the ﬁnal text is presented to the user.
EVALUATION
To demonstrate the capability of the proposed technique for generating natural language texts from process models, we conduct a two-step evaluation. First,
in Section 5.1, we apply our technique to real-world
process models and investigate how the generated texts
compare to textual descriptions created by humans.
Second, in Section 5.2, we study in how far humans
are capable of making sense of the generated texts. To
this end, we ask humans to transform the generated
texts back into process models.
Technical Evaluation
The overall goal of the technical evaluation is to
compare the generated texts with textual descriptions
created by humans. Our hypothesis is that both
generated and manually created texts result in text
metrics being in a comparable range. Section 5.1.1
presents the general setup of the technical evaluation
and the employed metrics. Section 5.1.2 introduces the
test collection we utilize. Section 5.1.3 investigates the
technique from a runtime performance perspective.
Section 5.1.4 presents the results from the text generation and comparison. Section 5.1.5 provides a detailed
discussion of the comparison.
In the context of the technical evaluation, we consider
two dimensions for comparing generated and manually created texts: text structure and text content.
The text structure dimension is concerned with syntactic characteristics of the texts indicating their complexity. Since syntactic complexity imposes a higher
cognitive load on the reader, it is often considered as
an important factor decreasing the understandability
of texts , . Nevertheless, up until now there is
no consensus regarding metrics that are best suited
for assessing the syntactic complexity . The ﬁrst
approaches that tried to automatically assess the
quality and complexity of texts date back to the sixties
to the works of Page , . He employed simple
text features such as word count or word length
to evaluate text quality. Today, more sophisticated
techniques are available, taking into account that
humans typically have a more holistic view on a text
 , , . For the purpose of this evaluation,
we adapt the sentence complexity metrics proposed
by Lu . They include different characteristics for
evaluating the syntactic complexity of sentences, and
are, hence, well-suited for comparing the complexity
of texts. In order to also cover the relationship between
text and model structure, we further consider a metric
capturing the number of sentences per process model
node. Altogether, we employ the following metrics:
• Average Number of Sentences (S): Average number
of sentences per text.
• Words per Sentence Ratio (W/S): Average number
of words per sentence.
• Clauses per Sentence Ratio (C/S): Average number
of clauses per sentence.
• T-Units per Sentence Ratio (T/S): Average number of
t-units per sentence. A t-unit is a main clause that
contains an attached or embedded subordinate
clause or any non-clausal structure .
• Complex T-Units per Sentence Ratio (CT/S): Average
number of complex t-units per sentence. A t-unit is
categorized as complex if it contains a dependent
clause .
• Average Sentences per Node Ratio (S/N): Average
number of sentences used for describing a node
of the process model.
The text content dimension refers to the extent the
text reﬂects the semantics of the model. In general,
we identiﬁed that the sentences of the generated and
the manually created texts can be subdivided into
three types: sentences describing the model content,
i.e., the nodes of the model, sentences solely discussing
the control ﬂow, and sentences providing additional
context information that is not captured by the model.
Hence, we operationalize the text content dimension
using the following metrics:
• Activity Coverage (AC): Share of activities that are
discussed in the text.
• Event Coverage (EC): Share of events that are
discussed in the text.
• Gateway Coverage (GC): Share of gateways that are
discussed in the text.
• Sequence Flow Coverage (FC): Share of sequence
ﬂows that are discussed in the text.
• Content Sentences (CS): Share of sentences explaining the model content, i.e., the semantics of the
model nodes.
• Meta Sentences (MS): Share of sentences that only
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
discuss the control ﬂow of the model.
• Information Sentences (IS): Share of sentences that
provide additional context information that is not
captured by the model.
Test Collection Demographics
For the evaluation, we employ the BPMN process
model collection from . The comprised models vary
with regard to several dimensions such as model
source, size, complexity, and the employed element set.
Hence, it is well-suited for achieving a high external
validity of the results. After removing one model from
the set since it did not fulﬁl the required soundness
criteria, we yielded a test set of 46 process models.
As each model is also complemented with a manually
created natural language text, the collection contains
all the necessary material for comparing generated
and manually created texts. Table 4 summarizes the
main characteristics of the test collection aggregated
by the comprised sources. In total, the test collection
consists of models from ten different sources:
1) Humboldt University of Berlin (HUB): The models
from the HU Berlin represent BPMN exercises
which are used in BPMN tutorials. The models
and the texts were translated from German to
2) Technical University of Berlin (TUB): The models
from the TU Berlin were created in the context
of a research project and are discussed in ,
3) Queensland University of Technology (QUT): Similar
to the models from the HU Berlin, the models
from the QUT represent BPMN exercises with
according solutions.
4) Eindhoven University of Technology (TUE): The
BPMN model from the TU Eindhoven was also
created in the context of a research project. The
details are discussed in .
5) Vendor Tutorials (VT): The vendor tutorial models
stem from the websites or online help documentations of the BPM tool vendors Active VOS and
6) inubit AG (IAG): The models from the inubit
AG represent modeling tutorials that are used
in the context of client and employee trainings.
All included texts and models were translated
from German to English.
7) BPM Practitioners (BPMP): This model represents
an exercise that was provided by a BPM consultant. It is used in BPMN modeling tutorials.
8) BPMN Practice Handbook (PHB): These models
represent exercises from the BPMN Practice Handbook . Both models and texts were translated
from German to English.
9) BPMN M&R Guide (MRG): Similar to the models
from the BPMN Practice Handbook, these models
represent exercises from the BPMN M&R Guide
10) FNA - Metrology Processes (FNA): This sample includes models from the Federal Network Agency
of Germany. The models were initially provided
as UML Sequence diagrams. Hence, they were
transformed into BPMN as documented in . In
addition, texts and models were translated from
German to English.
The data from Table 4 illustrates that the models
from the different sources vary in many regards. While
the models stemming from exercises and tutorials are
rather small, some models from the research projects
contain more than 50 nodes. Particularly, the number
of gateways and arcs emphasizes that the majority
of the models are not simple sequences of tasks,
but frequently contain splits and joins. Furthermore,
the number of pools and lanes highlight that the
models also include different degrees of interaction.
The models from the TU Eindhoven and the inubit AG
include, on average, four or more lanes. The models
from the TU Berlin and the FNA frequently make use
of multiple pools. Concerning the number of BPMN
symbols, we observe differences between 4 and 12
distinct BPMN symbols per model from a single source.
In total, the models cover 22 different BPMN symbols
including various event and gateway types, attached
events, and subprocesses. Against this background, we
consider the test sample to be suitable for illustrating
the capability of the technique to successfully generate
natural language texts.
Performance Results
The main application scenario for the presented text
generation technique is to provide domain experts
with a complementary text. Hence, the generation is
not necessarily time critical. However, if the generation
is included in a modeling tool, for instance to provide
an alternative view on the model, the computation
must be adequately fast. We tested the text generation
on a MacBook Pro with a 2.26 GHz Intel Core Duo
processor and 4 GB RAM, running on Mac OS X 10.6.8
and Java Virtual Machine 1.5. To exclude distortions
due to one-off setup times, we ran the generation twice
and considered the second run only.
Table 5 summarizes the average, minimum, and
maximum execution times of the text generation
technique. The numbers show that an average generation run consumes 5.66 seconds. Large deviations
from this value can be only observed for extremely
large or extremely small models. Thus, the longest
generation run was measured for the largest model of
the collection containing over 50 nodes and 4 pools.
Considering the details, it becomes apparent that
especially the number of pools increases the generation
time. This can be explained by the fact that a model
with multiple pools is split up into several individual
models and that the generation is triggered for each
pool separately. Nevertheless, the models from the TU
Berlin illustrate that also large models are converted
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Overview of Test Data Set Characteristics by Source
Public Sector
Legend: M = Total Number of Models per Source, N = Nodes per Model, A = Activities per Model, E =
Events per Model, G = Gateways per Model, F = Sequence Flows per Model, P = Pools per Model, L =
Lanes per Model, NS = Total Number of Different BPMN Symbols per Source
Average Generation Time for each Model by Source
into text between 8 and 10 seconds. As the generation
technique is not required to instantly present a result to
the user, we consider this as reasonable performance.
Text Generation Results
From the evaluation experiment, we learned that
the presented technique is capable of generating
grammatically
appropriately
respective
example, consider the following text, which was
generated by our technique and represents the process
model from Figure 1. It illustrates the handling of
labeled and unlabled gateways, nested structures, and
The process begins when the Room-Service Manager takes
down an order. Subsequently, the process contains a region
which allows for different execution paths. One option from
start to end is the following:
– The Room-Service Manager checks the customer solvency. If it is not ok, the Room-Service Manager debits
the guest’s account.
However, the region also allows for a number deviations:
– In case of a premium customer the Room-Service
Manager approves the order without debit.
– After checking the customer solvency, the Room-Service
Manager may also approve the order without debit.
Then, the process is split into 2 parallel branches:
– If it is necessary, the Room-Service Manager gives
the order to the sommelier. In case alcoholic beverages
were ordered, one or both of the following activities are
– The Sommelier prepares the alcoholic beverages.
– The Sommelier fetches the wine from the cellar.
– The Room-Service Manager submits the order ticket
to the kitchen. Then, the Kitchen prepares the meal.
Once both branches were executed, the Waiter delivers to
the guest’s room. Afterwards, the process is ﬁnished.
Table 6 summarizes the overall evaluation results
for the structural dimension. A general observation
is that the generated sentences are shorter than the
manually created sentences. While the sentences from
the original texts contain an average of 15.5 words,
the generated sentences only include an average of 8.3
words. However, the shortness does not imply that
the generated texts use less words to communicate the
content. In fact, the shortness in terms of word count
is compensated by a higher number of sentences. Still,
the complexity metrics of clauses per sentence ratio
(C/S), t-units per sentence ratio (T/S), and complex
t-units per sentence ration (CT/S) indicate that the
generated sentences are less complex with regard to the
syntactic dimension. Particularly the number of clauses
per complex t-units is, on average, much smaller for
the generated sentences.
Considering the individual values from the employed sources reveals that these general observations
do not equally apply to all collections. As the original
texts were created by humans, they are subject to a
certain degree of variation. For instance, the original
text for the TUE model contains 40 sentences while
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Comparison of the Structural Dimension of Original and Generated Texts
Original Texts
Generated Texts
Legend: S = Sentence, W/S = Words per Sentence, C/S = Clauses per Sentence, T/S = T-Units per
Sentence, CT/S = Complex T-Units per Sentence, S/N = Sentence per Node
(a) Original Texts
(b) Generated Texts
Fig. 7. Node-Sentence Comparison of Original and Generated Texts
the generated text only consists of 24. We also observe signiﬁcant deviations for the complexity of the
manually created texts. As an example, consider the
complex t-units per sentence ratio for the BPMP model
(0.1) and the Vendor Tutorial models (0.7). Likewise,
the sentence to node ratio illustrates great differences.
Among the set of original texts, we observe differences
between 0.3 and 1.3 sentences per node. Among the
generated texts, we face a rather stable value of 0.9.
Figure 7 further illustrates the relationship between
the number of process model nodes and the number
of sentences. For the original texts, it shows a rather
weak linear relationship with some obvious exceptions.
By contrast, it shows a clear linear relationship for the
set of generated texts. This emphasizes that the results
of the text generation are much more stable than the
results produced by humans.
Table 7 shows the results for the content dimension.
The data illustrates that the generated texts cover all
aspects, i.e. activities, events, gateways, and sequence
ﬂows that are included in the models. Considering the
design of the generation algorithm, this is actually a
predictable result. As we traverse the RPST and convert
the model node by node, it is technically not possible
to miss an aspect of the model. Although the coverage
values of the manually created texts are also very close
to 100%, in total three activities and twelve events are
not discussed in the investigated texts. While these
cases do not signiﬁcantly affect the ability of the reader
to understand the models, it reﬂects the general risk
that humans may miss activities when describing a
model. A further observation in this context is that the
manually created texts occasionally use other words
to describe activities. For example, instead of using
the word message as provided in the model activity, an
original text used the word notiﬁcation. While this can
have the positive effect of introducing more variety,
it may also confuse model readers as they need to
identify the correspondence between sentence and
Considering the type distribution of the sentences,
we observe more substantial differences. First, the
generated texts do not contain information sentences
providing additional context information. By contrast,
the manually created texts include an average of
8% information sentences. Typical examples for such
information sentence are A small company manufactures
customized bicycles or The Evanstonian is an upscale
independent hotel. They help to understand the context
of the model, but are not necessary for understanding
the model semantics. Similar to the activity coverage,
this is not surprising. Since the generation algorithm
solely builds on the information from the model,
all generated sentences are either content or meta
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
sentences. The second difference with regard to the
sentence types is the share of meta sentences. While
the generated texts often explicitly discuss control ﬂow
aspects such as splits, joins, and rigids, the manually
created sentences do not discuss these aspects in
isolation. They rather use short fragments like in
parallel or conditional sentences to explain the control
ﬂow on a higher abstraction level. Although explicit
discussions of such control ﬂow aspects may reduce
the impression of generated texts being natural, it may
help readers to fully understand the model semantics.
Discussion of Results
The evaluation shows several similarities between the
generated and the manually created texts. However,
there are three types of differences: the stability of the
structural text characteristics, the semantic coverage,
and the cost for creation and adaptation.
The evaluation demonstrated that the generated
texts are very stable with respect to structural characteristics. In particular, we learned that the generated
sentences are comparably short and simple. Nevertheless, as this is the direct result of the parametrization
of the algorithm, the complexity of the output can be
adapted to the speciﬁc requirements of the users. If
the readers perceive the generated sentences as too
short, the conﬁguration of the aggregation component
can be adjusted accordingly. In case the readers face
understandability problems due to long sentences, the
aggregation can be turned off. Analogously, the segmentation of the text using bullet points or paragraphs
can be adapted. In general, it is important to note
that the structural characteristics of the generated text
are conﬁgurable and, hence, not subject to notable
variations. In comparison to manually created texts,
this represents an important advantage. As illustrated
by the varying complexity among the texts of the
test sample, the complexity of manually created texts
is hard to predict. To guarantee for a stable level of
complexity among manually created texts, it would
be necessary to sufﬁciently train the text writers.
With respect to the semantic coverage, the evaluation
illustrates that the generated texts reliably cover all
activities of the model. As the purpose of textual
descriptions is to increase the model understanding,
this is an important feature. The evaluation showed
that the manual creation of texts might be associated
with a coverage below 100%. This may either originate
from unintentionally leaving out an activity due to the
complexity of the model or from the conscious decision
of a model writer to skip a certain step. Abstracting
from the particular reason, we may conclude that
the manual creation of a text is always subject to
incompleteness in terms of semantic coverage. Due
to the design of the algorithm, the generated texts
do not suffer from this problem. Besides the activity
coverage, we also learned that the generated sentences
are semantically much closer to the model. This applies
to content sentences as well as to meta sentences
describing the control ﬂow. As the presented technique
builds on the information from the model, additional
context information is only provided by manually
created texts. Nevertheless, as context sentences are
much more general than sentences describing the
model, they are also not subject to frequent changes.
Hence, we consider the possibility of including humans
for complementing context sentences as a reasonable
approach. A manually complemented sentence could
easily be recognized by the technique and accordingly
included in the text in a future generation run.
Concerning the costs of creating or adapting textual
descriptions, it is apparent that the automatic generation is not associated with additional costs. Generated
texts can be created with a single click. In contrast, a
manual creation of a textual description is, depending
on the size of the model, associated with considerable
effort. The deﬁnition of requirements often involves
the creation and validation of various process models.
In a more general setting, large corporations maintain
collections with up to thousands of process models ,
the manual creation does not appear to be a reasonable
solution. It is also important to note that process
models are typically subject to changes. Hence, the
describing texts must be adapted accordingly. While
the generated texts can be updated by repeating the
generation run, the manual adaptation might be a
cumbersome task. Especially, if the changes in the
model are not well documented, the user must ﬁrst
identify the delta between model and text in order to
subsequently update the text.
In conclusion, we can state that the introduced
technique generates texts that are, in many regards,
close to those created by humans. The generated
texts are, however, more stable than the manually
created ones. Important characteristics such as sentence
complexity, text size, and also the full coverage of all
process model nodes in the text are a direct result
of the algorithm design and not subject to variation.
While the manual creation of texts might be associated
with considerable effort, the automatic generation
is accomplished with a single click in a reasonable
time. In view of these facts, the presented technique
appears to be well suited for supporting process model
validation with generated natural language texts.
User Evaluation
The goal of the user evaluation is to demonstrate that
humans can successfully make sense of the generated
texts. Section 5.2.1 introduces the general setup of the
evaluation experiment. Then, Section 5.2.2 introduces
the test data set and the participants of the experiment.
Finally, Section 5.2.3 presents the results.
To demonstrate that the generated texts can be properly
understood by humans, we employ an instrument from
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Comparison of the Content Dimension of Original and Generated Texts
Original Texts
Generated Texts
Legend: AC = Activity Coverage, EC = Event Coverage, GC = Gateway Coverage, FC = Sequence Flow Coverage, CS = Content
Sentences, MS = Meta Sentences, IS = Information Sentences
social science which is referred to as back translation
 , . Back translation is typically used in the
context of cross-cultural research when, for instance,
questionnaires need to be distributed in multiple
languages. To make sure that the original and the
translated version are semantically equivalent, the
translated version is blindly converted back into the
original language. Amongst others, this procedure
enables to identify information loss and to detect
unclear concepts. Since the introduced text generation
technique can be considered as a translation from a
process model to a natural language text, we adopt the
instrument of back translation to our context. Assuming that the text generation produces an equivalent
and well understandable natural language text, the
back translation by humans should yield the original
process model.
Test Data and Participants
For the back translation experiment, we selected 12
process models from the test collection introduced in
Section 5.1.2. We subdivided the models into four sets,
each consisting of three models. Table 8 summarizes
the main characteristics of the four model sets and the
comprised models. It shows that we selected models
with challenging characteristics and structures, i.e.,
large models, models containing rigids or subprocesses,
and models with a variety of different symbols. In this
way, we aim at maximizing the external validity of
the evaluation experiment.
As participants, we recruited 11 graduate and PhD
students from the Humboldt University Berlin, Technical University of Berlin, Hasso-Plattner-Institute, and
WU Vienna. Main criterion for participation was a
solid knowledge of BPMN. Nevertheless, to increase
the heterogeneity of the group, we also made sure
that the recruited students differed with respect to
the ﬁnal grade they received for their bachelor or
master studies. For the experiment, we randomly
Characteristics of the Back Translation Model Sets
Legend: MID = Model ID, A = Activities, E = Events, G
= Gateways, R = Rigids, SP = Subprocesses, F = Sequence
Flows, P = Pools, L = Lanes, NS = Number of different
assigned each participant to one of the four model
sets and asked the participants to transform the three
comprised texts into BPMN process models using the
Signavio editor. The participants did not receive further
instructions about the texts. They were only asked
to stick to the original order of the texts and to not
include additional aspects that were not mentioned by
the texts. The participants were allowed to spend as
much time on the translation task as they needed. We,
however, made sure that they did not use any external
knowledge sources for solving the task.
Back Translation Results
As a result from the user evaluation, we received 33
back translated BPMN process models. By manually
comparing these models with their corresponding
originals, we classiﬁed each process model aspect
described by the text as properly translated or as
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Fig. 8. Error Classes from Back Translation
erroneously translated. Table 9 gives an overview of
the results by showing the share of aspects that have
been properly translated.
In general, the results illustrate that the participants
understood and interpreted the generated texts very
well. From the 33 back translated process models,
in total 22 models perfectly matched their original.
Even the lowest obtained score of 83% still indicates
that the text was well understood and that only
details were erroneously translated. The fact that 3
out of 4 participants also understood the verbal rigid
description highlights that the generated texts can also
successfully describe complex process model behavior.
However, a detailed consideration of the results also
shows that a number of mistakes were made and that
especially missing and wrong elements are the main
reason for a non-perfect translation.
To get a better understanding of the back translation mistakes, consider the bar chart in Figure
8. It summarizes the different error classes of the
back translation experiment and their frequency. The
frequency of the error classes shows that the majority
of the back translation mistakes stems from missing
elements. Particularly in big models (e.g., see results
for models 1 and 4 in Table 9), the participants left out
activities and events. Although we cannot claim that all
these cases were unintended, the general results from
these participants strongly indicate that these mistakes
did not result from a misunderstanding, but rather
happened through an oversight. A similar observation
can be made for errors that resulted from wrong symbols
and syntax errors. Cases of wrong symbol use can
be traced back to the confusion of the send and the
receive message event and to the confusion of different
gateway types. Syntax errors mainly occurred when
sequence ﬂows were missing. Again, both error types
are more likely to be a result of a lack of skill with
respect to BPMN than of a serious misunderstanding
of the text. Nevertheless, we also observed mistakes
that doubtlessly resulted from misinterpretations of
the text. Such semantic errors were mainly caused by
the rigid in process model 2. While this represents
a weakness of the generated text, it also has to be
noted that the participants were only provided with the
text in isolation. The actual intention of the generated
text is to represent a complementary artifact. Hence,
we expect that the combination of model and text is
reducing the ambiguity of the textual description such
that the description is also helpful for understanding
complex model semantics. Against the background that
participant 1 and 2 understood the rigid description
correctly, we are conﬁdent that this is actually the case.
Altogether, we can say that the back translation
experiment indicated that the generated texts are
understandable and successfully allow the reader to
comprehend the semantics of the original process models. An analysis of the error sources revealed that also
oversight and a lack of BPMN knowledge may have
contributed to the share of erroneously transformed
aspects and that only a small number of errors can be
doubtlessly traced back to misinterpretations.
While these results are very promising, we also
have to point out that there are a number of aspects
potentially reducing the validity of the back translation
experiment. The external validity is affected by two
main factors. First, the group of participants was
relatively small and only consisted of students. Hence,
we cannot claim that our ﬁndings are representative.
However, the consistently high performance among
all 33 models makes us conﬁdent that the ﬁndings of
our study are not a coincidence. Other studies have
also found that students represent good proxies for
young industry professionals . Still, the beneﬁt of
the generated texts for industry users still needs to be
investigated in future experiments. The second factor
affecting the external validity is the familiarity of the
participants with the domain of process modeling. Due
to their process modeling knowledge, the participants
already had some idea of what to expect from a text
describing a business process and were used to terms
such as ”parallel branch” or ”region”. Nevertheless, it
has to be noted that the actual use case of the generated
texts is less complex. Users would not be required to
use a generated text for creating a process model but
for developing an understanding of an existing model.
In case novices struggle with understanding terms
from the process modeling domain, the presented
technique offers the possibility to adapt these terms
without editing the source code. From the perspective of construct validity, it must be noted that the
experiment did not demonstrate that generated texts
help to improve the understanding of process models.
We showed that participants could successfully make
sense of the generated texts and were able to create a
corresponding process model. While we believe that
these two aspects are highly correlated, further studies
are needed to prove this effect. For the conclusion
validity, we want to highlight that our results do not
allow to conclude about the statistical power. However,
our results credibly show that the generated texts did
not contain systematic weaknesses that prevented the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
Share of Correctly Back-Translated Process Model Elements
Legend: MID = Model ID, PID = Participant ID, A = Activities, E = Events, G = Gateways, R =
Rigids, SP = Subprocesses, F = Sequence Flows, P = Pools, L = Lanes, n.a. = not applicable
participants from successfully transforming them into
the corresponding process models.
ADAPTATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES
Although the general approach to text generation
technique is not language-speciﬁc, the adaptation to
languages other than English requires the replacement
of three resources: the parsing and annotation component, the predeﬁned DSynT templates, and the surface
As the generation technique builds on the linguistic
information from the input process model, the replacement of the parsing and annotation component is an
essential task. Without the proper inference of action,
business object, and addition, it is not possible to
generate a text using the proposed technique. However,
as the annotation technique from can be effectively
adapted to other languages, this component can be
respectively exchanged.
In addition to the parsing and annotation component, it is required to replace the predeﬁned DSynTtemplates. As these templates signiﬁcantly contribute
to the verbalization of events, bonds, and rigids, a
proper adaptation is an important prerequisite. As
an example, consider the fragment The process begins
when, which is used to communicate a start event. In
a German implementation of the generation technique
we use the fragment Der Prozess beginnt wenn and in
a Portuguese implementation we use the fragment
O processo come¸ca quando. In total, we deﬁned about
50 different fragments. However, the templates can
be translated with reasonable effort as they represent
short and rather simple text fragments. In addition, it
should be kept in mind that this represents a one time
As a last step, the surface realization component of
the generation approach needs to be replaced with a
component that is capable of realizing sentences of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. X, NO. X, JULY 2013
the target language. Hence, one option is to replace
the English realization component with an off-theshelf realizer of the target language. Although such
tools have been developed for various languages
including German , French , and Portuguese
 , their availability is often restricted. The second
solution is to replace the English realizer with a self
developed solution. In general, the development of a
full-ﬂedged realizer represents a tremendous effort that
requires profound linguistic knowledge. By contrast,
the development of a realizer for generating texts
from process models is signiﬁcantly less complex. The
reason is given by the limited complexity of the generated sentences. As an example, consider the sentence
The Room-Service Manager checks the customer solvency,
which was generated from the activity Check customer
solvency and its associated role Room-Service Manager.
The generation of this sentence essentially requires the
conjugation of the verb, and the insertion of deﬁnite
articles for the role and the business object. Hence,
a realizer for the purpose of generating texts from
process models can be developed with manageable
In conclusion, it must be stated that the adaptation
of the text generation technique requires additional
implementation effort. However, if the discussed components are available, the technique can be adapted
to many different languages. Considering the overall
beneﬁts of the text generation, the associated effort for
the adaptation can be considered as reasonable. Once
the text generation technique is available, text can be
generated and updated with a single click.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we addressed the problem of supporting
business process model validation through the generation of natural language texts from BPMN process
models. Building on a literature review on natural language generation, we identiﬁed several challenges that
are associated with generating natural language from
process models. In order to adequately address these
aspects, we introduced a pipeline architecture with
six components. We used the parsing and annotation
technique from and the Reﬁned Process Structure
Tree , to transform BPMN process models
into textual descriptions. The technical evaluation of
the technique using a set of 46 process models from
different sources demonstrated the applicability of
the presented technique for successfully generating
texts from process models. The comparison of the
generated and the manually created texts showed that
the generated texts convey the model semantics in
a more compact and also syntactically less complex
manner. Due to the design of the technique, the
generated texts are closer to the model and describe
the model content and control ﬂow explicitly. The user
evaluation demonstrated that the generated texts are
very informative and can successfully be interpreted
by humans. Altogether, the evaluation demonstrated
that the presented technique is capable of generating
appropriate and understandable texts that fully explain
the model semantics. The fact that the generation is
accomplished within a few seconds and without any
manual effort, further emphasizes the usefulness of
the technique.
Based on our ﬁndings, we conclude that the text
generation technique presented in this paper has
the potential to facilitate the validation discourse
between domain experts and process analysts. First,
the generated texts support domain experts in understanding the details of process models even if they are
not familiar with process modeling. Second, the text
generation may also train domain experts in reading
and interpreting process models. As long as text and
model are presented together, readers can see and
learn about the connection between model and text.
Thus, their overall familiarity with process models can
be expected to increase in the long term.
In future work, we aim at investigating to what
extent industry participants can beneﬁt from the generated texts. To this end, we plan to conduct a study in
the context of an industrial requirements engineering
project to empirically investigate the effect of the
generation technique on process model validation.
Furthermore, we plan to incorporate the technique into
a modeling tool. This will provide us with additional
opportunities to study the impact of the proposed
generation technique.