ISSN 1392-1541 print / ISSN 1648-3502 online
 
GEODEZIJA IR KARTOGRAFIJA / GEODESY AND CARTOGRAPHY
1. Introduction
Today, total stations cover most geodetic applications
for determining 3D real-time positions indoors. However, to access increased availability, various weaknesses remain inherent in total station systems such as the
requirement of direct line-of-sight and manual setup of
a relatively large sized and expensive instrument. This
paper addresses these weaknesses and looks forward to
alternative positioning methods that may enable a ‘Millimeters Everywhere’ scenario in the near future. Unfortunately, locations inside buildings, basements and tunnels remain harsh environments for precise positioning.
Typical indoor environments contain multiple walls and
a large number of obstacles that consist of various materials. As a result, current indoor positioning systems
cannot satisfy the challenging demands for most indoor
applications. This insufficiency may explain the diversity
of current indoor position systems – see Fig. 1.
Some attempts exploit new sensors that measure inter-nodal ranges, signal strengths, acceleration or angles for
localisation as well as research, leading to higher sensitivity algorithms for signal acquisition and tracking in harsh
environments. There is also the trend of combined usage
or integration of different sensor systems and data sources.
The large number of available sensors has lead to a variety
of localisation schemes such as triangulation, trilateration,
hyperbolic localisation, data matching and many more.
The employed signal technologies include RF (radio
frequency) technology, ultrasound, infrared, vision-based
systems and magnetic fields. The RF signal-based technologies can be split into WLAN (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz band),
Bluetooth (2.4 GHz band), Ultrawideband and RFID.
In general, most techniques and algorithms can be
applied for both outdoors and indoors. This paper focuses on innovative positioning hardware and techniques
that are currently or in the near future available to determine positions inside buildings or in the underground.
2. AGNSS & high sensitivity receivers
Radio signal attenuation from walls causes standard
GNSS receivers to perform poorly in indoor environments. The weak signals from the satellites become nearly undetectable for the receivers. Depending on the
electrical properties such as the dielectric coefficient of
the building material, GNSS signals are attenuated indoors by 20–30 dB (a factor of 100–1000) compared to
outdoors (Table 1). As a consequence, the attenuation in
buildings is 5–15 dB for residential houses, 20–30 dB for
office buildings and >30 dB for underground car parks
and tunnels, see Table 2.
doi: 10.3846/1392-1541.2009.35.18-22
Overview of Current Indoor Positioning Systems
Rainer Mautz
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
E-mail: 
Received 2008 09 18, accepted 2008 12 23
Abstract. Precise positioning in indoor environments faces different challenges than the outdoor ones. While
indoor environments are limited in size to rooms and buildings, outdoor positioning capabilities require regional
or even global coverage. Secondly, the difficulty of receipting satellite signals indoors has triggered the development
of high sensitive and AGNSS receivers – with many issues remaining unsolved. Thirdly, the accuracy requirements
are dissimilar between indoor and outdoor environments – typically there is a higher demand for relative accuracy
indoors. This paper should be regarded as an overview of the current and near future positioning capabilities for
indoor and outdoor environments. However, it does not lay claim to completeness. Focus is given on various novel
position systems that achieve cm-level accuracy or better which is a requirement for most geodetic applications.
Keywords: indoor positioning, GNSS, wireless networks, novel positioning systems, future positioning scenarios.
35(1): 18–22
Table 1. Attenuation of various building materials for the
L-Band (L1 = 1500 MHz), according to Stone 
Factor [-]
Painted glass
Roofing tiles / Bricks
0.06–0.00005
Ferro-concrete
0.001–0.0005
Geodezija ir kartografija / Geodesy and Cartography, 2009, 35(1): 18–22
Table 2. Signal strength in decibel watt (decibels relative to
one watt) of GNSS satellites
Environment
signal strength delivered from
unaided fixes OK for standard
decode limit for high sensitive
Underground
decode limit for aided, ultra-high
sensitive receivers
The AGNSS or AGPS (Assisted GPS) addresses this
problem. AGPS is successfully used for localisation of
mobile phones. A data link via mobile phone provides
information of the satellite Ephemeris, Almanac, differential corrections and other relevant information that is
normally obtained from the GNSS satellites directly. As
a consequence, the AGPS receiver can more easily lock
on the satellites and obtain a fix position – assuming that
some weak GNSS signals can be received.
In order to make use of the weak satellite signals indoors, the low signal to noise ratio is improved by integration
over multiple intervals, which, on the other hand, requires
longer acquisition times. Massive parallel correlators in
the GNSS receivers are used to reduce the computing time
and power of the receiver during the correlation process
by a factor of 500 or more . Furthermore, AGPS provides external frequency information that
reduces the search interval for the GNSS satellites.
Eisfeller concludes that acquisition of GNSS signals
in environments with signal attenuation of >25 dB (basements, concrete buildings) is not possible without AGPS.
The AGPS accuracy indoors does currently allow room
identification. In order to provide cm-level accuracy, the
AGPS will need to be enhanced by DGPS methods. Currently, with the use of SBAS (Satellite Based Augmentation System) 10 m accuracies are typical for indoor environments (e.g. Opus III from eRide).
Lachapelle concludes that the currently
achievable performance indoors can serve the emerging
location-based services market. With better signal tracking, the use of new GPS and Galileo signals and various
improvements within the next 10 years, a new level of
indoor performance with GNSS will be reached.
3. Pseudolites using GNSS similar signals (LOcata)
The Locata technology consists of a network of terrestrially-based and time-synchronised pseudolite transceivers,
as shown in Fig. 2, that transmit GNSS-like signals for single-point positioning using carrier-phase measurements.
Barnes et al. achieved a real-time positioning standard deviation of 6 mm or 1 cm 93% of the time to a maximum of 100 m distance. In a kinematic test, 16 mm standard deviation with 82% values being less than ±20 mm.
The authors conclude that their system can operate indoors and outside anywhere within sub-cm accuracy despite
multipath errors. The Locata Technology Primer 
Fig. 1. Current positioning systems according to their accuracy and coverage area
Fig. 2. Locata antenna 
R. Mautz. Overview of current indoor positioning systems
demonstrates a standard deviation of better than 5 mm
indoors. Barnes et al. demonstrate the suitability
of the Locata technology for machine tracking/guidance
in factories or warehouses where GNSS satellite coverage
is limited. Barnes et al. conclude that movements
of less than 1 cm can be detected. Due to the signals being
orders of magnitude stronger than GNSS, Locata signals
can penetrate walls. However, the performance degrades
to decimetre level accuracy inside buildings.
4. Laser tracker (Leica Geosystems, Faro, ATT)
Laser trackers as shown in Fig. 3 are usually portable instruments that combine angular and distance measurements using a laser interferometer or an absolute distometer to determine 3D coordinates. A typical maximum
range is 15 m, expandable to 30 m or 70 m. Accuracies
of 0.001” or 10 μm + 5 ppm (μm/m) can be reached. The
principle is that a laser tracker sends a beam to a reflector
sends it back to a rotating sensor – in order to determine the horizontal and vertical angles to the reflector. For
dynamic tracking, the system can follow the target automatically via the survey beam.
5. Resection using infrared Laser (iGPS)
iGPS is a high-precision tracking system offered by Metris that allows monitoring of several sensors simultaneously. It has a range from 2 m to 80 m for indoor and
outdoor applications. According to the manufacturer, an
accuracy of ±0.1 mm for 3D positions can be reached.
The principle is that 2 or more iGPS transmitters continuously send out infrared signals and rotating fan-shaped laser beams. According to Fig. 4, the first laser beam
follows the second at a 90° angle. Both laser beams have
an inclination of 30° from the vertical (one to the left, the
other 2 the right). The vertical angle between transmitter
and sensors is determined by the time interval between the 2 laser beams. The horizontal angle can be derived from the time interval between a third signal that is
sent out every other rotation and the arrival of the laser
beams. With receiving light signals form multiple transmitters simul­taneous­ly the own 3D position of a sensor
is determined from multiple horizontal and vertical angles by spatial forward intersection. A more detailed description of the system can be found in Krautschneider
 . He concludes that the dynamic mode allows realtime applications such as machine control and monitoring. Fig. 5 shows some system components.
6. Positioning using TOA/TDOA measurements
Various indoor localisation systems employ the Time
Of Arrival (TOA) or the Time Difference Of Arrival
(TDOA) methods for ranging between nodes of a network. Different types of signals are used to infer the inter-nodal distances.
6.1. Ultra sound systems
The beacons are typically static units that are mounted
on the ceiling above the mobile listeners. The beacon unit
broadcasts periodically ultrasonic (US) pulses and simultaneously radio frequency (RF) messages with its unique
ID number. Using the TOA information from different
beacons and the temperature corrected speed of sound
measurement; the listener calculates its distances from the
beacons. Because RF travels about 106 times faster than ultrasound, the listener can use the time difference of arrival
between the start of the RF message from a beacon and the
corresponding ultrasonic pulse to directly infer its distance from the beacon. The position of the listener can then
be determined based on the beacons’ coordinates and the
measured ranges. With several distances to known reference beacons being available, the 3D coordinate position
can be determined using a trilateration or multilateration
technique. However, there are several disadvantages when
Fig. 4. The 2 rotating fan-shaped laser planes of iGPS,
graphic from Metris
Fig. 5. iGPS transmitter and sensor during a test in a tunnel
Fig. 3. Leica Laser Tracker LTD 840 and Absolute Tracker
AT901. Pictures from EMO Hannover and Magazine Archives
Geodezija ir kartografija / Geodesy and Cartography, 2009, 35(1): 18–22
choosing Cricket as a platform for positioning and tracking, because the ultrasound is sensitive to temperature
variations and multipath signals.
6.1.1. Crickets
The Cricket nodes are tiny devices developed by the MIT
Laboratory for Computer Science as part of the Project
Oxygen. A 3D positioning accuracy of 1–2 cm can be reached indoors within a maximum volume size of 10 m.
A Cricket board is shown in Fig. 6. The Cricket unit can
be programmed either as a beacon or listener. Real-time
tracking is generally possible with an update-rate of 1 Hz.
The system details are given in Priyantha .
Fig. 6. Cricket unit / RS232 cable assembly
6.1.2. DOLPHIN
Distributed Object Locating System for Physicalspace Internetworking (DOLPHIN) is described in Fukuju et al. and Minami et al. . An accuracy of
2 cm could be reached on a test bed of 3 m in size. A prototype implementation of the nodes is shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. DOLPHIN units, picture from Fukuju et al.
6.1.3. Active Bat
The Active Bat System is the pioneer work in the development of a broadband ultrasonic positioning system. It
consists of roaming Active Bat tags, which transmit an ultrasonic pulse, and fixed ultrasonic receivers mounted on
the ceiling. The Active Bat system measures the distance
between a tag and a receiver based on the time-of-flight
of the ultrasonic pulse, and computes each tag’s position
by performing multilateration. The Active Bat system also
provides direction information, which is useful for implementing many ubiquitous computing applications. However, Active Bat employs centralized system architecture and
requires a large number of precisely positioned ultrasonic
receivers. The system is described by Hazas and Hopper
 . It was shown to have 2 cm accuracy. The 3D accuracy of a synchronous receiver is better than 5 cm in 95% of
cases. The principle of operation is shown in Fig. 8.
6.2. Radio frequency systems (WLAN, Bluetooth)
Symeo offers a 2D positioning system based on TDOA
distance measurements in the ISM-Band (5.8GHz). Fixed reference transponders acquire the distances to rover antennas (Fig. 9). The positions are determined by a
lateration technique. A position accuracy of 5 cm can be
reached. The system is designed for dynamic applications, e.g. for tracking cranes and transport vehicles.
Fig. 8. The principle of the Bat Ultrasonic Location System.
Picture from the Cambridge University Website
Fig. 9. Symeo antennas and transmitter, picture from Symeo
7. Positioning by signal strength
A common approach for ranging is simply to exploit the
signal attenuation without requirement of clock synchronization. The Received Signal Strength Information
(RSSI) is taken to estimate distances between transmitters and receivers. Various signals can be used – usually
RF signals such as WLAN or Bluetooth. The location
is then determined from the distance estimation form
multiple transmitters by tri- or multilateration. Alternatively, for special indoor environments, an initialisation or training phase is carried out. Hereby, a rover is
moved to each location and a signal-strength characteristic is derived. For position determination, the current RSSI characteristic is compared with the data-base
and matched to the best fit. However, the reliability and
accuracy of such a system does not meet the requirements for geodetic applications. Usually the estimated
position varies by a few metres.
8. Conclusions
From the diversity of present positioning systems can follow
that there is no overall solution for positioning yet. While
GNSS have become the dominating system for open-sky,
several systems share the indoor market; each having its
own drawbacks, such as low accuracy, sophisticated infrastructures, limited coverage area or inadequate acquisition
costs. The main problem is the direct line of sight that most
systems require, but indoor environments hardly provide.
The usage of signals that can penetrate building materials
may overcome this problem in the near future.
R. Mautz. Overview of current indoor positioning systems