Fast, Robust, Continuous Monocular Egomotion Computation
Andrew Jaegle∗, Stephen Phillips∗, and Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA USA
{ajaegle, stephi, kostas}@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract— We propose robust methods for estimating camera
egomotion in noisy, real-world monocular image sequences in
the general case of unknown observer rotation and translation
with two views and a small baseline. This is a difﬁcult problem
because of the nonconvex cost function of the perspective
camera motion equation and because of non-Gaussian noise
arising from noisy optical ﬂow estimates and scene non-rigidity.
To address this problem, we introduce the expected residual
likelihood method (ERL), which estimates conﬁdence weights
for noisy optical ﬂow data using likelihood distributions of
the residuals of the ﬂow ﬁeld under a range of counterfactual
model parameters. We show that ERL is effective at identifying
outliers and recovering appropriate conﬁdence weights in many
settings. We compare ERL to a novel formulation of the
perspective camera motion equation using a lifted kernel, a
recently proposed optimization framework for joint parameter
and conﬁdence weight estimation with good empirical properties. We incorporate these strategies into a motion estimation
pipeline that avoids falling into local minima. We ﬁnd that ERL
outperforms the lifted kernel method and baseline monocular
egomotion estimation strategies on the challenging KITTI
dataset, while adding almost no runtime cost over baseline
egomotion methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Visual odometry in real-world situations has attracted
increased attention in the past few years in large part
because of its applications in robotics domains such as
autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
navigation. Stereo odometry and simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) methods using recently introduced
depth sensors have made dramatic progress on real-world
datasets. Signiﬁcant advances have also been achieved in
the case of monocular visual odometry when combined with
inertial information.
State-of-the-art visual odometry uses either the discrete
epipolar constraint to validate feature correspondences and
compute inter-frame motion or directly estimates 3D
motion and 3D map alignment from image intensities .
In contrast to the state of the art, in this paper we revisit
the continuous formulation of structure from motion (SfM),
which computes the translational and rotational velocities
and depths up to a scale from optical ﬂow measurements.
Our motivation lies in several observations:
• UAV control schemes often need to estimate the translational velocity, which is frequently done using a
combination of monocular egomotion computations and
single-point depths from sonar .
∗Authors contributed equally.
Flow residual under motion model 1
Likelihood under Laplacian fit
Flow residual under motion model 2
Likelihood under Laplacian fit
Flow residual under motion model M
Likelihood under Laplacian fit
Schematic depiction of the ERL method for egomotion estimation
from noisy ﬂow ﬁelds. Figure best viewed in color. (A) Example optical
ﬂow ﬁeld from two frames of KITTI odometry (sequence 5, images 2358-
2359). Note the outliers on the grass in the lower right part of the image
and scattered throughout the ﬂow ﬁeld. (B) We evaluate the ﬂow ﬁeld
under M models with translation parameters sampled uniformly over the
unit hemisphere. The residuals for the ﬂow ﬁeld under three counterfactual
models are shown. Each black point indicates the translation direction used.
Residuals are scaled to for visualization. (C) We estimate the likelihood
of each observed residual under each of the models by ﬁtting a Laplacian
distribution to each set of residuals. The ﬁnal conﬁdence weight for each
ﬂow vector is estimated as the expected value of the residual likelihood
over the set of counterfactual models. Likelihood distributions are shown
for the three models above. (D) The weighted ﬂow ﬁeld is used to make a
ﬁnal estimate of the true egomotion parameters. The black point indicates
the translation direction estimated using ERL and the green point indicates
ground truth. The unweighted estimate of translation is not visible as it is
outside of the image bounds.
• Fast UAV maneuvers require an immediate estimate of
the direction of translation (the focus of expansion) in
order to compute a time-to-collision map.
• Continuous SfM computations result in better estimates
when the incoming frame rate is high and the baseline
is very small.
However, estimating camera motion and scene parameters
from a single camera (monocular egomotion estimation)
remains a challenging problem. This problem case arises
in many contexts where sensor weight and cost are at a
premium, as is the case for lightweight UAVs and consumer
 
cameras. Situations involving monocular sensors on small
platforms pose additional problems: computational resources
are often very limited and estimates must be made in real
time under unusual viewing conditions (e.g. with a vertically
ﬂipped camera, no visible ground plane, and a single pass
through a scene). These contexts present many sources of
noise. Real-time ﬂow estimation produces unreliable data,
and the associated noise is often pervasive and non-Gaussian,
which makes estimation difﬁcult and explicit outlier rejection
problematic. Furthermore, violations of the assumption of
scene rigidity due to independent motion of objects in the
scene can lead to valid ﬂow estimates that are outliers
nonetheless. Even in the noise-free case, camera motion
estimation is plagued with many suboptimal interpretations
(illusions) caused by the hilly structure of the cost function.
Additionally, forward motion, which is very common in
real-world navigation, is known to be particularly hard for
monocular visual odometry .
We propose an algorithm suitable for the robust estimation
of camera egomotion and scene depth from noisy ﬂow in
real-world settings with high-frame-rate video, large images,
and a large number of noisy optical ﬂow estimates. Our
method runs in real-time on a single CPU and can estimate
camera motion and scene depth in scenes with noisy optical
ﬂow with outliers, making it suitable for integration with
ﬁlters for real-time navigation and for deployment on lightweight UAVs. The technical contributions of this paper are:
• A novel robust estimator based on the expected residual
likelihood (ERL) of ﬂow data that effectively attenuates
the inﬂuence of outlier ﬂow measurements and runs at
30-40 Hz on a single CPU.
• A novel robust optimization strategy using a lifted
kernel that modiﬁes the shape of the objective function to enable joint estimation of weights and model
parameters, while enabling good empirical convergence
properties.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Egomotion/visual odometry
Many approaches to the problem of visual odometry have
been proposed. A distinction is commonly made between
feature-based methods, which use a sparse set of matching
feature points to compute camera motion, and direct methods, which estimate camera motion directly from intensity
gradients in the image sequence. Feature-based approaches
can again be roughly divided into two types of methods:
those estimating camera motion from point correspondences
between two frames (discrete approaches) and those estimating camera motion and scene structure from the optical
ﬂow measurements induced by the motion between the two
frames (continuous approaches). In practice, point correspondences and optical ﬂow measurements are often obtained
using similar descriptor matching strategies. Nonetheless, the
discrete and continuous approaches use different problem
formulations, which reﬂect differing assumptions about the
size of the baseline between the two camera positions.
The continuous approach is the appropriate choice in situations where the real-world camera motion is slow relative
to the sampling frequency of the camera. Our approach is
primarily intended for situations in which this is the case, e.g.
UAVs equipped with high-frame-rate cameras. Accordingly,
we focus our review on continuous, monocular methods. For
a more comprehensive discussion, see .
B. Continuous, monocular approaches
In the absence of noise, image velocities at 5 or 8 points
can be used to give a ﬁnite number of candidate solutions
for camera motion . With more velocities, there
is a unique optimal solution under typical scene conditions
 . Many methods have been proposed to recover this
solution, either by motion parallax or
by using the so-called continuous epipolar constraint .
The problem is nonlinear and nonconvex, but various linear
approximation methods have been proposed to simplify and
speed up estimation .
Although the problem has a unique optimum, it is characterized by many local minima, which pose difﬁculties
for linear methods . Furthermore, in the presence of
noise, many methods are biased and inconsistent in the
sense that they do not produce correct estimates in the limit
of an unlimited number of image velocity measurements
 . Many methods also fail under many common viewing
conditions or with a limited ﬁeld of view . Recently, 
and proposed branch-and-bound methods that estimate
translational velocity in real time and effectively handle a
large numbers of outliers. However, these methods deal with
the case of pure translational camera motion, while our
approach estimates both translational and rotational motion.
Most directly related to our work is the robust estimation framework presented in . They propose a method
based on a variant of a common algebraic manipulation and
show that this manipulation leads to an unbiased, consistent
estimator. They pose monocular egomotion as a nonlinear
least-squares problem in terms of the translational velocity. In this framework, angular velocity and inverse scene
depths are also easily recovered after translational velocity
is estimated. To add robustness, they use a loss function
with sub-quadratic growth, which they solve by iteratively
reweighted least squares (IRLS). We use a similar formulation but demonstrate several novel methods for estimating
the parameters of a robust loss formulation. Our methods
have properties that are well-suited for dealing with image
sequences containing several thousand ﬂow vectors in real
time. In particular, we demonstrate that the ERL method adds
robustness without requiring costly iterative reweighting,
resulting in very little runtime overhead.
Other methods for monocular odometry augment velocity
data with planar homography estimates or depth
ﬁlters to estimate scale. In this work, we do not rely on
ground-plane estimation in order to maintain applicability to
cases such as UAV navigation, where image sequences do not
always contain the ground plane. Because we focus on frameby-frame motion estimation, we cannot rely on a ﬁltering
Algorithm 1 ERL conﬁdence weight estimation
Input: Measured ﬂow {un}N
n=1, sampled translational velocities {tm}M
Output: Estimated conﬁdence weights { ˆwn}N
for all m do
Compute scaled residuals:
˜ru = |A⊥(tm)⊤(B ˆωm(tm)−u)|
Compute maximum likelihood estimators of residual distribution:
ˆµm = median(˜ru)
∥˜run −ˆµm∥
for all n do
Compute conﬁdence weights as expected likelihood under Laplacian ﬁts:
L (˜run; ˆµm, ˆbm)
return { ˆwn}N
approach to estimate depth. Our method can be augmented
with domain-appropriate scale or depth estimators as part of
a larger SLAM system.
C. Robust optimization
In this work, we propose to increase the robustness of
monocular egomotion estimation (1) by estimating each ﬂow
vector’s conﬁdence weight as its expected residual likelihood
(ERL) and (2) by using a lifted robust kernel to jointly
estimate conﬁdence weights and model parameters. ERL
conﬁdence weights are conceptually similar to the weights
recovered in the IRLS method for optimizing robust kernels
 . Robust kernel methods attempt to minimize the residuals of observations generated by the target model process
(“inliers”) while limiting the inﬂuence of other observations
(“outliers”). Such methods have been used very successfully
in many domains of computer vision . However, we
are unaware of any previous work that attempts to estimate
conﬁdence weights based on the distribution of residuals
at counterfactual model parameters, as we do in the ERL
The lifted kernel approach offers another method to design
and optimize robust kernels in particularly desirable ways.
Lifted kernels have recently been used in methods for bundle
adjustment in SfM , object pose recovery , and nonrigid object reconstruction . Our lifted kernel approximates the truncated quadratic loss, which has a long history
of use in robust optimization in computer vision and
has demonstrated applicability in a wide variety of problem
Previous studies have used robust loss functions for
monocular egomotion , visual SLAM , and RGB-
D odometry . To our knowledge, we present the ﬁrst
application of lifted kernels for robust monocular egomotion.
Noise is typically handled in odometry by using samplingbased iterative methods such as RANSAC, which makes use
of a small number of points to estimate inlier sets (typically
ﬁve or eight points in monocular methods). The use of a
robust kernel allows us to derive our ﬁnal estimate from
a larger number of points. This is desirable because the
structure of the problem of continuous monocular odometry
admits fewer correct solutions when constrained by a larger
number of input points, which can better reﬂect the complex
depth structure of real scenes. Our robust methods allow us
to take advantage of a large number of ﬂow estimates, which,
while noisy, may each contribute weakly to the ﬁnal estimate.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION AND APPROACH
In this section, we present the continuous formulation of
the problem of monocular visual egomotion. We describe
and motivate our approach for solving the problem in the
presence of noisy optical ﬂow. We then describe two methods
for estimating the conﬁdence weights for each ﬂow vector in
a robust formulation of the problem, as well as the pipeline
we use to estimate camera motion and scene depth.
A. Visual egomotion computation and the motion ﬁeld
In the continuous formulation, visual egomotion methods
attempt to estimate camera motion and scene parameters
from observed local image velocities (optical ﬂow). The
velocity of an image point due to camera motion in a rigid
scene under perspective projection is given by
u(xi) = ρ(xi)A(xi)t +B(xi)ω.
where ui(xi) = (ui,vi)⊤∈R2 is the velocity (optical ﬂow)
at image position xi = (xi,yi)⊤∈R2, t = (tx,ty,tz)⊤∈R3
is the camera’s instantaneous translational velocity, ω =
(ωx,ωy,ωz)⊤∈R3 is the camera’s instantaneous rotational
velocity, and ρ(xi) =
Z(xi) ∈R is the inverse of scene depth
at xi along the optical axis. We normalize the camera’s
focal length to 1, without loss of generality. In the case of
calibrated image coordinates,
This formulation is appropriate for the small-baseline case
where point correspondences between frames can be treated
as 2D motion vectors.
The goal of monocular visual egomotion computation is
thus to estimate the six motion parameters of t and ω and the
N values for ρ from N point velocities u induced by camera
motion. t and ρ are multiplicatively coupled in equation (1)
above, so t can only be recovered up to a scale. We therefore
restrict estimates of t to the unit hemisphere, ∥t∥= 1.
The full expression for the set of N point velocities can
be expressed compactly as
u = A(t)ρ +Bω.
where the expressions for A(x), B(x), and ρ(x) for all N
points are
∈R2N×N
∈R2N×3
and the velocity and depth for each of the points are
concatenated to form u = (u⊤
N)⊤∈R2N×1 and
ρ = (ρ(x1),ρ(x2),...,ρ(xN))⊤∈RN×1. We estimate camera
motion and scene depth by minimizing the objective
t,ρ,ω E(t,ρ,ω) = min
t,ρ,ω L(r(t,ρ,ω))
t,ρ,ω ∥A(t)ρ +Bω −u∥2
Here, L(x) : RN →R is a loss function and r(t,ρ,ω) :
RN+6 →RN is a residual function for the ﬂow ﬁeld depending on the estimated model parameters. We ﬁrst describe the
case of an unweighted residual function under a quadratic
loss, which is suitable for the case of Gaussian noise.
Following , we note that no loss of generality occurs
by ﬁrst solving this objective for ρ in the least-squares sense.
Minimizing over ρ gives
ρ ∥A(t)ρ +Bω −u∥2
t,ω ∥A⊥(t)⊤(Bω −u)∥2
where A⊥(t) is the orthogonal compliment to A(t). This
expression no longer depends on ρ and depends on t only
through A⊥(t)⊤, which is fast to compute due to the sparsity
of A(t) (see section II of the supplement for more details).
In the absence of noise, we could proceed by directly
minimizing equation (4) in t and ω. In particular, given a
solution for t, we can directly solve for ω by least squares in
O(N) time. In the noiseless case, we estimate t by optimizing
∥A⊥(t)⊤(B ˆω(t)−u)∥2
where ˆω(t) is the least-squares estimate of ω for a given
t (see section IV of the supplement for more details). This
method of estimating t, ρ, and ω was shown to be consistent
in . That is, in the absence of outliers, this method
leads to arbitrarily precise, unbiased estimates of the motion
parameters as the sample size increases.
B. Robust formulation
However, the manipulations introduced in equations (4)
and (5) rely on least-squares solutions and are not stable
in the presence of outliers. Accordingly, instead of directly
solving (5), we propose to solve a robust form. To do so, we
introduce a conﬁdence weight for each ﬂow vector wi(ui) ∈
 to give
L(r(t, ˆω(t)),w)
∥w◦A⊥(t)⊤(B ˆω(t)−u)∥2
where w = (w(u1),w(u2),...,w(uN))⊤∈ N is the vector
of all weights, r ∈RN is the vector of residuals for the ﬂow
ﬁeld at some estimate of t, and ◦is the Hadamard product.
Each entry w(ui) of w attempts to weight the corresponding data point ui proportionally to its residual at the optimal
model parameters (ˆt, ˆρ, ˆω), reﬂecting the degree to which the
point is consistent with a single generating function for the
motion in the scene, possibly with Gaussian noise. In other
words, it reﬂects the degree to which ui is an inlier for the
optimal model of camera motion in a rigid scene. This is
equivalent to replacing the choice of L(x) = x2 as the loss in
equation (5) with a function that grows more slowly.
We introduce a method to directly estimate the conﬁdence
weights as the expected residual likelihood (ERL) for each
ﬂow vector given the distribution of residuals for the ﬂow
ﬁeld at a range of model parameters consistent with the
solution in (5). We interpret each weight in terms of an
estimate of the validity of the corresponding point under
the model: that is, as an estimate of the point’s residual at
the optimal model parameters in a noise-free context. We
compare ERL to a method that replaces L(x) = x2 in (5) with
a lifted truncated quadratic kernel and jointly optimizes
the conﬁdence weights and model parameters. We demonstrate that ERL outperforms the lifted kernel approach on
the KITTI dataset, and both of these approaches outperform
existing methods for monocular egomotion computation.
C. Conﬁdence weight estimation by expected residual likelihood
Here, we describe the ERL method for estimating the con-
ﬁdence weights in (6), and we demonstrate that this method
provides a good estimate of the appropriate conﬁdence
weights in the case of optical ﬂow for visual egomotion.
At the optimal model parameters, (t∗,ρ∗,ω∗), the residuals for inlier points (i.e. correct ﬂow vectors due to rigid
motion) are distributed according to a normal distribution, re-
ﬂecting zero-mean Gaussian noise. However, in the presence
of outliers, a zero-mean Laplacian distribution provides a better description of the residual distribution (see Supplemental
Fig. 2). Accordingly, we can ﬁt a Laplacian distribution to
the observed residuals at the optimal model parameters to
approximate the probability density function for residuals.
We use this property to identify outliers as those points
that are inconsistent with the expected residual distribution
at a range of model values. For each point, we compute the
likelihood of each observed, scaled residual as
ui|(tm,ρm,ωm),˜rm
u ) = L (˜rui; ˆµm, ˆbm),
ui is the scaled residual under the mth model
(tm,ρm,ωm) at the ith ﬂow vector and ˜rm
u2,..., ˜rm
We ﬁt ˆµm and ˆbm, respectively the location and scale parameters of the Laplacian distribution, to the set of scaled
residuals ˜rm
u using maximum likelihood.
Because inliers exhibit smaller self-inﬂuence than outliers
 , inlier residuals will typically be associated with higher
likelihood values. However, the distribution used to estimate
the likelihood reﬂects both the inlier and outlier points. If
the counterfactual model parameters used to estimate the mth
likelihood correspond to a model that is highly suboptimal,
some outliers may be assigned higher likelihoods than they
Line fitting with outliers
Least squares fit
Confidence weight assigned by ERL
A 2D line-ﬁtting problem demonstrating how ERL weights inliers
and outliers. Inliers are generated as yi ≈2xi +1 with Gaussian noise. Each
data points is colored according to its estimated conﬁdence weight.
would be at the optimal model. Moreover, the presence
of Gaussian noise means that the estimated likelihood for
individual inliers may be erroneously low by chance for a
particular model even if the optimal exponential distribution
is exactly recovered.
To arrive at more reliable estimates and to discount the
effect of erroneous likelihoods due to the speciﬁc model parameters being evaluated, we estimate the expected residual
likelihood for each data point by evaluating the likelihood
under M models,
ˆwi = E[˜rm
L (˜rui; ˆµm, ˆbm).
This method returns a vector ˆw ∈RN. To use ˆw as conﬁdence
weights in a robust optimization context, we scale them to
the interval . Scaling the maximum ˆwi to 1 and the
minimum ˆwi to 0 for each ﬂow ﬁeld works well in practice.
The full process to estimate weights by ERL is shown
in Algorithm 1. This method returns conﬁdence weights in
O(MN) time, where M is set by the user. Empirically, the
ERL method gives results that reﬂect the inlier structure of
the data with small values of M (we use M ≈100), allowing
very quick runtimes. In practice, the method assigns high
weights to very few outliers while assigning low weights to
acceptably few inliers. Thus, the method balances a low false
positive rate against a moderately low false negative rate.
This is a good strategy because our method takes a large
number of ﬂow vectors as input, which leads to redundancy
in the local velocity information. Fig. 2 illustrates the ERL
method’s use in a simple 2D robust line-ﬁtting application.
As discussed above, choosing values for the conﬁdence
weights in a least squares objective is equivalent to ﬁtting a
robust kernel. We note that regression under the assumption
of Laplacian noise leads to an L1 cost. However, we have no
guarantees about the form of the robust kernel corresponding
to the weights chosen by the ERL method. Accordingly, we
also explored using a robust kernel with known properties.
D. Robust estimation using a lifted kernel
Here, we explore the effect of jointly optimizing the
conﬁdence weights, w(u), and ω for a given value of t using
Error surface after outliers removed
Translation, x component
Lifted kernel error surface
Translation, x component
Translation, y component
ERL error surface
Translation, y component
Raw error surface
Robust methods recover the error surface of the outlier-free ﬂow
ﬁeld. (A) Example optical ﬂow ﬁeld from two frames of KITTI odometry
(sequence 10, images 14-15). Note the prominent outliers indicated by
the yellow box. Error surfaces on this ﬂow ﬁeld for (A) the raw method
(equation (5)) with all ﬂow vectors, (B) with outliers removed by hand, and
(C) with conﬁdence weights estimated by ERL or (D) the lifted kernel. The
green point is the true translational velocity and the black point the method’s
estimate. Blue: low error. Red: high error. Translation components are given
in calibrated coordinates.
the lifted kernel approach described in . In our case, a
lifted kernel takes the form
t,ω,w ˆL(r(t,ω),w)
ω,w(∥w◦A⊥(t)⊤(Bω(t)−u)∥2
where the lifted kernel of the loss L is denoted as ˆL. κ(x) :
R →R is a regularization function applied to the weights.
Because this approach does not rely on the least squares
solution for rotational velocity, ˆω, it may gain additional
robustness to noise. This approach also allows us to estimate
the conﬁdence weights for particular values of t, unlike the
ERL approach, which relies on estimates at several values
of t to produce stable results.
Different choices of κ produces different kernels. We use
which gives a kernel that is a smooth approximation to the
truncated quadratic loss . τ is a hyperparameter that
determines the extent of the quadratic region of the truncated
quadratic loss. We set τ = 0.05 for all results shown here,
but other choices give similar results.
The lifted kernel approach to solving nonlinear least
squares problems is similar to IRLS insofar as it incorporates
Vehicle velocity (m/s)
Rotational error (percent)
Median Rotational Error
Soatto/Brockett
Zhang/Tomasi
8-Pt Epipolar + RANSAC
Lifted Kernel
Translational error (deg)
Median Translational Error
Median translational and rotational errors on the full KITTI
odometry dataset for our methods and baselines.
conﬁdence weights on each of the data points and optimizes
the values of these weights in addition to the value of the
target model parameters. However, rather than alternately estimating the best weights given estimated model parameters
and the best model parameters given estimated weights, the
lifted approach simultaneously optimizes for both weights
and model parameters, effectively “lifting” a minimization
problem to a higher dimension.
The lifted kernel approach has several properties that
are particularly beneﬁcial for encouraging fast convergence.
First, by using the weights to increase the dimensionality
of the optimization problem, the lifted kernel minimizes the
extent of regions of low gradient in the cost function. This
ensures the method can quickly and reliable converge to
minima of the function. Second, optimization can exploit the
Gauss-Newton structure of the joint nonlinear least-squares
formulation for faster convergence than the slower iterativeclosest-points-like convergence exhibited by IRLS.
To illustrate the effect of our two robust optimization
strategies, we display the error surfaces for the ERL and
lifted-kernel methods on a sample ﬂow ﬁeld from KITTI
(Fig. 3). The error surfaces are shown as a function of the
translational velocity. Both methods recover error surfaces
that resemble the error due to inlier ﬂow vectors. The
conﬁdence weights estimated by ERL generally more closely
resemble the pattern of inliers and outliers in ﬂow data.
To produce the results for the case with outliers removed,
we strengthened the maximum bidirectional error criterion
for ﬂow inclusion to eliminate noisy matches and manually
removed obvious outliers from the ﬂow ﬁeld.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We compare the performance of the proposed methods
(called “ERL” and “Lifted Kernel” in the ﬁgures) to several
baseline methods for monocular egomotion/visual odometry
from the literature: 5-point epipolar+RANSAC (using ),
8-point epipolar+RANSAC (using ), and two continuous
epipolar methods - Zhang/Tomasi , which is identical to
equation (5), and Soatto/Brockett . All experiments were
run on a desktop with an Intel Core i7 processor and 16 GB
of RAM. A single CPU core was used for all experiments.
With ∼1000 ﬂow vectors, the ERL method runs at 30-40
Hz in an unoptimized C++ implementation. Because of the
low overhead of the ERL procedure, this is effectively the
same runtime as the Zhang/Tomasi method. The lifted kernel
optimization has no convergence guarantees, and it typically
runs at <1 Hz in a MATLAB implementation. Note that both
of these runtimes can be signiﬁcantly improved with better
optimization. The Soatto/Brockett method runs extremely
quickly (>500 Hz), but performs poorly on real sequences.
The implementation of epipolar+RANSAC used here runs at
∼25 Hz. Optical ﬂow for all our results was extracted using
a multiscale implementation of the KLT method .
For both ERL and the lifted approach, we optimize t
using Gauss-Newton. We initialize t at a grid of values
spaced over the unit hemisphere to decrease the chance of
converging to a non-global minimum. We then prune the
grid to a single initial value t0 by choosing the grid point
that gives the lowest residual under equation (6) or (9) for
ERL or the lifted kernel, respectively. We then optimize
to convergence starting from t0. This pruning strategy is
effective at avoiding local minima because good estimates for
the weights return an error surface that is very similar to the
noiseless case (see Fig. 3) and this error surface is smooth
with respect to the sampling density we use (625 points)
 . Conﬁdence weights for ERL are computed using model
parameters sampled on a coarser grid (100 points), as this is
adequate to give good conﬁdence weight estimates.
For all tests using the lifted kernel, we optimize the expression in equation (9) using the efﬁcient Schur compliment
implementation of Levenberg-Marquardt described in .
Details of the optimization procedure used here are given
in section III of the supplement. We did not explore jointly
optimizing over t, ω, and w, but joint optimization over these
model parameters with a lifted kernel is possible, and we plan
to explore its use in future work.
A. Evaluation on KITTI
We evaluate the performance of our method using the
KITTI dataset , which is a collection of real-world
driving sequences with ground-truth camera motion and
depth data. The sequences contained in the dataset are
challenging for state-of-the-art odometry methods for several
reasons. First, they contain large inter-frame motions and
repetitive scene structures that make estimating accurate
ﬂow correspondences difﬁcult in real time. Second, several
sequences feature little to no camera motion, which typically
causes monocular odometry methods to fail. Finally, some
sequences contain independent motion due to other vehicles
and pedestrians, which violates the assumption of scene
rigidity and makes reliable odometry more difﬁcult.
All results are performed on neighboring frames of the
KITTI odometry dataset (no skipped-frame sequences are
evaluated), as these image pairs better match the modeling
assumptions of continuous egomotion/odometry methods.
All sequences were captured at 10 Hz at a resolution of 1392
x 512 pixels. We evaluated all methods on all 16 sequences
of the KITTI odometry test set.
The results for methods on KITTI are shown in Figs.
4-6. For ease of visualization, the results for the 5-point
Translational velocity error (deg)
Zhang/Tomasi
8-Pt Epipolar + RANSAC
Vehicle speed (m/s)
Lifted Kernel
Full distribution of translational velocity errors.
Zhang/Tomasi
8-Pt Epipolar + RANSAC
Vehicle speed (m/s)
Rotational velocity error (percent)
Lifted Kernel
Full distribution of rotational velocity errors.
epipolar method with RANSAC are not shown (they were
signiﬁcantly worse than all other methods we attempted).
ERL produces the best estimates of translational velocity,
while the lifted kernel produces results of similar quality to 8point epipolar with RANSAC and the Zhang/Tomasi method.
ERL, the lifted kernel, and Zhang/Tomasi produce rotational
velocity estimates of similar quality. The 8-point epipolar
method produces worse estimates in this case because of the
large baseline assumption, which is not suitable for rotational
velocity estimation under these conditions. Soatto/Brockett
produces bad estimates in these test cases because of the
bias introduced by its algebraic manipulation.
B. Synthetic sequences
To estimate the robustness of our methods to outliers,
we test the methods on synthetic data. Synthetic data were
created by simulating a ﬁeld of 1500 image points distributed
uniformly at random depths between 2 and 10 m in front
of the camera and uniformly in x and y throughout the
frame. A simulated camera is moved through this ﬁeld with a
translational velocity drawn from a zero-mean Gaussian with
standard deviation of 1 m/frame and a rotational velocity
drawn from a zero-mean Gaussian with standard deviation of
0.2 radians/frame. Flow was generated from the resulting 3D
point trajectories by perspective projection using a camera
model with a 1 m focal length. All ﬂow vectors were
corrupted with noise in a random direction and magnitude
drawn from a zero-mean Gaussian with a standard deviation
1/10th the mean ﬂow vector magnitude. Outliers were created
by replacing a fraction of the points with random values
drawn from a Gaussian ﬁt to the magnitude and direction of
all inlier ﬂow vectors. We ran 100 iterations at each outlier
rate. We ran all egomotion methods on the same data.
Percent outliers
Translational velocity error (deg)
Performance on synthetic data
Soatto/Brockett
Zhang/Tomasi
Lifted Kernel
Translation error as a function of percent outliers on synthetic data
for our robust methods and two baseline continuous egomotion methods.
The errors in translational motion estimated on this data
are shown in Fig. 7. As expected, the two robust methods
outperform least-squares methods for reasonable numbers of
outliers. At higher outlier rates, however, the performance
of both robust methods deteriorates. Interestingly, the performance of the lifted kernel method is stable even when the
majority of data points are outliers. We are uncertain why
the lifted kernel performs better than ERL on synthetic data,
while the opposite is true for KITTI. This difference may be
due to the way the data were generated - in KITTI, outliers
often reﬂect real structures in the scene and may contain
some information about camera motion, but this is not the
case in the synthetic data. The difference may also be due
in part to the difference in depth structures in KITTI and
the synthetic data. In KITTI, ﬂow magnitude for both inliers
and outliers is reﬂective of depth structure, and depth in real
scenes is not distributed uniformly.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced new techniques for robust, continuous
egomotion computation from monocular image sequences.
We described ERL, a novel robust method that directly
estimates conﬁdence weights for the vectors of a ﬂow ﬁeld
by evaluating the distribution of ﬂow residuals under a set
of self-consistent counterfactual model parameters. We also
introduced a new formulation of the perspective motion
equation using a lifted kernel for joint optimization of
model parameters and conﬁdence weights. We compared the
results of ERL and the lifted kernel formulation, and showed
that while the lifted kernel appears to be more stable in
the presence of a large fraction of outliers, ERL performs
better in a real-world setting. The ERL method achieves
good results on KITTI without relying on stereo data or
ground plane estimation and accordingly is well-suited for
use in lightweight UAV navigation. We are unable to directly
evaluate our methods on this target domain because there
are currently no UAV datasets with suitable ground truth.
Although the empirical results here are promising, we have
no guarantees on the weights recovered by ERL, and this
remains a topic for future work.
Our code is publicly available at 
com/stephenphillips42/erl_egomotion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge support by the grants
NSF-DGE-0966142, NSF-IIP-1439681, NSF-IIS-1426840,
ARL MAST-CTA W911NF-08-2-0004, and ARL RCTA
W911NF-10-2-0016.