Convolutional Feature Masking for Joint Object and Stuff Segmentation
Jifeng Dai
Kaiming He
Microsoft Research
{jifdai,kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com
The topic of semantic segmentation has witnessed considerable progress due to the powerful features learned
by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) . The current leading approaches for semantic segmentation exploit
shape information by extracting CNN features from masked
image regions. This strategy introduces artiﬁcial boundaries on the images and may impact the quality of the extracted features. Besides, the operations on the raw image
domain require to compute thousands of networks on a single image, which is time-consuming.
In this paper, we propose to exploit shape information
via masking convolutional features. The proposal segments
(e.g., super-pixels) are treated as masks on the convolutional feature maps. The CNN features of segments are directly masked out from these maps and used to train classiﬁers for recognition. We further propose a joint method
to handle objects and “stuff” (e.g., grass, sky, water) in
the same framework. State-of-the-art results are demonstrated on benchmarks of PASCAL VOC and new PASCAL-
CONTEXT, with a compelling computational speed.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to label each
image pixel to a semantic category. With the recent breakthroughs by convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
 , R-CNN based methods for semantic segmentation have substantially advanced the state of the art.
The R-CNN methods for semantic segmentation
extract two types of CNN features - one is region features
 extracted from proposal bounding boxes ; the other
is segment features extracted from the raw image content
masked by the segments . The concatenation of these
features are used to train classiﬁers . These methods
have demonstrated compelling results on this long-standing
challenging task.
However, the raw-image-based R-CNN methods 
have two issues. First, the masks on the image content can
lead to artiﬁcial boundaries. These boundaries do not exhibit on the samples during the network pre-training (e.g.,
in the 1000-category ImageNet ). This issue may degrade the quality of the extracted segment features. Second,
similar to the R-CNN method for object detection , these
methods need to apply the network on thousands of raw
image regions with/without the masks. This is very timeconsuming even on high-end GPUs.
The second issue also exists in R-CNN based object detection. Fortunately, this issue can be largely addressed by
a recent method called SPP-Net , which computes convolutional feature maps on the entire image only once and
applies a spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) strategy to form
cropped features for classiﬁcation. The detection results via
these cropped features have shown competitive detection
accuracy , and the speed can be ∼50× faster. Therefore, in this paper, we raise a question: for semantic segmentation, can we use the convolutional feature maps only?
The ﬁrst part of this work says yes to this question. We
design a convolutional feature masking (CFM) method to
extract segment features directly from feature maps instead
of raw images. With the segments given by the region proposal methods (e.g., selective search ), we project them
to the domain of the last convolutional feature maps. The
projected segments play as binary functions for masking
the convolutional features. The masked features are then
fed into the fully-connected layers for recognition. Because
the convolutional features are computed from the unmasked
image, their quality is not impacted. Besides, this method is
efﬁcient as the convolutional feature maps only need to be
computed once. The aforementioned two issues involving
semantic segmentation are thus both addressed. Figure 1
compares the raw-image-based pipeline and our featuremap-based pipeline.
The second part of this paper further generalizes our
method for joint object and stuff segmentation . Different from objects, “stuff” (e.g., sky, grass, water) is
usually treated as the context in the image. Stuff mostly exhibits as colors or textures and has less well-deﬁned shapes.
It is thus inappropriate to use a single rectangular box or
a single segment to represent stuff. Based on our masked
 
segment proposals
input image
feature maps
mask & wrap
convolutional
convolutional
feature making
convolutional
neural network
recognition
object segmentation
object & stuff
segmentation
raw pixels
raw-image-based (R-CNN, SDS)
feature-map-based (ours)
Figure 1: System pipeline. Top: the methods of “Regions with CNN features” (R-CNN) and “Simultaneous Detection
and Segmentation” (SDS) that operate on the raw image domain. Bottom: our method that masks the convolutional
feature maps.
convolutional features, we propose a training procedure that
treats a stuff as a compact combination of multiple segment
features. This allows us to address the object and stuff in
the same framework.
Based on the above methods, we show state-of-the-art results on the PASCAL VOC 2012 benchmark for object
segmentation. Our method can process an image in a fraction of a second, which is ∼150× faster than the R-CNNbased SDS method . Further, our method is also the
ﬁrst deep-learning-based method ever applied to the newly
labeled PASCAL-CONTEXT benchmark for both object and stuff segmentation, where our result substantially
outperforms previous states of the art.
2. Convolutional Feature Masking
2.1. Convolutional Feature Masking Layer
The power of CNNs as a generic feature extractor has
been gradually revealed in the computer vision area . In Krizhevsky et al.’s work , they suggest that the features of the fully-connected layers can be
used as holistic image features, e.g., for image retrieval. In
 , these holistic features are used as generic features
for full-image classiﬁcation tasks in other datasets via transfer learning. In the breakthrough object detection paper of
R-CNN , the CNN features are also used like holistic
features, but are extracted from sub-images which are the
crops of raw images. In the CNN-based semantic segmentation paper , the R-CNN idea is generalized to masked
raw image regions. For all these methods, the entire network is treated as a holistic feature extractor, either on the
entire image or on sub-images.
In the recent work of SPP-Net , it shows that the convolutional feature maps can be used as localized features.
On a full-image convolutional feature map, the local rectangular regions encode both the semantic information (by
strengths of activations) and spatial information (by positions). The features from these local regions can be pooled
 directly for recognition.
The spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) in actually plays
two roles: 1) masking the feature maps by a rectangular region, outside which the activations are removed; 2) generating a ﬁxed-length feature from this arbitrary sized region.
So, if masking by rectangles can be effective, what if we
mask the feature maps by a ﬁne segment with an irregular
The Convolutional Feature Masking (CFM) layer is thus
developed.
We ﬁrst obtain the candidate segments (like
super-pixels) on the raw image. Many regional proposal
methods (e.g., ) are based on super-pixels. Each proposal box is given by grouping a few super-pixels. We call
such a group as a segment proposal. So we can obtain the
candidate segments together with their proposal boxes (referred to as “regions” in this paper) without extra effort.
These segments are binary masks on the raw images.
Next we project these binary masks to the domain of the
last convolutional feature maps. Because each activation in
the convolutional feature maps is contributed by a receptive ﬁeld in the image domain, we ﬁrst project each activation onto the image domain as the center of its receptive
ﬁeld (following the details in ). Each pixel in the binary
masks on the image is assigned to its nearest center of the
receptive ﬁelds. Then these pixels are projected back onto
 
 
Figure 2: An illustration of the CFM layer.
the convolutional feature map domain based on this center
and its activation’s position. On the feature map, each position will collect multiple pixels projected from a binary
mask. These binary values are then averaged and thresholded (by 0.5). This gives us a mask on the feature maps
(Figure 2). This mask is then applied on the convolutional
feature maps. Actually, we only need to multiply this binary mask on each channel of the feature maps. We call the
resulting features as segment features in our method.
2.2. Network Designs
In , it has been shown that the segment features alone
are insufﬁcient.
These segment features should be used
together with the regional features (from bounding boxes)
generated in a way like R-CNN . Based on our CFM
layer, we can have two possible ways of doing this.
Design A: on the last convolutional layer. As shown in
Figure 3 (left part), after the last convolutional layer, we
generate two sources of features. One is the regional feature produced by the SPP layer as in . The other is
the segment feature produced in the following way. The
CFM layer is applied on the full-image convolutional feature map. This gives us an arbitrary-sized (in terms of its
bounding box) segment feature. Then we use another SPP
layer on this feature to produce a ﬁxed-length output. The
two pooled features are fed into two separate fc layers. The
features of the last fc layers are concatenated to train a classiﬁer, as is the classiﬁer in .
In this design, we have two pathways of the fc layers in
both training and testing.
Design B: on the spatial pyramid pooling layer. We ﬁrst
adopt the SPP layer to pool the features. We use a 4level pyramid of {6 × 6, 3 × 3, 2 × 2, 1 × 1} as in .
The 6 × 6 level is actually a 6 × 6 tiny feature map that still
has plenty spatial information. We apply the CFM layer on
this tiny feature map to produce the segment feature. This
feature is then concatenated with the other three levels and
fed onto the fc layers, as shown in Figure 3 (right).
In this design, we keep one pathway of the fc layers to
reduce the computational cost and over-ﬁtting risk.
2.3. Training and Inference
Based on these two designs and the CFM layer, the training and inference stages can be easily conducted following
the common practices in . In both stages, we use
the region proposal algorithm (e.g., selective search ) to
generate about 2,000 region proposals and associated segments. The input image is resized to multiple scales (the
shorter edge s ∈{480, 576, 688, 864, 1200}) , and the
convolutional feature maps are extracted from full images
and then ﬁxed (not further tuned).
Training. We ﬁrst apply the SPP method 1 to ﬁnetune
a network for object detection. Then we replace the ﬁnetuned network with the architecture as in Design A or B,
and further ﬁnetune the network for segmentation. In the
second ﬁne-tuning step, the segment proposal overlapping
a ground-truth foreground segment by [0.5, 1] is considered
as positive, and [0.1, 0.3] as negative. The overlap is measured by intersection-over-union (IoU) score based on the
two segments’ areas (rather than their bounding boxes). After ﬁne-tuning, we train a linear SVM classiﬁer on the network output, for each category. In the SVM training, only
the ground-truth segments are used as positive samples.
Inference. Each region proposal is assigned to a proper
scale as in . The features of each region and its associated segment are extracted as in Design A or B. The SVM
classiﬁer is used to score each region.
Given all the scored region proposals, we obtain the
pixel-level category labeling by the pasting scheme in SDS
 . This pasting scheme sequentially selects the region
proposal with the highest score, performs region reﬁnement,
inhibits overlapping proposals, and pastes the pixel labels
onto the labeling result. Region reﬁnement improves the accuracy by about 1% on PASCAL VOC 2012 for both SDS
and our method.
2.4. Results on Object Segmentation
We evaluate our method on the PASCAL VOC 2012 semantic segmentation benchmark that has 20 object categories. We follow the “comp6” evaluation protocol, which
is also used in . The training set of PASCAL VOC
1 
classifier
image-wise computation
region-wise computation
scaled input images
segment proposals
image-wise computation
classifier
region-wise computation
concatenate
Figure 3: Two network designs in this paper. The input image is processed as a whole at the convolutional layers from conv1
to conv5. Segments are exploited at a deeper hierarchy by: (Left) applying CFM on the feature map of conv5, where “ b”
means for “bounding boxes” and “ s” means for segments; (Right) applying CFM on the ﬁnest feature map of the spatial
pyramid pooling layer.
2012 and the additional segmentation annotations from 
are used for training and evaluation as in . Two
scenarios are studied: semantic segmentation and simultaneous detection and segmentation.
Scenario I: Semantic Segmentation
In the experiments of semantic segmentation, category labels are assigned to all the pixels in the image, and the accuracy is measured by region IoU scores .
We ﬁrst study using the “ZF SPPnet” model as our
feature extractor. This model is based on Zeiler and Fergus’s fast model but with the SPP layer . It has
ﬁve convolutional layers and three fc layers. This model is
released with the code of . We note that the results in
R-CNN and SDS use the “AlexNet” instead.
To understand the impacts of the pre-trained models, we report their object detection mAP on the val set of PASCAL
VOC 2012: SPP-Net (ZF) is 51.3%, R-CNN (AlexNet) is
51.0%, and SDS (AlexNet) is 51.9%. This means that both
pre-trained models are comparable as generic feature extractors. So the following gains of CFM are not simply due
to pre-trained models.
To show the effect of the CFM layer, we present a baseline with no CFM - in our Design B, we remove the CFM
layer but still use the same entire pipeline. We term this
baseline as the “no-CFM” version of our method. Actually,
this baseline degrades to the original SPP-net usage ,
except that the deﬁnitions of positive/negative samples are
for segmentation. Table 1 compares the results of no-CFM
and the two designs of CFM. We ﬁnd that the CFM has obvious advantages over the no-CFM baseline. This is as expected, because the no-CFM baseline has not any segmentbased feature. Further, we ﬁnd that the designs A and B
perform just comparably, while A needs to compute two
pathways of the fc layers. So in the rest of this paper, we
adopt Design B for ZF SPPnet.
In Table 2 we evaluate our method using different region
proposal algorithms. We adopt two proposal algorithms:
Selective Search (SS) , and Multiscale Combinatorial
Grouping (MCG) . Following the protocol in , the
“fast” mode is used for SS, and the “accurate” mode is used
for MCG. Table 2 shows that our method achieves higher
accuracy on the MCG proposals. This indicates that our
feature masking method can exploit the information generated by more accurate segmentation proposals.
Table 1: Mean IoU on PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set
using our various designs. Here we use ZF SPPnet and Selective Search.
Table 2: Mean IoU on PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set
using different pre-trained networks and proposal methods.
SS denotes Selective Search , and MCG denotes Multiscale Combinatorial Grouping .
Table 3: Mean IoU on PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set
using different scales. Here we use MCG for proposals.
total time
SDS (AlexNet) 
CFM, (ZF, 5 scales)
CFM, (ZF, 1 scale)
CFM, (VGG, 5 scales)
CFM, (VGG, 1 scale)
Table 4: Feature extraction time per image on GPU.
In Table 2 we also evaluate the impact of pre-trained networks. We compare the ZF SPPnet with the public VGG-16
model 2. Recent advances in image classiﬁcation have
shown that very deep networks can signiﬁcantly improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. The VGG-16 model has
13 convolutional and 3 fc layers. Because this model has no
SPP layer, we consider its last pooling layer (7×7) as a special SPP layer which has a single-level pyramid of {7 × 7}.
In this case, our Design B does not apply because there is
no coarser level. So we apply our Design A instead. Table
2 shows that our results improve substantially when using
the VGG net. This indicates that our method beneﬁts from
the more representative features learned by deeper models.
2www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/very_deep/
In Table 3 we evaluate the impact of image scales. Instead of using the 5 scales, we simply extract features from
single-scale images whose shorter side is s = 576. Table 3
shows that our single-scale variant has negligible degradation. But the single-scale variant has a faster computational
speed as in Table 4.
Next we compare with the state-of-the-art results on
the PASCAL VOC 2012 test set in Table 5.
 is the previous state-of-the-art method on this task,
and O2P is a leading non-CNN-based method.
method with ZF SPPnet and MCG achieves a score of 55.4.
This is 3.8% higher than the SDS result reported in 
which uses AlexNet and MCG. This demonstrates that our
CFM method can produce effective features without masking raw-pixel images. With the VGG net, our method has a
score of 61.8 on the test set.
Besides the high accuracy, our method is much faster
than SDS. The running time of the feature extraction steps
in SDS and our method is shown in Table 4.
Both approaches are run on an Nvidia GTX Titan GPU based on the
Caffe library . The time is averaged over 100 random
images from PASCAL VOC. Using 5 scales, our method
with ZF SPPnet is ∼47× faster than SDS; using 1 scale,
our method with ZF SPPnet is ∼150× faster than SDS and
is more accurate. The speed gain is because our method
only needs to compute the feature maps once. Table 4 also
shows that our method is still feasible using the VGG net.
Concurrent with our work, a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) method is proposed for semantic segmentation. It has a score (62.2 on test set) comparable with
our method, and has a fast speed as it also performs convolutions once on the entire image. But FCN is not able to
generate instance-wise results, which is another metric evaluated in . Our method is also applicable in this case, as
evaluated below.
Scenario II: Simultaneous Detection and Segmentation
In the evaluation protocol of simultaneous detection and
segmentation , all the object instances and their segmentation masks are labeled. In contrast to semantic segmentation, this scenario further requires to identify different
object instances in addition to labeling pixel-wise semantic
categories. The accuracy is measured by mean APr score
deﬁned in .
We report the mean APr results on VOC 2012 validation
set following , as the ground-truth labels for the test set
are not available. As shown in Table 6, our method has a
mean APr of 53.2 when using ZF SPPnet and MCG. This is
better than the SDS result (49.7) reported in . With the
VGG net, our mean APr is 60.7, which is the state-of-theart result reported in this task. Note that the FCN method
 is not applicable when evaluating the mean APr metric,
mean areo bike
boat bottle
chair cow table dog horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train
47.8 64.0 27.3 54.1 39.2 48.7 56.6 57.7 52.5 14.2 54.8 29.6 42.2 58.0 54.8
50.2 36.6 58.6 31.6 48.4 38.6
SDS (AlexNet + MCG) 51.6 63.3 25.7 63.0 39.8 59.2 70.9 61.4 54.9 16.8 45.0 48.2 50.5 51.0 57.7
63.3 31.8 58.7 31.2 55.7 48.5
CFM (ZF + SS)
53.5 63.3 21.5 59.1 40.3 52.4 68.6 55.4 66.6 25.4 60.5 48.5 60.0 53.6 58.6
59.8 40.5 68.6 31.7 49.3 53.6
CFM (ZF + MCG)
55.4 65.2 23.5 59.0 40.4 61.1 68.9 57.9 70.8 23.9 59.4 44.7 66.2 57.5 62.1
57.6 44.1 64.5 42.5 52.9 55.7
CFM (VGG + MCG)
61.8 75.7 26.7 69.5 48.8 65.6 81.0 69.2 73.3 30.0 68.7 51.5 69.1 68.1 71.7
67.5 50.4 66.5 44.4 58.9 53.5
Table 5: Mean IoU scores on the PASCAL VOC 2012 test set.
SDS (AlexNet + MCG) 
CFM (ZF + SS)
CFM (ZF + MCG)
CFM (VGG + MCG)
Table 6: Instance-wise semantic segmentation evaluated by
mean APr on PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set.
because it cannot produce object instances.
3. Joint Object and Stuff Segmentation
The semantic categories in natural images can be roughly
divided into objects and stuff.
Objects have consistent
shapes and each instance is countable, while stuff has consistent colors or textures and exhibits as arbitrary shapes,
e.g., grass, sky, and water. So unlike an object, a stuff region is not appropriate to be represented as a rectangular
region or a bounding box. While our method can generate segment features, each segment is still associated with
a bounding box due to its way of generation. When the
region/segment proposals are provided, it is rarely that the
stuff can be fully covered by a single segment. Even if the
stuff is covered by a single rectangular region, it is almost
certain that there are many pixels in this region that do not
belong to the stuff. So stuff segmentation has issues different from object segmentation.
Next we show a generalization of our framework to address this issue involving stuff. We can simultaneously handle objects and stuff by a single solution. Especially, the
convolutional feature maps need only to be computed once.
So there will be little extra cost if the algorithm is required
to further handle stuff.
Our generalization is to modify the underlying probabilistic distributions of the samples during training. Instead
of treating the samples equally, our training will bias toward the proposals that can cover the stuff as compact as
possible (discussed below). A Segment Pursuit procedure
is proposed to ﬁnd the compact proposals.
3.1. Stuff Representation by Segment Combination
We treat stuff as a combination of multiple segment proposals. We expect that each segment proposal can cover
a stuff portion as much as possible, and a stuff can be fully
covered by several segment proposals. At the same time, we
hope the combination of these segment proposals is compact - the fewer the segments, the better.
We ﬁrst deﬁne a candidate set of segment proposals (in
a single image) for stuff segmentation. We deﬁne a “purity
score” as the IoU ratio between a segment proposal and the
stuff portion that is within the bounding box of this segment.
Among all the segment proposals in a single image, those
having high purity scores (> 0.6) with stuff consist of the
candidate set for potential combinations.
To generate one compact combination from this candidate set, we adopt a procedure similar to the matching pursuit . We sequentially pick segments from the candidate set without replacement. At each step, the largest
segment proposal is selected. This selected proposal then
inhibits its highly overlapped proposals in the candidate set
(they will not be selected afterward). In this paper, the inhibition overlap threshold is set as IoU=0.2. The process is
repeated till the remaining segments all have areas smaller
than a threshold, which is the average of the segment areas in the initial candidate set (of that image). We call this
procedure segment pursuit.
Figure 4 (b) shows an example if segment proposals are
randomly sampled from the candidate set. We see that there
are many small segments. It is harmful to deﬁne these small,
less discriminative segments as either positive or negative
samples (e.g., by IoU) - if they are positive, they are just a
very small part of the stuff; if they are negative, they share
the same textures/colors as a larger portion of the stuff. So
we prefer to ignore these samples in the training, so the classiﬁer will not bias toward any side about these small samples. Figure 4 (c) shows the segment proposals selected by
segment pursuit. We see that they can cover the stuff (grass
here) by only a few but large segments. We expect the solver
to rely more on such a compact combination of proposals.
However, the above process is deterministic and can only
give a small set of samples from each image. For example,
in Figure 4 (c) it only provides 5 segment proposals. In
(b) uniform
(c) deterministic segment pursuit
(d) stochastic segment pursuit
Figure 4: Stuff segment proposals sampled by different
methods. (a) input image; (b) 43 regions uniformly sampled; (c) 5 regions sampled by deterministic segment pursuit; (d) 43 regions sampled by stochastic segment pursuit
for ﬁnetuning.
the ﬁne-tuning process, we need a large number of stochastic samples for the training. So we inject randomness into
the above segment pursuit procedure. In each step, we randomly sample a segment proposal from the candidate set,
rather than using the largest. The picking probability is proportional to the area size of a segment (so a larger one is still
preferred). This can give us another compact combination
in a stochastic way. Figure 4 (d) shows an example of the
segment proposals generated in a few trials.
All the segment proposals given by this way are considered as the positive samples of a category of stuff. The
negative samples are the segment proposals whose purity
scores are below 0.3. These samples can then be used for
ﬁne-tuning and SVM training as detailed below.
During the ﬁne-tuning stage, in each epoch each image
generates a stochastic compact combination. All the segment proposals in this combination for all images consist
of the samples of this epoch. These samples are randomly
permuted and fed into the SGD solver. Although now the
samples appear mutually independent to the SGD solver,
they are actually sampled jointly by the rule of segment pursuit. Their underlying probabilistic distributions will impact
the SGD solver. This process is repeated for each epoch.
For the SGD solver, we halt the training process after 200k
mini-batches. For SVM training, we only use the single
combination given by the deterministic segment pursuit.
Using this way, we can treat object+stuff segmentation
in the same framework as for object-only. The only difference is that the stuff samples are provided in a way given
by segment pursuit, rather than purely randomly. To balance different categories, the portions of objects, stuff, and
aeroplane†
motorbike†
pottedplant†
tvmonitor†
bedclothes
Table 7: Segmentation accuracy measured by IoU scores on
the new PASCAL-CONTEXT validation set . The categories marked by † are the 33 easier categories identiﬁed
in . The results of SuperParsing and O2P are
from the errata of .
background samples in each mini-batch are set to be approximately 30%, 30%, and 40%. The testing stage is the
same as in the object-only case. While the testing stage is
unchanged, the classiﬁers learned are biased toward those
compact proposals.
tree mountain
road fence
ground-truth
our results
ground-truth
our results
Figure 5: Some example results of our CFM method (with VGG and MCG) for joint object and stuff segmentation. The
images are from the PASCAL-CONTEXT validation set .
3.2. Results on Joint Object and Stuff Segmentation
We conduct experiments on the newly labeled PASCAL-
CONTEXT dataset for joint object and stuff segmentation. In this enriched dataset, every pixel is labeled with
a semantic category. It is a challenging dataset with various
images, diverse semantic categories, and balanced ratios of
object/stuff pixels. Following the protocol in , the semantic segmentation is performed on the most frequent 59
categories and one background category (Table 7). The segmentation accuracy is measured by mean IoU scores over
the 60 categories. Following , the mean of the scores
over a subset of 33 easier categories (identiﬁed by )
is reported in this 60-way segmentation task as well. The
training and evaluation are performed on the train and val
sets respectively. We compare with two leading methods -
SuperParsing and O2P , whose results are reported
in . For fair comparisons, the region reﬁnement is
not used in all methods. The pasting scheme is the same as
in O2P . In this comparison, we ignore R-CNN and
SDS because they have not been developed for stuff.
Table 7 shows the mean IoU scores. Here “no-CFM”
is our baseline (no CFM, no segment pursuit); “CFM w/o
SP” is our CFM method but without segment pursuit; and
“CFM” is our CFM method with segment pursuit. When
segment pursuit is not used, the positive stuff samples are
uniformly sampled from the candidate set (in which the segments have purity scores > 0.6).
SuperParsing gets a mean score of 15.2 on the easier
33 categories, and the overall score is unavailable in .
The O2P method results in 29.2 on the easier 33 categories and 18.1 overall, as reported in . Both methods
are not based on CNN features.
For the CNN-based results, the no-CFM baseline (20.7,
with ZF and SS) is already better than O2P (18.1). This
is mainly due to the generic features learned by deep networks. Our CFM method without segment pursuit improves
the overall score to 24.0.
This shows the effects of the
masked convolutional features. With our segment pursuit,
the CFM method further improves the overall score to 26.6.
This justiﬁes the impact of the samples generated by segment pursuit. When replacing the ZF SPPnet by the VGG
net, and the SS proposals by MCG, our method yields an
over score of 34.4. So our method beneﬁts from deeper
models and more accurate segment proposals. Some of our
results are shown in Figure 5.
It is worth noticing that although only mean IoU scores
are evaluated in this dataset, our method is also able to generate instance-wise results for objects.
Additional Results. We also run our trained model on an
external dataset of MIT-Adobe FiveK , which consists
of images taken by professional photographers to cover a
broad range of scenes, subjects, and lighting conditions. Although our model is not trained for this dataset, it produces
reasonably good results (see Figure 6).
4. Conclusion
We have presented convolutional feature masking, which
exploits the shape information at a late stage in the network.
We have further shown that convolutional feature masking
our results
our results
Figure 6: Some visual results of our trained model (with VGG and MCG) for cross-dataset joint object and stuff segmentation. The network is trained on the PASCAL-CONTEXT training set , and is applied on MIT-Adobe FiveK .
is applicable for joint object and stuff segmentation.
We plan to further study improving object detection by
convolutional feature masking. Exploiting the context information provided by joint object and stuff segmentation
would also be interesting.