Ultrafast multi-focus 3-D nano-fabrication based
on two-photon polymerization
Qiang Geng
1,2, Dien Wang1,2, Pengfei Chen
1 & Shih-Chi Chen
Two-photon polymerization (TPP) is the most precise 3-D printing process that has been
used to create many complex structures for advanced photonic and nanoscale applications.
However, to date the technology still remains a laboratory tool due to its high operation cost
and limited fabrication rate, i.e., serial laser scanning process. Here we present a revolutionary laser nanofabrication process based on TPP and an ultrafast random-access digital
micromirror device (DMD) scanner. By exploiting binary holography, the DMD scanner can
simultaneously generate and individually control one to tens of laser foci for parallel nanofabrication at 22.7 kHz. Complex 3-D trusses and woodpile structures have been fabricated
via single or multi-focus processes, showing a resolution of ~500 nm. The nanofabrication
system may be used for largescale nano-prototyping or creation of complex structures, e.g.,
overhanging structures, that cannot be easily fabricated via conventional raster-scanningbased systems, bringing signiﬁcant impact to the world of nanomanufacturing.
 
1 Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong. 2These authors contributed equally:
Qiang Geng, Dien Wang. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.-C.C. (email: )
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:2179 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1234567890():,;
printing, i.e., additive manufacturing, is one of
the most important technological innovation in
the past few decades. Two-photon polymerization (TPP) is the 3-D printing process that achieves the highest
resolution and has been used to create many complex structures
for advanced photonic and nanoscale applications. The application of the two-photon absorption (TPA) phenomenon for
micro-fabrication was ﬁrst proposed and realized in the 1990s1–4.
By exploiting TPA, TPP fabrication can be achieved with a
femtosecond laser in combination with a pair of laser scanners,
e.g., galvanometric scanners. During the TPP process, the laser is
focused to a highly conﬁned region within a photosensitive resin
which induces nonlinear absorption, i.e., two or more photons are
simultaneously absorbed by the polymers, and subsequently
polymerizes (solidiﬁes) the local resin as nanoscale building
blocks, i.e., voxels. Accordingly, 3-D structures can be fabricated
by precisely overlapping the voxels via scanning the laser focus or
the sample. In recent years, the TPP process has been extensively
used to fabricate many micro-structures and nano-structures for a
wide range of applications, e.g., photonic crystals or microﬂuidic
devices5. The TPP process has a reported lateral resolution of 100
nm and axial resolution of 300 nm6–8. Although sub-100 nm
resolution has been demonstrated by ﬁne-tuning the laser
intensity to the threshold value, the throughput and pattern
reproducibility
compromised
conditions.
Recently, TPP fabrication has been commercialized by Nanoscribe GmbH, which reliably achieves a lateral resolution of
400 nm and axial resolution of 1000 nm9.
A typical TPP fabrication system includes two galvanometric
scanners that raster-scan the laser focus in the X-Y plane, and a
precision XYZ stage that performs axial scanning (speed ~ 0.1
Hz) or sample maneuvering. During the printing process, structures are fabricated in a layer-by-layer fashion, i.e., after the
completion of one layer, the sample stage moves the build plane
axially to polymerize the next layer. Although this process can
produce high-resolution 3-D structures, the throughput is limited
by the sequential laser scanning process. The disadvantage is
more pronounced when printing complex hollow structures, e.g.,
octet truss10, or nonplanar structures as the laser is always
required to scan through the entire build volume.
Recently, several parallel TPP methods have been proposed to
improve the fabrication throughput11–17. For example, by
including a microlens array or liquid-crystal spatial light modulator in the light path, one may split the laser focus into multiple
foci for parallel processing11–15. By spatially and temporally
focusing a femtosecond laser in combination with a photomask or
digital micromirror device, a patterned light sheet can be generated for laser micro-processing16,17. However, these methods are
either limited to fabricate periodic structures or compromise
fabrication resolution. A high precision, high throughput method
for TPP fabrication has yet to be developed.
In this paper, we present a revolutionary laser nanofabrication
process based on TPP and an ultrafast random-access digital
micromirror device (DMD) scanner. By exploiting binary holography, the DMD scanner can simultaneously generate and
control one to tens of laser foci for parallel nanofabrication at the
DMD pattern rate, i.e., 22.7 kHz. The axial and lateral scanning
resolutions (i.e., minimum step size) are 270 nm and 130 nm,
respectively. Previously, we have demonstrated high-speed femtosecond laser beam shaping and single-focus random-access
scanning, i.e., the laser focus can move to any random point in
the work space at equal speed, using a DMD for optical imaging
applications18–21. This work is built upon the previous work,
which extends the single-focus scanning capability to multi-focus
scanning for parallel nanofabrication. As the control of focus
position and laser dosage is entirely discretized, the fabrication
throughput, grayscale control, precision, and repeatability are
substantially improved.
Optical design. Figure 1 presents the optical design for the
DMD-based nanofabrication system. Firstly, femtosecond laser
pulses are generated by a tunable Ti:sapphire laser (680–1080 nm,
200 fs, 3.3 W, Chameleon Ultra II, Coherent), where the laser is
set at its central wavelength (i.e., 800 nm) for all TPP fabrication
experiments. To fully utilize all pixels on the DMD (DLP 4100
0.7″ XGA, 1024 × 768 pixels, Texas Instrument), L1 and L2 which
form a 4-f system adjust the beam diameter to be larger than the
DMD aperture. Note that due to the small pixel sizes on the
DMD (i.e., 13.68 µm), the device will introduce negative angular
dispersion to the laser beam, i.e., laser pulses will be widened and
the lowered peak power cannot generate TPA. To compensate
angular dispersion, we insert a blazed transmission grating and a
high reﬂectivity mirror (M1) in the optical system to generate
positive angular dispersion. (See dispersion compensation design
in “Methods” section.) To control the generated laser foci in the
focal region of the objective lens, the DMD is placed at the
conjugation plane of the objective lens’ back aperture via another
4-f system, i.e., an achromatic lens L3 and a tube lens L4. Lastly, a
spatial ﬁlter is placed at the back focal plane of L3 to spatially
select the 1st order diffraction of the binary hologram. To
monitor the nanofabrication process in situ, a microscopic imaging system is built in conjunction with the fabrication setup. As
shown in Fig. 1, the microscope shares the objective with the
fabrication system. An epi-illumination light source is coupled
into the system for sample illumination; the CCD camera after
the dichroic mirror records the fabrication process. The sample
(i.e., photosensitive resin) is mounted on a motorized precision
XYZ stage. The resin used in the TPP experiments is IP-Dip
(Nanoscribe GmbH). A high NA oil immersion objective (Nikon
CFI S Fluor 40× Oil, NA = 1.3, WD = 0.22 mm) is used to match
the refractive index of the resin (~1.52).
Synthesis of binary holograms for single-focus and multi-focus
3-D scanning. Manipulation of the dispersion-free laser beam is
Sample & XYZ stage
Fig. 1 Optical conﬁguration of the TPP fabrication system. Femtosecond
laser beams are scanned by the DMD multi-point random-access scanner.
M1, high-reﬂectivity mirrors; DM, dichroic mirror; BS, beam splitter; L1–L4:
lenses (fL1, fL2, fL3, fL4 = 100, 250, 200, 200 mm, respectively)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:2179 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
achieved by applying binary holography (i.e., Lee holography)
18,22 to a DMD. Equation (1) presents the governing equation of
binary holography. To implement it on a DMD, let A(x,y) ∙exp[iφ
(x,y)] be the target wavefront, where A(x,y) ∈ and φ(x,y)
represent the amplitude and phase of the electric ﬁeld respectively; x and y are the coordinates in the Cartesian coordinate
system. Next, let h(i,j) ∈{0,1}, (1 ≤i ≤m, 1 ≤j ≤n, i, j ∈N) be the
pixels on the DMD, where 1 and 0 refer to the “on” and “off”
states respectively; and m and n refer to the number of rows and
columns respectively, i.e., x = i∙dD and y = j∙dD. Figure 2 presents
representative binary holograms generated via Eq. (1).
1;  sin1 A x;y
2π þ k  sin1 Aðx;yÞ
0; otherwise
Single-focus random-access scanning can be achieved by
superposing lateral and axial scanning holograms, as shown in
Fig. 2c, and rapidly modulating them in the DMD. Lateral
scanning can be achieved by modulating the tilted phase term, R
(x,y), in Eq. (1), which controls the spatial separation of different
diffraction orders; T is the grating period and k is an integer.
Generally, the tilted phase is given by R(x,y) = cosθ∙x + sinθ∙y,
where θ is the angle of the fringes measured counter-clockwise
from the y-axis. Accordingly, by controlling T and θ, as illustrated
in Fig. 2a, b, the ﬁrst diffraction order can be shifted laterally21.
Axial scanning can be achieved by applying binary holograms of
spherical wavefronts of increasing or decreasing focal lengths to
the DMD. The spherical wavefronts are mathematically expressed
in Eq. (2)19.
Þ ¼ πðx2 þ y2Þ
Multi-focus random-access scanning can be achieved by
superposing designed binary holograms, where each constituent
hologram contains the spatial and intensity information of a
designed laser focus. This is feasible as the target wavefront A(x,y)
∙exp[iφ(x,y)] can contain many frequency components instead of
one. As such, all focal points generated by the hologram can be
independently controlled and arbitrarily positioned in the same
work space. Through the intensity distribution control among the
focal points, single exposure grayscale control can be realized. To
mathematically realize multi-focus scanning, let A(x,y)∙exp[iφ(x,
y)] be the target wavefront containing k focal points. Binary
holograms with the desired intensity distribution among the k
focal points can be synthesized via Eq. (3) below:
1; Aðx; yÞ  P
Bk sin 2π Rk x;y
Þ þ φw;k x; y
0; otherwise
where h(i, j) represents the binary value of the micromirrors on
the DMD; Bk, Rk(x,y), Tk, and ϕk are the relative amplitude factor,
tilted phase, grating period, and phase for the kth focal point
respectively. ϕw,k is the additional wavefront information to be
included in the hologram for controlling the size and shape of the
focal points. Note that the power of each focal length can be
individually controlled by adjusting Bk. In practical applications,
the number of laser foci is often limited by the total laser power,
i.e., each laser focus must have high enough intensity to induce
multi-photon adsorption. On the other hand, due to the limited
total DMD pixels, increasing the number of laser foci may slightly
compromise the print resolution. To optimize the modulation
resolution for multiple focal points, iterative Gerchberg-Saxton
algorithm23 may be applied to design the binary holograms.
(Note that the use of Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm may increase
the required computational power.)
The relationship between the scanning performance, i.e., range
and resolution, and the DMD parameters, i.e., pixel size (dD) and
aperture sizes (~ndD), has been studied and reported in19–21. The
results are applicable to both single-focus and multi-focus
scanning processes. Brieﬂy, for lateral scanning, the range is
inversely proportional to dD and the magniﬁcation of the
objective lens (Mobj); the minimum step size is inversely
proportional to ndD and Mobj. For axial scanning, the range is
inversely proportional to dD2 and Mobj2; the minimum step size is
inversely proportional to n2dD2 and Mobj2. When using a 40×
objective lens, the work volume of the DMD scanner is calculated
to be 103 × 206 × 524 µm3; and the scanning resolution is 130 nm
and 270 nm in the lateral and axial directions, respectively. As the
scanning resolution is much smaller than a voxel, the DMD
scanner may be used to realize high-resolution and highreproducibility TPP fabrication. This is because although the
scanning path is entirely discrete and non-continuous, the small
step sizes ensure each voxel can be precisely overlapped.
Importantly, the control of laser dosage is also discrete, and the
smallest pixel dwell time is 44 µs. When used in combination with
an electro-optic modulator and the hologram-enabled intensity
distribution control, precise dosage and gray scale control can be
achieved. Note that when a DMD of higher resolution is used,
e.g., DLP6500 (dD = 7.68 µm), the work volume will be increased
by a factor of 10.07.
Experiments of the nanofabrication system. In this section, TPP
fabrication experiments are devised and performed to demonstrate the precision and speed of the random-access DMDscanner. In the ﬁrst experiment, we fabricate selected truss
structures via single-focus writing. The fabrication results are
presented in Fig. 3, including octet truss, Fig. 3a–c, triangular
truss, Fig. 3d–f, and pyramidal truss, Fig. 3g–i. In these experiments, the laser power is set to be 10 mW with a writing speed of
2 kHz (~0.5 mm/s). From the SEM images, one may observe the
Fig. 2 Computer generated holograms based on binary holography. a hologram for x-axis scanning; b hologram for in-plane x-y scanning; c hologram with
titled phase and spherical wavefront for 3-D random-access scanning
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:2179 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
fabricated structures match well with the 3-D models with high
accuracy and minimal distortion. It is worthwhile to note that
during the fabrication process, the laser focus only need to scan
through the spaces with designed structures; as such, the total
fabrication time of the DMD system is only proportional to the
total solid volume regardless of the level of complexity. This is
because the DMD can randomly access any point in space with
equal speed (up to 22.7 kHz or 5 mm/s), presenting great
advantages for fabricating complex structures. In addition, planning of different writing trajectories only requires reordering the
holograms stored in the DMD memory. For example, the octet
truss structure, shown in Fig. 3(a), consists of ~60,000 points (or
holograms), and the total fabrication time is ~60,000/2 kHz =
30 s. At 22.7 kHz, the total fabrication time will be ~2.64 s, with
slightly compromised structure resolution due to the increased
writing laser intensity5.
To investigate the print resolution, four suspended bridges
with widths of a single voxel are fabricated via single-focus
writing, as shown in Fig. 4a. Figure 4b, c present zoom-in top
and isometric views of the bridge, showing a lateral and axial
resolution of ~500 nm and ~1600 nm, respectively, which are
close to the diffraction limit. Better resolution may be achieved
via precise laser intensity control. Note that laser intensity can be
directly controlled by the DMD scanner via modulating the
amplitude factor A(x,y) in Eq. (1). See Supplementary Movie 1
for a demonstration of precise intensity and grayscale control, a
checkerboard pattern (40 × 40 µm2) is fabricated with a pitch of
2 µm, where the graded structures are directly fabricated without
compromising the speed (~5 mm/s; 22.7 kHz) and precision
(Supplementary Movie 1). The laser power at the high and low
positions alternates between 16 mW and 8 mW, repeatedly; the
total write time is ~1.1 s.
Next, we demonstrate the multi-focus TPP fabrication process
and compare the results with single-focus fabrication. In the
experiments, the DMD scanner is programmed to fabricate a 10layer woodpile structure (36 × 36 × 20 μm3) via the single-focus,
two-focus, and three-focus writing mode. In the experiments, the
laser power of the single-focus, two-focus, and three-focus mode
is set to 10, 20, and 30 mW, respectively. (Note all focal points
have equal laser power.) The total number of holograms used for
the single-focus, two-focus, and three-focus mode are 21,600,
10,800 and 7200, respectively. The laser scans at 2 kHz and thus
the total fabrication time for each mode is 10.8, 5.4, and 3.6 s,
respectively. Figure 5a–c present the planned scanning trajectories, where trajectories of different laser foci are labeled by
different colors. Figure 5d–f present snapshots of the single-focus,
two-focus, and three-focus fabrication processes, respectively,
recorded by the built-in microscope (Supplementary Movie 2).
Figure 5g–i present the SEM images of the fabrication results via
the single-focus, two-focus, and three-focus writing processes,
respectively; from the SEM images, one may ﬁnd all fabricated
structures have good resolution and integrity. Further examining
the SEM images, it is observed that the single-focus written
structures show better surface smoothness. From the experiments, we can conﬁrm that the print resolution is approximately
500 nm (limited by diffraction) for all writing modes.
Lastly, we fabricated a microscale London Bridge (120 × 14 ×
60 μm3) via the DMD scanner, demonstrating the capability of
writing arbitrary microstructures. The CAD model and fabrication results are presented in Fig. 6a, b, respectively. To perform
Fig. 3 Single-focus DMD fabrication results. a–c Octet truss, scale bars: 10 µm; d–f triangular truss, scale bars: 5 µm; g–i pyramid truss, scale bars: 5 µm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:2179 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
the fabrication, the CAD model (in STL format) is ﬁrst converted
into 3-D point arrays with approximately 80,000 points; each
point in space is then converted into a unique binary hologram.
This process is automated via our custom-developed software.
Next, the scanning trajectories are planned by ordering the
sequence of the binary holograms. (Note that the total fabrication
time remains constant regardless of the writing sequence.) To
save fabrication time, holograms can be superposed to perform
multi-focus fabrication.
Discussion
In summary, we have presented a nanofabrication platform for
TPP based on the random-access DMD scanner, achieving
Fig. 4 Suspended single-voxel bridges. a TPP printed four-bridge structure, scale bar: 3 µm; b, c zoom-in top view and isometric view of a single bridge in a.
Scale bars: 1 µm
Fig. 5 Single-focus, two-focus, and three-focus fabrication results. a–c planned laser scanning trajectories; d–f snapshots of the multi-focus TPP fabrication
process; g–i SEM images of the fabricated woodpile structures. Scale bars: 10 µm
Fig. 6 Fabrication of arbitrary structures. a CAD model of the microscale London Bridge; b SEM image of the TPP fabricated London Bridge. Scale bar: 10 µm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:2179 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
diffraction-limited fabrication resolution and a writing speed of
22.7 kHz (n × 5 mm/s; n = number of foci)—the highest fabrication speed reported to date for TPP fabrication, without compromising the resolution. By controlling the amplitude and phase
of the input laser via binary holograms and the fast-switching
micromirrors, the laser beam can be split into multiple focal
points for simultaneous nano-writing. Parametric models for
single-focus and multi-focus hologram generation and laser
scanning have been developed and veriﬁed via nanofabrication
experiments, including different truss structures, woodpiles, and a
London Bridge. Comparing with existing point-scanning-based
solutions, the DMD system presents distinctive advantages in
precisely controlling the focus position (~100 nm) and laser
dosage (i.e., grayscale control), thereby enabling the design and
creation of complex 3-D photonic structures, topologically optimized mechanical devices, and many other structures, e.g.,
overhanging structures, that are difﬁcult to fabricate through
conventional raster-scanning-based systems, bringing signiﬁcant
impact to the world of nanomanufacturing.
Dispersion compensation. In this section, we present a method to fully compensate the angular dispersion introduced by the DMD, which is more accurate
and robust compared to the method reported previously19–21. The optimal system
parameters will be mathematically determined. We begin with the grating equation
as expressed in Eq. (4).
d sin θi þ sin θm
where d is grating period; m is an integer that indicates the diffraction order; θi and
θm are the incident and diffraction angles of the mth diffraction order respectively.
Differentiating Eq. (4), we can obtain the angular dispersion ∂θm/∂λ = m/(d∙cosθm).
By comparing the angular dispersion between the grating and the DMD, the ratio
of the cone angles ΔθG and ΔθD can be obtained and expressed as
¼ mGdD cos θiD
mDdG cos θmG
where the subscripts G and D denote the related parameters of the grating and
DMD respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, L1 and L2 form a 4-f system that expands
the laser beam and adjusts the dispersion angle after the grating. Accordingly, the
angular dispersion introduced by DMD can be entirely compensated. As ΔθG and
ΔθD are small, they can be approximated as
To ﬁnd the optimal parameters, consider the incident laser beam to the DMD is
45°, the effective DMD pixel size (dD,E) can be calculated as 13.68/cos(45°) = 19.35
μm; the pitch of the grating (dG) is 0.83 μm (1200 lines/mm, LightSmyth); the
relevant diffraction orders of the grating (mG) and the DMD (mD) are 1 and 10,
respectively; and the corresponding diffraction angles are θmG = 27° and θiD = 17°,
respectively. Substituting these values into Eqs. 5 and 6, we ﬁnd that fL2 = 2.5∙fL1;
accordingly, fL1 and fL2 are selected to be 100 mm and 250 mm, respectively. Note
that when a different grating or DMD model is used, a suitable 4-f system can
always be found to compensate the angular dispersion as θiD can be adjusted
continuously in the system.
Data availability
All data are included in this article and the supplementary movies. Additional
information is available on request from the corresponding author (S.C.).
Code availability
The computer codes that automatically generate binary holograms are available on
request from the corresponding author (S.C.)
Received: 8 November 2018 Accepted: 29 April 2019