Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Web-Scale
Recommender Systems
Rex Ying∗†, Ruining He∗, Kaifeng Chen∗†, Pong Eksombatchai∗,
William L. Hamilton†, Jure Leskovec∗†
∗Pinterest, †Stanford University
{rhe,kaifengchen,pong}@pinterest.com,{rexying,wleif,jure}@stanford.edu
Recent advancements in deep neural networks for graph-structured
data have led to state-of-the-art performance on recommender
system benchmarks. However, making these methods practical and
scalable to web-scale recommendation tasks with billions of items
and hundreds of millions of users remains a challenge.
Here we describe a large-scale deep recommendation engine
that we developed and deployed at Pinterest. We develop a dataefficient Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) algorithm PinSage,
which combines efficient random walks and graph convolutions
to generate embeddings of nodes (i.e., items) that incorporate both
graph structure as well as node feature information. Compared to
prior GCN approaches, we develop a novel method based on highly
efficient random walks to structure the convolutions and design a
novel training strategy that relies on harder-and-harder training
examples to improve robustness and convergence of the model.
We deploy PinSage at Pinterest and train it on 7.5 billion examples on a graph with 3 billion nodes representing pins and boards,
and 18 billion edges. According to offline metrics, user studies and
A/B tests, PinSage generates higher-quality recommendations than
comparable deep learning and graph-based alternatives. To our
knowledge, this is the largest application of deep graph embeddings to date and paves the way for a new generation of web-scale
recommender systems based on graph convolutional architectures.
ACM Reference Format:
Rex Ying∗†, Ruining He∗, Kaifeng Chen∗†, Pong Eksombatchai∗, William L.
Hamilton†, Jure Leskovec∗†. 2018. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
for Web-Scale Recommender Systems. In KDD ’18: The 24th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, August
19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
 
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning methods have an increasingly critical role in recommender system applications, being used to learn useful lowdimensional embeddings of images, text, and even individual users
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from .
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5552-0/18/08...$15.00
 
 . The representations learned using deep models can be used
to complement, or even replace, traditional recommendation algorithms like collaborative filtering. and these learned representations
have high utility because they can be re-used in various recommendation tasks. For example, item embeddings learned using a
deep model can be used for item-item recommendation and also to
recommended themed collections (e.g., playlists, or “feed” content).
Recent years have seen significant developments in this space—
especially the development of new deep learning methods that are
capable of learning on graph-structured data, which is fundamental for recommendation applications (e.g., to exploit user-to-item
interaction graphs as well as social graphs) .
Most prominent among these recent advancements is the success of deep learning architectures known as Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) . The core idea behind GCNs is
to learn how to iteratively aggregate feature information from local graph neighborhoods using neural networks (Figure 1). Here a
single “convolution” operation transforms and aggregates feature
information from a node’s one-hop graph neighborhood, and by
stacking multiple such convolutions information can be propagated
across far reaches of a graph. Unlike purely content-based deep
models (e.g., recurrent neural networks ), GCNs leverage both
content information as well as graph structure. GCN-based methods
have set a new standard on countless recommender system benchmarks (see for a survey). However, these gains on benchmark
tasks have yet to be translated to gains in real-world production
environments.
The main challenge is to scale both the training as well as inference of GCN-based node embeddings to graphs with billions of
nodes and tens of billions of edges. Scaling up GCNs is difficult
because many of the core assumptions underlying their design are
violated when working in a big data environment. For example,
all existing GCN-based recommender systems require operating
on the full graph Laplacian during training—an assumption that
is infeasible when the underlying graph has billions of nodes and
whose structure is constantly evolving.
Present work. Here we present a highly-scalable GCN framework
that we have developed and deployed in production at Pinterest. Our
framework, a random-walk-based GCN named PinSage, operates
on a massive graph with 3 billion nodes and 18 billion edges—a
graph that is 10, 000× larger than typical applications of GCNs.
PinSage leverages several key insights to drastically improve the
scalability of GCNs:
 
INPUT GRAPH
TARGET NODE
BATCH OF NETWORKS
(See Algorithm 1)
convolve(2)
convolve(1)
Figure 1: Overview of our model architecture using depth-2 convolutions (best viewed in color). Left: A small example input
graph. Right: The 2-layer neural network that computes the embedding h(2)
A of node A using the previous-layer representation,
A , of node A and that of its neighborhood N(A) (nodes B,C, D). (However, the notion of neighborhood is general and not all
neighbors need to be included (Section 3.2).) Bottom: The neural networks that compute embeddings of each node of the input
graph. While neural networks differ from node to node they all share the same set of parameters (i.e., the parameters of the
convolve(1) and convolve(2) functions; Algorithm 1). Boxes with the same shading patterns share parameters; γ denotes an
importance pooling function; and thin rectangular boxes denote densely-connected multi-layer neural networks.
• On-the-fly convolutions: Traditional GCN algorithms perform graph convolutions by multiplying feature matrices by
powers of the full graph Laplacian. In contrast, our PinSage algorithm performs efficient, localized convolutions by sampling the
neighborhood around a node and dynamically constructing a
computation graph from this sampled neighborhood. These dynamically constructed computation graphs (Fig. 1) specify how
to perform a localized convolution around a particular node, and
alleviate the need to operate on the entire graph during training.
• Producer-consumer minibatch construction: We develop a
producer-consumer architecture for constructing minibatches
that ensures maximal GPU utilization during model training. A
large-memory, CPU-bound producer efficiently samples node
network neighborhoods and fetches the necessary features to
define local convolutions, while a GPU-bound TensorFlow model
consumes these pre-defined computation graphs to efficiently
run stochastic gradient decent.
• Efficient MapReduce inference: Given a fully-trained GCN
model, we design an efficient MapReduce pipeline that can distribute the trained model to generate embeddings for billions of
nodes, while minimizing repeated computations.
In addition to these fundamental advancements in scalability, we
also introduce new training techniques and algorithmic innovations. These innovations improve the quality of the representations
learned by PinSage, leading significant performance gains in downstream recommender system tasks:
• Constructing convolutions via random walks: Taking full
neighborhoods of nodes to perform convolutions (Fig. 1) would
result in huge computation graphs, so we resort to sampling.
However, random sampling is suboptimal, and we develop a new
technique using short random walks to sample the computation graph. An additional benefit is that each node now has an
importance score, which we use in the pooling/aggregation step.
• Importance pooling: A core component of graph convolutions
is the aggregation of feature information from local neighborhoods in the graph. We introduce a method to weigh the importance of node features in this aggregation based upon randomwalk similarity measures, leading to a 46% performance gain in
offline evaluation metrics.
• Curriculum training: We design a curriculum training scheme,
where the algorithm is fed harder-and-harder examples during
training, resulting in a 12% performance gain.
We have deployed PinSage for a variety of recommendation
tasks at Pinterest, a popular content discovery and curation application where users interact with pins, which are visual bookmarks
to online content (e.g., recipes they want to cook, or clothes they
want to purchase). Users organize these pins into boards, which contain collections of similar pins. Altogether, Pinterest is the world’s
largest user-curated graph of images, with over 2 billion unique
pins collected into over 1 billion boards.
Through extensive offline metrics, controlled user studies, and
A/B tests, we show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance compared to other scalable deep content-based recommendation algorithms, in both an item-item recommendation
task (i.e., related-pin recommendation), as well as a “homefeed”
recommendation task. In offline ranking metrics we improve over
the best performing baseline by more than 40%, in head-to-head
human evaluations our recommendations are preferred about 60%
of the time, and the A/B tests show 30% to 100% improvements in
user engagement across various settings.
To our knowledge, this is the largest-ever application of deep
graph embeddings and paves the way for new generation of recommendation systems based on graph convolutional architectures.
RELATED WORK
Our work builds upon a number of recent advancements in deep
learning methods for graph-structured data.
The notion of neural networks for graph data was first outlined
in Gori et al. and further elaborated on in Scarselli et
al. . However, these initial approaches to deep learning
on graphs required running expensive neural “message-passing”
algorithms to convergence and were prohibitively expensive on
large graphs. Some limitations were addressed by Gated Graph
Sequence Neural Networks —which employs modern recurrent
neural architectures—but the approach remains computationally
expensive and has mainly been used on graphs with <10, 000 nodes.
More recently, there has been a surge of methods that rely on
the notion of “graph convolutions” or Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). This approach originated with the work of Bruna et
al. , which developed a version of graph convolutions based
on spectral graph thery . Following on this work, a number of
authors proposed improvements, extensions, and approximations
of these spectral convolutions , leading to new state-of-the-art results on benchmarks such as node
classification, link prediction, as well as recommender system tasks
(e.g., the MovieLens benchmark ). These approaches have consistently outperformed techniques based upon matrix factorization
or random walks (e.g., node2vec and DeepWalk ), and
their success has led to a surge of interest in applying GCN-based
methods to applications ranging from recommender systems to
drug design . Hamilton et al. and Bronstein et al.
 provide comprehensive surveys of recent advancements.
However, despite the successes of GCN algorithms, no previous
works have managed to apply them to production-scale data with
billions of nodes and edges—a limitation that is primarily due to
the fact that traditional GCN methods require operating on the
entire graph Laplacian during training. Here we fill this gap and
show that GCNs can be scaled to operate in a production-scale
recommender system setting involving billions of nodes/items. Our
work also demonstrates the substantial impact that GCNs have on
recommendation performance in a real-world environment.
In terms of algorithm design, our work is most closely related to
Hamilton et al. ’s GraphSAGE algorithm and the closely
related follow-up work of Chen et al. . GraphSAGE is
an inductive variant of GCNs that we modify to avoid operating
on the entire graph Laplacian. We fundamentally improve upon
GraphSAGE by removing the limitation that the whole graph be
stored in GPU memory, using low-latency random walks to sample
graph neighborhoods in a producer-consumer architecture. We
also introduce a number of new training techniques to improve
performance and a MapReduce inference pipeline to scale up to
graphs with billions of nodes.
Lastly, also note that graph embedding methods like node2vec
 and DeepWalk cannot be applied here. First, these are
unsupervised methods. Second, they cannot include node feature
information. Third, they directly learn embeddings of nodes and
thus the number of model parameters is linear with the size of the
graph, which is prohibitive for our setting.
In this section, we describe the technical details of the PinSage architecture and training, as well as a MapReduce pipeline to efficiently
generate embeddings using a trained PinSage model.
The key computational workhorse of our approach is the notion
of localized graph convolutions.1 To generate the embedding for
a node (i.e., an item), we apply multiple convolutional modules
that aggregate feature information (e.g., visual, textual features)
from the node’s local graph neighborhood (Figure 1). Each module
learns how to aggregate information from a small graph neighborhood, and by stacking multiple such modules, our approach can
gain information about the local network topology. Importantly,
parameters of these localized convolutional modules are shared
across all nodes, making the parameter complexity of our approach
independent of the input graph size.
Problem Setup
Pinterest is a content discovery application where users interact
with pins, which are visual bookmarks to online content (e.g., recipes
they want to cook, or clothes they want to purchase). Users organize
these pins into boards, which contain collections of pins that the
user deems to be thematically related. Altogether, the Pinterest
graph contains 2 billion pins, 1 billion boards, and over 18 billion
edges (i.e., memberships of pins to their corresponding boards).
Our task is to generate high-quality embeddings or representations of pins that can be used for recommendation (e.g., via nearestneighbor lookup for related pin recommendation, or for use in a
downstream re-ranking system). In order to learn these embeddings, we model the Pinterest environment as a bipartite graph
consisting of nodes in two disjoint sets, I (containing pins) and
C (containing boards). Note, however, that our approach is also
naturally generalizable, with I being viewed as a set of items and
C as a set of user-defined contexts or collections.
In addition to the graph structure, we also assume that the
pins/items u ∈I are associated with real-valued attributes, xu ∈
Rd. In general, these attributes may specify metadata or content
information about an item, and in the case of Pinterest, we have
that pins are associated with both rich text and image features.
Our goal is to leverage both these input attributes as well as the
structure of the bipartite graph to generate high-quality embeddings. These embeddings are then used for recommender system
1Following a number of recent works (e.g., ) we use the term “convolutional”
to refer to a module that aggregates information from a local graph region and to
denote the fact that parameters are shared between spatially distinct applications of
this module; however, the architecture we employ does not directly approximate a
spectral graph convolution (though they are intimately related) .
candidate generation via nearest neighbor lookup (i.e., given a pin,
find related pins) or as features in machine learning systems for
ranking the candidates.
For notational convenience and generality, when we describe
the PinSage algorithm, we simply refer to the node set of the full
graph with V = I ∪C and do not explicitly distinguish between
pin and board nodes (unless strictly necessary), using the more
general term “node” whenever possible.
Model Architecture
We use localized convolutional modules to generate embeddings
for nodes. We start with input node features and then learn neural
networks that transform and aggregate features over the graph to
compute the node embeddings (Figure 1).
Forward propagation algorithm. We consider the task of generating an embedding, zu for a node u, which depends on the node’s
input features and the graph structure around this node.
Algorithm 1: convolve
:Current embedding zu for node u; set of neighbor
embeddings {zv |v ∈N(u)}, set of neighbor weights
α; symmetric vector function γ(·)
Output:New embedding znew
for node u
1 nu ←γ ({ReLU (Qhv + q) | v ∈N(u)} ,α);
←ReLU (W · concat(zu, nu) + w);
The core of our PinSage algorithm is a localized convolution
operation, where we learn how to aggregate information from u’s
neighborhood (Figure 1). This procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1
convolve. The basic idea is that we transform the representations
zv, ∀v ∈N(u) of u’s neighbors through a dense neural network
and then apply a aggregator/pooling fuction (e.g., a element-wise
mean or weighted sum, denoted as γ) on the resulting set of vectors
(Line 1). This aggregation step provides a vector representation,
nu, of u’s local neighborhood, N(u). We then concatenate the aggregated neighborhood vector nu with u’s current representation
hu and transform the concatenated vector through another dense
neural network layer (Line 2). Empirically we observe significant
performance gains when using concatenation operation instead of
the average operation as in . Additionally, the normalization in
Line 3 makes training more stable, and it is more efficient to perform
approximate nearest neighbor search for normalized embeddings
(Section 3.5). The output of the algorithm is a representation of u
that incorporates both information about itself and its local graph
neighborhood.
Importance-based neighborhoods. An important innovation in
our approach is how we define node neighborhoods N(u), i.e., how
we select the set of neighbors to convolve over in Algorithm 1.
Whereas previous GCN approaches simply examine k-hop graph
neighborhoods, in PinSage we define importance-based neighborhoods, where the neighborhood of a nodeu is defined as theT nodes
that exert the most influence on node u. Concretely, we simulate
random walks starting from nodeu and compute the L1-normalized
visit count of nodes visited by the random walk .2 The neighborhood of u is then defined as the top T nodes with the highest
normalized visit counts with respect to node u.
The advantages of this importance-based neighborhood definition are two-fold. First, selecting a fixed number of nodes to
aggregate from allows us to control the memory footprint of the
algorithm during training . Second, it allows Algorithm 1 to
take into account the importance of neighbors when aggregating
the vector representations of neighbors. In particular, we implement γ in Algorithm 1 as a weighted-mean, with weights defined
according to the L1 normalized visit counts. We refer to this new
approach as importance pooling.
Stacking convolutions. Each time we apply the convolve operation (Algorithm 1) we get a new representation for a node, and we
can stack multiple such convolutions on top of each other in order
to gain more information about the local graph structure around
node u. In particular, we use multiple layers of convolutions, where
the inputs to the convolutions at layer k depend on the representations output from layer k −1 (Figure 1) and where the initial (i.e.,
“layer 0”) representations are equal to the input node features. Note
that the model parameters in Algorithm 1 (Q, q, W, and w) are
shared across the nodes but differ between layers.
Algorithm 2 details how stacked convolutions generate embeddings for a minibatch set of nodes, M. We first compute the neighborhoods of each node and then apply K convolutional iterations
to generate the layer-K representations of the target nodes. The
output of the final convolutional layer is then fed through a fullyconnected neural network to generate the final output embeddings
zu, ∀u ∈M.
The full set of parameters of our model which we then learn
is: the weight and bias parameters for each convolutional layer
(Q(k), q(k), W(k), w(k), ∀k ∈{1, ...,K}) as well as the parameters of
the final dense neural network layer, G1, G2, and g. The output dimension of Line 1 in Algorithm 1 (i.e., the column-space dimension
of Q) is set to be m at all layers. For simplicity, we set the output
dimension of all convolutional layers (i.e., the output at Line 3 of
Algorithm 1) to be equal, and we denote this size parameter by d.
The final output dimension of the model (after applying line 18 of
Algorithm 2) is also set to be d.
Model Training
We train PinSage in a supervised fashion using a max-margin ranking loss. In this setup, we assume that we have access to a set of
labeled pairs of items L, where the pairs in the set, (q,i) ∈L, are
assumed to be related—i.e., we assume that if (q,i) ∈L then item i
is a good recommendation candidate for query item q. The goal of
the training phase is to optimize the PinSage parameters so that the
output embeddings of pairs (q,i) ∈L in the labeled set are close
We first describe our margin-based loss function in detail. Following this, we give an overview of several techniques we developed
that lead to the computation efficiency and fast convergence rate
of PinSage, allowing us to train on billion node graphs and billions
training examples. And finally, we describe our curriculum-training
2In the limit of infinite simulations, the normalized counts approximate the Personalized PageRank scores with respect to u.
Algorithm 2: minibatch
:Set of nodes M ⊂V; depth parameter K;
neighborhood function N : V →2V
Output:Embeddings zu, ∀u ∈M
/* Sampling neighborhoods of minibatch nodes.
1 S(K) ←M;
2 for k = K, ..., 1 do
S(k−1) ←S(k);
for u ∈S(k) do
S(k−1) ←S(k−1) ∪N(u);
/* Generating embeddings
←xu, ∀u ∈S(0);
9 for k = 1, ...,K do
for u ∈S(k) do
, ∀v ∈N(u)
←convolve(k) 
15 for u ∈M do
zu ←G2 · ReLU
scheme, which improves the overall quality of the recommendations.
Loss function. In order to train the parameters of the model, we
use a max-margin-based loss function. The basic idea is that we
want to maximize the inner product of positive examples, i.e., the
embedding of the query item and the corresponding related item.
At the same time we want to ensure that the inner product of
negative examples—i.e., the inner product between the embedding
of the query item and an unrelated item—is smaller than that of the
positive sample by some pre-defined margin. The loss function for
a single pair of node embeddings (zq, zi) : (q,i) ∈L is thus
JG(zqzi) = Enk ∼Pn(q) max{0, zq · znk −zq · zi + ∆},
where Pn(q) denotes the distribution of negative examples for item
q, and ∆denotes the margin hyper-parameter. We shall explain the
sampling of negative samples below.
Multi-GPU training with large minibatches. To make full use
of multiple GPUs on a single machine for training, we run the forward and backward propagation in a multi-tower fashion. With
multiple GPUs, we first divide each minibatch (Figure 1 bottom) into
equal-sized portions. Each GPU takes one portion of the minibatch
and performs the computations using the same set of parameters. After backward propagation, the gradients for each parameter across
all GPUs are aggregated together, and a single step of synchronous
SGD is performed. Due to the need to train on extremely large
number of examples (on the scale of billions), we run our system
with large batch sizes, ranging from 512 to 4096.
We use techniques similar to those proposed by Goyal et al. 
to ensure fast convergence and maintain training and generalization
accuracy when dealing with large batch sizes. We use a gradual
warmup procedure that increases learning rate from small to a
peak value in the first epoch according to the linear scaling rule.
Afterwards the learning rate is decreased exponentially.
Producer-consumer minibatch construction. During training,
the adjacency list and the feature matrix for billions of nodes are
placed in CPU memory due to their large size. However, during the
convolve step of PinSage, each GPU process needs access to the
neighborhood and feature information of nodes in the neighborhood. Accessing the data in CPU memory from GPU is not efficient.
To solve this problem, we use a re-indexing technique to create a
sub-graph G′ = (V ′, E′) containing nodes and their neighborhood,
which will be involved in the computation of the current minibatch.
A small feature matrix containing only node features relevant to
computation of the current minibatch is also extracted such that
the order is consistent with the index of nodes in G′. The adjacency
list of G′ and the small feature matrix are fed into GPUs at the start
of each minibatch iteration, so that no communication between
the GPU and CPU is needed during the convolve step, greatly
improving GPU utilization.
The training procedure has alternating usage of CPUs and GPUs.
The model computations are in GPUs, whereas extracting features,
re-indexing, and negative sampling are computed on CPUs. In addition to parallelizing GPU computation with multi-tower training,
and CPU computation using OpenMP , we design a producerconsumer pattern to run GPU computation at the current iteration
and CPU computation at the next iteration in parallel. This further
reduces the training time by almost a half.
Sampling negative items. Negative sampling is used in our loss
function (Equation 1) as an approximation of the normalization
factor of edge likelihood . To improve efficiency when training
with large batch sizes, we sample a set of 500 negative items to be
shared by all training examples in each minibatch. This drastically
saves the number of embeddings that need to be computed during
each training step, compared to running negative sampling for each
node independently. Empirically, we do not observe a difference
between the performance of the two sampling schemes.
In the simplest case, we could just uniformly sample negative
examples from the entire set of items. However, ensuring that the
inner product of the positive example (pair of items (q,i)) is larger
than that of theq and each of the 500 negative items is too “easy” and
does not provide fine enough “resolution” for the system to learn.
In particular, our recommendation algorithm should be capable
of finding 1,000 most relevant items to q among the catalog of
over 2 billion items. In other words, our model should be able to
distinguish/identify 1 item out of 2 million items. But with 500
random negative items, the model’s resolution is only 1 out of
500. Thus, if we sample 500 random negative items out of 2 billion
items, the chance of any of these items being even slightly related
to the query item is small. Therefore, with large probability the
learning will not make good parameter updates and will not be able
to differentiate slightly related items from the very related ones.
To solve the above problem, for each positive training example
(i.e., item pair (q,i)), we add “hard” negative examples, i.e., items
Figure 2: Random negative examples and hard negative examples. Notice that the hard negative example is significantly more similar to the query, than the random negative
example, though not as similar as the positive example.
that are somewhat related to the query item q, but not as related
as the positive item i. We call these “hard negative items”. They
are generated by ranking items in a graph according to their Personalized PageRank scores with respect to query item q . Items
ranked at 2000-5000 are randomly sampled as hard negative items.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the hard negative examples are more
similar to the query than random negative examples, and are thus
challenging for the model to rank, forcing the model to learn to
distinguish items at a finer granularity.
Using hard negative items throughout the training procedure
doubles the number of epochs needed for the training to converge. To help with convergence, we develop a curriculum training
scheme . In the first epoch of training, no hard negative items are
used, so that the algorithm quickly finds an area in the parameter
space where the loss is relatively small. We then add hard negative
items in subsequent epochs, focusing the model to learn how to
distinguish highly related pins from only slightly related ones. At
epoch n of the training, we add n −1 hard negative items to the set
of negative items for each item.
Node Embeddings via MapReduce
After the model is trained, it is still challenging to directly apply the
trained model to generate embeddings for all items, including those
that were not seen during training. Naively computing embeddings
for nodes using Algorithm 2 leads to repeated computations caused
by the overlap between K-hop neighborhoods of nodes. As illustrated in Figure 1, many nodes are repeatedly computed at multiple
layers when generating the embeddings for different target nodes.
To ensure efficient inference, we develop a MapReduce approach
that runs model inference without repeated computations.
We observe that inference of node embeddings very nicely lends
itself to MapReduce computational model. Figure 3 details the data
flow on the bipartite pin-to-board Pinterest graph, where we assume
the input (i.e., “layer-0”) nodes are pins/items (and the layer-1 nodes
are boards/contexts). The MapReduce pipeline has two key parts:
(1) One MapReduce job is used to project all pins to a lowdimensional latent space, where the aggregation operation
will be performed (Algorithm 1, Line 1).
(2) Another MapReduce job is then used to join the resulting pin
representations with the ids of the boards they occur in, and
the board embedding is computed by pooling the features of
its (sampled) neighbors.
Note that our approach avoids redundant computations and that
the latent vector for each node is computed only once. After the embeddings of the boards are obtained, we use two more MapReduce
jobs to compute the second-layer embeddings of pins, in a similar
fashion as above, and this process can be iterated as necessary (up
to K convolutional layers).3
Efficient nearest-neighbor lookups
The embeddings generated by PinSage can be used for a wide range
of downstream recommendation tasks, and in many settings we
can directly use these embeddings to make recommendations by
performing nearest-neighbor lookups in the learned embedding
space. That is, given a query item q, the we can recommend items
whose embeddings are the K-nearest neighbors of the query item’s
embedding. Approximate KNN can be obtained efficiently via locality sensitive hashing . After the hash function is computed,
retrieval of items can be implemented with a two-level retrieval process based on the Weak AND operator . Given that the PinSage
model is trained offline and all node embeddings are computed via
MapReduce and saved in a database, the efficient nearest-neighbor
lookup operation enables the system to serve recommendations in
an online fashion,
EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the efficiency of PinSage and the quality of the
embeddings it generates, we conduct a comprehensive suite of
experiments on the entire Pinterest object graph, including offline
experiments, production A/B tests as well as user studies.
Experimental Setup
We evaluate the embeddings generated by PinSage in two tasks:
recommending related pins and recommending pins in a user’s
home/news feed. To recommend related pins, we select the K nearest neighbors to the query pin in the embedding space. We evaluate
performance on this related-pin recommendation task using both
offline ranking measures as well as a controlled user study. For the
homefeed recommendation task, we select the pins that are closest
in the embedding space to one of the most recently pinned items by
the user. We evaluate performance of a fully-deployed production
system on this task using A/B tests to measure the overall impact
on user engagement.
Training details and data preparation. We define the set, L,
of positive training examples (Equation (1)) using historical user
engagement data. In particular, we use historical user engagement
data to identify pairs of pins (q,i), where a user interacted with pin
i immediately after she interacted with pin q. We use all other pins
as negative items (and sample them as described in Section 3.3).
Overall, we use 1.2 billion pairs of positive training examples (in
addition to 500 negative examples per batch and 6 hard negative
examples per pin). Thus in total we use 7.5 billion training examples.
Since PinSage can efficiently generate embeddings for unseen
data, we only train on a subset of the Pinterest graph and then
generate embeddings for the entire graph using the MapReduce
pipeline described in Section 3.4. In particular, for training we use
3Note that since we assume that only pins (and not boards) have features, we must
use an even number of convolutional layers.
Figure 3: Node embedding data flow to compute the first layer representation using MapReduce. The second layer computation
follows the same pipeline, except that the inputs are first layer representations, rather than raw item features.
a randomly sampled subgraph of the entire graph, containing 20%
of all boards (and all the pins touched by those boards) and 70% of
the labeled examples. During hyperparameter tuning, a remaining
10% of the labeled examples are used. And, when testing, we run
inference on the entire graph to compute embeddings for all 2
billion pins, and the remaining 20% of the labeled examples are
used to test the recommendation performance of our PinSage in the
offline evaluations. Note that training on a subset of the full graph
drastically decreased training time, with a negligible impact on final
performance. In total, the full datasets for training and evaluation
are approximately 18TB in size with the full output embeddings
being 4TB.
Features used for learning. Each pin at Pinterest is associated
with an image and a set of textual annotations (title, description). To
generate feature representation xq for each pin q, we concatenate
visual embeddings (4,096 dimensions), textual annotation embeddings (256 dimensions), and the log degree of the node/pin in the
graph. The visual embeddings are the 6-th fully connected layer of
a classification network using the VGG-16 architecture . Textual annotation embeddings are trained using a Word2Vec-based
model , where the context of an annotation consists of other
annotations that are associated with each pin.
Baselines for comparison. We evaluate the performance of Pin-
Sage against the following state-of-the-art content-based, graphbased and deep learning baselines that generate embeddings of
(1) Visual embeddings (Visual): Uses nearest neighbors of deep
visual embeddings for recommendations. The visual features
are described above.
(2) Annotation embeddings (Annotation): Recommends based
on nearest neighbors in terms of annotation embeddings. The
annotation embeddings are described above.
(3) Combined embeddings (Combined): Recommends based on
concatenating visual and annotation embeddings, and using
a 2-layer multi-layer perceptron to compute embeddings that
capture both visual and annotation features.
(4) Graph-based method (Pixie): This random-walk-based method
 uses biased random walks to generate ranking scores by
simulating random walks starting at query pin q. Items with
top K scores are retrieved as recommendations. While this
approach does not generate pin embeddings, it is currently the
state-of-the-art at Pinterest for certain recommendation tasks
 and thus an informative baseline.
The visual and annotation embeddings are state-of-the-art deep
learning content-based systems currently deployed at Pinterest to
generate representations of pins. Note that we do not compare
against other deep learning baselines from the literature simply
due to the scale of our problem. We also do not consider non-deep
learning approaches for generating item/content embeddings, since
other works have already proven state-of-the-art performance of
deep learning approaches for generating such embeddings [9, 12,
We also conduct ablation studies and consider several variants
of PinSage when evaluating performance:
• max-pooling uses the element-wise max as a symmetric aggregation function (i.e., γ = max) without hard negative samples;
• mean-pooling uses the element-wise mean as a symmetric
aggregation function (i.e., γ = mean);
• mean-pooling-xent is the same as mean-pooling but uses the
cross-entropy loss introduced in .
• mean-pooling-hard is the same as mean-pooling, except that
it incorporates hard negative samples as detailed in Section 3.3.
• PinSage uses all optimizations presented in this paper, including the use of importance pooling in the convolution step.
The max-pooling and cross-entropy settings are extensions of the
best-performing GCN model from Hamilton et al. —other variants (e.g., based on Kipf et al. ) performed significantly worse
in development tests and are omitted for brevity.4 For all the above
variants, we used K = 2, hidden dimension size m = 2048, and set
the embedding dimension d to be 1024.
Computation resources. Training of PinSage is implemented in
TensorFlow and run on a single machine with 32 cores and
16 Tesla K80 GPUs. To ensure fast fetching of item’s visual and
annotation features, we store them in main memory, together with
the graph, using Linux HugePages to increase the size of virtual
memory pages from 4KB to 2MB. The total amount of memory used
in training is 500GB. Our MapReduce inference pipeline is run on
a Hadoop2 cluster with 378 d2.8xlarge Amazon AWS nodes.
4Note that the recent GCN-based recommender systems of Monti et al. and Berg
et al. are not directly comparable because they cannot scale to the Pinterest size
Annotation
max-pooling
mean-pooling
mean-pooling-xent
mean-pooling-hard
Table 1: Hit-rate and MRR for PinSage and content-based
deep learning baselines. Overall, PinSage gives 150% improvement in hit rate and 60% improvement in MRR over
the best baseline.5
Offline Evaluation
To evaluate performance on the related pin recommendation task,
we define the notion of hit-rate. For each positive pair of pins (q,i)
in the test set, we use q as a query pin and then compute its top
K nearest neighbors NNq from a sample of 5 million test pins. We
then define the hit-rate as the fraction of queries q where i was
ranked among the top K of the test sample (i.e., where i ∈NNq).
This metric directly measures the probability that recommendations
made by the algorithm contain the items related to the query pin q.
In our experiments K is set to be 500.
We also evaluate the methods using Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR), which takes into account of the rank of the item j among
recommended items for query item q:
Due to the large pool of candidates (more than 2 billion), we use a
scaled version of the MRR in Equation (2), where Ri,q is the rank
of item i among recommended items for query q, and n is the total
number of labeled item pairs. The scaling factor 100 ensures that,
for example, the difference between rank at 1, 000 and rank at 2, 000
is still noticeable, instead of being very close to 0.
Table 1 compares the performance of the various approaches
using the hit rate as well as the MRR.5 PinSage with our new
importance-pooling aggregation and hard negative examples achieves
the best performance at 67% hit-rate and 0.59 MRR, outperforming
the top baseline by 40% absolute (150% relative) in terms of the
hit rate and also 22% absolute (60% relative) in terms of MRR. We
also observe that combining visual and textual information works
much better than using either one alone (60% improvement of the
combined approach over visual/annotation only).
Embedding similarity distribution. Another indication of the
effectiveness of the learned embeddings is that the distances between random pairs of item embeddings are widely distributed. If
all items are at about the same distance (i.e., the distances are tightly
clustered) then the embedding space does not have enough “resolution” to distinguish between items of different relevance. Figure 4
5Note that we do not include the Pixie baseline in these offline comparisons because the
Pixie algorithm runs in production and is “generating” labeled pairs (q, j) for us—i.e.,
the labeled pairs are obtained from historical user engagement data in which the Pixie
algorithm was used as the recommender system. Therefore, the recommended item j
is always in the recommendations made by the Pixie algorithm. However, we compare
to the Pixie algorithm using human evaluations in Section 4.3.
Figure 4: Probability density of pairwise cosine similarity
for visual embeddings, annotation embeddings, and Pin-
Sage embeddings.
plots the distribution of cosine similarities between pairs of items
using annotation, visual, and PinSage embeddings. This distribution
of cosine similarity between random pairs of items demonstrates
the effectiveness of PinSage, which has the most spread out distribution. In particular, the kurtosis of the cosine similarities of PinSage
embeddings is 0.43, compared to 2.49 for annotation embeddings
and 1.20 for visual embeddings.
Another important advantage of having such a wide-spread in
the embeddings is that it reduces the collision probability of the
subsequent LSH algorithm, thus increasing the efficiency of serving
the nearest neighbor pins during recommendation.
User Studies
We also investigate the effectiveness of PinSage by performing headto-head comparison between different learned representations. In
the user study, a user is presented with an image of the query pin,
together with two pins retrieved by two different recommendation
algorithms. The user is then asked to choose which of the two
candidate pins is more related to the query pin. Users are instructed
to find various correlations between the recommended items and
the query item, in aspects such as visual appearance, object category
and personal identity. If both recommended items seem equally
related, users have the option to choose “equal”. If no consensus is
reached among 2/3 of users who rate the same question, we deem
the result as inconclusive.
Table 2 shows the results of the head-to-head comparison between PinSage and the 4 baselines. Among items for which the user
has an opinion of which is more related, around 60% of the preferred items are recommended by PinSage. Figure 5 gives examples
of recommendations and illustrates strengths and weaknesses of the
different methods. The image to the left represents the query item.
Each row to the right corresponds to the top recommendations
made by the visual embedding baseline, annotation embedding
baseline, Pixie, and PinSage. Although visual embeddings generally predict categories and visual similarity well, they occasionally
make large mistakes in terms of image semantics. In this example,
visual information confused plants with food, and tree logging with
war photos, due to similar image style and appearance. The graphbased Pixie method, which uses the graph of pin-to-board relations,
Fraction of wins
PinSage vs. Visual
PinSage vs. Annot.
PinSage vs. Combined
PinSage vs. Pixie
Table 2: Head-to-head comparison of which image is more
relevant to the recommended query image.
correctly understands that the category of query is “plants” and it
recommends items in that general category. However, it does not
find the most relevant items. Combining both visual/textual and
graph information, PinSage is able to find relevant items that are
both visually and topically similar to the query item.
In addition, we visualize the embedding space by randomly
choosing 1000 items and compute the 2D t-SNE coordinates from
the PinSage embedding, as shown in Figure 6.6 We observe that the
proximity of the item embeddings corresponds well with the similarity of content, and that items of the same category are embedded
into the same part of the space. Note that items that are visually
different but have the same theme are also close to each other
in the embedding space, as seen by the items depicting different
fashion-related items on the bottom side of the plot.
Production A/B Test
Lastly, we also report on the production A/B test experiments,
which compared the performance of PinSage to other deep learning
content-based recommender systems at Pinterest on the task of
homefeed recommendations. We evaluate the performance by observing the lift in user engagement. The metric of interest is repin
rate, which measures the percentage of homefeed recommendations
that have been saved by the users. A user saving a pin to a board
is a high-value action that signifies deep engagement of the user.
It means that a given pin presented to a user at a given time was
relevant enough for the user to save that pin to one of their boards
so that they can retrieve it later.
We find that PinSage consistently recommends pins that are
more likely to be re-pinned by the user than the alternative methods.
Depending on the particular setting, we observe 10-30% improvements in repin rate over the Annotation and Visual embedding
based recommendations.
Training and Inference Runtime Analysis
One advantage of GCNs is that they can be made inductive :
at the inference (i.e., embedding generation) step, we are able to
compute embeddings for items that were not in the training set.
This allows us to train on a subgraph to obtain model parameters,
and then make embed nodes that have not been observed during
training. Also note that it is easy to compute embeddings of new
nodes that get added into the graph over time. This means that
recommendations can be made on the full (and constantly growing) graph. Experiments on development data demonstrated that
training on a subgraph containing 300 million items could achieve
the best performance in terms of hit-rate (i.e., further increases in
6Some items are overlapped and are not visible.
Figure 5: Examples of Pinterest pins recommended by different algorithms. The image to the left is the query pin. Recommended items to the right are computed using Visual embeddings, Annotation embeddings, graph-based Pixie, and
the training set size did not seem to help), reducing the runtime by
a factor of 6 compared to training on the full graph.
Table 3 shows the the effect of batch size of the minibatch SGD
on the runtime of PinSage training procedure, using the meanpooling-hard variant. For varying batch sizes, the table shows: (1)
the computation time, in milliseconds, for each minibatch, when
varying batch size; (2) the number of iterations needed for the model
to converge; and (3) the total estimated time for the training procedure. Experiments show that a batch size of 2048 makes training
most efficient.
When training the PinSage variant with importance pooling,
another trade-off comes from choosing the size of neighborhood
T. Table 3 shows the runtime and performance of PinSage when
T = 10, 20 and 50. We observe a diminishing return as T increases,
and find that a two-layer GCN with neighborhood size 50 can best
capture the neighborhood information of nodes, while still being
computationally efficient.
After training completes, due to the highly efficient MapReduce
inference pipeline, the whole inference procedure to generate embeddings for 3 billion items can finish in less than 24 hours.
Figure 6: t-SNE plot of item embeddings in 2 dimensions.
Batch size
Per iteration (ms)
# iterations
Total time (h)
Table 3: Runtime comparisons for different batch sizes.
# neighbors
Training time (h)
Table 4: Performance tradeoffs for importance pooling.
CONCLUSION
We proposed PinSage, a random-walk graph convolutional network
(GCN). PinSage is a highly-scalable GCN algorithm capable of learning embeddings for nodes in web-scale graphs containing billions
of objects. In addition to new techniques that ensure scalability, we
introduced the use of importance pooling and curriculum training
that drastically improved embedding performance. We deployed
PinSage at Pinterest and comprehensively evaluated the quality
of the learned embeddings on a number of recommendation tasks,
with offline metrics, user studies and A/B tests all demonstrating
a substantial improvement in recommendation performance. Our
work demonstrates the impact that graph convolutional methods
can have in a production recommender system, and we believe
that PinSage can be further extended in the future to tackle other
graph representation learning problems at large scale, including
knowledge graph reasoning and graph clustering.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Raymond Hsu, Andrei Curelea and Ali
Altaf for performing various A/B tests in production system, Jerry
Zitao Liu for providing data used by Pixie , and Vitaliy Kulikov
for help in nearest neighbor query of the item embeddings.