FCOS: Fully Convolutional One-Stage Object Detection
Chunhua Shen∗
The University of Adelaide, Australia
We propose a fully convolutional one-stage object detector (FCOS) to solve object detection in a per-pixel prediction fashion, analogue to semantic segmentation. Almost
all state-of-the-art object detectors such as RetinaNet, SSD,
YOLOv3, and Faster R-CNN rely on pre-deﬁned anchor
boxes. In contrast, our proposed detector FCOS is anchor
box free, as well as proposal free. By eliminating the predeﬁned set of anchor boxes, FCOS completely avoids the
complicated computation related to anchor boxes such as
calculating overlapping during training. More importantly,
we also avoid all hyper-parameters related to anchor boxes,
which are often very sensitive to the ﬁnal detection performance. With the only post-processing non-maximum suppression (NMS), FCOS with ResNeXt-64x4d-101 achieves
44.7% in AP with single-model and single-scale testing,
surpassing previous one-stage detectors with the advantage
of being much simpler. For the ﬁrst time, we demonstrate
a much simpler and ﬂexible detection framework achieving
improved detection accuracy. We hope that the proposed
FCOS framework can serve as a simple and strong alternative for many other instance-level tasks. Code is available
tinyurl.com/FCOSv1
1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in
computer vision, which requires the algorithm to predict a
bounding box with a category label for each instance of interest in an image. All current mainstream detectors such
as Faster R-CNN , SSD and YOLOv2, v3 rely
on a set of pre-deﬁned anchor boxes and it has long been
believed that the use of anchor boxes is the key to detectors’
success. Despite their great success, it is important to note
that anchor-based detectors suffer some drawbacks: 1) As
shown in , detection performance is sensitive to the
sizes, aspect ratios and number of anchor boxes. For example, in RetinaNet , varying these hyper-parameters affects the performance up to 4% in AP on the COCO bench-
∗Corresponding author, email: 
Figure 1 – As shown in the left image, FCOS works by predicting a 4D vector (l, t, r, b) encoding the location of a bounding box at each foreground pixel (supervised by ground-truth
bounding box information during training). The right plot shows
that when a location residing in multiple bounding boxes, it
can be ambiguous in terms of which bounding box this location
should regress.
mark . As a result, these hyper-parameters need to be
carefully tuned in anchor-based detectors.
2) Even with
careful design, because the scales and aspect ratios of anchor boxes are kept ﬁxed, detectors encounter difﬁculties to
deal with object candidates with large shape variations, particularly for small objects. The pre-deﬁned anchor boxes
also hamper the generalization ability of detectors, as they
need to be re-designed on new detection tasks with different object sizes or aspect ratios.
3) In order to achieve
a high recall rate, an anchor-based detector is required to
densely place anchor boxes on the input image (e.g., more
than 180K anchor boxes in feature pyramid networks (FPN)
 for an image with its shorter side being 800). Most
of these anchor boxes are labelled as negative samples during training. The excessive number of negative samples aggravates the imbalance between positive and negative samples in training. 4) Anchor boxes also involve complicated
computation such as calculating the intersection-over-union
(IoU) scores with ground-truth bounding boxes.
Recently, fully convolutional networks (FCNs) have
achieved tremendous success in dense prediction tasks such
as semantic segmentation , depth estimation
 
 , keypoint detection and counting . As one
of high-level vision tasks, object detection might be the
only one deviating from the neat fully convolutional perpixel prediction framework mainly due to the use of anchor
boxes. It is nature to ask a question: Can we solve object
detection in the neat per-pixel prediction fashion, analogue
to FCN for semantic segmentation, for example?
those fundamental vision tasks can be uniﬁed in (almost)
one single framework. We show that the answer is afﬁrmative. Moreover, we demonstrate that, for the ﬁrst time,
the much simpler FCN-based detector achieves even better
performance than its anchor-based counterparts.
In the literature, some works attempted to leverage the
FCNs-based framework for object detection such as Dense-
Box . Speciﬁcally, these FCN-based frameworks directly predict a 4D vector plus a class category at each spatial location on a level of feature maps. As shown in Fig. 1
(left), the 4D vector depicts the relative offsets from the four
sides of a bounding box to the location. These frameworks
are similar to the FCNs for semantic segmentation, except
that each location is required to regress a 4D continuous
vector. However, to handle the bounding boxes with different sizes, DenseBox crops and resizes training images to a ﬁxed scale. Thus DenseBox has to perform detection on image pyramids, which is against FCN’s philosophy
of computing all convolutions once. Besides, more significantly, these methods are mainly used in special domain
objection detection such as scene text detection or
face detection , since it is believed that these methods do not work well when applied to generic object detection with highly overlapped bounding boxes. As shown
in Fig. 1 (right), the highly overlapped bounding boxes result in an intractable ambiguity: it is not clear w.r.t. which
bounding box to regress for the pixels in the overlapped regions.
In the sequel, we take a closer look at the issue and show
that with FPN this ambiguity can be largely eliminated. As
a result, our method can already obtain comparable detection accuracy with those traditional anchor based detectors.
Furthermore, we observe that our method may produce a
number of low-quality predicted bounding boxes at the locations that are far from the center of an target object. In
order to suppress these low-quality detections, we introduce a novel “center-ness” branch (only one layer) to predict the deviation of a pixel to the center of its corresponding bounding box, as deﬁned in Eq. (3). This score is then
used to down-weight low-quality detected bounding boxes
and merge the detection results in NMS. The simple yet effective center-ness branch allows the FCN-based detector
to outperform anchor-based counterparts under exactly the
same training and testing settings.
This new detection framework enjoys the following advantages.
• Detection is now uniﬁed with many other FCNsolvable tasks such as semantic segmentation, making
it easier to re-use ideas from those tasks.
• Detection becomes proposal free and anchor free,
which signiﬁcantly reduces the number of design parameters. The design parameters typically need heuristic tuning and many tricks are involved in order to
achieve good performance.
Therefore, our new detection framework makes the detector, particularly its
training, considerably simpler.
• By eliminating the anchor boxes, our new detector
completely avoids the complicated computation related to anchor boxes such as the IOU computation and
matching between the anchor boxes and ground-truth
boxes during training, resulting in faster training and
testing as well as less training memory footprint than
its anchor-based counterpart.
• Without bells and whistles, we achieve state-of-theart results among one-stage detectors. We also show
that the proposed FCOS can be used as a Region
Proposal Networks (RPNs) in two-stage detectors and
can achieve signiﬁcantly better performance than its
anchor-based RPN counterparts. Given the even better
performance of the much simpler anchor-free detector,
we encourage the community to rethink the necessity of
anchor boxes in object detection, which are currently
considered as the de facto standard for detection.
• The proposed detector can be immediately extended
to solve other vision tasks with minimal modiﬁcation,
including instance segmentation and key-point detection. We believe that this new method can be the new
baseline for many instance-wise prediction problems.
2. Related Work
Anchor-based Detectors.
Anchor-based detectors inherit
the ideas from traditional sliding-window and proposal
based detectors such as Fast R-CNN . In anchor-based
detectors, the anchor boxes can be viewed as pre-deﬁned
sliding windows or proposals, which are classiﬁed as positive or negative patches, with an extra offsets regression
to reﬁne the prediction of bounding box locations. Therefore, the anchor boxes in these detectors may be viewed
as training samples.
Unlike previous detectors like Fast
RCNN, which compute image features for each sliding window/proposal repeatedly, anchor boxes make use of the feature maps of CNNs and avoid repeated feature computation,
speeding up detection process dramatically. The design of
anchor boxes are popularized by Faster R-CNN in its RPNs
 , SSD and YOLOv2 , and has become the convention in a modern detector.
However, as described above, anchor boxes result in
excessively many hyper-parameters, which typically need
Classification
Center-ness
Regression
Shared Heads Between Feature Levels
Feature Pyramid
Classification + Center-ness + Regression
1 00x1 28 /8
50x64 /1 6
1 3x1 6 /64
Figure 2 – The network architecture of FCOS, where C3, C4, and C5 denote the feature maps of the backbone network and P3 to P7 are
the feature levels used for the ﬁnal prediction. H × W is the height and width of feature maps. ‘/s’ (s = 8, 16, ..., 128) is the downsampling ratio of the feature maps at the level to the input image. As an example, all the numbers are computed with an 800 × 1024
to be carefully tuned in order to achieve good performance. Besides the above hyper-parameters describing anchor shapes, the anchor-based detectors also need other
hyper-parameters to label each anchor box as a positive,
ignored or negative sample. In previous works, they often employ intersection over union (IOU) between anchor
boxes and ground-truth boxes to determine the label of an
anchor box (e.g., a positive anchor if its IOU is in [0.5, 1]).
These hyper-parameters have shown a great impact on the
ﬁnal accuracy, and require heuristic tuning.
Meanwhile,
these hyper-parameters are speciﬁc to detection tasks, making detection tasks deviate from a neat fully convolutional
network architectures used in other dense prediction tasks
such as semantic segmentation.
Anchor-free Detectors.
The most popular anchor-free
detector might be YOLOv1 . Instead of using anchor
boxes, YOLOv1 predicts bounding boxes at points near
the center of objects. Only the points near the center are
used since they are considered to be able to produce higherquality detection. However, since only points near the center are used to predict bounding boxes, YOLOv1 suffers
from low recall as mentioned in YOLOv2 . As a result,
YOLOv2 employs anchor boxes as well. Compared to
YOLOv1, FCOS takes advantages of all points in a ground
truth bounding box to predict the bounding boxes and the
low-quality detected bounding boxes are suppressed by the
proposed “center-ness” branch. As a result, FCOS is able to
provide comparable recall with anchor-based detectors as
shown in our experiments.
CornerNet is a recently proposed one-stage anchorfree detector, which detects a pair of corners of a bounding box and groups them to form the ﬁnal detected bounding box. CornerNet requires much more complicated postprocessing to group the pairs of corners belonging to the
same instance. An extra distance metric is learned for the
purpose of grouping.
Another family of anchor-free detectors such as are
based on DenseBox . The family of detectors have been
considered unsuitable for generic object detection due to
difﬁculty in handling overlapping bounding boxes and the
recall being relatively low. In this work, we show that both
problems can be largely alleviated with multi-level FPN
prediction. Moreover, we also show together with our proposed center-ness branch, the much simpler detector can
achieve even better detection performance than its anchorbased counterparts.
3. Our Approach
In this section, we ﬁrst reformulate object detection in
a per-pixel prediction fashion.
Next, we show that how
we make use of multi-level prediction to improve the recall and resolve the ambiguity resulted from overlapped
bounding boxes. Finally, we present our proposed “centerness” branch, which helps suppress the low-quality detected
bounding boxes and improves the overall performance by a
large margin.
3.1. Fully Convolutional One-Stage Object Detector
Let Fi ∈RH×W ×C be the feature maps at layer i of
a backbone CNN and s be the total stride until the layer.
The ground-truth bounding boxes for an input image are
deﬁned as {Bi}, where Bi = (x(i)
1 , c(i)) ∈
R4 × {1, 2 ... C}. Here (x(i)
0 ) and (x(i)
1 ) denote
the coordinates of the left-top and right-bottom corners of
the bounding box. c(i) is the class that the object in the
bounding box belongs to. C is the number of classes, which
is 80 for MS-COCO dataset.
For each location (x, y) on the feature map Fi, we can
map it back onto the input image as (⌊s
which is near the center of the receptive ﬁeld of the location
(x, y). Different from anchor-based detectors, which consider the location on the input image as the center of (multiple) anchor boxes and regress the target bounding box with
these anchor boxes as references, we directly regress the target bounding box at the location. In other words, our detector directly views locations as training samples instead of
anchor boxes in anchor-based detectors, which is the same
as FCNs for semantic segmentation .
Speciﬁcally, location (x, y) is considered as a positive
sample if it falls into any ground-truth box and the class label c∗of the location is the class label of the ground-truth
box. Otherwise it is a negative sample and c∗= 0 (background class). Besides the label for classiﬁcation, we also
have a 4D real vector ttt∗= (l∗, t∗, r∗, b∗) being the regression targets for the location. Here l∗, t∗, r∗and b∗are the
distances from the location to the four sides of the bounding box, as shown in Fig. 1 (left). If a location falls into
multiple bounding boxes, it is considered as an ambiguous
sample. We simply choose the bounding box with minimal
area as its regression target. In the next section, we will
show that with multi-level prediction, the number of ambiguous samples can be reduced signiﬁcantly and thus they
hardly affect the detection performance. Formally, if location (x, y) is associated to a bounding box Bi, the training
regression targets for the location can be formulated as,
l∗= x −x(i)
0 , t∗= y −y(i)
1 −x, b∗= y(i)
It is worth noting that FCOS can leverage as many foreground samples as possible to train the regressor. It is different from anchor-based detectors, which only consider the
anchor boxes with a highly enough IOU with ground-truth
boxes as positive samples. We argue that it may be one of
the reasons that FCOS outperforms its anchor-based counterparts.
Network Outputs.
Corresponding to the training targets,
the ﬁnal layer of our networks predicts an 80D vector ppp of
classiﬁcation labels and a 4D vector ttt = (l, t, r, b) bounding box coordinates. Following , instead of training a
multi-class classiﬁer, we train C binary classiﬁers. Similar to , we add four convolutional layers after the feature maps of the backbone networks respectively for classiﬁcation and regression branches. Moreover, since the regression targets are always positive, we employ exp(x) to
map any real number to (0, ∞) on the top of the regression
branch. It is worth noting that FCOS has 9× fewer network
output variables than the popular anchor-based detectors
 with 9 anchor boxes per location.
Loss Function.
We deﬁne our training loss function as
L({pppx,y}, {tttx,y}) =
Lcls(pppx,y, c∗
1{c∗x,y>0}Lreg(tttx,y,ttt∗
where Lcls is focal loss as in and Lreg is the IOU loss
as in UnitBox . Npos denotes the number of positive
samples and λ being 1 in this paper is the balance weight
for Lreg. The summation is calculated over all locations
on the feature maps Fi. 1{c∗
i >0} is the indicator function,
being 1 if c∗
i > 0 and 0 otherwise.
Inference.
The inference of FCOS is straightforward.
Given an input images, we forward it through the network
and obtain the classiﬁcation scores pppx,y and the regression
prediction tttx,y for each location on the feature maps Fi.
Following , we choose the location with px,y > 0.05 as
positive samples and invert Eq. (1) to obtain the predicted
bounding boxes.
3.2. Multi-level Prediction with FPN for FCOS
Here we show that how two possible issues of the proposed FCOS can be resolved with multi-level prediction
with FPN . 1) The large stride (e.g., 16×) of the ﬁnal
feature maps in a CNN can result in a relatively low best
possible recall (BPR)1. For anchor based detectors, low recall rates due to the large stride can be compensated to some
extent by lowering the required IOU scores for positive anchor boxes. For FCOS, at the ﬁrst glance one may think that
the BPR can be much lower than anchor-based detectors
because it is impossible to recall an object which no location on the ﬁnal feature maps encodes due to a large stride.
Here, we empirically show that even with a large stride,
FCN-based FCOS is still able to produce a good BPR, and
it can even better than the BPR of the anchor-based detector RetinaNet in the ofﬁcial implementation Detectron
 (refer to Table 1). Therefore, the BPR is actually not
a problem of FCOS. Moreover, with multi-level FPN prediction , the BPR can be improved further to match the
1Upper bound of the recall rate that a detector can achieve.
best BPR the anchor-based RetinaNet can achieve. 2) Overlaps in ground-truth boxes can cause intractable ambiguity
, i.e., which bounding box should a location in the overlap
regress? This ambiguity results in degraded performance of
FCN-based detectors. In this work, we show that the ambiguity can be greatly resolved with multi-level prediction,
and the FCN-based detector can obtain on par, sometimes
even better, performance compared with anchor-based ones.
Following FPN , we detect different sizes of objects on different levels of feature maps.
Speciﬁcally,
we make use of ﬁve levels of feature maps deﬁned as
{P3, P4, P5, P6, P7}. P3, P4 and P5 are produced by the
backbone CNNs’ feature maps C3, C4 and C5 followed by
a 1 × 1 convolutional layer with the top-down connections
in , as shown in Fig. 2. P6 and P7 are produced by applying one convolutional layer with the stride being 2 on P5
and P6, respectively. As a result, the feature levels P3, P4,
P5, P6 and P7 have strides 8, 16, 32, 64 and 128, respectively.
Unlike anchor-based detectors, which assign anchor
boxes with different sizes to different feature levels, we directly limit the range of bounding box regression for each
level. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrstly compute the regression
targets l∗, t∗, r∗and b∗for each location on all feature levels. Next, if a location satisﬁes max(l∗, t∗, r∗, b∗) > mi
or max(l∗, t∗, r∗, b∗) < mi−1, it is set as a negative sample and is thus not required to regress a bounding box anymore. Here mi is the maximum distance that feature level
i needs to regress. In this work, m2, m3, m4, m5, m6 and
m7 are set as 0, 64, 128, 256, 512 and ∞, respectively.
Since objects with different sizes are assigned to different
feature levels and most overlapping happens between objects with considerably different sizes. If a location, even
with multi-level prediction used, is still assigned to more
than one ground-truth boxes, we simply choose the groundtruth box with minimal area as its target. As shown in our
experiments, the multi-level prediction can largely alleviate
the aforementioned ambiguity and improve the FCN-based
detector to the same level of anchor-based ones.
Finally, following , we share the heads between different feature levels, not only making the detector
parameter-efﬁcient but also improving the detection performance. However, we observe that different feature levels
are required to regress different size range (e.g., the size
range is for P3 and for P4), and therefore it
is not reasonable to make use of identical heads for different feature levels. As a result, instead of using the standard
exp(x), we make use of exp(six) with a trainable scalar si
to automatically adjust the base of the exponential function
for feature level Pi, which slightly improves the detection
performance.
3.3. Center-ness for FCOS
After using multi-level prediction in FCOS, there is still
a performance gap between FCOS and anchor-based detectors. We observed that it is due to a lot of low-quality predicted bounding boxes produced by locations far away from
the center of an object.
We propose a simple yet effective strategy to suppress
these low-quality detected bounding boxes without introducing any hyper-parameters. Speciﬁcally, we add a singlelayer branch, in parallel with the classiﬁcation branch (as
shown in Fig. 2) to predict the “center-ness” of a location2.
The center-ness depicts the normalized distance from the
location to the center of the object that the location is responsible for, as shown Fig. 7. Given the regression targets
l∗, t∗, r∗and b∗for a location, the center-ness target is de-
centerness∗=
min(l∗, r∗)
max(l∗, r∗) × min(t∗, b∗)
max(t∗, b∗).
We employ sqrt here to slow down the decay of the centerness. The center-ness ranges from 0 to 1 and is thus trained
with binary cross entropy (BCE) loss. The loss is added to
the loss function Eq. (2). When testing, the ﬁnal score (used
for ranking the detected bounding boxes) is computed by
multiplying the predicted center-ness with the corresponding classiﬁcation score. Thus the center-ness can downweight the scores of bounding boxes far from the center
of an object. As a result, with high probability, these lowquality bounding boxes might be ﬁltered out by the ﬁnal
non-maximum suppression (NMS) process, improving the
detection performance remarkably.
An alternative of the center-ness is to make use of only
the central portion of ground-truth bounding box as positive samples with the price of one extra hyper-parameter,
as shown in works . After our submission, it has
been shown in that the combination of both methods
can achieve a much better performance. The experimental
results can be found in Table 3.
4. Experiments
Our experiments are conducted on the large-scale detection benchmark COCO . Following the common practice , we use the COCO trainval35k split
(115K images) for training and minival split (5K images)
as validation for our ablation study. We report our main results on the test dev split (20K images) by uploading our
detection results to the evaluation server.
2After the initial submission, it has been shown that the AP on MS-
COCO can be improved if the center-ness is parallel with the regression
branch instead of the classiﬁcation branch. However, unless speciﬁed, we
still use the conﬁguration in Fig. 2.
Figure 3 – Center-ness. Red, blue, and other colors denote 1, 0
and the values between them, respectively. Center-ness is computed by Eq. (3) and decays from 1 to 0 as the location deviates
from the center of the object. When testing, the center-ness predicted by the network is multiplied with the classiﬁcation score
thus can down-weight the low-quality bounding boxes predicted
by a location far from the center of an object.
Training Details.
Unless speciﬁed, ResNet-50 is used
as our backbone networks and the same hyper-parameters
with RetinaNet are used. Speciﬁcally, our network is
trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for 90K iterations with the initial learning rate being 0.01 and a minibatch of 16 images. The learning rate is reduced by a factor
of 10 at iteration 60K and 80K, respectively. Weight decay and momentum are set as 0.0001 and 0.9, respectively.
We initialize our backbone networks with the weights pretrained on ImageNet . For the newly added layers, we
initialize them as in . Unless speciﬁed, the input images are resized to have their shorter side being 800 and
their longer side less or equal to 1333.
Inference Details.
We ﬁrstly forward the input image
through the network and obtain the predicted bounding
boxes with a predicted class. Unless speciﬁed, the following
post-processing is exactly the same with RetinaNet and
we directly make use of the same post-processing hyperparameters of RetinaNet. We use the same sizes of input
images as in training. We hypothesize that the performance
of our detector may be improved further if we carefully tune
the hyper-parameters.
4.1. Ablation Study
Multi-level Prediction with FPN
As mentioned before, the major concerns of an FCN-based
detector are low recall rates and ambiguous samples resulted from overlapping in ground-truth bounding boxes. In
the section, we show that both issues can be largely resolved
Low-quality matches
Table 1 – The BPR for anchor-based RetinaNet under a variety of matching rules and the BPR for FCN-based FCOS. FCNbased FCOS has very similar recall to the best anchor-based one
and has much higher recall than the ofﬁcial implementation in
Detectron , where only low-quality matches with IOU ≥0.4
are considered.
Amb. samples (%)
Amb. samples (diff.) (%)
Table 2 – Amb. samples denotes the ratio of the ambiguous
samples to all positive samples. Amb. samples (diff.) is similar
but excludes those ambiguous samples in the overlapped regions
but belonging to the same category as the kind of ambiguity
does not matter when inferring. We can see that with FPN, this
percentage of ambiguous samples is small (3.75%).
with multi-level prediction.
Best Possible Recalls.
The ﬁrst concern about the FCNbased detector is that it might not provide a good best possible recall (BPR). In the section, we show that the concern is not necessary. Here BPR is deﬁned as the ratio of
the number of ground-truth boxes a detector can recall at
the most divided by all ground-truth boxes. A ground-truth
box is considered being recalled if the box is assigned to
at least one sample (i.e., a location in FCOS or an anchor
box in anchor-based detectors) during training. As shown
in Table 1, only with feature level P4 with stride being 16
(i.e., no FPN), FCOS can already obtain a BPR of 95.55%.
The BPR is much higher than the BPR of 90.92% of the
anchor-based detector RetinaNet in the ofﬁcial implementation Detectron, where only the low-quality matches with
IOU ≥0.4 are used. With the help of FPN, FCOS can
achieve a BPR of 98.40%, which is very close to the best
BPR that the anchor-based detector can achieve by using all
low-quality matches. Due to the fact that the best recall of
current detectors are much lower than 90%, the small BPR
gap (less than 1%) between FCOS and the anchor-based detector will not actually affect the performance of detector.
It is also conﬁrmed in Table 3, where FCOS achieves even
better AR than its anchor-based counterparts under the same
training and testing settings. Therefore, the concern about
low BPR may not be necessary.
Ambiguous Samples.
Another concern about the FCNbased detector is that it may have a large number of ambigu-
Improvements
+ ctr. on reg.
+ ctr. sampling 
+ GIoU 
+ Normalization
Table 3 – FCOS vs. RetinaNet on the minival split with ResNet-50-FPN as the backbone. Directly using the training and testing
settings of RetinaNet, our anchor-free FCOS achieves even better performance than anchor-based RetinaNet both in AP and AR. With
Group Normalization (GN) in heads and NMS threshold being 0.6, FCOS can achieve 37.1 in AP. After our submission, some almost
cost-free improvements have been made for FCOS and the performance has been improved by a large margin, as shown by the rows
below “Improvements”. “ctr. on reg.”: moving the center-ness branch to the regression branch. “ctr. sampling”: only sampling the
central portion of ground-truth boxes as positive samples. “GIoU”: penalizing the union area over the circumscribed rectangle’s area in
IoU Loss. “Normalization”: normalizing the regression targets in Eq. (1) with the strides of FPN levels. Refer to our code for details.
ous samples due to the overlapping in ground-truth bounding boxes, as shown in Fig. 1 (right). In Table 2, we show
the ratios of the ambiguous samples to all positive samples
on minival split. As shown in the table, there are indeed a
large amount of ambiguous samples (23.16%) if FPN is not
used and only feature level P4 is used. However, with FPN,
the ratio can be signiﬁcantly reduced to only 7.14% since
most of overlapped objects are assigned to different feature
levels. Moreover, we argue that the ambiguous samples resulted from overlapping between objects of the same category do not matter. For instance, if object A and B with the
same class have overlap, no matter which object the locations in the overlap predict, the prediction is correct because
it is always matched with the same category. The missed object can be predicted by the locations only belonging to it.
Therefore, we only count the ambiguous samples in overlap between bounding boxes with different categories. As
shown in Table 2, the multi-level prediction reduces the ratio of ambiguous samples from 17.84% to 3.75%. In order
to further show that the overlapping in ground truth boxes is
not a problem of our FCN-based FCOS, we count that when
inferring how many detected bounding boxes come from
the ambiguous locations. We found that only 2.3% detected
bounding boxes are produced by the ambiguous locations.
By further only considering the overlap between different
categories, the ratio is reduced to 1.5%. Note that it does
not imply that there are 1.5% locations where FCOS cannot
work. As mentioned before, these locations are associated
with the ground-truth boxes with minimal area. Therefore,
these locations only take the risk of missing some larger objects. As shown in the following experiments, they do not
make our FCOS inferior to anchor-based detectors.
center-ness†
center-ness
Table 4 – Ablation study for the proposed center-ness branch
minival split.
“None” denotes that no center-ness is
used. “center-ness†” denotes that using the center-ness computed from the predicted regression vector.
“center-ness” is
that using center-ness predicted from the proposed center-ness
branch. The center-ness branch improves the detection performance under all metrics.
With or Without Center-ness
As mentioned before, we propose “center-ness” to suppress
the low-quality detected bounding boxes produced by the
locations far from the center of an object. As shown in
Table 4, the center-ness branch can boost AP from 33.5%
to 37.1%, making anchor-free FCOS outperform anchorbased RetinaNet (35.9%).
Note that anchor-based RetinaNet employs two IoU thresholds to label anchor boxes as
positive/negative samples, which can also help to suppress
the low-quality predictions. The proposed center-ness can
eliminate the two hyper-parameters. However, after our initial submission, it has shown that using both center-ness and
the thresholds can result in a better performance, as shown
by the row “+ ctr. sampling” in Table 3. One may note
that center-ness can also be computed with the predicted
regression vector without introducing the extra center-ness
branch. However, as shown in Table 4, the center-ness computed from the regression vector cannot improve the performance and thus the separate center-ness is necessary.
FCOS vs. Anchor-based Detectors
The aforementioned FCOS has two minor differences from
the standard RetinaNet. 1) We use Group Normalization
Two-stage methods:
Faster R-CNN w/ FPN 
ResNet-101-FPN
Faster R-CNN by G-RMI 
Inception-ResNet-v2 
Faster R-CNN w/ TDM 
Inception-ResNet-v2-TDM
One-stage methods:
YOLOv2 
DarkNet-19 
SSD513 
ResNet-101-SSD
DSSD513 
ResNet-101-DSSD
RetinaNet 
ResNet-101-FPN
CornerNet 
Hourglass-104
ResNeXt-64x4d-101-FPN
ResNet-101-FPN
HRNet-W32-5l 
ResNeXt-32x8d-101-FPN
ResNeXt-64x4d-101-FPN
FCOS w/ improvements
ResNeXt-64x4d-101-FPN
Table 5 – FCOS vs. other state-of-the-art two-stage or one-stage detectors (single-model and single-scale results). FCOS outperforms the
anchor-based counterpart RetinaNet by 2.4% in AP with the same backbone. FCOS also outperforms the recent anchor-free one-stage
detector CornerNet with much less design complexity. Refer to Table 3 for details of “improvements”.
RPN w/ FPN & GN (ReImpl.)
FCOS w/ GN w/o center-ness
FCOS w/ GN
Table 6 – FCOS as Region Proposal Networks vs. RPNs with
FPN. ResNet-50 is used as the backbone.
FCOS improves
AR100 and AR1k by 8.1% and 3.4%, respectively. GN: Group
Normalization.
(GN) in the newly added convolutional layers except
for the last prediction layers, which makes our training more
stable. 2) We use P5 to produce the P6 and P7 instead of
C5 in the standard RetinaNet. We observe that using P5 can
improve the performance slightly.
To show that our FCOS can serve as an simple and strong
alternative of anchor-based detectors, and for a fair comparison, we remove GN (the gradients are clipped to prevent
them from exploding) and use C5 in our detector. As shown
in Table 3, with exactly the same settings, our FCOS still
compares favorably with the anchor-based detector (36.3%
vs 35.9%). Moreover, it is worth to note that we directly use
all hyper-parameters (e.g., learning rate, the NMS threshold
and etc.) from RetinaNet, which have been optimized for
the anchor-based detector. We argue that the performance
of FCOS can be improved further if the hyper-parameters
are tuned for it.
It is worth noting that with some almost cost-free improvements, as shown in Table 3, the performance of
our anchor-free detector can be improved by a large margin. Given the superior performance and the merits of the
anchor-free detector (e.g., much simpler and fewer hyperparameters than anchor-based detectors), we encourage the
community to rethink the necessity of anchor boxes in object detection.
4.2. Comparison with State-of-the-art Detectors
We compare FCOS with other state-of-the-art object detectors on test −dev split of MS-COCO benchmark. For
these experiments, we randomly scale the shorter side of
images in the range from 640 to 800 during the training and
double the number of iterations to 180K (with the learning rate change points scaled proportionally). Other settings are exactly the same as the model with AP 37.1% in
Table 3. As shown in Table 5, with ResNet-101-FPN, our
FCOS outperforms the RetinaNet with the same backbone
ResNet-101-FPN by 2.4% in AP. To our knowledge, it is
the ﬁrst time that an anchor-free detector, without any bells
and whistles outperforms anchor-based detectors by a large
margin. FCOS also outperforms other classical two-stage
anchor-based detectors such as Faster R-CNN by a large
margin. With ResNeXt-64x4d-101-FPN as the backbone, FCOS achieves 43.2% in AP. It outperforms the recent state-of-the-art anchor-free detector CornerNet by
a large margin while being much simpler. Note that CornerNet requires to group corners with embedding vectors,
which needs special design for the detector. Thus, we argue that FCOS is more likely to serve as a strong and simple alternative to current mainstream anchor-based detectors. Moreover, FCOS with the improvements in Table 3
achieves 44.7% in AP with single-model and single scale
testing, which surpasses previous detectors by a large margin.
5. Extensions on Region Proposal Networks
So far we have shown that in a one-stage detector, our
FCOS can achieve even better performance than anchorbased counterparts. Intuitively, FCOS should be also able
to replace the anchor boxes in Region Proposal Networks
(RPNs) with FPN in the two-stage detector Faster R-
CNN. Here, we conﬁrm that by experiments.
Compared to RPNs with FPN , we replace anchor
boxes with the method in FCOS. Moreover, we add GN into
the layers in FPN heads, which can make our training more
stable. All other settings are exactly the same with RPNs
with FPN in the ofﬁcial code . As shown in Table 6, even
without the proposed center-ness branch, our FCOS already
improves both AR100 and AR1k signiﬁcantly. With the proposed center-ness branch, FCOS further boosts AR100 and
AR1k respectively to 52.8% and 60.3%, which are 18% relative improvement for AR100 and 3.4% absolute improvement for AR1k over the RPNs with FPN.
6. Conclusion
We have proposed an anchor-free and proposal-free onestage detector FCOS. As shown in experiments, FCOS
compares favourably against the popular anchor-based onestage detectors, including RetinaNet, YOLO and SSD,
but with much less design complexity. FCOS completely
avoids all computation and hyper-parameters related to anchor boxes and solves the object detection in a per-pixel prediction fashion, similar to other dense prediction tasks such
as semantic segmentation. FCOS also achieves state-of-theart performance among one-stage detectors. We also show
that FCOS can be used as RPNs in the two-stage detector
Faster R-CNN and outperforms the its RPNs by a large margin. Given its effectiveness and efﬁciency, we hope that
FCOS can serve as a strong and simple alternative of current mainstream anchor-based detectors. We also believe
that FCOS can be extended to solve many other instancelevel recognition tasks.
7. Class-agnostic Precision-recall Curves
Orginal RetinaNet 
RetinaNet w/ GN 
Table 7 – The class-agnostic detection performance for RetinaNet and FCOS. FCOS has better performance than RetinaNet.
Moreover, the improvement over RetinaNet becomes larger with
a stricter IOU threshold. The results are obtained with the same
models in Table 4 of our main paper.
In Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, we present class-agnostic
precision-recall curves on split minival at IOU thresholds
Original RetinaNet
Retinanet w/ GN
Figure 4 – Class-agnostic precision-recall curves at IOU =
being 0.50, 0.75 and 0.90, respectively. Table 7 shows APs
corresponding to the three curves.
As shown in Table 7, our FCOS achieves better performance than its anchor-based counterpart RetinaNet. Moreover, it worth noting that with a stricter IOU threshold,
FCOS enjoys a larger improvement over RetinaNet, which
suggests that FCOS has a better bounding box regressor to
detect objects more accurately. One of the reasons should
be that FCOS has the ability to leverage more foreground
samples to train the regressor as mentioned in our main paper.
Finally, as shown in all precision-recall curves, the best
recalls of these detectors in the precision-recall curves are
much lower than 90%. It further suggests that the small gap
(98.40% vs. 99.23%) of best possible recall (BPR) between
FCOS and RetinaNet hardly harms the ﬁnal detection performance.
8. Visualization for Center-ness
As mentioned in our main paper, by suppressing lowquality detected bounding boxes, the proposed center-ness
branch improves the detection performance by a large margin. In this section, we conﬁrm this.
We expect that the center-ness can down-weight the
scores of low-quality bounding boxes such that these
bounding boxes can be ﬁltered out in following postprocessing such as non-maximum suppression (NMS). A
detected bounding box is considered as a low-quality one if
it has a low IOU score with its corresponding ground-truth
bounding box. A bounding box with low IOU but a high
conﬁdence score is likely to become a false positive and
harm the precision.
In Fig. 7, we consider a detected bounding box as a 2D
Original RetinaNet
Retinanet w/ GN
Figure 5 – Class-agnostic precision-recall curves at IOU =
Original RetinaNet
Retinanet w/ GN
Figure 6 – Class-agnostic precision-recall curves at IOU =
point (x, y) with x being its score and y being the IOU with
its corresponding ground-truth box. As shown in Fig. 7
(left), before applying the center-ness, there are a large
number of low-quality bounding boxes but with a high con-
ﬁdence score (i.e., the points under the line y = x). Due
to their high scores, these low-quality bounding boxes cannot be eliminated in post-processing and result in lowering
the precision of the detector. After multiplying the classi-
ﬁcation score with the center-ness score, these points are
pushed to the left side of the plot (i.e., their scores are reduced), as shown in Fig. 7 (right). As a result, these lowquality bounding boxes are much more likely to be ﬁltered
out in post-processing and the ﬁnal detection performance
can be improved.
9. Qualitative Results
Some qualitative results are shown in Fig. 8. As shown
in the ﬁgure, our proposed FCOS can detect a wide range
of objects including crowded, occluded, highly overlapped,
extremely small and very large objects.
10. More discussions
Center-ness vs. IoUNet:
Center-ness and IoUNet of Jiang et al. “Acquisition of
Localization Conﬁdence for Accurate Object Detection”
shares a similar purpose (i.e., to suppress low-quality predictions) with different approaches. IoUNet trains a separate network to predict the IoU score between predicted
bounding-boxes and ground-truth boxes. Center-ness, as a
part of our detector, only has a single layer and is trained
jointly with the detector, thus being much simpler. Moreover, “center-ness” does not take as input the predicted
bounding-boxes. Instead, it directly accesses the location’s
ability to predict high-quality bounding-boxes.
BPR in Section 4.1 and ambiguity analysis:
We do not aim to compare “recall by speciﬁc IoU” with
“recall by pixel within box”. The main purpose of Table 1
is to show that the upper bound of recall of FCOS is very
close to the upper bound of recall of anchor-based RetinaNet (98.4% vs. 99.23%). BPR by other IoU thresholds
are listed as those are used in the ofﬁcial code of RetinaNet.
Moreover, no evidence shows that the regression targets of
FCOS are difﬁcult to learn because they are more spreadout. FCOS in fact yields more accurate bounding-boxes.
During training, we deal with the ambiguity at the same
FPN level by choosing the ground-truth box with the minimal area. When testing, if two objects A and B with the
same class have overlap, no matter which one object the
locations in the overlap predict, the prediction is correct
and the missed one can be predicted by the locations only
belonging to it. In the case that A and B do not belong
to the same class, a location in the overlap might predict
A’s class but regress B’s bounding-box, which is a mistake.
That is why we only count the ambiguity across different
classes. Moreover, it appears that this ambiguity does not
make FCOS worse than RetinaNet in AP, as shown in Table
Additional ablation study:
As shown in Table 8, a vanilla FCOS performs on par with
RetinaNet, being of simpler design and with ∼9× less network outputs. Moreover, FCOS works much better than
RetinaNet with single anchor. As for the 2% gain on testdev, besides the performance gain brought by the components in Table 8, we conjecture that different training details
(e.g., learning rate schedule) might cause slight differences
in performance.
RetinaNet with Center-ness:
classification_score
IOU with Ground-truth Boxes
classification_score * center-ness
IOU with Ground-truth Boxes
Figure 7 – Without (left) or with (right) the proposed center-ness. A point in the ﬁgure denotes a detected bounding box. The dashed line
is the line y = x. As shown in the ﬁgure (right), after multiplying the classiﬁcation scores with the center-ness scores, the low-quality
boxes (under the line y = x) are pushed to the left side of the plot. It suggests that the scores of these boxes are reduced substantially.
RetinaNet (#A=1)
RetinaNet (#A=9)
FCOS (pure)
Table 8 – Ablation study on MS-COCO minival. “#A” is the
number of anchor boxes per location in RetinaNet. “IOU” is
IOU loss. “Scalar” denotes whether to use scalars in exp. All
experiments are conducted with the same settings.
Center-ness cannot be directly used in RetinaNet with
multiple anchor boxes per location because one location on
feature maps has only one center-ness score but different
anchor boxes on the same location require different “centerness” (note that center-ness is also used as “soft” thresholds
for positive/negative samples).
For anchor-based RetinaNet, the IoU score between anchor boxes and ground-truth boxes may serve as an alternative of “center-ness”.
Positive samples overlap with RetinaNet:
We want to highlight that center-ness comes into play
only when testing.
When training, all locations within
ground-truth boxes are marked as positive samples. As a
result, FCOS can use more foreground locations to train the
regressor and thus yield more accurate bounding-boxes.
Acknowledgments.
We would like to thank the author of
 for the tricks of center sampling and GIoU. We also
thank Chaorui Deng for HRNet based FCOS and his suggestion of positioning the center-ness branch with box regression.