Measuring driving styles : a validation of the multidimensional
driving style inventory
Citation for published version (APA):
Hooft van Huysduynen, H., Terken, J. M. B., Martens, J. B. O. S., & Eggen, J. H. . Measuring driving
styles : a validation of the multidimensional driving style inventory. In AutomotiveUI '15 Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (pp. 257-264).
Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. 
10.1145/2799250.2799266
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/2015
Document Version:
 
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
 
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Measuring Driving Styles: A Validation of the
Multidimensional Driving Style Inventory
Hanneke Hooft van Huysduynen, Jacques Terken, Jean-Bernard Martens, and Berry Eggen
Eindhoven University of Technology
P.O Box 513, 5600MB Eindhoven
The Netherlands
{H.Hooft.van.Huysduynen, J.M.B.Terken, J.B.O.S.Martens, J.H.Eggen}@tue.nl
The aim of this study was to validate the stability of the
different factors of the Multidimensional Driving Style
Inventory (MDSI) , which was originally developed
and validated with participants in different geographical
areas of Israel. In this study, the questionnaire was
distributed in the Netherlands and Belgium. A factor
analysis of the data of 364 participants revealed five of the
eight factors that resulted from the original factor analysis:
Angry driving, Anxious driving, Dissociative driving,
Distress-reduction driving, and Careful driving style. In
addition, 24 items divided over the five factors seem to be
stable compared to the 44 items divided over the eight
factors of the original analysis. The factors revealed
through the analysis of these data were used to determine
driver profiles, consisting of one or two driving styles. The
next step is to compare self-report data on driving style to
actual driving behaviour.
Author Keywords
Driving Style, Driving behaviour, Human factors, Self-
Report, Questionnaire, Factor Analysis
ACM Classification Keywords
H.1.2 User/Machine Systems: Human factors
INTRODUCTION
Advanced Driver
Assistance Systems (ADAS) are
developed with the purpose of increasing safety, efficiency
and driver comfort and reducing driver’s workload. These
systems interact with the driver with the purpose to advise
or assist the driver or take over control altogether in certain
driving situations .
To the extent that the advice or assistance requires drivers
to deviate from their typical behavioural patterns,
acceptance of those systems may be jeopardized. For
instance, if a speed advice system advises the driver to slow
down or if a speed control system reduces the speed of the
car without a clearly perceivable and obvious need, drivers
who are used to drive at a higher speed may not adopt the
advice or allow the vehicle to reduce the speed of the
The typical behavioural patterns of drivers are usually
referred to by the term ‘driving style’ . This includes the
choice of driving speed, headway, overtaking of other
vehicles and the tendency of commiting traffic violations
 . In order to learn more about compliance towards
ADAS we need to understand how the compliance to
ADAS is influenced by people’s driving style. Such insight
will enable us to explore means to influence people’s
willingness to comply with such systems that are tuned to
the needs and interests of specific driver groups. It appears
evident that what might influence or persuade one group
may not work at all for another group , or may even
encourage greater involvement in risky behaviour .
An easy way to determine drivers’ driving style is by means
of a questionnaire, giving information about someone’s
self-reported driving style. Several self-report measures of
driving behaviour, style and cognition have been
constructed and validated over the last couple of years. In
this paper, we will review several driving style
questionnaires that have been proposed in the literature and
then validate one to be used for our further research.
Driving Style Questionnaires
Gulian et al. developed the Driver Behaviour Inventory
(DBI) to study dimensions causing driver stress. This
questionnaire covered vehicle use, demographics, accidents,
convictions and attitudes towards those, health, work and
personal problems, moods, emotions and attitudes towards
driving and other road users. The 35 items of the
questionnaire highlighted driver stress reactions. A factor
analysis of the 35 items revealed five factors including
feelings as aggression, irritation when overtaking, alertness,
dislike and frustration when failing to overtake. As the DBI
focuses on driver stress, other factors determining driving
style are not addressed in this questionnaire, rendering the
DBI less useful for our research.
Reason et al. developed a Driver Behaviour Questionnaire
(DBQ) consisting of 50 items covering five classes of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
permission
permissions
 .
AutomotiveUI '15, September 01 - 03, 2015, Nottingham, United
Kingdom. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-3736-6/15/09…$15.00
DOI: 
aberrant behaviour: slips, lapses, mistakes, unintended
violations, and deliberate violations. Participants had to
indicate for each item on a five-point scale how often they
committed that behaviour while driving. The analyses of
the results of this questionnaire resulted in three factors:
violations, dangerous errors and silly errors. As the DBQ
focuses on aberrant behaviours, non-aberrant aspects of
typical driving behaviour are not addressed, therewith
rendering the DBI less useful for our current purpose.
Furnham and Saipe developed a Driver Behaviour
Questionnaire measuring risk taking on the road. The
results of the 25 items of the questionnaire revealed five
factors: feeling and expressing aggression, law breaking
behaviour, expressing confidence in taking driving risks,
the excitement of driving and taking risks when driving.
These factors describe differences in driving behaviour but
do not represent different driving styles. Breaking the law,
for example, can be part of a driving style, but is not a
driving style by itself.
French et al revealed six dimensions labelled speed,
calmness, planning, focus, social resistance (advise) and
deviance through a principal component analysis of fifteen
driving style questions. The outcomes of the Driver Style
Questionnaire (DSQ) were used to describe the relation
between driving style, decision-making style and accident
liability. The results showed that thoroughness (one of the
factors resulting from the analysis of the decision making
style questionnaire) correlated with all the driving styles
and idealism correlated with none of the driving styles. The
weakness of this questionnaire is the distribution of fifteen
items over six dimensions resulting in two or three items
per dimension.
Lajunen and Summala developed the driver Skill
Inventory (DSI) to measure self-reported safety motive and
skill dimensions. The 29 items relate to perceptual-motor
skills and safety orientation , referring to the ability to
drive in a safe and skilful manner by assessing their abilities
to a hypothetical average driver on a five-point scale. This
questionnaire taps into driving skills and safety motives
rather than driving style.
Ishibashi et al. define driving style as an attitude,
orientation and way of thinking for daily driving. They
developed a Driving Style Questionnaire consisting of
eighteen questions divided over eight components:
Confidence in driving skill, Hesitation for driving,
Impatience in driving, Methodical driving, Preparatory
manoeuvres at traffic signals, Importance of automobile for
self-expression, Moodiness in driving and Anxiety about
traffic accidents. Through analysis of car following
behaviour at low speed, they examined the validity of the
questionnaire. Results showed, for example, a positive
relationship between confidence in driving skill and the use
of the gas pedal. The weakness of the questionnaire is that
each component consists out of two items.
Taubman-Ben-Ari et al. suggested four broad driving
styles: (1) Reckless and careless driving, which is
correlated with violations and thrill seeking while driving,
characterized by for example higher speed. (2) Anxious
driving, referring to feelings of alertness and tension. (3)
Angry and hostile driving, characterized by more use of the
horn and flash functionality. (4) Patient and careful driving,
reflecting a well-adjusted driving style. Building on these
four broad styles they created the Multidimensional Driving
Style Inventory (MDSI) consisting of 44 items. A
factor analysis revealed eight main factors. (a) Dissociative
driving, in which people are easily distracted and
dissociated during driving. (b) Anxious driving, in which
people show signs of anxiety and lack of confidence. (c)
Risky driving, in which people seek for sensation and more
risky driving. (d) Angry driving, in which people tend to be
hostile and aggressive. (e) High-velocity driving, in which
people tend to drive faster and are more time driven. (f)
Distress-reduction driving, in which people engage in
relaxing activities to reduce stress. (g) Patient driving, in
which people are polite to other road users and have no
pressure of time. (h) Careful driving, in which people drive
carefully and structured.
The MDSI consists of items which were adapted from
several other existing surveys, such as the DBI of Gulian et
al. studying dimensions defining driver stress, the DBQ
 developed by Reason et al. about aberrant behaviour,
the DBQ developed by Furnham and Saipe measuring
risk taking on the road, and the DSQ of French et al. 
describing the relation between driving style, decisionmaking style and accident liability. Additionally, original
items were created to complete the questionnaire.
Taubman-Ben-Ari et al. conducted their study in
various geographical areas in Israel. To be able to use the
MDSI in future studies in another geographical region we
needed to conduct a independent validation of the
questionnaire. So the aim of this study is to validate the
eight main factors and loadings found by Taubman-Ben-Ari
et al. through distribution of the same questionnaire among
drivers in the Netherlands and the Dutch speaking part of
Participants
Three hundred twenty five participants volunteered to
participate in this study and completed the online
questionnaire. In addition, forty participants volunteered to
participate in the study of a master student Industrial
Design completed the same questionnaire.
Of the participants who filled in the online questionnaire
(N=365) the majority drove most of their miles in the
Netherlands (N=197, 54%) and Belgium (N=116, 32%).
Other participants drove most of their miles in: Greece
(N=11), Germany (N=8), United Kingdom (N=4), India
(N=4), Malaysia (N=4), Europa (N=3), Italy (N=2),
Portugal (N=2), Turkey (N=2), Australia (N=2), United
Stated (N=2), Bulgaria (N=1), Ireland (N=1), Sweden
(N=1), Russia (N=1), Mexico (N=1), Japan (N=1), United
Arab Emirates (N=1) and South Africa (N=1).
Two hundred eighty one participants completing the online
questionnaire were male and eighty-four were female.
Twenty one percent were within the age category 17 to 24,
forty one percent were between the age of 25 and 39, thirty
five percent were between the age of 40 and 65, and three
percent were older than 65. Three quarter of the participants
indicated that they make use of a navigation system
(N=278, 76%) and half of the participants indicated that
they use Cruise Control (N=189, 52%). A fifth indicated
that they make use of an Advanced Parking Assist System
(N=81, 22%), five percent (N=20) indicated that they make
use of Adaptive Cruise Control, four percent (N=14) that
make use of a Blind Sport Warning System and one percent
(N=4) of the participants indicated to use a Lane Departure
Warning System.
Procedure and Measure
The questionnaire was offered in two different languages:
English and Dutch. Instead of literally translating the
questions from English, the English version was translated
into Dutch with the aim to preserve the meaning of the
questions as much as possible. Both versions were
distributed through Facebook, email and both Dutch and
Flemish online automotive forums.
Participants were asked to complete an online questionnaire
that consisted out of six questions relating to their
demographic
multidimensional driving style inventory of Taubman-Ben-
Ari et al consisting of 44 statements.
The questions related to the demographic data and driving
history concerned gender, age category, duration of being in
possession of a driver’s license, miles driven per year, in
which country the most annual mileage were driven and
which driver’s support systems are used.
The multidimensional driving style inventory (MDSI) 
is a validated self-report questionnaire by which each
statement is rated on a six-point scale (“not at all” to “very
much” and in the Dutch version also “never” to “always”
depending on the statement). This questionnaire assesses
eight factors resulting from the original analysis:
Dissociative driving (8 items, Cronbach’s alpha .82),
Anxious driving (7 items, Cronbach’s alpha .82), Risky
driving (5 items, Cronbach’s alpha .83), Angry driving (5
items, Cronbach’s .80). High-velocity driving (6 items,
Cronbach’s alpha .76), Distress-reduction driving (4 items,
Cronbach’s alpha 75), Patient driving (4 items, Cronbach’s
alpha 74) and Careful driving (5 items, Cronbach’s alpha
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
MDSI Factors Reproduced
Identical to the factor analyses performed by Taubman-
Ben-Ari et al. , a factor analysis with Varimax rotation
was conducted with eight factors to determine if the items
would be divided over the same eight factors compared to
the results of Taubman-Ben-Ari et al. . Next to the
factor analysis with eight factors a second analysis with six
factors was conducted as a follow up on the results of the
first analysis. The first analyses revealed eight factors of
which two factors did not have enough items to have a
meaningful contribution. Finally, an Oblique Principal
Component Cluster Analysis (OPCCA) was conducted as a
check to the results of the Varimax factor analysis. In
OPCCA the dimensions do not have to be orthogonal,
which tends to deliver factors that are easier to interpret. In
all three analyses, item nine was not taken in consideration
due to a mistake in the set-up of the questionnaire, which
resulted in missing data of item nine for 146 participants
(40%). In addition, one of the participants was removed
from the analyses. SPSS indicated multiple answers of this
participant as outliers and inspection of the answers for this
participant revealed internal inconsistencies, indicating that
this person’s answers were not reliable.
The first factor analysis was conducted with the answers of
364 participants revealing a distribution of the 43 items
over eight factors explaining 49% of the variance. In Table
1 the item distribution can be found.
Factor 1 consists of seven items addressing angry and
frustrated behaviour when driving. This factor, explaining
14% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .81), was labelled
“Angry driving style”. Factor 2 consists of five items
addressing risky and thrill seeking behaviour. This factor,
explaining 11% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .83), was
labelled “Risky driving style”. Factor 3 consists of seven
items addressing nervous and anxious driving behaviour.
This factor, explaining 6% of the variance (Cronbach’s
alpha .74), was labelled “Anxious driving style”. Factor 4
consists of nine items addressing nonchalant, dissociated
behaviour, except for item 19, which addresses assertive,
risky behaviour. This factor, explaining 5% of the variance
(Cronbach’s alpha .67), was labelled “Dissociative driving
style”. Factor 5 consists of five items addressing careful and
cautious behaviour. This factor, explaining 4% of the
variance (Cronbach’s alpha .63), was labelled “Careful
driving style”. Factor 6 consists of four items addressing
behaviour to become relaxed, less stressed. This factor,
explaining 3% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .54), was
labelled “De-stress driving style”. Factor 7 consists of two
items addressing dissociated behaviour. This factor explains
3% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .11). Factor 8
consists of four items addressing two different types of
behaviours, two items address careful behaviour and two
Table 1: Results of two factor analysis (Loadings are from the second analysis)
Factor 1 | Angry Driving
Honk my horn at others
Blow my horn or “flash” the car in front as a way of expressing frustrations
When someone does something on the road that annoys me, I flash them with high beam
Swear at other drivers
When a traffic light turns green and the car in front of me doesn’t get going immediately, I try to urge the driver to move on
When a traffic light turns green and the car in front of me doesn’t get going, I wait for a while until it moves [-]
Purposely tailgate other drivers
Factor 2 | Risky Driving
Enjoy the excitement of dangerous driving
Like to take risks while driving
Like the thrill of flirting with death or disaster
Enjoy the sensation of driving on the limit
Get a thrill out of breaking the law
Factor 3 | Anxious Driving
Feel nervous while driving
Driving makes me feel frustrated
Feel comfortable while driving [-]
Feel I have control over driving [-]
It worries me when driving in bad weather
Feel distressed while driving
Always ready to react to unexpected manoeuvres by other drivers [-]
While driving, I try to relax myself [-]
Factor 4 | Dissociative Driving
Attempt to drive away from traffic lights in third gear (or on the neutral mode in automatic cars)
Forget that my lights are on full beam until flashed by another motorist
Nearly hit something due to misjudging my gap in a parking lot
Plan my route badly, so that I hit traffic that I could have avoided
Intend to switch on the windscreen wipers, but switch on the lights instead
Fix my hair / makeup while driving
Distracted or preoccupied, and suddenly realize the vehicle ahead has slowed down, and have to slam on the breaks to avoid a
Drive through traffic lights that have just turned red
When someone tries to skirt in front of me on the road, I drive in an assertive way in order to prevent it
Factor 5 | Careful Driving
Tend to drive cautiously
Drive cautiously
Base my behaviour on the motto “better safe than sorry"
On a clear freeway, I usually drive at or a little below the speed limit
Always ready to react to unexpected manoeuvres by other drivers
Factor 6 | Distress-Reduction Driving Style
Do relaxing activities while driving
Use muscle relaxation techniques while driving
Meditate while driving
I daydream to pass the time while driving
Lost in thoughts or distracted, I fail to notice someone at the pedestrian crossings
Misjudge the speed of an upcoming vehicle when passing
Plan long journeys in advance
In a traffic jam, I think about ways to get through traffic faster
At an intersection where I have to give right-of-way to oncoming traffic, I wait patiently for crossing traffic to pass
Get impatient during rush hour
When in a traffic jam and the lane next to me starts to move, I try to move into that lane as soon as possible
The grey items were removed from the second analysis; the italic items do not correlate with the same items compared to the
original factor analysis
items address frustrated risky behaviour. This factor
explains 3% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .31).A
constraint was set to have at least three items per factor 
and in combination with the low Cronbach’s alpha factor 7
was removed from the analysis. As a Cronbach alpha value
indicates the overall reliability of a questionnaire of which
at least 0.7 is considered good [4:681]. The items in factor
8 are heterogeneous which makes it difficult to label this
factor and in combination with the low Cronbach’s alpha
the decision was made to also remove this factor from the
analysis. As item 19 addresses assertive, risky behaviour
which is not in line with the other items in factor 4 this item
was also removed from further analysis.
As a follow up on the results of the first factor analysis a
second factor analysis with Varimax rotation consisting of
six factors was conducted in which items 9, 15, 16, 18, 19,
30, 32 and 38 were left out as those do not fit in the six
main factors used in this analysis. This analysis revealed a
distribution of 36 items over six factors explaining 48% of
the variance. In Table 1 the item distribution can be found,
as mentioned above, the items in grey are discarded in this
analysis and the last column provides the factor loadings of
each item.
Factor 1 consists of seven items labelled “Angry driving
style”. This factor explains 16% of the variance
(Cronbach’s alpha .81). Factor 2 consists of five items
labelled “Risky driving style”. This factor explains 12% of
the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .83). Factor 3 consists of
eight items labelled “Anxious driving style”. This factor
explains 6% the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .76). Factor 4
consists of eight items labelled “Dissociative driving style”.
This factor explains 5% of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha
.68). Factor 5 consists of four items labelled “Careful
driving style”. This factor explains 4% of the variance
(Cronbach’s alpha .65). Factor 6 consists of four items
labelled “De-stress driving style”. This factor explains 4%
of the variance (Cronbach’s alpha .54).
Another method to investigate different clusters of items
projected within one dimension is an Oblique Principal
Component Cluster Analysis (OPCCA). This analysis was
performed as a validation to the factors resulting from the
second analysis.
For the OPCCA analysis the same 37 items used for the
second factor analysis were used. This analysis revealed
five main clusters with a second eigenvalue smaller than 1,2
(indicating
dimensionally): Factor 1, Careful Driving (Cronbach’s
alpha .85); Factor 2, Anxious Driving (Cronbach’s alpha
.75); Factor 3, Angry Driving (Cronbach’s alpha .81);
Factor 4 Distress-Reduction Driving (Cronbach’s alpha
.55); and Factor 5 Dissociative Driving (Cronbach’s alpha
.70). In this analysis, the items of Careful driving and
Risky driving (resulting from the second analysis) were
combined into one factor, labelled Careful driving (as the
items of Risky driving are negative in this factor).
MDSI Factors Original and Reproduced
The original factor analysis of the MDSI revealed
eight factors: Dissociative driving , Anxious driving, Risky
driving, Angry driving, High-velocity driving, Distressreduction driving, Patient driving, and Careful driving. As
can be seen in Table 1, six of these factors could be
reproduced with a Varimax rotation using data mainly
collected within the Netherlands and Belgium. The items in
italics in Table 1 are items that are assigned to other factors
within the original factor analysis compared to the second
analysis performed within this study. Removing these items
resulted in twenty-four items divided over six factors that
seem to be stable. Five factors still have enough items when
taking the constraint of at least three items per factor. The
factor Careful driving resulting from the second analysis
does not have enough items left to have a meaningful
contribution. The OPCCA revealed five factors of which
the factor labelled Careful Driving in the second analysis is
combined with Risky Driving. If we compare the outcomes
of the one-dimensional OPCCA with the original factor
analysis by Taubman-Ben-Ari et al. , we arrive at five
stable factors with a minimum of at least three items per
factor in which Careful and Risky are combined to six
items. These analyses result in a questionnaire that exists of
twenty four items tapping into feelings, attitudes and
behaviours, with a distribution over five clusters: Careful
driving, Angry Driving, Anxious Driving, Dissociative
driving and Distress-Reduction Driving.
Driving styles and Driver Profiles
One of the reasons to conduct this study was to investigate
the possibility to categorise people’s driving style on the
self-reported
behaviour.
Categorisation of people’s driving style can help in
understanding how to incorporate certain aspects of
behaviours in ADAS to enhance compliance towards these
systems. For example, drivers who are categorized as Risky
drivers may prefer a smaller headway compared to Careful
drivers. This aspect might be incorporated in an ADAS to
enhance compliance.
The next question is how we can determine people’s
driving style. The factor analysis with Varimax rotation
revealed six driving styles. The simplest method is to use
the average scores for each factor (summing the scores of
the items assigned to each factor and dividing the sum by
the number of items) and taking the highest scoring factor
as someone’s driving style. This method identifies 331
(91%) participants as Careful drivers. Thus, this method has
little discriminating power. A second method takes the
factor loadings into consideration for the different items. In
this method a person’s score for each item is multiplied
with the factor loading of that item and then the average
score for each factor is calculated for each person. This
method identifies 299 (82%) participants as Careful drivers,
still having little discriminating power. In the third method
“the factor loadings are adjusted to take account of the
initial correlations between items” . Accordingly, the
item scores are multiplied by the adjusted factor loadings,
and the average of the resulting scores is taken across the
items for each factor for each individual. The factor with
the highest average is taken as the participants driving style.
This method revealed an almost equal distribution of
participants over the six different factors when taking the
highest score as identifying someone’s driving style. As
mentioned by Field [4:634], this is a more sophisticated
method for calculating factor scores, providing factor scores
which show the deviation of each participant from the mean
of that factor. If someone scores high on a factor according
to the factor score, that person scores high relative to the
average of the scores of all participants within the same
It should be noticed, however, that all these methods take
the highest scoring factor as indicative of someone’s
driving style, therewith ignoring the scores for the other
factors. This may be satisfactory for one-dimensional
constructs, but there is no a priori reason to assume that
driving style is a one-dimensional construct. If we take
driving style as a multi-dimensional construct, it might be
more appropriate to talk about driver profiles, so that
someone might be said to be both a careful and attentive
To determine driver profiles, the factors obtained from the
second factor analysis were used, giving rise to six different
factors. The factor scores of each participant as calculated
by the third method above were normalized by subtracting
the mean from each factor score and dividing by the
standard deviation. The means and standard deviations (SD)
were calculated across the six factor scores of each
participant. Next, a threshold was calculated by taking the
mean + 1 SD of each participant to see which factor scores
for each individual driver exceeded the calculated threshold
(this method is similar to the method used by Shahab et al.
 ). The profile of an individual was then built on the
factor(s) which exceed the threshold value.
Applying this method resulted in 21 different profiles
consisting of one or two driving styles. For 11 participants
no profile could be determined, due to the fact that none of
their factor scores exceed the threshold. As can be seen in
Figure 1, 272 (75%) of the participants are allocated to a
profile consisting of one driving style. The profiles shown
in Figure 1 indicate that within the sample of 364
participants, for example, 49 participants are angry drivers
compared to the other participants and 48 are careful
drivers in comparison to the rest. Figure 1 provides an
overview of the division of driving styles with respect to all
the participants within the sample.
As a final check, driver profiles were also determined on
the basis of the outcomes of the OPCCA analysis. In this
method the factor scores resulting from the OPCCA were
subjected to multidimensional scaling and the outcomes
were visualized in a two-dimensional plot, identifying both
the relationships between these constructs and illustrating
Figure 1: Distribution Driver Profiles
diversity of the drivers that participated in the survey (see
Figure 2). This plot reveals no obvious clustering, from
which it may be concluded that not all people can be
categorised as for instance either an angry or careful driver.
The scores on all the factors together determine what type
of driver someone is, therewith providing further support
for the notion of driver profile.
Figure 2: Two-Dimensional Visualization of One-Dimensional
CONCLUSION AND GENERAL DISCUSSION
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems have the potential to
improve traffic safety and throughput when drivers comply
to use these systems. If these systems do not meet drivers’
needs and expectations, drivers will refrain from using
them. Provided that different people are sensitive to
different forms of persuasion, as shown in , the notion of
driver profiles may help to identify common differences in
characteristics between groups of drivers.
A first step to identify differences between drivers is by
means of a questionnaire giving information about
someone’s self-reported driving style . This paper described
the validation of the Multidimensional Driving Style
Inventory developed by Taubman-Ben-Ari et al. . The
analysis of the results of 364 participants completing the
questionnaire showed that most of the original factors could
be replicated quite well, with 24 of the 44 original items
divided over five or six main factors. A factor analysis with
Varimax rotation revealed six factors among the 24 items
and an OPCCA analysis revealed five factors: Dissociative
driving, Anxious driving, Risky driving, Angry driving,
Distress-reduction driving, and Careful driving (Risky and
Careful driving are combined in OPCCA revealing five
factors). As a side note, it needs to be kept in mind that the
Cronbach alpha values of the Distress-reduction style
within all the three analyses is below the acceptable
threshold of 0.7 and therefore should be interpreted with
The scores gained from the analysis were used to create
driver profiles consisting of one or more driving styles. The
first two methods that were used to identify driving styles
identified most drivers as Careful drivers. This may be due
either to respondents giving socially desirable answers, or
to the fact that people in general try to avoid accidents.
Anyway, these methods are not discriminating enough. The
third method resulted in 21 driver profiles. It needs to be
kept in mind that these profiles created are relative within
the sample. People who are categorized as angry drivers are
angry drivers in comparison to the other drivers within the
sample. This means that a driver who is categorized as an
angry driver in this study may not be an angry driver in an
absolute sense, comparing to all drivers outside this study.
The scores resulting from the OPCCA were used and
rendered jointly in a two dimensional space. The render of
the scores does not reveal obvious clustering of the drivers
participating in the survey, indicating that characterizing
drivers in terms of a single dominant driving style is too
simple. The scores on all the factors together determine
what type of driver someone is.
The two dimensional plot resulting from the OPCCA
analysis can be used for selection of participants in follow
up studies to create a balanced representation of different
driving styles.
Another aspect that has to be taken into consideration is that
the results are a context-free and momentary self-report.
Multiple factors may influence drivers’ behaviour, such as
the driving environment, traffic conditions, the driver’s
condition and personal characteristics (gender, age, driving
experience, etc.) . As mentioned by Bekiaris et al. 
driver behaviour is not necessarily static, but evolves over
time and in context, as dependent on the ability to drive and
the driving performance of a particular person in a specific
environment and under specific circumstances. This notion
should be taken into consideration when making use of a
self-report measurement of someone’s driving behaviour.
The purpose of the research was to validate the
questionnaire to know if this questionnaire can measure
driving styles in future studies. A next question is how the
results of the MDSI (self-reported behaviour) are correlated
with actual behaviour in a vehicle or driving simulator. For
such driving style questionnaires to be meaningful, they
should predict actual driving behaviour. This can enhance
the understanding of driving styles and the relation to
certain behaviours and help to decide which direction to
take when investigating how persuasive systems can be
used to influence the compliance towards ADAS.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research project is part of the Impuls Programme of
the Eindhoven University of Technology and we are
grateful to Marin Sikkenk for making her data available for
this study.