This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Dayoub, Feras, Morris, Timothy, Upcroft, Ben, & Corke, Peter
Vision-only autonomous navigation using topometric maps.
In Amato, N (Ed.) Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., United States, pp.
1923-1929.
This ﬁle was downloaded from: 
© Copyright 2013 [please consult the author]
This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the document is available under a Creative Commons License (or other speciﬁed license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to 
Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Submitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identiﬁed by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appearance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
 
Vision-Only Autonomous Navigation Using Topometric Maps
Feras Dayoub, Timothy Morris, Ben Upcroft and Peter Corke
Abstract— This paper presents a mapping and navigation
system for a mobile robot, which uses vision as its sole
sensor modality. The system enables the robot to navigate
autonomously, plan paths and avoid obstacles using a vision
based topometric map of its environment. The map consists of
a globally-consistent pose-graph with a local 3D point cloud
attached to each of its nodes. These point clouds are used for
direction independent loop closure and to dynamically generate
2D metric maps for locally optimal path planning. Using
this locally semi-continuous metric space, the robot performs
shortest path planning instead of following the nodes of the
graph — as is done with most other vision-only navigation
approaches. The system exploits the local accuracy of visual
odometry in creating local metric maps, and uses pose graph
SLAM, visual appearance-based place recognition and point
clouds registration to create the topometric map. The ability of
the framework to sustain vision-only navigation is validated
experimentally, and the system is provided as open-source
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to achieve vision-only autonomous navigation,
mobile robots require the competencies of mapping, localisation, path planning and obstacle avoidance. These competencies must be achieved using monocular or stereo vision rather
than a laser range ﬁnder. In recent years visual navigation
systems have been able to create accurate large-scale maps
whilst maintaining precise position and orientation estimates
for indoor and outdoor mobile robots , , , . Vision
has also become critical for ‘closing the loop’ — forming
connections from the current view to other corresponding
views elsewhere in the map that might not be co-located
in the current map due to sensor error or odometry drift
 . Through visual pose estimation, and with the aid of
visual loop closure detection, highly accurate global maps
can be computed using graph optimisation techniques to
correct the map. Despite the advantages of vision as a sensor
for mapping, a reliable end-to-end mapping and autonomous
visual navigation system that includes loop closure detection
and subsequent optimisation has not yet been available. This
work provides such a system in an open source platform.
This paper progresses the state-of-the-art in vision-only
topometric mapping and navigation. Our system does not
use a laser range ﬁnder (LRF) and operates in a visually
challenging indoor environment with problems such as poor
light conditions and scarcity of features. The contributions
and novelty of this work are:
The authors are with the CyPhy Lab, School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane,
Australia. 
*This research was supported under Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project number DP110103006).
The hybrid topometric map consists of two levels: global and
local. On the global level, the world is represented as a globally consistent
graph (the white line). Whereas on the local level each node is the centre of
an occupancy grid that covers the immediate neighbourhood surrounding
the node. The occupancy grids are generated from visual point clouds
which were ray traced and projected to ground level. Red regions represent
obstacles in front of the robot. The blue line represents the local plan in the
local metric map. The ﬁgure shows also a point cloud generated from the
stereo head of the robot.
• A mobile robot equipped with only a stereo vision
sensor able to perform an autonomous navigation using
a topometric map of its environment.
• A system that exploits the local accuracy of visual
odometry (VO) from stereo imagery and 3D point
cloud registration in constructing local metric maps
dynamically and on-demand.
• A robust recovery behaviour to handle the periods of
vision blackout during navigation.
After a mapping stage and during a navigation stage,
the robot uses the topological level of the map to plan a
global path along a graph to its target, when possible taking
shortcuts using the local metric map instead of following the
graph. The local metric maps are occupancy grids generated
from the point clouds by ray casting and projected to ground
level. (See Fig. 1). The system stores 3D point clouds rather
than occupancy grids. Storing the clouds instead of the grids
allows the grids to be rendered dynamically when needed and
the possibility of updating the clouds over time in response
to changes in the environment. To ensure robust VO during
dropouts — e.g when the robot is turning on the spot inside
a narrow corridor and facing a plain wall – the system
integrates the velocity commands issued by the robot’s base
planner. The integration is done only when the number of
image features is very low. The system does not use wheel
odometry, only visual odometry. The system is built as an
open source package1 for the Robot Operating System (ROS)
platform .
The rest of the paper is constructed as follows. In Section II, we discuss related work in the ﬁeld. Section III
contains details of the architecture of the system. Section IV
presents the experimental evaluation. Finally we draw conclusions and discuss future work in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Regardless of the sensor used, mobile robots need to be
able to plan and navigate in their environment in order to
do useful work, and in order to do this must construct
some form of map. Many methods have been proposed
to build such a map, but a simple taxonomy groups the
methods into three classes based on the way they represent
the environment. Metric mapping generates a geometric map
of the environment where the positions of landmarks or data
are stored in the map relative to a global coordinate system.
Topological mapping represents the environment as a graph,
and the nodes of the graph correspond to places in the real
environment. Hybrid methods represent the environment as a
combination of two or more distinct maps — most commonly
a combination of topological and metric maps, often referred
to as topometric maps.
Metric maps, when represented as occupancy grids, provide a dense representation of the environment and are
particularly suitable for precise trajectory planning, but they
do not scale well to large-scale environments. On the other
hand, pure topological maps provide a more abstract level
of representation, which still permits goal-directed planning
tasks to be performed. The resulting maps are also more
compact and scale better with the size of the environment,
but they cannot be used for accurate, shortest path navigation.
The complementary strengths and weaknesses of metric and
topological methods are the motivation for the topometric
mapping approach, which has seen signiﬁcant recent increase
in interest , . The environment is typically represented
by a global topological map, which connects relatively small
local metric maps (sub-maps). The main emphasis is on
creating accurate metric sub-maps which are anchored to
certain places in the environment and cover the sensor range
of the robot at these places.
One of the most comprehensive approaches to hybrid
mapping was presented by , where the environment of
the robot was mapped in a hierarchical fashion, referred
to as the Spatial Semantic Hierarchy (SSH) consisting of
several layers of topological and metric maps. Later, 
presented an extension to the spatial semantic hierarchy,
using an occupancy grid to represent local metric maps of
small-scale space created using a particle ﬁlter method, while
topological methods were used to represent the structure of
large-scale space. The method creates a set of topological
map hypotheses and can handle multiple nested, large-scale
loops. Recently, formulated the hybrid mapping problem as a uniﬁed hybrid metric-topological (HMT) Bayesian
1 
estimation via the factorisation of the general Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) problem. This means that
the global map produced by the SLAM system is divided
into a set of metric sub-maps, which can then be estimated
theoretically from conditionally-independent sequences of
observations.
This work is closely related to the work by . However,
we differ by using only vision sensor to build the topometric
map and use the map for vision-based navigation. Our system
also maintains a database of point clouds attached to the
nodes of the graph. These point clouds are used to create
the local occupancy grids after a registration process and
can serve as a base for persistent navigation - by updating
the point cloud at each node in the pose graph over time, we
will be able to model the persistent structure around each
node, which consequently can be reﬂected in its occupancy
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The system presented in this paper is composed of two
layers. The ﬁrst layer is a visual pose-graph SLAM system
which takes as input a stream of stereo images captured
by on-board cameras, and produces a globally optimized
pose-graph online using state-of-the-art methods. The posegraph is built and optimised using visual odometry ,
visual vocabulary for appearance-base loop closure,
wide-baseline stereo to geometrically verify the loop closures
triggered by the appearance matcher, and the optimisation
algorithm g2o by for graph optimisation.
The second layer of the system, which is the focus of
this paper, is the visual topometric mapping and navigation
system. The topometric layer uses the pose-graph produced
from the visual pose-SLAM system as a skeleton for a
topometric map. Using the topometric map, this layer allows
the robot to perform vision-only navigation, which involves
localization and path planning. Fig 2 shows the two layers
of the system and the most important relations between their
components.
The following sections describe the methodology used
for mapping, localization and planning in the topometric
navigation system.
A. Map Construction
While the robot is performing visual pose-graph SLAM,
a record of data associated with each node in the graph is
maintained. For each new node added to the SLAM posegraph, an entry is also added to the topometric database
which contains a 3D point cloud and its associated node
ID number. The point clouds are generated using the stateof-the-art dense disparity estimation method (Efficient
LArge-scale Stereo Matching) ELAS . Using
ELAS, we construct a rolling window of point clouds for the
local area around the robot Fig. 3. Successive point clouds
are registered simply using visual odometry, and this is made
possible due to the local accuracy of the visual odometry .
The snap shot of the rolling window for a node in the graph
is taken when the VSLAM system declares a new node.
Laser-Scan
Appearance
Topological
Motor Control
loop closure
Topometric
Navigation
Pose-Graph
Visual SLAM
The two layers of the propsed system. The ﬁrst layer is a visual pose-graph SLAM system which takes as an input a stream of stereo images
captured by the cameras on-board the robot while moving through the environment, and produces a globally optimized pose-graph. The second layer is
the visual topometric mapping and navigation system, which uses the pose-graph as a skeleton for a topometric map. Using the topometric map, this layer
allows the robot to perform vision-only navigation, which involves localization and path planning.
Grey: Rolling window of point clouds. Red: The point cloud
produced from ELAS from one stereo frames of the robot current view.
Local metric map centred on one of the nodes of the pose-graph.
The pose-graph is represented as a white line in the ﬁgure. The ﬁgure shows
the occupancy grid and extruded above it the point cloud, which has been
used to create it.
The local metric maps produced by our system are Occupancy Grids . These grids are a powerful map representation for accurate metric navigation, which are usually
built from laser sensory data. In our case, we use point
clouds from stereo vision instead. When requested to build a
local map centred on a particular node, the visual pose-graph
SLAM system is queried for a set of nodes that lie within
a predeﬁned graph distance from that particular node. The
point clouds of the nodes in the local regions are recalled
from the database and ray cast across the occupancy grid.
Ray casting on point clouds is performed only in the ground
plane dimensions (x,y) — no ﬁltering based on height is
completed other than a threshold of maximum distance from
the sensor in three dimensional space. Rays which exceed
the maximum distance are discarded. For a cell within the
occupancy grid to be classiﬁed as either “free” or “occupied”
a minimum number of rays must pass through or end in
the cell otherwise it will be classiﬁed as “unknown”. Given
sufﬁcient observations, a cell in the occupancy grid is marked
as “occupied” if the ratio of rays ending and passing through
is greater then the speciﬁed threshold. Fig. 4 shows an
example of one of the occupancy grids centred on one of
the nodes from the pose-graph and the point cloud which
was used to ﬁll it.
Each point cloud is deﬁned with respect to the local
frame of its node, so point clouds from several nodes must
be registered before the occupancy grid can be generated.
Due to noisy point clouds, we ﬁnd the Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) registration method fails. Instead we use a
recently introduced method based on 3D Normal distribution
Transform (3D-NDT) by , which is proven to outperform
the current state-of-the-art registration methods. In this work,
we use 3D-NDT registration with the relative pose of the
Fig. 5. Block diagram of the topometric planner state machine architecture.
nodes in the graph as an initial guess. Compared to ICP, 3D-
NDT registration is almost an order of a magnitude faster.
In order to account for any errors in registration, a score
based on a closed-form expression for the covariance of the
solution obtained from the registration is used .
B. Localization
In order to track the position of the robot inside the
local 2D occupancy grid, the system uses AMCL, an adaptive
particle ﬁlter localizer provided in ROS. We convert
the point cloud generated in the current view of the robot
to a pseudo-laser-scan required by AMCL by cutting
a horizontal slice out of the point cloud and selecting the
closest points to ﬁll in the scan ranges.
While the robot is moving towards a local goal inside
the current map, the localizer monitors the distance between
the robot’s position and the local goal in the current local
map. When a pre-deﬁned distance to the goal is reached,
the localizer sends a message indicating that a local goal is
about to be reached. The localizer then requests a new map
centred at a node on the path towards the global goal that
covers the current position of the robot. After the new map
is delivered, the localizer re-initializes the robot’s position
in the local frame of the current map with the covariances
estimated from the previous local map. A new local goal is
subsequently generated within the current map.
C. Vision Blackout
It is often the case that the robot temporarily lose salience
visual information resulting in localization error. This can
occur when the robot is turning on the spot inside a narrow
corridor with plain walls. To overcome this, we supplement
VO with open loop integration of velocity commands sent
to the motors. In other words, we assure that the robot
accurately performs the requested commands in the short
periods of localization failure. This recovery behaviour has
proven very effective as we show is section IV-D.
D. Planning and navigation
The topometric planning in the system is implemented as
a state machine to control the execution of a global path
through the series of local metric maps that are retrieved
on-demand. Figure 5 illustrates the states of the planner.
The planner initializes to the Generate Global Plan state.
On entry, it waits to localize in the current local occupancy
grid. It then calculates which of the topological graph nodes
is closest to the robot’s current position, giving the start
position in the graph. A global path is then planned to the
goal position using Dijkstra’s search. Once the global path
has been obtained, the planner transitions into the Execute
Local Plan state. It ﬁnds the last pose on the global path
that is contained in the current local map and sends this
as a local goal to the robot’s controller, monitoring its
execution. However, if the global goal lies in the current
map, its position (rather than that of the nearest topological
node) is sent to the controller. The controller then uses
the pseudo-laser-scan to build an obstacle costmap.
Using the costmap, the controller guides the robot safely to
its current local goal.
Typically the robot will not reach the local goal in the
current map, as the localizer will ask for a new map before
this happens. On receiving notiﬁcation from the localizer that
a switch of maps is about to occur, the planner stops the robot
by cancelling the goal, and transitions to the Switch Pending
state. If however, the global goal lies in the current map, the
robot will reach the goal and the planner will transition back
to the Generate Global Plan state to await another global
In the Switch Pending state the planner is merely waiting
for notiﬁcation from the localizer that a new local map has
been loaded and that the robot is localized within this map.
When this occurs, a message will be received and the robot
transitions back into the Execute Local Plan state.
If at any point in executing the local plan the robot
becomes lost and/or is unable to reach the local goal, it will
transition to the Lost state where it will perform pre-planned
recovery behaviours (such as in place rotation) in an attempt
to re-localize. From here it will transition back to the Get
Global Plan state to re-plan and continue navigation towards
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Our experimental platform is a MobileRobots’ Research
GuiaBot shown in Figure 7. The robot is equipped with two
Point Grey Grasshopper monochrome cameras which each
have a 1.4M pixel 2/3′′ CCD sensor and a FireWire interface.
Images are acquired at 12.5 frames per second. The robot has
three on-board computers all running ROS.
The experiments took place on Level 11 ﬂoor of the
Science and Engineering Faculty building. This ﬂoor has
featureless walls, narrow corridors, glass walls and lighting
variations along the main corridor which greatly impact
the quality of the point clouds. In addition, navigating this
environment requires the robot to make sharp 180◦turns
which often result in featureless views close to walls.
A. The topometric map
Fig. 6 shows the topometric map built for Level 11. The
nodes in the graph are 0.5m apart. During the mapping
Sample of local metric maps. Left: the grids created from unregistered point clouds. Centre: enlarged and cropped overlay of the resulting
occupancy grids registered (green) and un-registered (red). Right: the same grids but after using 3D NDT registration on the point clouds before creating
the grids. The images on the far right show the registered region from multiple views as observed by the robot. Note that without multiple views occluded
regions would be missing from the map.
A topometric map built from one traversal of Level 11 S-block QUT Gardens Point. The robot starts from one end of the corridor and is required
to navigate to the other end (delivery 1) and then return to the elevator area (delivery 2). Please see the attached video of the performing the navigation
task. The ﬁgure shows a local map centred on node 5 of the global graph. Inside the local map: red represents inﬂated obstacles, yellow represents the
pseudo-laser-scan generated using point clouds from live vision and blue represents the trajectory taken by the robot. The ﬁgure shows the local goal
obtained from the planner and the two global delivery nodes.
phase the robot stores a point cloud for each node in the
graph. When a new map centred on one of the nodes is
requested, the point clouds associated with the nodes inside
an area of 4 × 4m are retrieved to build an occupancy
grid of size 10 × 10 cells. The clouds used to build local
maps can be from distinct views of the same area. The
use of 3D geometry enables successful registration of these
different views where appearance techniques often fail. Fig. 6
shows sample of the local metric maps with and without
the registration step. When no registration is used, the local
occupancy grids contain misaligned walls which affect the
performance of localization during autonomous navigation
and the availability of valid plans through the maps.
Results of position and orientation error in Visual Odometry with and without open-loop correction as compared to the localised trajectory observed
over 30 minutes of autonomous operation in narrow corridors. Note that the angular error in VO without correction (red) signiﬁcantly increases during
periods of VO failure (blue dashed). In contrast the VO with open-loop correction dubbed ‘Open Odometry’ (green) performs much better as angular errors
are not as severe and therefore the error in position is less divergent.
Visualisation of the effects when visual odometry becomes ‘lost’ and requires correction. Pink: raw visual odometry. Blue: visual odometry
supplemented with command velocity integration during visually ambiguous observations. An example of missing pose estimates due to visual odometry
failure, which in-turn causes major corruption of the robots integrated path. The border images are select frames taken from the camera on-board the robot
while turning 360 degree in a narrow corridor.
B. Autonomous navigation
Using the topometric map, the robot was able to navigate
autonomously for a period of 30 minutes which was limited
by battery life. The robot was given three delivery goals to
visit repeatedly in a cyclic manner. The average speed of
the robot while navigating was 0.09m/s. The total distance
covered was 156.2 meters. One of the most important group
of parameters, which has a big effect on the navigation
performance, was the particle ﬁlter localization parameters.
The pseudo-laser-scan, published at 3Hz is significantly lower then the usual 10HZ for a real laser scan.
This has some effect on localization and limits the speed of
the robot. This in turn required the rotational update of the
particle ﬁlter to be set to 0.5o degrees and the translational
movement required before performing a ﬁlter update was set
to 0.1 m. Please see the accompanying video of the robot
performing the navigation task.
C. Shortcuts and Obstacle Avoidance
In order to force the system to perform a shortcut in
the local metric space, the above navigation experiment was
repeated but instead of using the full graph we used only a
single direction traversal of the main corridor. Fig. 7 shows
a snapshot of the graph shown as a white line, without its
nodes for the sake of clarity. The snap shot was taken while
the robot autonomously navigated inside a local metric map
centred on node number 5. The ﬁgure shows the occupancy
grid of the local map with the associated 3D point clouds.
The ﬁgure also shows a person standing in front of the robot,
as an obstacle, and the reﬂection of his existence in the local
map as an obstacle shown in red. As mentioned before, the
robot dynamically adapts its path to avoid obstacles added
to the costmap using the pseudo-laser-scan during
navigation.
During navigation, the robot starts from one end of the
corridor and is required to navigate to the other end (delivery
1) and then return back towards the lift lobby (delivery 2).
Please see the accompanying video of the robot performing
the navigation task. Fig. 1 demonstrates this case, where the
local map is shown as a blue line and the global plan follows
the graph, represented as a white line.
D. Overcoming VO failures
Experimentation in our ofﬁce environment found that VO
failure is common (See Fig 8). This impacts the quality of
our topological structure during mapping and our localization
during navigation. Analysis shows that discontinuities in VO
due to failure are typically brief periods highly correlated
with increases in angular error. We found that during short
periods of failure supplementing VO with open loop integration of velocity commands sent by the local planner dramatically increases the performance of all odometry dependant
processes. Since no other sensors signal is substituted, we
maintain the claim of vision only. Throughout the 30 minutes
of autonomous navigation we found the average position
error of un-corrected VO when compared to the localised
position to be 18m . In contrast VO with failures corrected
by open loop integration (‘Open Odometry’) achieves an
average position error of less then 2.5m.
Figure 9 visualizes the divergence of odometry sources in
position due to a brief angular discontinuity. In this example
the robot performed a 360o in place rotation as a recovery
behaviour to clear obstacles. Because the corridor is narrow,
the robot faces a featureless wall, shown in the ﬁgure as
a sequence of images captured from the camera by the
robot while turning. The point failure during rotation leads
to divergent trajectory, creating a complete dependence on
the particle ﬁlter to maintain an accurate pose of the robot,
in practice requiring absurd levels of particle uncertainty.
Whereas in the case of using the “open-loop” correction
from the command velocity, the odometry reﬂected the 360o
degree turn. Please note that the ﬁgure shows the odometry
sources initially offset due to prior visual odometry failures.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented an open-source framework that enables a mobile robot equipped with only a stereo vision
sensor to create a topometric map of its environment and
then use the map for autonomous navigation. The aim of the
topometric map is to provide a user friendly representation
of the environment where a human operator can choose a
goal from a topological map consisting of nodes which can
easily be labelled with semantic information. In addition,
the robot can create local metric maps formed of varying
data as the topology changes. The use of local metric maps
enables the robot to plan paths / shortcuts within the free
space surrounding the graph and perform obstacle avoidance
using only vision.
The presented system uses a database to store point clouds
attached to each node in a global graph. As future work, this
dataset of clouds will serve as a base for persistent navigation
within non-static environments. An updating mechanism will
be deployed so the point cloud stored at each node in
the graph is kept up-to-date with the current state of the
environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Elizabeth Murphy and
Patrick Ross for helpful discussion and technical contributions.