College of Natural and Applied Sciences
Transforming the lecture-hall environment: The fully interactive
Transforming the lecture-hall environment: The fully interactive
physics lecture
physics lecture
David E. Meltzer
Kandiah Manivannan
Missouri State University
Follow this and additional works at: 
Recommended Citation
Recommended Citation
Meltzer, David E., and Kandiah Manivannan. "Transforming the lecture-hall environment: The fully
interactive physics lecture." American Journal of Physics 70, no. 6 : 639-654.
This article or document was made available through BearWorks, the institutional repository of Missouri State
University. The work contained in it may be protected by copyright and require permission of the copyright holder
for reuse or redistribution.
For more information, please contact .
Transforming the lecture-hall environment: The fully interactive
physics lecture
David E. Meltzera)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011
Kandiah Manivannan
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Materials Science, Southwest Missouri State University,
901 South National Avenue, Springﬁeld, Missouri 65804
~Received 19 September 2001; accepted 29 January 2002!
Numerous reports suggest that learning gains in introductory university physics courses may be
increased by ‘‘active-learning’’ instructional methods. These methods engender greater mental
engagement and more extensive student–student and student–instructor interaction than does a
typical lecture class. It is particularly challenging to transfer these methodologies to the
large-enrollment lecture hall. We report on seven years of development and testing of a variant of
Peer Instruction as pioneered by Mazur that aims at achieving virtually continuous instructor–
student interaction through a ‘‘fully interactive’’ physics lecture. This method is most clearly
distinguished by instructor–student dialogues that closely resemble one-on-one instruction. We
present and analyze a detailed example of such classroom dialogues, and describe the format,
procedures, and curricular materials required for creating the desired lecture-room environment. We
also discuss a variety of assessment data that indicate strong gains in student learning, consistent
with other researchers. We conclude that interactive-lecture methods in physics instruction are
practical, effective, and amenable to widespread implementation. © 2002 American Association of Physics
@DOI: 10.1119/1.1463739#
I. INTRODUCTION
Numerous investigations in recent years have shown
active-learning methods to be effective in increasing student
learning of physics concepts. These methods aim at promoting substantially greater engagement of students during inclass activities than occurs, for instance, in a traditional
physics lecture. A long-standing problem has been that of
transporting active-learning methods to large-enrollment
classes in which 50–300 students sit together in a single
classroom.
An important breakthrough in addressing this problem was
the 1991 introduction of the Peer Instruction method by Eric
Mazur at Harvard University.1 This now widely adopted
method restructures the traditional lecture class into a series
of short lecture presentations punctuated by a series of
‘‘ConcepTests.’’ These are qualitative multiple-choice questions to which all students in the class simultaneously respond, both before and after discussion.
In this paper we describe a variant of Peer Instruction that
we have developed and tested. It carries the transformation
of the physics lecture-room environment several steps further, aiming at the achievement of a virtually continuous dialogue between students and instructor of a type ordinarily
characteristic only of one-on-one ~or one-on-few! instruction
that takes place, for example, in the instructor’s ofﬁce with a
handful of students present. This ‘‘fully interactive lecture’’
offers a useful option for physics instructors who want to
maximize the potential for instructor–student interaction in
the large-classroom environment. We have employed these
methods in our classes over the past seven years at Southeastern Louisiana University ~SLU!, the University of Virginia, Iowa State University ~ISU!, and Southwest Missouri
State University.
The basic elements of an interactive lecture strategy have
been described by Mazur.1 In this paper we broaden and
extend that discussion, explaining in detail how the lecture
component in large-classroom instruction may be almost
eliminated. Depending on the preferences of the instructor
and the speciﬁc student population, this strategy may yield
worthwhile learning outcomes. To carry out the rapid backand-forth dialogue observed in one-on-one instruction in
large-enrollment classes requires a variety of speciﬁc instructional strategies, an unusual form of preparation by the instructor, and speciﬁc characteristics of the curricular materials.
In Sec. II we review the research related to student learning in physics lecture classes. In Sec. III we give an overview of our general strategy for creating interactive lectures,
and the student response systems necessary to that strategy
are discussed in Sec. IV. In Sec. V we outline the format of
the fully interactive lecture class, while Sec. VI contains a
detailed, almost verbatim, excerpt from an actual class. This
excerpt is analyzed in Sec. VII. In Sec. VIII we discuss the
printed curricular materials that have been developed for use
with these instructional methods. In Sec. IX we discuss
implementation issues, and in Sec. X we discuss the analysis
of assessment data related to student learning in our classes.
We offer some concluding remarks in Sec. XI.
II. A LONG-STANDING CHALLENGE: PROMOTING
ACTIVE-LEARNING IN LARGE LECTURE
A. Motivation: Student–instructor disconnect in
large-enrollment classes
Recent research has cast serious doubt on the effectiveness
of instruction for the majority of students enrolled in intro-
Am. J. Phys. 70 ~6!, June 2002
 
© 2002 American Association of Physics Teachers
ductory physics courses, the most common setting for largeenrollment, lecture-based instruction. Not surprisingly, the
large-enrollment lecture class is among the most challenging
environments in which to achieve improved learning gains. It
is very difﬁcult for instructors to assess student learning and
to implement any needed alterations in instruction in ‘‘realtime.’’ Moreover, the high student/instructor ratio makes it
difﬁcult for instructors to engage students in instructional
activities that go much beyond passive listening.
B. Limitations of the lecture approach: The case of
An increasing body of evidence suggests that instruction
utilizing only lecture classes and standard recitations and
labs results in relatively small increases in most students’
understanding of fundamental concepts.2–8 Complex scientiﬁc concepts are often not effectively communicated to students simply by lecturing about them—however clearly and
logically the concepts may be presented.9–12 Students taught
exclusively through lecture-based curricula are inclined to
short-circuit
process.13,14 Lectures that are particularly clear and wellorganized may, ironically, contribute to students’ tendency to
confuse the results of science with the scientiﬁc process itself. Students who avoid the intense mental struggle that often accompanies growth in personal understanding may
never succeed in developing mastery over a concept.15 In
other words, students do not absorb physics concepts simply
by being told ~or shown! that they are true, and they must be
guided to resolve conceptual confusion through a process
that maximizes the active engagement of their mental faculties.
A term that is often used to characterize an instructional
process of this type is ‘‘active learning,’’ and the term ‘‘interactive engagement’’ ~IE! has been used to describe the
type of physics instruction that most effectively engenders
discussion
instructors.4 Active learners are relatively efﬁcient at learning physics concepts. They are perhaps most easily characterized as students who continuously and actively probe their
own understanding in the process of learning new concepts.
They frequently formulate and pose questions to themselves,
constantly testing their knowledge. They scrutinize implicit
assumptions, examine systems in varied contexts, and are
sensitive to areas of confusion in their understanding. By
contrast, the majority of students in introductory physics
courses are unable to do efﬁcient active learning on their
own. In essence, they don’t know the questions they need to
ask. They are often unable to recognize when their own understanding is inadequate, and tend to lack conﬁdence in
their ability to resolve confusion. In order to carry through
the learning process effectively, they require substantial
guidance by instructors and aid from appropriate curricular
materials.
There is good evidence that, in addition to improving
learning by students who may not be natural active learners,
interactive-engagement methods result in signiﬁcant learning
gains by the best students as well.16,17 Pedagogical models
that engage students in a process of investigation and
discovery—often oriented around activities in the instructional
laboratory—are
interactiveengagement methods found to be effective.5,6,10,17–20 The targeted concepts are in general not told to the students before
they have the opportunity to follow through chains of reasoning that might lead them to synthesize the concept on
their own. It is especially challenging to develop effective
active-learning methods that lack a laboratory component,
and the large lecture class is an inherently difﬁcult environment in which to establish active learning.
C. Recent approaches to active learning in large physics
lecture classes
The issue of how to increase attention and engagement of
students during lecture courses is not unique to physics. Various systems have been designed that allow students in large
classes to provide instantaneous responses to instructors’
questions.21–23
inﬂuential
‘‘think-pair-share’’ 24 ~periodic interruption of lectures for
student discussion!, and the ‘‘minute paper’’ 25 ~students’
written comments during the last minute of class!. Various
strategies have been reviewed by Bonwell and Eison.26
Physics educators have explicitly addressed the challenge
of the large-class learning environment. Van Heuvelen27,28
has developed ‘‘active-learning problem sheets’’ 29,30 for student use during class meetings in the lecture hall.31 Mazur
popularizing
Instruction1,32–35 by suspending a lecture at regular intervals
with challenging conceptual questions posed to the whole
class. Other early strategies for lecture classes have been
described.36–38 More recently, the group at the University of
Massachusetts has developed and popularized interactivelecture
electronic
system.39–41 Poulis et al.42 have also made use of interactive
lecturing with an electronic system, and other electronic
communication systems for use in lectures have been discussed by Shapiro,43 and by Burnstein and Lederman.44
Other strategies for implementing active learning in largeenrollment classes have been described by Beichner et al.45
and by Zollman.46 Sokoloff and Thornton have adapted their
very popular microcomputer-based laboratory materials,
originated in collaboration with Priscilla Laws,6,18,47 for use
in large lecture classes in the form of ‘‘interactive lecture
demonstrations.’’ 48,49 Assessment data from several groups
support the effectiveness of this method.6,17,18 Novak and
collaborators50 have developed the ‘‘just-in-time teaching’’
method in physics lecture courses, incorporating some techniques similar to those used by Hestenes and his collaborators in the ‘‘modeling instruction’’ 51 method. Textbooks and
workbooks with a high interactive component, usable in
large classes, include those by Chabay and Sherwood52,53
and by Knight.54 There is good evidence for the effectiveness
of both of these innovative curricular materials.55,56 The
interactive-lecture strategies to be discussed in this paper
build on the recent history of efforts to improve instruction in
Preliminary
published,57,58 and several workshops have been presented.59
Other important pedagogical reform methods focus more
particularly on activities that occur in small-class laboratories or recitation sections associated with lecture courses.
Among the most prominent are the Tutorials in Introductory
Physics,60,61 Collaborative Group Problem Solving,62–65 and
RealTime Physics,66 along with its close relative, Workshop
Physics.67 Important research results related to instruction in
large-enrollment physics classes have been reported by
Kraus,68 and Cummings et al.17 have described a careful investigation of a technology-rich studio environment.69
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
III. TRANSFORMING THE LECTURE-ROOM
ENVIRONMENT
Our goal is the transformation of the lecture class, to the
furthest extent possible, to the type of instructional environment that exists in an instructor’s ofﬁce. When physics instructors have one or two students in their ofﬁce, they would
likely speak for just a few minutes, solicit some feedback,
then continue the discussion based on that feedback. In the
ofﬁce, instructors can get a sense of where students are conceptually and of how well they are following the discussion.
It is possible to tailor one’s presentation to the students’ actual pace of understanding. By asking students to consider
each other’s ideas, the instructor helps them to think critically about their own ideas. The key issue is whether it is
practical to do this in a room ﬁlled with 100 or more students.
We ~and others! have found that it is practical to bring
about this transformation to a very great extent. Success
hinges on two key strategies: ~1! students need to be guided
in a deliberate, step-by-step process to think about, discuss,
and then respond to a carefully designed sequence of questions and exercises; ~2! there must be a system for the instructor to obtain instantaneous responses from all of the
students in the class simultaneously. This system allows instructors to gauge their students’ thinking and to rapidly
modify their presentation, subsequent questioning, and discussion of students’ ideas. Our methods are a variant of Peer
Instruction,1,32–35 and are similar to methods used at the University of Massachusetts39–41 and at Eindhoven.42
The basic objective is to drastically increase the quantity
and quality of interaction that occurs in class between the
instructor and the students and among the students themselves. To this end, the instructor poses many questions. Students decide on an answer, discuss their ideas with each
other, and provide their responses using a classroom communication system. The instructor makes immediate use of
these responses by tailoring the succeeding questions and
discussion to most effectively match the students’ pace of
understanding.
In attempting to address the insufﬁciencies of the traditional lecture, the fully interactive lecture method that we
employ essentially abandons any effort to utilize class time
for presenting detailed and comprehensive explanations and
derivations of physics principles. Instead, that time is used in
much the same way as in one-on-one tutoring: there is a
continual interchange of questions and answers between instructor and students. The instructor guides the students in
step-by-step fashion to consider certain problems; the students listen, think, write or calculate, and then receive immediate feedback regarding the correctness of their responses,
both from their classmates and from the instructor.
In abandoning lecture’s traditional role of providing extensive and detailed background information, we must evidently
utilize other means for achieving that objective. The burden
of providing a detailed compendium of facts, derivations,
and explanations is carried by a set of lecture notes; these
largely substitute for the traditional textbook. Students are
expected to read and refer to the lecture notes for background
information and sample problems. Although we do review
during class the concepts developed in the lecture notes, we
do not ﬁnd it productive to spend extensive amounts of time
on that activity.
IV. STUDENT RESPONSE SYSTEM
There are a number of student response systems available
for use with interactive-lecture methods, including commercially available electronic systems.70–72 Our method employs
ﬂash cards on which oversize letters of the alphabet are
printed. Flash cards are less expensive and easier to implement, although they lack useful features of the electronic
systems such as instant graphical displays of responses. We
emphasize that almost everything we discuss in this paper
may be implemented equally effectively with electronic response systems.
With the use of the ﬂash-card system, we are able to ask
many questions during class and no longer have to wait for
one daring individual to respond. Every student in the class
has a pack of six large cards ~5 1
2 in.!, each printed
with one of the letters A, B, C, D, E, or F. Students bring the
cards every day, and extra sets are always available. During
class we repeatedly present multiple-choice questions. Often,
the questions stress qualitative concepts involving comparison of magnitudes, directions, or trends ~for example, ‘‘Will
it decrease, remain the same, or increase?’’!. These questions
are difﬁcult to answer by plugging numbers into an equation.
We give the students time to consider their response, 15 s to
1 min depending on the difﬁculty. Then we ask them to
signal their response by holding up one of the cards, everybody at once ~see Fig. 1!. We can easily see all the cards
from the front of the room. Immediately, we can tell whether
most of the students have the answer we were seeking—or if,
instead, there is a ‘‘split vote,’’ that is, part of the class with
one answer, part with another—or perhaps more than one
other. ~One of them, it is hoped, is the right answer!!
One of the advantages of this system is that it allows the
instructor to observe the students’ body language. We can see
whether the students held up their cards quickly, with conﬁdence, or if instead they brought them up slowly, with confused looks on their faces. Do a large number of students
delay their response, ﬁnally holding up an upside-down F?
This is our signal for ‘‘I don’t really know the answer, and I
can’t even give a very good guess.’’ It is not particularly easy
for students to see each others’ cards and so there is a fair
degree of anonymity in their responses. Students’ comfort in
signaling answers with the cards seems to increase as the
course progresses.
Fig. 1. Students signaling their response to instructor’s question using ﬂash
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
V. FORMAT OF THE FULLY INTERACTIVE
LECTURE CLASS
A. Overview
Although there is considerable ﬂexibility in the actual format of a fully interactive lecture class, it is possible to describe a characteristic pattern. The actual length and sequencing of the individual phases will vary depending on the
activities of the previous class and those planned for the
succeeding days. A typical class proceeds in three phases.
~1! A brief introduction/review of the basic concepts is
presented at the blackboard, a sort of mini-lecture usually
lasting around 3–7 min.
~2! A sequence of multiple-choice questions is posed to the
class. These emphasize qualitative reasoning, proceeding
from relatively simple to more challenging, and are closely
linked to each other to explore just one or two concepts from
perspectives,
representations.73 Students provide responses by using the
ﬂash cards. Every opportunity is taken to interrupt the sequence of multiple-choice questions with brief free-response
exercises, for example, drawing simple diagrams or performing elementary calculations.74
~3! Follow-up activities are carried out. These vary and
may consist of interactive demonstrations, group work using
free-response worksheets, or another mini-lecture and question sequence.
At ISU, in addition to the class meetings ~3 h/week! in the
lecture hall, we make use of a once-per-week 50-min recitation session, which has been converted into a full-ﬂedged
University
Washington.10,60 Students spend the entire session working in
small groups on carefully structured printed worksheets,
guided by Socratic questioning from the instructors. Worksheets used in these tutorials have been designed by us and
also form part of the Workbook for Introductory Physics.75 At
ISU we also have been able to make use of four of the
weekly, 2-h laboratory periods to do additional activelearning instruction. In these we use Tutorials for Introductory Physics61 and materials from the text Electric and Magnetic Interactions.52
B. Mini-lecture
The instructor begins by taking a few minutes to outline
the principles and concepts underlying that day’s activities.
One or two key ideas are sketched, along with relevant diagrams and mathematical formulations. A demonstration
might be shown ~soliciting students’ predictions of the outcome! and an example problem solved at the board. From
then on the ball moves to the students’ court.
C. Interactive-question sequence
The instructor proceeds to ask a series of questions to
which the students all respond. We might use questions
printed in the Workbook ~which students always bring to
class76! or present questions on the board or with an overhead transparency. The sequence starts with easy questions,
in order to build conﬁdence. Students consider the question
on their own, taking perhaps 15–30 s. At a certain moment,
all are asked to give their responses simultaneously. Because
the ﬁrst few questions are simple, the responses should be
overwhelmingly correct. Gradually, the questions become
more challenging. The instructor takes any available opportunity to interject a question requiring a ‘‘free response,’’
such as a simple sketch. As the students work on the freeresponse questions, the instructor circulates around the room
and observes their work.
As an example, the diagram in Fig. 2~a! was presented to
the class ~e represents an electron, p a proton!. Students
were ﬁrst asked about the net electrical charge on the object
represented by the circle; is it ~A! greater than zero, ~B!
equal to zero, or ~C! less than zero. Most students quickly
responded with the correct answer, B. The instructor then
drew in a nearby positive charge @Fig. 2~b!#, inviting students
to consider the nature of the interaction between the circled
object and the positive charge ~assuming the electrons and
protons are ﬁxed in position!. He asked the students to sketch
a set of arrows representing all electrical forces acting on that
positive charge due to each of the protons and electrons. As
the students worked at their desks, the instructor walked
around the room, and quickly assessed how well the students
were handling the assignment; he stepped to the board for a
few moments to offer some hints. This entire process took
less than 1 min. The instructor then asked the students
whether the net interaction force implied by the collection of
force vectors they had drawn was ~A! toward the right, ~B!
toward the left, or ~C! approximately equal to zero.
As an example of a more extended sequence, consider the
series of electric ﬁeld questions in Fig. 3. Question 1 is fairly
easy; a large majority of students gave the correct answer ~B!
without needing to discuss it with their neighbors. When we
came to question 2, however, we found that students were
split in their choices; in addition to the correct answer ~B!, a
signiﬁcant fraction of the class held up the A card. When we
came to question 3, the class response was very split; each of
the options received some support. ~Later, question 4 was
given as a follow-up question in a different context.!
At some point, there is likely to be a signiﬁcant split in
opinion reﬂected in the students’ responses. Perhaps 50%–
70% give one answer ~for example, A!, while the remainder
give a different answer ~let’s say, C!. The instructor informs
Fig. 2. Diagrams used in interactive-question sequence: ~a! initial diagram,
requiring ﬂash-card response; ~b! follow-up diagram, requiring free response
by students writing at their desks.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
the class of the difference of opinion: ‘‘We have A’s and C’s,
perhaps a few more A’s. Why don’t you take a few seconds
to discuss it with each other?’’ The students are expected to
discuss the question with whoever is at a convenient distance. Almost always, an animated class-wide discussion ensues; nearly all students are actively engaged in comparing
their answers, arguing for their point of view, and listening
critically to their neighbors’ reasoning. The instructor does
not rush to press for an answer. A minute or more might
elapse before a decreased intensity of discussion is noticed.
Perhaps the instructor gives a warning, ‘‘another 30 seconds.’’ At a certain point, all students are asked to give their
response. Often, the students will have reached a consensus:
nearly everyone now has the same answer. Sometimes, however, the split in opinion persists; that is a signal that more
discussion—with
additional
questions—is probably needed.
If student opinion remains divided and a split vote persists
despite the student discussion, we will often ask for an A
supporter to present his/her argument, followed by a proponent of the C viewpoint. If necessary, we will eventually step
in to alleviate the confusion. By this time, most of the students will have carefully thought through the problem. If
they haven’t already ﬁgured it out by themselves, they will
now at least be in an excellent position to make sense out of
any argument we offer to them. Before those minutes of hard
thinking, we could have made the same argument and
watched as almost every student in the class gave the wrong
answer to some simple question. We know this to be true
because we have tried it often enough.
One of the results of using interactive lectures is that the
instructor begins to acquire startling new insights into what
the students are really getting out of a typical lecture. One
can present a straightforward concept ~from the instructor
point of view! and a simple example, and then—instead of
proceeding rapidly to the next topic as would a traditional
lecturer—present a short set of questions for the students to
answer. One often discovers that the students are deeply
mired in confusion. This is precisely what might occur in the
ofﬁce setting when, in the course of leading the student~s!
through a series of questions, the instructor uncovers an unexpected and serious conceptual confusion. A tactical retreat
is usually necessary, backtracking to simpler concepts that
are more ﬁrmly understood by the student; one can then lead
once again from the new starting point. This process takes
some time but is necessary, because the student could not
hope to master the new idea without consolidating his or her
understanding of the foundation concepts.
This process is exactly what may be replicated through a
fully interactive lecture. By using a properly thought out sequence of questions ~often developed on the ﬂy without having been scripted in advance! along with the student response
system, the instructor is able to identify an area of conceptual
confusion. Recognizing the need to retreat, the instructor offers another question that refers back to concepts previously
discussed. One may then probe to locate a region of relatively ﬁrm understanding that can serve as a new launching
point toward the original target.
As we work our way through a series of intermediate
questions, at each step, we get a reading on our class: Do
they respond quickly? With conﬁdence? Mostly correctly?
Then we comment brieﬂy and move forward. Otherwise, we
pause for a longer discussion. Instead of disposing of the
entire topic in less than 2 min of traditional lecture, we now
might take 10–15 min, struggling together with our students
as they work their way through a conceptual mineﬁeld.
D. Follow-up activities
The sequence of interactive questions may be followed by
another such sequence, perhaps preceded by a new minilecture. Mini-lectures may also be judiciously sprinkled into
a class at various moments, allowing an opportunity for motivational or philosophical comments, or simply to provide a
break from problem solving. We also expend considerable
amounts of time on student group work using printed worksheets, included as an integral component of the Workbook;
an excerpt is in Appendix A. Another method that we have
Fig. 3. Excerpt from interactive-question sequence.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
used with great success is to convert the standard physics
lecture demonstration into a fully interactive sequence.77
Our worksheets designed for use in large-enrollment
classes focus on qualitative questions or problems that require only elementary algebraic calculations. Responses required from students include simple sketches, diagrams,
graphs, and elementary numerical or algebraic expressions.
Such responses may be easily and rapidly scanned and evaluated by an instructor who walks through the room.78 By
quickly sampling a signiﬁcant fraction of the class, the instructor is able to recognize common difﬁculties and offer
appropriate hints or other guidance.
VI. SAMPLE INTERACTIVE-QUESTION
The instructional sequence that follows below occurred
during the ﬁrst half of an actual class. After having already
studied series and parallel circuits, as well as electrical
power, the students had started a new worksheet in the tutorial session on the previous day. The teaching assistant had
reported substantial confusion, and so the instructor began
class this day by posing a question ~Instructor Statement 1!
regarding battery power in a parallel circuit.
The instructor asks students to consider the two-resistor
parallel circuit shown in Fig. 4(a), and then proceeds to ask
a sequence of questions as follows.
~1! Instructor: Suppose an additional resistor is added in
parallel to the circuit shown @in Fig. 4~a!#, and so we get the
circuit shown @in Fig. 4~b!#. Will the power produced by the
battery ~A! increase, ~B! decrease, or ~C! remain the same?
@The instructor writes the question and the three response
options on the board, and follows the same procedure with
all questions cited in this segment.#
Students’ responses are split approximately equally among
the three options.
~2! Instructor: Will the current through the battery ~A!
increase, ~B! decrease, or ~C! remain the same?
Student responses are split approximately equally between
(A) increase, and (B) decrease.
~3! Instructor: Okay, how about this: is DVR3 ~A! greater
than, ~B! less than, or ~C! equal to DVR2? Note: DVR3 represents the absolute value of the potential drop across resistor
Students are slow to show their ﬂash cards; responses are
still very split among the options.
~4! Instructor: Okay, let’s go back to the two-resistor circuit @Fig. 4~a!#. Is DVR2 ~A! greater than, ~B! less than, or
~C! equal to DVR1?
Student question: Is R25R1?
~5! Instructor: Let’s assume they are.
The large majority of students correctly answer (C).
~6! Instructor: Okay, now assume that R2.R1 ; what will
be the answer in that case?
Again, the large majority of students correctly answer
~7! Instructor: What happens to I1 if we increase R2 , will
it ~A! increase, ~B! decrease, or ~C! remain the same? I1
represents the current through resistor R1 , etc.
The large majority of students correctly answer (C).
~8! Instructor: All right, now let’s go back to the threeresistor case. Is DVR3 ~A! greater than, ~B! less than, or ~C!
equal to DVR2?
Flash cards are slow coming up, responses are mixed.
~9! Instructor: All right, here’s a hint. @Instructor uses red
chalk to highlight all conducting segments connected directly
to positive terminal of battery, and uses blue chalk to highlight all segments connected to negative terminal @Fig. 4~c!#;
this mnemonic had been introduced in previous classes to
emphasize that the potential difference between any point in
the red region and any point in the blue region was equal to
the potential difference between the battery terminals, that is,
that Vred2Vblue5DVbat.#
Now, the large majority of students hold up the correct
answer (C).
~10! Instructor: And how about compared to DVR1, is
DVR3~A! greater than, ~B! less than, or ~C! equal to DVR1?
The large majority of students again hold up correct answer (C).
~11! Instructor: Okay.
Student question: So what changes? Doesn’t something
~12! Instructor: Yes, but not DV. Okay, let’s assume that
all three resistors are equal, R15R25R3 , and let me ask you
about the current. Is I3 ~A! greater than, ~B! less than, or ~C!
equal to I2?
Nearly all students correctly answer (C).
~13! Instructor: And is I3 ~A! greater than, ~B! less than,
or ~C! equal to I1?
Fig. 4. Diagrams used in sample interactive-question sequence ~Sec. VI!: ~a!
initial diagram; ~b! follow-up diagram; ~c! diagram representing mnemonic
for circuit potential map ~instructor statement 9!: left-side conducting segments ~light shade; referred to as ‘‘red’’ by instructor! are at potential of
positive battery terminal, right-side conducting segments ~dark shade; referred to as ‘‘blue’’! are at potential of negative battery terminal.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
Again, nearly all students correctly answer (C).
~14! Instructor: Okay, now if we start with that initial
two-resistor circuit and add the third resistor, will the total
current through the battery ~A! increase, ~B! decrease, or ~C!
remain the same?
Student response is approximately 50% for (A), 40% for
(B), and 10% for (C).
~15! Instructor: Okay, we still have a split vote. Will
somebody explain why they think the answer is ~A!?
Student: It’s ~A! because the equivalent resistance of the
circuit will decrease.
~16! Instructor: And now will somebody explain why they
think the answer is ~B!?
Nobody volunteers to defend answer (B). Instructor now
draws on board diagram shown in Fig. 5.
~17! Instructor: Okay, once again: If we start with that
initial two-resistor circuit and add the third resistor, will the
total current through the battery ~A! increase, ~B! decrease,
or ~C! remain the same?
Now there is a much larger proportion of correct (A) responses.
~18! Instructor: ~A! is correct. I guess that still seems
Several students agree out loud that it does seem weird.
Instructor reminds students that they have observed and discussed experiments in the laboratory that are consistent with
this conclusion.
Student question: How far can the battery go and still keep
putting out more current?
~19! Instructor: I don’t know. It basically depends on the
equipment you’re using.
Student: But aren’t you increasing the equivalent resistance, since Requiv5R11R21R3?
~20! Instructor: Ah. No, that’s only for series circuits. It’s
not true for parallel circuits. Okay, let’s go back to our original question. If we add a resistor in parallel to the original
two-resistor parallel circuit, will the power produced by the
battery ~A! increase, ~B! decrease, or ~C! remain the same?
A full two minutes elapse before the students are asked for
a response. The large majority of students correctly answer
~21! Instructor: Okay, ~A! is correct.
VII. DISCUSSION OF SAMPLE INTERACTIVE-
QUESTION SEQUENCE
The sequence in Sec. VI is a representative example of
how closely a fully interactive lecture may resemble a oneon-one tutorial session, and how little it resembles a traditional lecture. The role of the instructor is essentially that of
asking questions, providing hints, and guiding discussion.
The instructor also conﬁrms answers on which the class has
achieved consensus. Here we discuss key elements of the
fully interactive lecture exempliﬁed by this sequence.
A. The frequency of questioning may be as high as several
per minute. During this relatively brief sequence, which took
only approximately 20 min, the students were asked to use
their ﬂash cards to respond to 13 separate questions. During
portions of the segment, there were two or three ~easy! questions in a single minute. This rate is similar to the rhythm of
one-on-one tutoring, in which there is often a rapid exchange
of questions and answers between students and instructor.
B. The instructor must often create unscripted questions
on the spot. All of the questions were improvised by the
instructor without previous scripting or preparation. In just
the way that an instructor must come up with appropriate
extemporaneous questions when doing one-on-one teaching,
an instructor in a fully interactive lecture must be prepared to
respond to the ﬂow of the large-class discussion. It is important to write both the question and the answer options on the
board so students may refer back to them. However, it may
be useful to delay writing the answer options for a few moments to ﬁrst give students time to consider their own response.
C. Easy questions are used to maintain the ﬂow of the
discussion. Many of the questions are easy for the students to
answer, and they receive overwhelmingly correct responses.
Crouch and Mazur35 note that questions with correctresponse rates over 70% tend to produce less useful discussions than do more difﬁcult questions. However, we ﬁnd that
they build student conﬁdence and are important signals to the
instructor of students’ current knowledge baseline. Often
enough, questions thought by the instructor to be simple turn
out not to be, requiring some backtracking. Because of that
inherent degree of unpredictability, some proportion of the
questions asked will turn out to be quite easy for the students. This small conceptual ‘‘step-size’’ allows more precise
ﬁne tuning of the class discussion.
D. Virtually any system offers a rich array of possible
question variants. Almost any physics problem may be
turned into an appropriate conceptual question. By using the
basic question paradigms ‘‘increase, decrease, remain the
same,’’ ‘‘greater than, less than, equal to,’’ and ‘‘left, right,
up, down, in, out,’’ along with obvious variations, it is possible to rapidly create many questions that probe students’
qualitative thinking about the system. By introducing minor
alterations in a physical system ~adding a force, increasing a
resistance, etc.!, students can be guided to apply their conceptual understanding in a variety of contexts. In this way,
the instructor is able to provide a vivid model of the mental
approach needed for active learning.
E. The instructor must be prepared to approach a given
problem with a variety of possible questioning strategies. It
often is found that students do not respond in an expected
manner, and that their knowledge base for a particular problem is shakier than anticipated. Just as in one-on-one tutoring, the instructor must be ready to pose easier questions set
in less complex physical settings, and to offer appropriate
hints to guide the students toward the target concept. By
remaining observant of students’ rapidity in offering responses, body language in showing the ﬂash cards, and expressions on their faces, the instructor should be able to
judge which questions might require additional response
Fig. 5. Diagram used in sample interactive-question sequence ~Sec. VI!,
drawn on board after instructor statement 16.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
VIII. STUDENT WORKBOOK
A. Elements of the Workbook
As our experience in implementing these methods has
evolved, we have found it increasingly necessary to abandon
traditional curricular materials and to develop our own in
order to support the instructional techniques. The ﬁrst need
was for a large stock of appropriate multiple-choice questions to be used in the fully interactive lectures. Despite the
excellent set of ConcepTests provided in Mazur’s book, our
methods required many more questions covering a wider
range of difﬁculty levels than were available in Mazur’s
book or in other sources. The materials we eventually developed for the second semester of the algebra-based general
physics course now form the Workbook for Introductory
Physics.79
Our early attempts to rely on standard textbooks as a
course reference eventually foundered due to the sharp clash
between the heavily mathematical approach of such texts,
and our strong focus on qualitative and conceptual problems.
This clash led to abandonment of a standard text for use in
our second-semester course, and the creation of a set of lecture notes as a substitute. These notes, now included as an
integral component of the Workbook, emphasize qualitative
reasoning, make heavy use of sketches and diagrams, and—
though treating fewer topics than standard texts—go into far
greater depth on those key concepts chosen for emphasis in
our course.
Another key element that was found to be necessary for
our Workbook was the creation of numerous free-response
worksheets ~see, for example, Appendix A!. The worksheets
emphasize qualitative questions, often require explanations
of reasoning, and target learning difﬁculties that have been
identiﬁed in the research literature as well as those familiar
to us from our own experience. In addition to in-class use,
the worksheets also serve as a primary source of homework
exercises. Although superb worksheets based on extensive
research are available in the Tutorials for Introductory
Physics,61 there was simply not enough to satisfy our need
for every-day use in the algebra-based course, covering the
full range of topics in that course and appropriate for students even with very low levels of preparation. ~Other
sources of worksheets of a somewhat different type are now
also available.29,30,80!
A ﬁnal element now included in the Workbook is a large
collection of quizzes and exams ~and solution sets for the
exams! that have been given in previous years. These form
an invaluable source of additional ﬂash-card questions, freeresponse exercises, and material for homework assignments
and student review. They also respond directly to incessant
student demands for samples of previous exams for exam
preparation and review.
B. Nature of the curricular materials
The materials are designed based on the assumption that
the solution of even very simple physics problems invariably
hinges on a lengthy chain of concepts and reasoning. The
question sequences guide the student to lay bare these chains
of reasoning, and to construct in-depth understanding of
physical concepts by step-by-step confrontation with conceptual sticking points. Carefully linked sequences of activities
ﬁrst lead the student to confront the conceptual difﬁculties,
and then to resolve them. This strategy was developed at the
University of Washington.8–10 Complex physical problems
are broken down into conceptual elements, allowing students
to grapple with each one in turn and then return to synthesize
a unifying perspective.
Over several years the ﬂash-card questions, worksheets,
and quiz and exam problems have undergone a continuous
~and unending! process of testing and revision in actual
classroom situations. Constant in-class use discloses ambiguous and confusing wording which is then rapidly corrected in
new printings of the materials—sometimes the same day, for
use in a later tutorial session. Analysis of assessment data
provides additional guidance for revisions.
IX. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
A. Constraints on topical coverage
The single greatest concern for most instructors who are
considering implementing interactive-lecture methods is that
of coverage: can one cover the same amount of material as in
a traditional course? The short answer is no. That is, the
instructor will not be able to present, at the board, the same
amount of material as in a standard course, and there will not
be enough time during class to discuss the usual wide variety
of topics. It is helpful to be very clear about this fundamental
However, that short answer only scratches the surface of
the issue. For one thing, there is extensive evidence that although instructors in introductory physics courses might
cover many topics, the majority of students do not gain any
signiﬁcant degree of mastery over most of the material. Assessment data from our courses and from many others show
convincingly that student learning of basic concepts is improved with interactive-engagement methods. Moreover, as
much as we might wish to give a clear-cut answer to the
question of coverage, there really does not exist an answer
that is both accurate and general. The amount of material that
can be covered is critically dependent on the student population. We found, for instance, that an amount of material
requiring virtually the entirety of a ﬁfteen-week semester at
one institution could be effectively covered before the midterm date at a different institution. There, the better-prepared
students were able to master the concepts more quickly.
The best response to this question is that instructors are
free to cover as many topics as they wish. The real issue is
depth of coverage. We choose certain concepts from each
topic—the big ideas in our view—and focus in-depth class
discussion on those concepts. We are content to discuss only
brieﬂy, if at all, other concepts contained within the same
topical area. For instance, we cover dc circuits, but not ac
circuits or multiloop circuits requiring analysis with simultaneous linear equations. We cover interference, but not diffraction, the optics of lenses, but not of mirrors or optical
instruments. We omit topics such as special relativity, particle physics, and astrophysics. ~On a time-per-topic basis,
our second-semester course spends approximately 75% on
electricity and magnetism and about 25% on optics and modern physics.! If it is necessary for some reason to cover certain topics, there is nothing to prevent an instructor from
devoting a few traditional lectures to those subjects; that will
ensure rapid coverage indeed!
B. Consistency of implementation
In a traditional lecture class the initiative lies entirely with
the instructor; the student is free to relax, listen, and pas-
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
sively observe the instructor’s board work. In the fully interactive lecture the student is continually being forced to think
hard about difﬁcult concepts, commit to decisions about
problem solutions, and interact with classmates to discuss
challenging questions. At the very least this interaction requires a signiﬁcant investment of thought and energy in a
course most students take merely to satisfy a requirement.
Many students who ﬁnd themselves in this situation do not
automatically welcome the opportunity to engage in a learning experience that is far more intensive than normal.81,82
Largely for these reasons, we and others have found that it
is critical to the success of these methods that they be implemented consistently throughout the course, beginning with
the very ﬁrst day. For example, our students pick up their
sets of ﬂash cards as they walk in the ﬁrst day of class, and
the ﬁrst set of ﬂash-card questions begins within the ﬁrst
minute of class. ~These are questions such as ‘‘Did you take
high-school physics?,’’ etc.! We explain that these methods
have been repeatedly demonstrated to yield positive results,
and reassure students that the impact on grades is usually
found to be favorable. Virtually every class period includes
interactive questions and related activities. Instructors need
to be aware that attempting to introduce these or other forms
of active-learning methods mid-semester, after students have
already settled down into the routine of a traditional lecture
course, could be disastrous for student ~and instructor! morale.
C. Grade-related assessment
As has been pointed out by many educators, it is absolutely essential to the success of any instructional method
that students be examined and graded in a manner consistent
with the form of instruction. In our second-semester course,
we give a written in-class quiz twice per week; the majority
of questions are very similar to the ﬂash-card questions. Indeed, actual past quiz questions are frequently used as part of
the ﬂash-card question sequences. Exams also focus heavily
on qualitative questions, and on problems that involve little
algebra but require good conceptual knowledge and proportional reasoning skills. Some problems require explanations
of students’ reasoning. To help promote a cooperative atmosphere among the students, an absolute grading scale is used
so that any student accumulating a preset point total is guaranteed in advance, at the minimum, a certain corresponding
letter grade.
D. Student attitudes
We and others35 have found that during the ﬁrst few weeks
many students are unsettled and uncomfortable with interactive lecture classes. It takes time for them to become accustomed to the new routine and to appreciate its beneﬁts. We
ﬁnd that by the end of the course, most students have positive attitudes. End-of-course surveys show that most students
react favorably to the instructional methods, with approximately 30%–40% giving maximum ratings on evaluations.
~Sample comment: ‘‘... best physics instructor I have ever
had... . He makes physics fun and interesting to learn... .’’!
Most of the remainder are positive or neutral, but there is
often a core of less than 10% that despises these methods.
~Sample comment from the same class: ‘‘... has a new way of
teaching he is trying to develop. It doesn’t work...going to
lecture was pointless other than to take required quizzes.’’!
During the Fall 2000 semester at ISU the number of responses in this most unsatisﬁed category dropped to zero but
it appears, unfortunately, that that was only an anomaly.
E. Demands on the instructor
Teaching a physics course using fully interactive lectures
is not an easy task; it requires much energy and commitment.
The instructor needs to come to class with a clear plan—
tentative though it may be—for that day’s intended sequence
of questions and activities. Pre-scripted questions must be
selected, and additional questions must be prepared as
needed. During class the instructor must be attentive to student reactions, willing to walk around the room and check on
student work, and prepared to shift gears and redirect discussion on short notice. ~When we ﬁnd ourselves lecturing for
more than ten minutes at a time, it indicates that we have not
prepared adequately for that day’s class.!
X. ASSESSMENT OF STUDENT LEARNING
We ﬁrst note a remarkable effect that we have consistently
observed, that is, a very small number of dropouts, typically
1%–3% after the ﬁrst week. Attendance is '90% on virtually every class day ~no doubt largely due to frequent graded
quizzes!. We should also acknowledge that, although we believe that the techniques would scale well with larger classes,
we have not personally tested these methods in classes with
over 100 students.
The Workbook has been used for the past ﬁve years at SLU
and ISU and has undergone continuous development. The
course at SLU consisted only of the interactive lectures,
while that at ISU has the very substantial additional element
of a weekly tutorial session. There are still other important
elements of the ISU course that certainly contribute to the
learning gains, including the four active-engagement laboratory sessions. ~We have no way of apportioning learning gain
contributions among the various course elements.! Our full
implementation model has been used only for the secondsemester algebra-based course, and data from that course are
reported here.
We discuss the results of the Conceptual Survey in Electricity ~CSE!, the Conceptual Survey in Electricity and Magnetism ~CSEM!,7 electric circuit concept questions, and
quantitative problem solving. Since 1997, an abridged version of the CSE has been administered on both the ﬁrst and
last days of class. The CSE is a 33-item multiple-choice test
that surveys knowledge related to electrical ﬁelds and forces.
About half of the items are identical ~or nearly so! to questions included on the CSEM. The items on the CSE and
CSEM are almost entirely qualitative and probe knowledge
both of physics concepts and aspects of related formalism.7
On the pre-test, students answered all questions, but on the
post-test they were instructed to respond only to a 23-item
subset.83 We refer to this subset of the CSE as the Abridged
CSE. Only the 23 designated items were graded, both on the
pre- and post-test. Table I gives these scores for the ﬁve
courses in which we administered the test; only students who
took both tests are included ~that is, data are ‘‘matched’’!.
Despite the addition of tutorials, along with expansions and
improvements in the curricular materials, we cannot conclusively state that the improvements in post-test scores and
normalized gain84 ~that is, Hake’s ^g&! observed at ISU can
be entirely attributed to changes in instruction. ~‘‘Normalized
gain’’ is deﬁned as the actual pre-test to post-test increase in
exam score, divided by the maximum possible increase.! As
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
one of us has shown ~DEM! in a recent report, various other
factors probably play a signiﬁcant role in determining student performance as reﬂected in assessment data of this
In all cases, our pre-test to post-test gains are quite high by
most standard measures such as normalized gain ^g& ~0.46–
0.69! and effect size. ~‘‘Effect size’’ is the change in exam
score divided by the standard deviation of the scores.! By
way of comparison, it has been found in mechanics courses
that typical values of normalized gain on the Force Concept
Inventory are ^g&'0.25 for traditional courses, and 0.35
<^g&<0.70 for interactive engagement courses.4,19 ~The
Force Concept Inventory is a very widely used mechanics
diagnostic test.! For the three ISU samples, treating the ‘‘pretest’’ and ‘‘post-test’’ populations as distinct, we ﬁnd effect
size d.3.0, while values of d'0.8 are ordinarily considered
Although our post-test and ^g& values are far higher than
comparable values found in a national survey of CSE
results,7 it would not be proper to attempt a direct comparison between our abridged-CSE data and other data reﬂecting
administration of the full CSE. Table II shows mean pre-test,
post-test, and normalized learning gain values for a 14-item
subset that consists of all questions included on both the
abridged CSE and on the CSEM; only ISU data are available. Also shown are comparable values from the national
survey data.7 ~Note that these latter data are not matched.!
These data show that although ISU pre-test scores are very
nearly equal to those in the algebra-based courses in the
national sample, post-test scores and normalized learning
gains are dramatically higher than both algebra-based and
calculus-based courses in that sample, with mean normalized
learning gains ~mean ^g&50.68! triple those found in the
national survey ~^g&50.22!.87 We note also that our students’
scores on ﬁnal-exam magnetism questions drawn from the
CSEM—well above those of the national sample post-tests—
are quite consistent with the data shown in Table II.
In Table III we present data on electric circuit questions
that have been administered on our ﬁnal exams for the past
four years; these questions ~Fig. 6! are drawn from the study
of Shaffer and McDermott.88 The authors report assessment
data on these questions for several different courses, including both traditional courses and courses that used the electric
circuit tutorials from Tutorials in Introductory Physics. Although we ﬁnd signiﬁcant year-to-year variations in the
scores of students in our courses, all of our eight scores are
higher than the comparable scores in traditional courses.88
Our course differs from most traditional courses in three
key ways: ~1! use of fully interactive lecture and highly interactive tutorials, ~2! strong emphasis on conceptual problems, and ~3! coverage of a smaller number of topics than
most courses. Our data do not allow us to estimate the relative contribution of these three factors to the assessment results reported here. In relation to item ~3!, we note that Hake
has concluded that the fraction of course time devoted to the
study of mechanics topics is not signiﬁcantly related to superior learning gains on the Force Concept Inventory reported for IE courses.89 He also notes that only partial
implementation of interactive methods—even when there
may be some emphasis on conceptual problems—is correlated with poorer learning gains than those achieved in
courses with full implementation of those methods.90 However, a study by Greene suggests that improved learning
gains may be possible even in a relatively traditional noninteractive course in which conceptual examples and problems
are strongly emphasized on homework assignments and
An important issue for many students in the algebra-based
physics course is preparation for pre-professional exams
such as the Medical College Admissions Test ~MCAT!. The
most recent versions of the MCAT put substantial emphasis
both on qualitative physics questions and on the analysis of
complex reading passages requiring application of fundamental physics concepts in unfamiliar contexts. Physics
courses that emphasize conceptual understanding might well
provide superior preparation for this type of exam. Careful
studies of MCAT performance for students enrolled in such a
course at the University of California at Davis provide support for this hypothesis.92
An important concern of many physics instructors is the
Table I. Scores on the 23-item abridged Conceptual Survey in Electricity
pre-test score
post-test score
~lecture only!
~lecture only!
(lecture1tutorial)
(lecture1tutorial)
(lecture1tutorial)
aCalculated using exact ~unrounded! pre-test and post-test scores.
Table II. Scores of CSEM subset of 14 electricity questions.
CSEM electricity subset
mean pre-test score
CSEM electricity subset
mean post-test score
National sample ~algebra-based courses!
National sample
~calculus-based courses!
aN for national sample is mean of values reported for each of the 14 individual questions, both pre and post;
data from Ref. 7.
bCalculated using exact ~unrounded! pre-test and post-test scores.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
extent to which a course’s focus on conceptual questions
may detract from students’ ability to solve standard quantitative problems. ~We stress, though, that our course’s emphasis on qualitative problems is accompanied by extensive
practice with some fairly standard quantitative problems, albeit ones requiring only a modest degree of algebraic manipulation; see Appendix B.93! We have attempted to address
this concern by including on our ﬁnal exam problems drawn
directly from the traditional calculus-based introductory
physics course at ISU ~omitting problems using calculus!. In
1998 we used six questions copied directly from two different ﬁnal exams in the calculus-based course; in 1999 and
2000 we included three of those same six questions. ~All six
are shown in Appendix C.! The data in Table IV show that
students in our algebra-based course outperformed the students in the calculus-based course on those questions; they
also show that results on the three-item subset were virtually
identical to those on the full six-item set.
Our results are consistent with those of others who have
implemented research-based instructional methods. That is,
students’ ability to solve quantitative problems is maintained
or even slightly improved. At the same time, at the cost of a
modest restriction of topical coverage, students are able to
meet substantially more rigorous standards on qualitative
problem solving.94
Table III. Post-instruction scores on circuit questions.
Four-bulb question
@Fig. 6~a!#: correct
with correct explanation
Five-bulb question
@Fig. 6~b!#: correct
with correct explanation
Traditional,
algebra-based,
university
Traditional,
calculus-based,
university
calculus-based,
university
calculus-based,
aFour-bulb question, four classes, total N'500; Five-bulb question: see notes ~b! and ~c!; data as reported in
bN'50; administered in subsequent course.
cN'50; administered in subsequent course.
dExplanation not required.
Fig. 6. Questions used to assess understanding of circuits ~from Ref. 88!. All
bulbs are identical, and all batteries are ideal. Students are asked to rank
relative brightness of bulbs, and to explain their reasoning; ~a! Answer: A
5D.B5C; ~b! Answer: A5D5E.B5C.
Table IV. Scores on quantitative problems, ISU courses.
Mean score
Traditional calculus-based course,
1997 and 1998
six ﬁnal exam questions
Interactive-lecture course, 1998
~algebra-based!
six ﬁnal exam questions
Traditional calculus-based course,
1997 and 1998
three-question subset
Interactive-lecture course,
1998, 1999, 2000
~algebra-based!
three-question subset
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
XI. CONCLUSION
Our objective is to transform the large-enrollment lecture
classroom, as much as possible, to one that is more typical of
small-group instruction. We try to achieve this objective by
obtaining simultaneous responses from all students to carefully designed sequences of questions emphasizing qualitative reasoning. The students’ responses allow us to modify
the pacing and direction of further class discussion and questioning. Curricular materials designed to facilitate this instructional method have been developed, tested, and assembled into a student workbook. Assessment data regarding
student learning show gains far higher than those reported in
national surveys of comparable courses.
Our experience and those of others makes it clear that
interactive lectures are now a practical and tested option,
available for immediate use by physics instructors virtually
anywhere. As with any other novel teaching method, there is
a learning curve for both students and instructors, but most
practitioners have found that a commitment to use the methods on an extended basis almost always results in at least
some degree of success.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dan McCarthy edited an early version of the Workbook
with painstaking care and offered many helpful suggestions
for improvements. We are very grateful to the teaching assistants at Iowa State University: Michael Fitzpatrick, Tina
Fanetti, Jack Dostal, Ngoc-Loan Nguyen, Agne`s Kim, Sarah
Orley, and David Oesper. Through close and dedicated work
with students in their tutorial sessions, they were able to
provide much valuable insight into student thinking and
many important suggestions for improvements to the curricular materials.
APPENDIX A: EXCERPT FROM FREE-RESPONSE
Torque on a Current Loop in a Magnetic Field
1. All throughout the boxed region below, there is a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld pointing into the page ~as indicated by the
cross!. @This ﬁeld is created by source currents outside of the
region.# A wire segment carrying a current in the direction
shown is placed inside the region. @Wires leading to the battery are not shown in this or in any subsequent ﬁgure.#
Indicate the direction of the force on the wire segment, using
either arrows or the ‘‘dot’’ or ‘‘cross’’ symbols. If the force is
zero, write ‘‘zero.’’
2. Now, a square wire loop carrying a steady clockwise current is placed in the region. ~Current in each of the four sides
is equal.! On each of the four sides of the loop, indicate the
direction of the magnetic force ~if there is one! or write
‘‘zero.’’ Is there a net force acting on the loop as a whole? If
so, state its direction. If not, explain how you can tell.
3. In this region, a uniform magnetic ﬁeld is present that
points toward the bottom of the page. A wire segment carrying a current in the direction shown is placed in the region.
Indicate the direction of the force on the wire segment, using
either arrows or the ‘‘dot’’ or ‘‘cross’’ symbols. If the force is
zero, write ‘‘zero.’’
4. Now, a square wire loop carrying a clockwise current is
placed in the region. On each of the four sides of the loop,
indicate the direction of the magnetic force ~if there is one.!
Is there a net force acting on the loop as a whole? If so, state
its direction. If not, explain how you can tell.
APPENDIX B: REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE OF
QUIZ AND EXAM PROBLEMS USED IN COURSE
1. An electron is located at ~0 m, 11 m! and two protons are
located at ~0 m, 22 m!. A 12-C charge is located at the
origin. What is the magnitude of the net electric ﬁeld experienced by the charge at the origin, produced by the electron
and the protons?
2. Current ﬂows out of a battery and into resistor A ~2 ohms!.
When the current ﬂows out of resistor A it branches, with
part of it going through resistor B ~2 ohms! and the rest
going through resistor C ~4 ohms!. The current then recombines and returns to the battery. If the voltage drop across
resistor A is DVA , what is the voltage drop across resistor
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
3. A charge Q is ﬁxed at the origin. An object with mass 3 kg
and charge 9 C is held motionless on the 6-V equipotential
circle ~a distance r from the origin!, and then released. ~See
diagram.! Which of these will be closest to the velocity attained by the object when it is very far ~more than 1,000 r!
from the origin?
4. A 5-ohm and a 2-ohm resistor are connected in series to a
battery. In a separate circuit, a 5-ohm and a 2-ohm resistor
are connected in parallel to a battery with the same voltage.
In which resistor is the most power being dissipated?
The 5-ohm resistor in the series circuit.
The 5-ohm resistor in the parallel circuit.
The 2-ohm resistor in the series circuit.
The 2-ohm resistor in the parallel circuit.
Both resistors in the series circuit, which dissipate the
same amount of power.
Both resistors in the parallel circuit, which dissipate
the same amount of power.
All four resistors dissipate the same amount of power.
5. A positive charge q is shot into a region in which there is
a uniform electric ﬁeld ~see diagram!. First, it is shot along
path #1; then it is shot in again along path #2. CHOOSE
TWO CORRECT STATEMENTS (half credit for each).
It gains kinetic energy while traveling inside this region.
It loses kinetic energy while traveling inside this region.
Its kinetic energy is constant while traveling inside
this region.
The kinetic energy change from @A to B# is greater
than the kinetic energy change from @A to C#.
The kinetic energy change from @A to B# is less than
the kinetic energy change from @A to C#.
The kinetic energy change from @A to B# is the same
as the kinetic energy change from @A to C#.
6. The diagram shows part of the path traveled by a particular light ray as it strikes a piece of three-layer material. The
different layers have different indices of refraction ~n1 , n2 ,
and n3! as indicated. Note that no ray is observed in the n3
What is the correct ranking ~largest to smallest! of the
three indices of refraction?
largest____________________smallest
APPENDIX C: QUESTIONS FROM ISU CALCULUS-
BASED PHYSICS EXAM
Questions 1–6 were given on the 1998 ﬁnal exam in the
interactive-lecture course. Questions 1, 2, and 4 were also
given on the 1999 and 2000 ﬁnal exams in that course; the
format of question 4 was slightly modiﬁed to increase its
difﬁculty.
1. Two point charges 17.0031029 C and 19.0031029 C
are located 4.00 m apart. The electric ﬁeld intensity ~in N/C!
halfway between them is:
2. Two particles, X and Y, are 4 m apart. X has a charge of
2Q and Y has a charge of Q. A third charged particle Z is
placed midway between X and Y. The ratio of the magnitude
of the electrostatic force on Z from X to that on Z from Y
~Fzx: Fzy! is:
3. An unknown resistor dissipates 0.50 W when connected to
a 3.0 V potential difference. When connected to a 1.0 V
potential difference, this resistor will dissipate:
D. 0.056 W
E. None of these.
4. In the diagram, the current in the 3.0-V resistor is 4.0 A.
The potential difference between points 1 and 2 is:
5. The electric ﬁeld at a distance of 10 cm from an isolated
point charge of 231029 C is:
A. 0.18 N/C
B. 1.8 N/C
D. 180 N/C
E. None of these
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
6. A portion of a circuit is shown, with the values of the currents given for some branches. What is the direction and value of
the current i?
a!Electronic mail: 
1Eric Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual ~Prentice–Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1997!.
2Ibrahim Abou Halloun and David Hestenes, ‘‘The initial knowledge state
of college physics students,’’ Am. J. Phys. 53, 1043–1055 ~1985!.
3David Hestenes, Malcolm Wells, and Gregg Swackhamer, ‘‘Force concept
inventory,’’ Phys. Teach. 30, 141–158 ~1992!.
4Richard R. Hake, ‘‘Interactive engagement versus traditional methods: A
six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses,’’ Am. J. Phys. 66, 64–74 ~1998!.
5Edward F. Redish, Jeffery M. Saul, and Richard N. Steinberg, ‘‘On the
effectiveness of active-engagement microcomputer-based laboratories,’’
Am. J. Phys. 65, 45–54 ~1997!.
6Ronald K. Thornton and David R. Sokoloff, ‘‘Assessing student learning
of Newton’s laws: The force and motion conceptual evaluation and the
evaluation of active learning laboratory and lecture curricula,’’ Am. J.
Phys. 66, 338–352 ~1998!.
7David P. Maloney, Thomas L. O’Kuma, Curtis J. Hieggelke, and Alan Van
Heuvelen, ‘‘Surveying students’ conceptual knowledge of electricity and
magnetism,’’ Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl. 69, S12–S23 ~2001!.
8Lillian C. McDermott, ‘‘Millikan Lecture 1990: What we teach and what
is learned—closing the gap,’’ Am. J. Phys. 59, 301–315 ~1991!.
9Lillian C. McDermott, ‘‘Guest comment: How we teach and how students
learn—a mismatch?,’’ Am. J. Phys. 61, 295–298 ~1993!.
10Lillian C. McDermott, ‘‘Bridging the gap between teaching and learning:
The role of research,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in
Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward F. Redish and John S.
Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 139–165 ~1997!#, pt. 1.
11E. F. Redish, ‘‘Implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics,’’Am.
J. Phys. 62, 796–803 ~1994!.
12Arnold B. Arons, Teaching Introductory Physics ~Wiley, New York, 1997!.
13David P. Maloney, ‘‘Research on problem solving: Physics,’’ in Handbook
of Research on Science Teaching and Learning, edited by Dorothy L.
Gabel ~Macmillan, New York, 1994!, pp. 327–354.
14Frederick Reif, ‘‘Millikan Lecture 1994: Understanding and teaching important scientiﬁc thought processes,’’ Am. J. Phys. 63, 17–32 ~1995!.
15It is widely acknowledged among physics educators that, one way or the
other—whether through homework, class work, or individual discussion—
most students must be guided to exert intense mental efforts in order to
learn physics effectively. Belief in this principle by no means is held only
by nontraditional physics educators. Preliminary results from a large-scale
interview study clearly suggest that these beliefs characterize the views of
many physics instructors regarding student learning of problem solving
skills: Patricia Heller, Kenneth Heller, Charles Henderson, Vince H. Kuo,
and Edit Yerushalmi, ‘‘Instructors’ beliefs and values about learning problem solving,’’ in Proceedings of the 2001 Physics Education Research
Conference, edited by Scott Franklin, Jeffrey Marx, and Karen Cummings
~Rochester, New York, 2001!, pp. 75–78.
16John R. Thompson, Paula R. L. Heron, Peter S. Shaffer, and Lillian C.
McDermott, ‘‘Development and assessment of curriculum,’’ AAPT Announcer 28 ~2!, 80 ~1998!.
17Karen Cummings, Jeffrey Marx, Ronald Thornton, and Dennis Kuhl,
‘‘Evaluating innovations in studio physics,’’ Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J.
Phys. Suppl. 67, S38–S44 ~1999!. Also see Ref. 62.
18Ronald K. Thornton and David R. Sokoloff, ‘‘Learning motion concepts
using real-time microcomputer-based laboratory tools,’’ Am. J. Phys. 58,
858–867 ~1990!.
19Edward F. Redish and Richard N. Steinberg, ‘‘Teaching physics: Figuring
out what works,’’ Phys. Today 52, 24–30 ~1999!.
20Fred Goldberg, ‘‘Constructing physics understanding in a computersupported learning environment,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward F. Redish
and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 903–911 ~1997!#, pt. 2.
21Raphael Littauer, ‘‘Instructional implications of a low-cost electronic student response system,’’ Educational Technology ~October 1972!, p. 69.
22E. A. Lumsden, ‘‘Use of student feedback cards for diagnostic purposes
during classroom lectures,’’ in Improving College and University Teaching
Yearbook 1976 ~Oregon State U.P., Corvallis, 1976!, p. 39.
23A form of the ‘‘feedback card’’ method was described by Thomas A.
Moore in his Six Ideas That Shaped Physics ~WCB McGraw–Hill, Boston,
24F. Lyman, ‘‘The responsive class discussion,’’ in Mainstreaming Digest,
edited by A. S. Anderson ~College of Education, University of Maryland,
College Park, 1981!; F. Lyman, ‘‘Think-pair-share, thinktrix, thinklinks,
and weird facts,’’ in Enhancing Thinking Through Cooperative Learning,
edited by N. Davidson and T. Worsham ~New York, Teacher’s College
Press, 1992!.
25The ‘‘minute paper’’ has long been ascribed to Wilson as he was apparently the ﬁrst to describe it in the literature @R. C. Wilson, ‘‘Improving
faculty teaching: Effective use of student evaluations and consultants,’’ J.
Higher Educ. 57, 192–211 ~1986!#. More recently, it has been acknowledged that the original source of the idea was Berkeley physicist C.
Schwartz. See Barbara Gross Davis, Lynn Wood, and Robert C. Wilson, A
Berkeley Compendium of Suggestions for Teaching with Excellence ~University
California,
teaching.berkeley.edu/compendium/, Suggestion #95!.
26Charles C. Bonwell and James A. Eison, ‘‘Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom,’’ ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 1,
The George Washington University, School of Education and Human Development, Washington, DC, 1991!, pp. 7–19 and passim, and references
27Alan Van Heuvelen, ‘‘Learning to think like a physicist: A review of
research-based instructional strategies,’’Am. J. Phys. 59, 891–897 ~1991!.
28Alan Van Heuvelen, ‘‘Overview, case study physics,’’ Am. J. Phys. 59,
898–907 ~1991!.
29Alan Van Heuvelen, ALPS Kit: Active Learning Problem Sheets, Mechanics ~Hayden–McNeil, Plymouth, MI, 1990!.
30Alan Van Heuvelen, ALPS Kit: Active Learning Problem Sheets, Electricity and Magnetism ~Hayden–McNeil, Plymouth, MI, 1990!.
31Van Heuvelen has updated his methods by incorporating multimedia tools
and innovative group activities: Alan Van Heuvelen, ‘‘Experiment problems for mechanics,’’ Phys. Teach. 3, 176–180 ~1995!; ‘‘Using interactive
simulations to enhance conceptual development and problem solving
skills,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate
Physics Education, edited by Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP
Conf. Proc. 399, 1119–1135 ~1997!#, pt. 2; Alan Van Heuvelen, Leith
Allen, and Pavlos Mihas, ‘‘Experiment problems for electricity and magnetism,’’ Phys. Teach. 37, 482–485 ~1999!.
32Eric Mazur, ‘‘Understanding or memorization: Are we teaching the right
thing?,’’ in Conference on the Introductory Physics Course, edited by Jack
Wilson ~Wiley, New York, 1997!, pp. 113–123.
33Eric Mazur, ‘‘Peer Instruction: getting students to think in class,’’ in The
Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education,
edited by Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399,
981–988 ~1997!#, pt. 2.
34Catherine H. Crouch, ‘‘Peer Instruction: An interactive approach for large
classes,’’ Opt. Photonics News 9 ~9!, 37–41 ~September 1998!; Adam P.
Fagen, Catherine H. Crouch, and Eric Mazur, ‘‘Peer instruction results
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
from a range of classrooms,’’ Phys. Teach. 40~4!, 206–209 ~2002!.
35Catherine H. Crouch and Eric Mazur, ‘‘Peer instruction: Ten years of experience and results,’’ Am. J. Phys. 69, 970–977 ~2001!; 
36Laurent Hodges, ‘‘Changes in the introductory calculus-based physics
course at Iowa State University,’’ in Conference on the Introductory Physics Course, edited by Jack Wilson ~Wiley, New York, 1997!, pp. 291–294.
37R. G. Fuller, ‘‘Using interactive lecture methods to teach physics,’’ American Physical Society Forum on Education, Spring 1994.
38H. T. Hudson, ‘‘Teaching physics to a large lecture section,’’ Phys. Teach.
23, 81–84 ~1985!.
39Robert J. Dufresne, William J. Gerace, William J. Leonard, Jose P. Mestre,
and Laura Wenk, ‘‘Classtalk: A classroom communication system for active
learning,’’
umperg.physics.umass.edu/gemsFolder/umperg2/CT–Paper.pdf ~1996!.
40Jose P. Mestre, William J. Gerace, Robert J. Dufresne, and William J.
Leonard, ‘‘Promoting active learning in large classes using a classroom
communication system,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in
Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward F. Redish and John S.
Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 1019–1036 ~1997!#, pt. 2.
41Laura Wenk, Robert Dufresne, William Gerace, William Leonard, and Jose
Mestre, ‘‘Technology-assisted active learning in large lectures,’’ in
Student-Active Science, Models of Innovation in College Science Teaching,
edited by Ann P. McNeal and Charlene D’Avanzo ~Saunders College Publishing, Fort Worth, 1997!, pp. 431–452.
42J. Poulis, C. Massen, E. Robens, and M. Gilbert, ‘‘Physics lecturing with
audience paced feedback,’’ Am. J. Phys. 66, 439–441 ~1998!.
43Joel A. Shapiro, ‘‘Electronic student response found feasible in large science lecture hall,’’ J. Coll. Sci. Teach. 26, 408–412 ~1997!.
44Ray A. Burnstein and Leon M. Lederman, ‘‘Using wireless keypads in
lecture classes,’’ Phys. Teach. 39, 8–11 ~2001!.
45Robert J. Beichner, Jeffery M. Saul, Rhett J. Allain, Duane L. Deardorff,
and David S. Abbott, ‘‘Introduction to SCALE-UP: Student-centered activities for large enrollment university physics,’’ Proceedings of the 2000
Annual Meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education, Session
 
Physics–Ed/index.html.
46Dean Zollman, ‘‘Learning Cycle physics,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward F.
Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 1137–1149 ~1997!#, pt.
47Priscilla W. Laws, ‘‘Calculus-based physics without lectures,’’ Phys. Today 44 ~12!, 24–31 ~1991!; ‘‘Millikan Lecture 1996: Promoting active
learning based on physics education research in introductory physics
courses,’’ Am. J. Phys. 65, 14–21 ~1997!.
48David R. Sokoloff and Ronald K. Thornton, ‘‘Using interactive lecture
demonstrations to create an active learning environment,’’ Phys. Teach. 35
~10!, 340–347 ~1997!.
49David R. Sokoloff and Ronald K. Thornton, ‘‘Using interactive lecture
demonstrations to create an active learning environment,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of
the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited
by Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 1061–
1074 ~1997!#, pt. 2.
50Gregor M. Novak, Evelyn T. Patterson, Andrew D. Gavrin, and Wolfgang
Christian, Just-In-Time Teaching: Blending Active Learning with Web
Technology ~Prentice–Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999!.
51David Hestenes, ‘‘Modeling methodology for physics teachers,’’ in The
Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education,
edited by Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399,
935–957 ~1997!#, pt. 2.
52Ruth W. Chabay and Bruce A. Sherwood, Electric and Magnetic Interactions ~Wiley, New York, 1995!.
53Bruce A. Sherwood and Ruth W. Chabay, ‘‘Integrating theory and experiment in lecture using desktop experiments,’’ in The Changing Role of
Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward
F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 1053–1060 ~1997!#,
54Randall D. Knight, Physics: A Contemporary Perspective ~Addison–
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997!, Vols. 1,2, preliminary ed. Also see Ref. 80.
55Ruth W. Chabay, ‘‘Qualitative understanding and retention,’’ AAPT Announcer 27 ~2!, 96 ~1997!.
56Randall D. Knight, ‘‘Studio Physics at Cal Poly: What have we learned?’’
AAPT Announcer 30 ~2!, 132 ~2000!.
57David E. Meltzer and Kandiah Manivannan, ‘‘Promoting interactivity in
physics lecture classes,’’ Phys. Teach. 34, 72–76 ~1996!.
58Kandiah Manivannan and David E. Meltzer, ‘‘Increasing active student
participation in the classroom through the use of ‘ﬂash cards,’ ’’ in The
Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education,
edited by Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399,
821–822 ~1997!#, pt. 1; David E. Meltzer, ‘‘Nontraditional approach to
algebra-based general physics,’’ ibid. 399, 823–824 ~1997!.
59David E. Meltzer and Kandiah Manivannan, ‘‘Interactive methods for
large classes: Workshop W29 at the AAPT Winter Meeting, New Orleans,
Louisiana, January 4, 1998’’; David E. Meltzer and Kandiah Manivannan,
‘‘Interactive methods for large classes: Workshop W36 at the AAPT Summer Meeting, Lincoln, Nebraska, August 4, 1998,’’ AAPT Announcer 28
~2!, 66 ~1998!; ‘‘Workshop W04 at the AAPT Summer Meeting, San Antonio, Texas, August 3, 1999,’’ 29 ~2!, 57 ~1999!; ‘‘Workshop W11 at the
AAPT Summer Meeting, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, July 29, 2000,’’ 30 ~2!,
53 ~2000!.
60Lillian C. McDermott, Stamatis Vokos, and Peter S. Shaffer, ‘‘Sample
class on Tutorials in Introductory Physics,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by Edward F.
Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 1007–1018 ~1997!#, pt.
61Lillian C. McDermott, Peter S. Shaffer, and the Physics Education Group,
Tutorials in Introductory Physics ~Prentice–Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
62Patricia Heller, Ronald Keith, and Scott Anderson ‘‘Teaching problem
solving through cooperative grouping. Group versus individual problem
solving,’’ Am. J. Phys. 60, 627–636 ~1992!.
63Patricia Heller and Mark Hollabaugh, ‘‘Teaching problem solving through
cooperative grouping. 2. Designing problems and structuring groups,’’Am.
J. Phys. 60, 637–644 ~1992!.
64Patricia Heller, Thomas Foster, and Kenneth Heller, ‘‘Cooperative group
problem solving laboratories for introductory classes,’’ in The Changing
Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by
Edward F. Redish and John S. Rigden @AIP Conf. Proc. 399, 913–933
~1997!#, pt. 2.
65Patrica Heller and Kenneth Heller, Cooperative Group Problem Solving in
~University
Minnesota,
Minneapolis,
www.physics.umn.edu/groups/physed/Research/CGPS/GreenBook.html.
66David R. Sokoloff, Ronald K. Thornton, and Priscilla W. Laws, RealTime
Physics, Active Learning Laboratories; Module 1: Mechanics; Module 2:
Heat and Thermodynamics ~Wiley, New York, 1999!.
67Priscilla W. Laws, with R. J. Boyle, P. J. Cooney, K. L. Laws, J. W.
Luetzelschwab, D. R. Sokoloff, and R. K. Thornton, Workshop Physics
Activity Guide, The Core Volume with Module 1: Mechanics 1 ~Wiley,
New York, 1997!.
68Pamela Ann Kraus, ‘‘Promoting Active Learning in Lecture-Based
Courses: Demonstrations, Tutorials, and Interactive Tutorial Lectures,’’
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Washington ~UMI, Ann Arbor, MI, 1997!,
UMI #9736313.
69Jack M. Wilson, ‘‘The CUPLE physics studio,’’ Phys. Teach. 32, 518–523
70Classtalk, a hard-wired system, may still be available from Interactive
Classroom Consulting, 
71A system based on infrared signaling is distributed by EduCue, 351 Alplaus Ave, Alplaus, NY 12008, a different system
is available from TI, 
overview.html.
Socratec.com,
www.socratec.com/.
73It is possible to use questions that focus on quantitative understanding or
methods of calculation. We do so on occasion, depending on the nature of
the topic and the course itself. In this regard, see Refs. 40 and 58. The
strategy of using an ‘‘easy-to-hard’’ conceptual sequence has also been
discussed by Mestre et al., Ref. 40.
74This strategy is also emphasized by Crouch and Mazur, Ref. 35.
75See Sec. VIII. We refer to these sessions as ‘‘tutorials’’ because their
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan
format and philosophy very closely match those developed at the University of Washington. However, for the most part, the materials we employ
during these sessions are not the actual Tutorials in Introductory Physics
cited in Ref. 61. The latter are used during three of the laboratory periods
76The Workbook is distributed in three-hole-punched format for ring binders,
so students do not have to bring all of the materials every day.
77Kandiah Manivannan and David E. Meltzer, ‘‘Use of in-class physics demonstrations in highly interactive format,’’ in Proceedings of the 2001 Physics Education Research Conference, edited by Scott Franklin, Jeffrey
Marx, and Karen Cummings ~Rochester, New York, 2001!, pp. 95–98.
78The idea of using specially designed worksheets in large lecture classes
has also been discussed by Van Heuvelen ~Refs. 27 and 28! and by Kraus
~Ref. 68!. Many questions in our worksheets also ask for explanations of
students’ reasoning. These explanations are emphasized and carefully
checked during the tutorial sessions, but not so much so during the interactive lectures. We have not found it practical to make a rigid separation
between worksheets used in lecture and those used in tutorials. In fact,
which worksheets get used where is variable, and is essentially a function
of day-to-day class scheduling.
79A preliminary edition of the Workbook is available from the authors in
CD-ROM format. There is now also a vastly expanded inventory of ConcepTests
galileo.harvard.edu/.
80Randall D. Knight, Physics: A Contemporary Perspective, Student Workbook ~Addison–Wesley Longman, Reading, MA, 1997!, Vols. 1, 2, preliminary ed.
81In fact, this type of student resistance to interactive-engagement physics
courses has been discussed in the literature by a number of practitioners,
for example, Ruth W. Chabay and Bruce A. Sherwood, Instructor’s
Manual to Accompany Electric and Magnetic Interactions ~Wiley, New
York, 1995!, pp. 8 and 9.
82Additional insight regarding possible gender-related disparities in student
responses are discussed by Priscilla W. Laws, Pamela J. Rosborough, and
Frances J. Poodry, ‘‘Women’s responses to an activity-based introductory
physics program,’’ Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl. 67, S32–S37
83The CSE was used in this abridged form, omitting some items, for various
reasons. In some cases, the notational conventions differed from what was
used in class ~for example, electric ﬁeld lines are used on the CSE, but
only ﬁeld vectors are used in class!. In other cases, the questions dealt with
material that was covered peripherally or not at all in class. This abridged
subset consisted of the following item numbers from CSE Form G @corresponding CSEM item numbers in brackets#: 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9@7#, 10@8#,
11@9#, 12, 13@10#, 14@11#, 15, 16@12#, 23@17#, 24@18#, 25@19#, 26, 27@16#,
28@20#, 31@3#, 32@4#, 33@5#. ~In several cases, there are minor differences
between the CSE questions and the corresponding CSEM items.!
84We follow Hake’s deﬁnition ~Ref. 4! of ‘‘normalized learning gain’’ g,
where g5@~post-test score-pre-test score!/~maximum possible score-pretest score!#; ^g& is calculated by using class-mean values for pre-test and
post-test scores in the formula for g.
85David E. Meltzer, ‘‘The relationship between mathematics preparation and
conceptual learning gains in physics: A possible ‘hidden variable’ in diagnostic pretest scores?,’’ Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl. ~submitted!,
and available at 
86The effect size d is a widely used measure in education research that
quantiﬁes the nonoverlap of two populations, typically including one that
has, and another that has not received some speciﬁed pedagogical intervention. ~Higher values of d correspond to greater nonoverlap, that is,
larger treatment ‘‘effect.’’! See, for example, Jacob Cohen, Statistical
Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences ~Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1988!, 2nd ed., Chap. 2. The deﬁnitions given by Cohen are
universally,
d5umA2mBu/srms ;
2)/2, where mA and sA are the mean score and standard deviation of population A, and mB and sB are those corresponding to population B. As an example, for the ISU 2000 sample we have mpre-test
533.7% and spre-test516.0%, mpost-test579.4% and spost-test514.3%,
srms515.2%, and d545.7/15.253.01.
87Of the 223 students in the three ISU samples combined, only 7 had individual values of g<0.22.
88Peter S. Shaffer and Lillian C. McDermott, ‘‘Research as a guide for
curriculum development: An example from introductory electricity. II. Design of instructional strategies,’’ Am. J. Phys. 60, 1003–1013 ~1992!.
89Reference 4, Sec. V B 3.
90Reference 4, Sec. III A.
91Ronald L. Greene, ‘‘Illuminating physics via web-based self-study,’’ Phys.
Teach. 39, 356–360 ~2001!. In Greene’s course, very strong emphasis was
placed on qualitative, conceptual problems in examples, homework assignments, quizzes, and exams. Although interactive methods were not used
during lectures, it is important to note that the extensive homework assignments made heavy use of a nontraditional, highly interactive web-based
methodology which itself incorporated IE techniques such as immediate
92C. J. DeLeone, W. H. Potter, and L. B. Coleman, ‘‘Comparisons of student
MCAT performance: Traditional lecture/laboratory course vs. Physics
Education Research based course,’’ APS Centennial Meeting Program,
Session LB20, Abstract LB20.07 ~1999!.
93The ratio of quantitative to qualitative problems on our quizzes and exams
is approximately 1/1. Many problems are of a combined nature, involving
both qualitative and quantitative elements; they often emphasize proportional reasoning in various contexts. During a semester, including quizzes,
homework, and exams, students solve approximately 400 problems for
grade credit.
94Lillian Christie McDermott, ‘‘Oersted Medal Lecture 2001: Physics Education Research—The key to student learning,’’ Am. J. Phys. 69, 1127–
1137 ~2001!.
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 70, No. 6, June 2002
D. E. Meltzer and K. Manivannan