Proceedings of The 12th International Conference on Natural Language Generation, pages 421–426,
Tokyo, Japan, 28 Oct - 1 Nov, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Noise Matters for Neural Natural Language Generation
Ondˇrej Duˇsek∗
Charles University
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Prague, Czech Republic
 
David M. Howcroft∗& Verena Rieser
The Interaction Lab, MACS
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
{d.howcroft,v.t.rieser}@hw.ac.uk
Neural natural language generation (NNLG)
systems are known for their pathological outputs, i.e. generating text which is unrelated to
the input speciﬁcation. In this paper, we show
the impact of semantic noise on state-of-theart NNLG models which implement different
semantic control mechanisms.
We ﬁnd that
cleaned data can improve semantic correctness
by up to 97%, while maintaining ﬂuency. We
also ﬁnd that the most common error is omitting information, rather than hallucination.
Introduction
Neural Natural Language Generation (NNLG) is
promising for generating text from Meaning Representations (MRs) in an ‘end-to-end’ fashion, i.e.
without needing alignments .
However, NNLG requires large volumes of indomain data, which is typically crowdsourced , introducing noise. For example, up to 40% of the E2E
Generation Challenge1 data contains omitted or
additional information .
In this paper, we examine the impact of this type
of semantic noise on two state-of-the-art NNLG
models with different semantic control mechanisms: TGen and SC-
LSTM . In particular, we investigate the systems’ ability to produce fact-accurate
text, i.e. without omitting or hallucinating information, in the presence of semantic noise.2 We ﬁnd
∗Denotes equal contribution.
1 
InteractionLab/E2E/
2Also see 
12/hallucination-in-neural-nlg/
• training on cleaned data reduces slot-error rate
up to 97% on the original evaluation data;
• testing on cleaned data is challenging, even for
models trained on cleaned data, likely due to
increased MR diversity in the cleaned dataset;
• TGen performs better than SC-LSTM, even
when cleaner training data is available. We hypothesise that this is due to differences in how
the two systems handle semantic input and the
degree of delexicalization that they expect.
In addition, we release our code and a cleaned
version of the E2E data with this paper.3
Mismatched Semantics in E2E Data
The E2E dataset contains input MRs and corresponding target human-authored textual references
in the restaurant domain. MRs here are sets of
attribute-value pairs (see Figure 1). Most MRs
in the dataset have multiple references (8.1 on average). These were collected using crowdsourcing, leading to noise when crowd workers did
not verbalise all attributes or added information
not present in the MR. According to Duˇsek et al.
 , the multiple references should help NLG
systems abstract from the noise. However, most
NLG systems in the E2E challenge in fact produced
noisy outputs, suggesting that they were unable to
learn to ignore noise in the training input.
Problems with the semantic accuracy in training
data is not unique to the E2E dataset. Howcroft
et al. collected a corpus of paraphrases differing with respect to information density for use
in training NLG systems and found that subjects’
paraphrases dropped about 5% of the slot-value
pairs from the original texts and changed the val-
3Data cleaning scripts, the resulting cleaned data and
links to code are available at 
tuetschek/e2e-cleaning.
Original MR: name[Cotto], eatType[coffee shop], food[English],
priceRange[less than £20], customer rating[low], area[riverside], near[The
Portland Arms]
Human reference 1 (accurate): At the riverside near The Portland Arms,
Cotto is a coffee shop that serves English food at less than £20 and has low
customer rating.
HR 2: Located near The Portland Arms in riverside, the Cotto coffee shop
serves English food with a price range of £20 and a low customer rating.
Corrected MR: name[Cotto], eatType[coffee shop], food[English],
customer rating[low], area[riverside], near[The Portland Arms]
(removed price range)
HR 3: Cotto is a coffee shop that serves English food in the city centre. They
are located near the Portland Arms and are low rated.
Corrected MR: name[Cotto], eatType[coffee shop], food[English],
customer rating[low], area[city centre], near[The Portland Arms]
(removed price range, changed area)
HR 4: Cotto is a cheap coffee shop with one-star located near The Portland
Corrected MR: name[Cotto], eatType[coffee shop], priceRange[less than
£20], customer rating[low], near[The Portland Arms]
(removed area)
Figure 1: MR and references from the E2E corpus. The
ﬁrst reference is accurate and verbalises all attributes,
but the remaining ones contain inaccuracies. Corrected
MRs were automatically produced by our slot matching script (see Section 3). Note that HR 2 is not ﬁxed
properly since the script’s patterns are not perfect.
Table 1: Data statistics comparison for the original E2E
data and our cleaned version (number of distinct MRs,
total number of textual references, SER as measured by
our slot matching script, see Section 3).
ues for approximately 10% of the slot-value pairs.
As a result of these changes and the insertion of
new facts, only 61% of the corpus contained all
and only the intended propositions. This is similar
to what Eric et al. found in their work on
the MultiWOZ 2.0 dataset: correcting the dialogue
state annotations resulted in changes to about 40%
of the dialogue turns in their dataset. These ﬁndings
suggest that efforts to create more accurate training
data—whether through stricter crowdsourcing protocols, conducting follow-up annotations , or automated cleanup heuristics like
we report here—are likely necessary in the NLG
and dialogue systems communities.
Cleaning the Meaning Representations
To produce a cleaned version of the E2E data, we
used the original human textual references, but
paired them with correctly matching MRs.4 To this
end, we reimplemented the slot matching script
of Reed et al. , which tags MR slots and
values using regular expressions. We tuned our expressions based on the ﬁrst 500 instances from the
E2E development set and ran the script on the full
dataset, producing corrected MRs for all human
references (see Figure 1). The differences against
the original MRs allow us to compute the semantic/slot error rate :
SER = #added + #missing + #wrong value
To guarantee the integrity of the test set, we removed instances from the TRAIN (training) and
DEV (development) sets that overlapped the TEST
set. This resulted in 20% reduction for TRAIN and
ca. 8% reduction for DEV in terms of references
(see Table 1). On the other hand, the number of
distinct MRs rose sharply after reannotation; the
MRs also have more variance in the number of
attributes. This means that the cleaned dataset is
more complex overall, with fewer references per
MR and more diverse MRs.
We manually evaluated 200 randomly chosen
instances from the cleaned TRAIN set to check the
accuracy of the slot matching script. We found that
the slot matching script itself has a SER of 4.2%,
with 39 instances (19.5%) not 100% correctly rated.
This is much lower than the E2E dataset authors’
own manual assessment of ca. 40% noisy instances
 and the script’s rating of the
whole dataset (mean SER: 16.37%),and comparable to the slot matching script of Juraska et al.
 evaluated on the same data.5
Evaluating the Impact on Neural NLG
We chose two recent neural end-to-end NLG systems, which represent two different approaches to
semantic control and have been widely used and
extended by the research community.
4Note that this can be done automatically, unlike ﬁxing the
references to match the original MRs.
5Juraska et al. ’s script reaches 6.2% SER and 60
instances with errors, most of which is just omitting the eat-
Type[restaurant] value. If we ignore this value, it gets 1.9%
SER and 20 incorrect instances. We did not use this script
as it was not available to us until very shortly before the
camera-ready deadline. The script is now accessible under
 We
plan to further improve our slot matching script based on errors found during the manual evaluation and comparison to
Juraska et al. .
TGen is the baseline
system used in the E2E challenge.6 TGen is in
essence a vanilla sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
model with attention using
LSTM cells where input MRs are encoded as sequences of triples in the form (dialogue act, slot,
value).7 TGen adds to the standard seq2seq setup
a reranker that selects the output with the lowest
SER from the decoder output beam (n-best list).
SER is estimated based on a classiﬁer trained to
identify the MR corresponding to a given text. We
use the default TGen parameters for the E2E data,
experimenting with three variants:
• TGen without reranker: a vanilla seq2seq
model with attention (TGen−);
• TGen with default reranker: the same augmented with an LSTM encoder and binary classiﬁer for individual slot-value pairs;
• TGen with oracle reranker: directly uses the
slot matching script to compute SER (TGen+).
We ﬁxed the parameters of the main seq2seq generator to see the direct inﬂuence of each reranker,
without the added effect of random initialization.
In contrast to seq2seq architecture used by TGen,
the Semantically Controlled LSTM uses a learned gating mechanism
to selectively express parts of the MR during generation. We use the SC-LSTM model provided
as part of the RNNLG repository8 with minor
changes to improve comparability to TGen. Most
importantly, we incorporate the tokenization and
normalization used by TGen into RNNLG. Since
the word embeddings provided with RNNLG only
cover about half of the tokens in the E2E dataset,
we use randomly initialised word embeddings (dimension 50; same as TGen).
Evaluation and Results
To measure the effect of noisy data, we compare
systems trained on the original data against systems trained using cleaned TRAIN and validation
(=DEV) sets; we perform the comparisons both on
the original and the cleaned TEST sets. Note that
6 
7The dialogue act is constant/ignored for the E2E dataset
since it’s not part of the MRs there.
8 
only scores on the same test set are directly comparable as the cleaned TEST set has more diverse
MRs and fewer references per MR (i.e. numbers in
Tables 2 and 3 cannot be compared across tables;
cf. Section 3).
Automatic Metrics
We use freely available word-overlap-based evaluation metrics (WOM) scripts that come with the
E2E data ,9 supporting BLEU
 , NIST ,
ROUGE-L , METEOR and CIDEr .
In addition, we use our slot matching script for
SER (cf. Section 3). We also show detailed results
for the percentages of added and missed slots and
wrong slot values.10
The results in Table 2 (top half) for the original
setup conﬁrm that the ranking mechanism for TGen
is effective for both WOMs and SER, whereas the
SC-LSTM seems to have trouble scaling to the E2E
dataset. We hypothesise that this is mainly due to
the amount of delexicalisation required. However,
the main improvement of SER comes from training on cleaned data with up to 97% error reduction with the ranker and 94% without.11 In other
words, just cleaning the training data has a much
more dramatic effect than just using a semantic
control mechanism, such as the reranker (0.97% vs.
4.27% SER). WOMs are slightly lower for TGen
trained on the cleaned data, except for NIST, which
gives more importance to matching less frequent ngrams. This suggests better preservation of content
at the expense of slightly lower ﬂuency.
The results for testing on cleaned data (Table 3,
top half) conﬁrm the positive impact of cleaned
training data and also show that the cleaned test
data is more challenging (cf. Section 3), as reﬂected
in the lower WOMs.
This raises the question
whether the improved results from clean training
data are due to seeing more challenging examples
at training time. However, the improved results
for training and testing on clean data (i.e. seeing
equally challenging examples at training and test
time), suggest the increase in performance can be
attributed to data accuracy rather than diversity.
Looking at the detailed results for the number of
9 
e2e-metrics
10Absolute numbers of errors and number of completely
correct instances are shown in Table 5 in the Supplementary.
4.27 = 0.028 and
15.94 = 0.061
METEOR ROUGE-L CIDEr
Table 2: Results evaluated on the original test set (averaged over 5 runs with different random initialisation). See
Section 5.1 for explanation of metrics. All numbers except NIST and ROUGE-L are percentages. Note that the
numbers are not comparable to Table 3 as the test set is different.
METEOR ROUGE-L CIDEr
Table 3: Results evaluated on the cleaned test set (cf. Table 2 for column details; note that the numbers are not
comparable to Table 2 as the test set is different).
Training data
Cleaned added
Cleaned missing
Table 4: Results of manual error analysis of TGen on a
sample of 100 instances from the original test set: total
absolute numbers of errors we found (added, missed,
wrong values, slight disﬂuencies).
added, missing, and wrong-valued slots (Add, Miss,
Wrong), we observe more deletions than insertions,
i.e. the models more often fail to realise part of the
MR, rather than hallucinating additional information. To investigate whether this effect stems from
the training data, we partially cleaned the data of
missing or added information only.12 However, the
results in bottom halves of Tables 2 and 3 do not
12We only performed these experiments on TGen because
of the low performance of SC-LSTM in general.
support our hypothesis: we observe the main effect
on SER from cleaning the missed slots, reducing
both insertions and deletions. Again, one possible explanation is that cleaning the missing slots
provided more complex training examples.
Manual Error Analysis
We carried out a detailed manual error analysis of
selected systems to conﬁrm the automatic metrics
results, performing a blind annotation of semantic
and ﬂuency errors (not a human preference rating). We evaluated a sample of 100 outputs on
the original test set produced by TGen with the
default reranker trained using all four cleaning settings (original data, cleaned missing slots, cleaned
added slots, fully cleaned). The results in Table
4 conﬁrm the ﬁndings of the automatic metrics:
systems trained on the fully cleaned set or the set
with cleaned missing slots have near-perfect per-
formance, with the fully-cleaned one showing a
few more slight disﬂuencies than the other. The
systems trained on the original data or with cleaned
added slots clearly perform worse in terms of both
semantic accuracy and ﬂuency. All ﬂuency problems we found were very slight and no added or
wrong-valued slots were found, so missed slots are
the main problem.
The manual error analysis also served to assess
the accuracy of the SER measuring script on system
outputs. Since NNLG tends to use more frequent
phrasing, we expected better performance than on
the dataset itself, and this proved true: we only
found 2 errors in the 400 system outputs (i.e. 99.5%
of instances and 99.93% of slots were matched
correctly). This conﬁrms that the automatic SER
numbers reﬂect the semantic accuracy of individual
systems very closely.
Discussion and Related Work
We present a detailed study of semantic errors
in NNLG outputs and how these relate to noise
in training data. We found that even imperfectly
cleaned input data signiﬁcantly improves semantic
accuracy for seq2seq-based generators (up to 97%
relative error reduction with the reranker), while
only causing a slight decrease in ﬂuency.
Contemporaneous with our work is the effort
of Nie et al. , who focus on automatic data
cleaning using a NLU iteratively bootstrapped from
the noisy data. Their analysis similarly ﬁnds that
omissions are more common than hallucinations.
Correcting for missing slots, i.e. forcing the generator to verbalise all slots during training, leads to
the biggest performance improvement. This phenomenon is also observed by Duˇsek et al. for systems in the E2E NLG challenge, but
stands in contrast to work on related tasks, which
mostly reports on hallucinations (i.e. adding information not grounded in the input), as observed for
image captioning , sports
report generation , machine
translation , and question answering .
These previous works suggest that the most likely
case of hallucinations is an over-reliance on language priors, i.e. memorising ‘which words go together’. Similar priors could equally exist in the
E2E data for omitting a slot; this might be connected with the fact that the E2E test set MRs tend
to be longer than training MRs (6.91 slots on average for test MRs vs. 5.52 for training MRs) and
that a large part of them is ‘saturated’, i.e. contains
all possible 8 attributes.
Furthermore, in accordance with our observations, related work also reports a relation between
hallucinations and data diversity: Rohrbach et al.
 observe an increase for “novel compositions
of objects at test time”, i.e. non-overlapping test
and training sets (cf. Section 3); whereas Lee et al.
 reports data augmentation as one of the most
efﬁcient counter measures. In future work, we plan
to experimentally manipulate these factors to disentangle the relative contributions of data cleanliness
and diversity.
Acknowledgments
This research received funding from the EP-
SRC projects DILiGENt (EP/M005429/1) and
MaDrIgAL (EP/N017536/1) and Charles University project PRIMUS/19/SCI/10.
The authors
would also like to thank Prof. Ehud Reiter, whose
blog13 inspired some of this research.