PointRCNN: 3D Object Proposal Generation and Detection from Point Cloud
Shaoshuai Shi
Xiaogang Wang
Hongsheng Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{ssshi, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
In this paper, we propose PointRCNN for 3D object detection from raw point cloud.
The whole framework is
composed of two stages: stage-1 for the bottom-up 3D
proposal generation and stage-2 for reﬁning proposals in
the canonical coordinates to obtain the ﬁnal detection results.
Instead of generating proposals from RGB image
or projecting point cloud to bird’s view or voxels as previous methods do, our stage-1 sub-network directly generates a small number of high-quality 3D proposals from
point cloud in a bottom-up manner via segmenting the point
cloud of the whole scene into foreground points and background.
The stage-2 sub-network transforms the pooled
points of each proposal to canonical coordinates to learn
better local spatial features, which is combined with global
semantic features of each point learned in stage-1 for accurate box reﬁnement and conﬁdence prediction. Extensive experiments on the 3D detection benchmark of KITTI
dataset show that our proposed architecture outperforms
state-of-the-art methods with remarkable margins by using only point cloud as input.
The code is available at
 
1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress on 2D
computer vision tasks, including object detection 
and instance segmentation , etc.
scene understanding, 3D object detection is crucial and indispensable for many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving and domestic robots. While recent developed 2D detection algorithms are capable of handling large
variations of viewpoints and background clutters in images,
the detection of 3D objects with point clouds still faces great
challenges from the irregular data format and large search
space of 6 Degrees-of-Freedom (DoF) of 3D object.
In autonomous driving, the most commonly used 3D
sensors are the LiDAR sensors, which generate 3D point
clouds to capture the 3D structures of the scenes. The dif-
ﬁculty of point cloud-based 3D object detection mainly lies
in irregularity of the point clouds. State-of-the-art 3D de-
estimation
point cloud
point cloud
in frustum
front view
projection & pooling
projection & pooling
front view
projection & pooling
projection & pooling
canonical 3D
box refinement
point cloud
point cloud
RoI pooling
point cloud
segmentation
3D proposal
generation
point-wise
feature vector
bottom-up 3D
proposal generation
Point cloud
Bird s view
3D Box Predictions
3D Box Predictions
3D Box Predictions
b: Frustum-Pointnet
a: Aggregate View Object Detection (AVOD)
c: Our approach (PointRCNN)
Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods. Instead of
generating proposals from fused feature maps of bird’s view and
front view , or RGB images , our method directly generates 3D proposals from raw point cloud in a bottom-up manner.
tection methods either leverage the mature 2D detection
frameworks by projecting the point clouds into bird’s view
 (see Fig. 1 (a)), to the frontal view , or
to the regular 3D voxels , which are not optimal and
suffer from information loss during the quantization.
Instead of transforming point cloud to voxels or other
regular data structures for feature learning, Qi et al. 
proposed PointNet for learning 3D representations directly
from point cloud data for point cloud classiﬁcation and segmentation. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), their follow-up work 
applied PointNet in 3D object detection to estimate the 3D
bounding boxes based on the cropped frustum point cloud
from the 2D RGB detection results. However, the performance of the method heavily relies on the 2D detection performance and cannot take the advantages of 3D information
for generating robust bounding box proposals.
Unlike object detection from 2D images, 3D objects in
autonomous driving scenes are naturally and well separated
 
by annotated 3D bounding boxes. In other words, the training data for 3D object detection directly provides the semantic masks for 3D object segmentation. This is a key
difference between 3D detection and 2D detection training
data. In 2D object detection, the bounding boxes could only
provide weak supervisions for semantic segmentation .
Based on this observation, we present a novel two-stage
3D object detection framework, named PointRCNN, which
directly operates on 3D point clouds and achieves robust
and accurate 3D detection performance (see Fig. 1 (c)). The
proposed framework consists of two stages, the ﬁrst stage
aims at generating 3D bounding box proposal in a bottomup scheme. By utilizing 3D bounding boxes to generate
ground-truth segmentation mask, the ﬁrst stage segments
foreground points and generates a small number of bounding box proposals from the segmented points simultaneously. Such a strategy avoids using the large number of 3D
anchor boxes in the whole 3D space as previous methods
 do and saves much computation.
The second stage of PointRCNN conducts canonical 3D
box reﬁnement. After the 3D proposals are generated, a
point cloud region pooling operation is adopted to pool
learned point representations from stage-1. Unlike existing
3D methods that directly estimate the global box coordinates, the pooled 3D points are transformed to the canonical coordinates and combined with the pooled point features
as well as the segmentation mask from stage-1 for learning
relative coordinate reﬁnement. This strategy fully utilizes
all information provided by our robust stage-1 segmentation
and proposal sub-network. To learn more effective coordinate reﬁnements, we also propose the full bin-based 3D box
regression loss for proposal generation and reﬁnement, and
the ablation experiments show that it converges faster and
achieves higher recall than other 3D box regression loss.
Our contributions could be summarized into three-fold.
(1) We propose a novel bottom-up point cloud-based 3D
bounding box proposal generation algorithm, which generates a small number of high-quality 3D proposals via segmenting the point cloud into foreground objects and background. The learned point representation from segmentation is not only good at proposal generation but is also helpful for the later box reﬁnement. (2) The proposed canonical
3D bounding box reﬁnement takes advantages of our highrecall box proposals generated from stage-1 and learns to
predict box coordinates reﬁnements in the canonical coordinates with robust bin-based losses. (3) Our proposed 3D
detection framework PointRCNN outperforms state-of-theart methods with remarkable margins and ranks ﬁrst among
all published works as of Nov. 16 2018 on the 3D detection
test board of KITTI by using only point clouds as input.
2. Related Work
3D object detection from 2D images.
There are existing works on estimating the 3D bounding box from images.
 leveraged the geometry constraints between 3D and
2D bounding box to recover the 3D object pose. 
exploited the similarity between 3D objects and the CAD
models. Chen et al. formulated the 3D geometric information of objects as an energy function to score the predeﬁned 3D boxes. These works can only generate coarse
3D detection results due to the lack of depth information
and can be substantially affected by appearance variations.
3D object detection from point clouds. State-of-the-art
3D object detection methods proposed various ways to learn
discriminative features from the sparse 3D point clouds.
 projected point cloud to bird’s view
and utilized 2D CNN to learn the point cloud features for
3D box generation. Song et al. and Zhou et al. 
grouped the points into voxels and used 3D CNN to learn
the features of voxels to generate 3D boxes. However, the
bird’s view projection and voxelization suffer from information loss due to the data quantization, and the 3D CNN is
both memory and computation inefﬁcient. utilized
mature 2D detectors to generate 2D proposals from images
and reduced the size of 3D points in each cropped image
regions. PointNet is then used to learn the point
cloud features for 3D box estimation. But the 2D imagebased proposal generation might fail on some challenging
cases that could only be well observed from 3D space. Such
failures could not be recovered by the 3D box estimation
step. In contrast, our bottom-to-up 3D proposal generation
method directly generates robust 3D proposals from point
clouds, which is both efﬁcient and quantization free.
Learning point cloud representations. Instead of representing the point cloud as voxels or multi-view
formats , Qi et al. presented the PointNet
architecture to directly learn point features from raw point
clouds, which greatly increases the speed and accuracies of
point cloud classiﬁcation and segmentation. The follow-up
works further improve the extracted feature quality by considering the local structures in point clouds. Our
work extends the point-based feature extractors to 3D point
cloud-based object detection, leading to a novel two-stage
3D detection framework, which directly generate 3D box
proposals and detection results from raw point clouds.
3. PointRCNN for Point Cloud 3D Detection
In this section, we present our proposed two-stage detection framework, PointRCNN, for detecting 3D objects from
irregular point cloud. The overall structure is illustrated in
Fig. 2, which consists of the bottom-up 3D proposal generation stage and the canonical bounding box reﬁnement stage.
3.1. Bottom-up 3D proposal generation via point
cloud segmentation
Existing 2D object detection methods could be classi-
ﬁed into one-stage and two-stage methods, where one-stage
Point Cloud
Bin-based 3D
Box Generation
Foreground Point
Segmentation
Point-wise
feature vector
Generate 3D proposal
from each foreground point
Semantic Features
Transformation
Point Cloud Region Pooling
Point Cloud
Point Cloud
Bin-based 3D
Box Refinement
Confidence
Prediction
Point Coords.
Semantic Features
Foreground Mask
Merged Features
a: Bottom-up 3D Proposal Generation
b: Canonical 3D Box Refinement
Point cloud representation
of input scene
3D boxes of detected objects
Local Spatial Points
Figure 2. The PointRCNN architecture for 3D object detection from point cloud. The whole network consists of two parts: (a) for
generating 3D proposals from raw point cloud in a bottom-up manner. (b) for reﬁning the 3D proposals in canonical coordinate.
methods are generally faster but directly
estimate object bounding boxes without reﬁnement, while
two-stage methods generate proposals ﬁrstly
and further reﬁne the proposals and conﬁdences in a second
stage. However, direct extension of the two-stage methods
from 2D to 3D is non-trivial due to the huge 3D search space
and the irregular format of point clouds. AVOD places
80-100k anchor boxes in the 3D space and pool features for
each anchor in multiple views for generating proposals. F-
PointNet generates 2D proposals from 2D images, and
estimate 3D boxes based on the 3D points cropped from the
2D regions, which might miss difﬁcult objects that could
only be clearly observed from 3D space.
We propose an accurate and robust 3D proposal generation algorithm as our stage-1 sub-network based on wholescene point cloud segmentation. We observe that objects in
3D scenes are naturally separated without overlapping each
other. All 3D objects’ segmentation masks could be directly
obtained by their 3D bounding box annotations, i.e., 3D
points inside 3D boxes are considered as foreground points.
We therefore propose to generate 3D proposals in a
bottom-up manner. Speciﬁcally, we learn point-wise features to segment the raw point cloud and to generate 3D
proposals from the segmented foreground points simultaneously. Based on this bottom-up strategy, our method avoids
using a large set of predeﬁned 3D boxes in the 3D space
and signiﬁcantly constrains the search space for 3D proposal generation. The experiments show that our proposed
3D box proposal method achieves signiﬁcantly higher recall
than 3D anchor-based proposal generation methods.
Learning point cloud representations. To learn discriminative point-wise features for describing the raw point
clouds, we utilize the PointNet++ with multi-scale
grouping as our backbone network. There are several other
alternative point-cloud network structures, such as 
or VoxelNet with sparse convolutions , which could
also be adopted as our backbone network.
Foreground point segmentation. The foreground points
provide rich information on predicting their associated objects’ locations and orientations. By learning to segment the
foreground points, the point-cloud network is forced to capture contextual information for making accurate point-wise
prediction, which is also beneﬁcial for 3D box generation.
We design the bottom-up 3D proposal generation method
to generate 3D box proposals directly from the foreground
points, i.e., the foreground segmentation and 3D box proposal generation are performed simultaneously.
Given the point-wise features encoded by the backbone
point cloud network, we append one segmentation head
for estimating the foreground mask and one box regression
head for generating 3D proposals. For point segmentation,
the ground-truth segmentation mask is naturally provided
by the 3D ground-truth boxes. The number of foreground
points is generally much smaller than that of the background
points for a large-scale outdoor scene. Thus we use the focal loss to handle the class imbalance problem as
Lfocal(pt) = −αt(1 −pt)γ log(pt),
where pt =
for forground point
During training point cloud segmentation, we keep the default settings αt = 0.25 and γ = 2 as the original paper.
Bin-based 3D bounding box generation.
As we mentioned above, a box regression head is also appended for simultaneously generating bottom-up 3D proposals with the
foreground point segmentation. During training, we only
require the box regression head to regress 3D bounding box
locations from foreground points. Note that although boxes
are not regressed from the background points, those points
also provide supporting information for generating boxes
because of the receptive ﬁeld of the point-cloud network.
A 3D bounding box is represented as (x, y, z, h, w, l, θ)
in the LiDAR coordinate system, where (x, y, z) is the object center location, (h, w, l) is the object size, and θ is the
object orientation from the bird’s view. To constrain the
generated 3D box proposals, we propose bin-based regression losses for estimating 3D bounding boxes of objects.
For estimating center location of an object, as shown in
Fig. 3, we split the surrounding area of each foreground
point into a series of discrete bins along the X and Z axes.
Speciﬁcally, we set a search range S for each X and Z axis
of the current foreground point, and each 1D search range is
divided into bins of uniform length δ to represent different
object centers (x, z) on the X-Z plane. We observe that using bin-based classiﬁcation with cross-entropy loss for the
X and Z axes instead of direct regression with smooth L1
loss results in more accurate and robust center localization.
The localization loss for the X or Z axis consists of two
terms, one term for bin classiﬁcation along each X and Z
axis, and the other term for residual regression within the
classiﬁed bin. For the center location y along the vertical Y
axis, we directly utilize smooth L1 loss for the regression
since most objects’ y values are within a very small range.
Using the L1 loss is enough for obtaining accurate y values.
The localization targets could therefore be formulated as
xp −x(p) + S
zp −z(p) + S
up −u(p) + S −
= yp −y(p)
where (x(p), y(p), z(p)) is the coordinates of a foreground
point of interest, (xp, yp, zp) is the center coordinates of its
corresponding object , bin(p)
and bin(p)
are ground-truth bin
assignments along X and Z axis, res(p)
and res(p)
ground-truth residual for further location reﬁnement within
the assigned bin, and C is the bin length for normalization.
The targets of orientation θ and size (h, w, l) estimation
are similar to those in . We divide the orientation 2π
into n bins, and calculate the bin classiﬁcation target bin(p)
and residual regression target res(p)
in the same way as x or
z prediction. The object size (h, w, l) is directly regressed
by calculating residual (res(p)
h , res(p)
w , res(p)
) w.r.t. the average object size of each class in the entire training set.
Figure 3. Illustration of bin-based localization. The surrounding
area along X and Z axes of each foreground point is split into a
series of bins to locate the object center.
In the inference stage, for the bin-based predicted parameters, x, z, θ, we ﬁrst choose the bin center with the highest predicted conﬁdence and add the predicted residual to
obtain the reﬁned parameters. For other directly regressed
parameters, including y, h, w, and l, we add the predicted
residual to their initial values.
The overall 3D bounding box regression loss Lreg with
different loss terms for training could then be formulated as
u , bin(p)
u ) + Freg(c
u , res(p)
v∈{y,h,w,l}
v , res(p)
bin + L(p)
where Npos is the number of foreground points, c
are the predicted bin assignments and residuals of the
foreground point p, bin(p)
and res(p)
are the ground-truth
targets calculated as above, Fcls denotes the cross-entropy
classiﬁcation loss, and Freg denotes the smooth L1 loss.
To remove the redundant proposals, we conduct nonmaximum suppression (NMS) based on the oriented IoU
from bird’s view to generate a small number of high-quality
proposals. For training, we use 0.85 as the bird’s view IoU
threshold and after NMS we keep top 300 proposals for
training the stage-2 sub-network. For inference, we use oriented NMS with IoU threshold 0.8, and only top 100 proposals are kept for the reﬁnement of stage-2 sub-network.
3.2. Point cloud region pooling
After obtaining 3D bounding box proposals, we aim at
reﬁning the box locations and orientations based on the previously generated box proposals. To learn more speciﬁc local features of each proposal, we propose to pool 3D points
and their corresponding point features from stage-1 according to the location of each 3D proposal.
For each 3D box proposal, bi
= (xi, yi, zi, hi, wi,
li, θi), we slightly enlarge it to create a new 3D box
LiDAR Coordinate
Transformation
Canonical Coordinate
Canonical Coordinate
Figure 4. Illustration of canonical transformation.
The pooled
points belonged to each proposal are transformed to the corresponding canonical coordinate system for better local spatial feature learning, where CCS denotes Canonical Coordinate System.
i = (xi, yi, zi, hi + η, wi + η, li + η, θi) to encode the
additional information from its context, where η is a constant value for enlarging the size of box.
For each point p = (x(p), y(p), z(p)), an inside/outside
test is performed to determine whether the point p is inside
the enlarged bounding box proposal be
i. If so, the point
and its features would be kept for reﬁning the box bi. The
features associated with the inside point p include its 3D
point coordinates (x(p), y(p), z(p)) ∈R3, its laser reﬂection
intensity r(p) ∈R, its predicted segmentation mask m(p) ∈
{0, 1} from stage-1, and the C-dimensional learned point
feature representation f (p) ∈RC from stage-1.
We include the segmentation mask m(p) to differentiate
the predicted foreground/background points within the enlarged box be
i. The learned point feature f (p) encodes valuable information via learning for segmentation and proposal
generation therefore are also included. We eliminate the
proposals that have no inside points in the following stage.
3.3. Canonical 3D bounding box reﬁnement
As illustrated in Fig. 2 (b), the pooled points and their
associated features (see Sec. 3.2) for each proposal are fed
to our stage-2 sub-network for reﬁning the 3D box locations
as well as the foreground object conﬁdence.
Canonical transformation.
To take advantages of our
high-recall box proposals from stage-1 and to estimate only
the residuals of the box parameters of proposals, we transform the pooled points belonging to each proposal to the
canonical coordinate system of the corresponding 3D proposal. As shown in Fig. 4, the canonical coordinate system for one 3D proposal denotes that (1) the origin is located at the center of the box proposal; (2) the local X′
and Z′ axes are approximately parallel to the ground plane
with X′ pointing towards the head direction of proposal and
the other Z′ axis perpendicular to X′; (3) the Y ′ axis remains the same as that of the LiDAR coordinate system.
All pooled points’ coordinates p of the box proposal should
be transformed to the canonical coordinate system as ˜p by
proper rotation and translation. Using the proposed canonical coordinate system enables the box reﬁnement stage to
learn better local spatial features for each proposal.
Feature learning for box proposal reﬁnement. As we
mentioned in Sec. 3.2, the reﬁnement sub-network combines both the transformed local spatial points (features) ˜p
as well as their global semantic features f (p) from stage-1
for further box and conﬁdence reﬁnement.
Although the canonical transformation enables robust local spatial features learning, it inevitably loses depth information of each object. For instance, the far-away objects
generally have much fewer points than nearby objects because of the ﬁxed angular scanning resolution of the Li-
DAR sensors. To compensate for the lost depth information, we include the distance to the sensor, i.e., d(p) =
(x(p))2 + (y(p))2 + (z(p))2, into the features of point p.
For each proposal, its associated points’ local spatial features ˜p and the extra features [r(p), m(p), d(p)] are ﬁrst concatenated and fed to several fully-connected layers to encode their local features to the same dimension of the global
features f (p). Then the local features and global features are
concatenated and fed into a network following the structure
of to obtain a discriminative feature vector for the following conﬁdence classiﬁcation and box reﬁnement.
Losses for box proposal reﬁnement. We adopt the similar bin-based regression losses for proposal reﬁnement.
A ground-truth box is assigned to a 3D box proposal for
learning box reﬁnement if their 3D IoU is greater than
0.55. Both the 3D proposals and their corresponding 3D
ground-truth boxes are transformed into the canonical coordinate systems, which means the 3D proposal bi
(xi, yi, zi, hi, wi, li, θi) and 3D ground-truth box bgt
i ) would be transformed to
˜bi = (0, 0, 0, hi, wi, li, 0),
i −xi, ygt
i −yi, zgt
i −zi, hgt
The training targets for the ith box proposal’s center location, (bini
∆y), are set in the
same way as Eq. (2) except that we use smaller search range
S for reﬁning the locations of 3D proposals. We still directly regress size residual (resi
∆l) w.r.t. the
average object size of each class in the training set since
the pooled sparse points usually could not provide enough
information of the proposal size (hi, wi, li).
For reﬁning the orientation, we assume that the angular
difference w.r.t. the ground-truth orientation, θgt
within the range [−π
4 ], based on the fact that the 3D IoU
between a proposal and their ground-truth box is at least
0.55. Therefore, we divide π
2 into discrete bins with the bin
size ω and predict the bin-based orientation targets as
∆θ · ω + ω
Therefore, the overall loss for the stage-2 sub-network can
be formulated as
Lreﬁne = 1
Fcls(probi, labeli)
bin + ˜L(i)
where B is the set of 3D proposals from stage-1 and Bpos
stores the positive proposals for regression, probi is the estimated conﬁdence of ˜bi and labeli is the corresponding label, Fcls is the cross entropy loss to supervise the predicted
conﬁdence, ˜L(i)
bin and ˜L(i)
res are similar to L(p)
bin and L(p)
res in Eq.
(3) with the new targets calculated by ˜bi and ˜bgt
i as above.
We ﬁnally apply oriented NMS with bird’s view IoU
threshold 0.01 to remove the overlapping bounding boxes
and generate the 3D bounding boxes for detected objects.
4. Experiments
PointRCNN is evaluated on the challenging 3D object
detection benchmark of KITTI dataset . We ﬁrst introduce the implementation details of PointRCNN in Sec. 4.1.
In Sec. 4.2, we perform a comparison with state-of-the-art
3D detection methods. Finally, we conduct extensive ablation studies to analyze PointRCNN in Sec. 4.3.
4.1. Implementation Details
Network Architecture.
For each 3D point-cloud scene
in the training set, we subsample 16,384 points from each
scene as the inputs. For scenes with the number of points
fewer than 16,384, we randomly repeat the points to obtain
16,384 points. For the stage-1 sub-network, we follow the
network structure of , where four set-abstraction layers
with multi-scale grouping are used to subsample points into
groups with sizes 4096, 1024, 256, 64. Four feature propagation layers are then used to obtain the per-point feature
vectors for segmentation and proposal generation.
For the box proposal reﬁnement sub-network, we randomly sample 512 points from the pooled region of each
proposal as the input of the reﬁnement sub-network. Three
set abstraction layers with single-scale grouping (with
group sizes 128, 32, 1) are used to generate a single feature vector for object conﬁdence classiﬁcation and proposal
location reﬁnement.
The training scheme. Here we report the training details
of car category since it has the majority of samples in the
KITTI dataset, and the proposed method could be extended
to other categories (like pedestrian and cyclist) easily with
little modiﬁcations of hyper parameters.
For stage-1 sub-network, all points inside the 3D groundtruth boxes are considered as foreground points and others
points are treated as background points. During training,
we ignore background points near the object boundaries
by enlarging the 3D ground-truth boxes by 0.2m on each
side of object for robust segmentation since the 3D groundtruth boxes may have small variations. For the bin-based
proposal generation, the hyper parameters are set as search
range S = 3m, bin size δ = 0.5m and orientation bin number n = 12.
To train the stage-2 sub-network, we randomly augment
the 3D proposals with small variations to increase the diversity of proposals. For training the box classiﬁcation head,
a proposal is considered as positive if its maximum 3D IoU
with ground-truth boxes is above 0.6, and is treated as negative if its maximum 3D IoU is below 0.45. We use 3D IoU
0.55 as the minimum threshold of proposals for the training
of box regression head. For the bin-based proposal reﬁnement, search range is S = 1.5m, localization bin size is
δ = 0.5m and orientation bin size is ω = 10◦. The context
length of point cloud pooling is η = 1.0m.
The two stage sub-networks of PointRCNN are trained
separately.
The stage-1 sub-network is trained for 200
epochs with batch size 16 and learning rate 0.002, while
the stage-2 sub-network is trained for 50 epochs with batch
size 256 and learning rate 0.002. During training, we conduct data augmentation of random ﬂip, scaling with a scale
factor sampled from [0.95, 1.05] and rotation around vertical Y axis between [-10, 10] degrees. Inspired by ,
to simulate objects with various environments, we also put
several new ground-truth boxes and their inside points from
other scenes to the same locations of current training scene
by randomly selecting non-overlapping boxes, and this augmentation is denoted as GT-AUG in the following sections.
4.2. 3D Object Detection on KITTI
The 3D object detection benchmark of KITTI contains
7481 training samples and 7518 testing samples (test split).
We follow the frequently used train/val split mentioned in
 to divide the training samples into train split (3712 samples) and val split (3769 samples). We compare PointR-
CNN with state-of-the-art methods of 3D object detection
on both val split and test split of KITTI dataset. All the
models are trained on train split and evaluated on test split
and val split.
Evaluation of 3D object detection.
We evaluate our
method on the 3D detection benchmark of the KITTI test
server, and the results are shown in Tab. 1. For the 3D
detection of car and cyclist, our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods with remarkable margins on
all three difﬁculties and ranks ﬁrst on the KITTI test board
among all published works at the time of submission. Although most of the previous methods use both RGB image
and point cloud as input, our method achieves better performance with an efﬁcient architecture by using only the point
cloud as input. For the pedestrian detection, compared with
previous LiDAR-only methods, our method achieves better
or comparable results, but it performs slightly worse than
the methods with multiple sensors. We consider it is due
Car (IoU=0.7)
Pedestrian (IoU=0.5)
Cyclist (IoU=0.5)
RGB + LiDAR
UberATG-ContFuse 
RGB + LiDAR
AVOD-FPN 
RGB + LiDAR
F-PointNet 
RGB + LiDAR
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
Table 1. Performance comparison of 3D object detection with previous methods on KITTI test split by submitting to ofﬁcial test server.
The evaluation metric is Average Precision(AP) with IoU threshold 0.7 for car and 0.5 for pedestrian/cyclist.
AP(IoU=0.7)
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
AVOD-FPN 
F-PointNet 
Ours (no GT-AUG)
Table 2. Performance comparison of 3D object detection with previous methods on the car class of KITTI val split set.
to the fact that our method only uses sparse point cloud as
input but pedestrians have small size and image could capture more details of pedestrians than point cloud to help 3D
detection.
For the most important car category, we also report the
performance of 3D detection result on the val split as shown
in Tab. 2. Our method outperforms previous stage-of-the-art
methods with large margins on the val split. Especially in
the hard difﬁculty, our method has 8.28% AP improvement
than the previous best AP, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed PointRCNN.
Evaluation of 3D proposal generation.
The performance of our bottom-up proposal generation network is
evaluated by calculating the recall of 3D bounding box with
various number of proposals and 3D IoU threshold.
shown in Tab. 3, our method (without GT-AUG) achieved
signiﬁcantly higher recall than previous methods.
only 50 proposals, our method obtains 96.01% recall at IoU
threshold 0.5 on the moderate difﬁculty of car class, which
outperforms recall 91% of AVOD by 5.01% at the same
number of proposals, note that the latter method uses both
2D image and point cloud for proposal generation while we
only use point cloud as input. When using 300 proposals,
our method further achieves 98.21% recall at IoU threshold
0.5. It is meaningless to increase the number of proposals
since our method already obtained high recall at IoU threshold 0.5. In contrast, as shown in Tab. 3, we report the recall
of 3D bounding box at IoU threshold 0.7 for reference. With
300 proposals, our method achieves 82.29% recall at IoU
threshold 0.7. Although the recall of proposals are loosely
 related to the ﬁnal 3D object detection performance,
Recall(IoU=0.5)
Recall(IoU=0.7)
Table 3. Recall of proposal generation network with different number of RoIs and 3D IoU threshold for the car class on the val split
at moderate difﬁculty. Note that only MV3D and AVOD 
of previous methods reported the number of recall.
the outstanding recall still suggests the robustness and accuracy of our bottom-up proposal generation network.
4.3. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct extensive ablation experiments to analyze the effectiveness of different components
of PointRCNN. All experiments are trained on the train split
without GT-AUG and evaluated on the val split with the car
Different inputs for the reﬁnement sub-network.
mentioned in Sec. 3.3, the inputs of the reﬁnement subnetwork consist of the canonically transformed coordinates
and pooled features of each pooled point.
We analyze the effects of each type of features to the
reﬁnement sub-network by removing one and keeping all
other parts unchanged.
All experiments share the same
ﬁxed stage-1 sub-network for fair comparison. The results
are shown in Tab. 4. Without the proposed canonical transformation, the performance of the reﬁnement sub-network
dropped signiﬁcantly, which shows the transformation into
a canonical coordinate system greatly eliminates much rotation and location variations and improve the efﬁciency of
feature learning for the stage-2. We also see that removing the stage-1 features f (p) learned from point cloud segmentation and proposal generation decreases the mAP by
2.71% on the moderate difﬁculty, which demonstrates the
1The KITTI test server only allows 3 submissions in every 30 days. All
previous methods conducted ablation studies on the validation set.
Table 4. Performance for different input combinations of reﬁnement network. APE, APM, APH denote the average precision
for easy, moderate, hard difﬁculty on KITTI val split, respectively.
CT denotes canonical transformation.
η (context width)
no context
Table 5. Performance of adopting different context width η of
context-aware point cloud pooling.
advantages of learning for semantic segmentation in the ﬁrst
stage. Tab. 4 also shows that the camera depth information
d(p) and segmentation mask m(p) for 3D points p contribute
slightly to the ﬁnal performance, since the camera depth
completes the distance information which is eliminated during the canonical transformation and the segmentation mask
indicates the foreground points in the pooled regions.
Context-aware point cloud pooling.
In Sec. 3.2, we introduce enlarging the proposal boxes bi by a margin η to
i to pool more contextual points for each proposal’s
conﬁdence estimation and location regression. Tab. 5 shows
the effects of different pooled context widths η. η = 1.0m
results in the best performance in our proposed framework.
We notice that when no contextual information is pooled,
the accuracies, especially those at the hard difﬁculty, drops
signiﬁcantly. The difﬁcult cases often have fewer points in
the proposals since the object might be occluded or far away
from the sensor, which needs more context information for
classiﬁcation and proposal reﬁnement. As shown in Tab. 5,
too large η also leads to performance drops since the pooled
region of current proposals may include noisy foreground
points of other objects.
Losses of 3D bounding box regression.
In Sec. 3.1,
we propose the bin-based localization losses for generating 3D box proposals. In this part, we evaluate the performances when using different types of 3D box regression loss for our stage-1 sub-network, which include the
residual-based loss (RB-loss) , residual-cos-based loss
(RCB-loss), corner loss (CN-loss) , partial-bin-based
loss (PBB-loss) , and our full bin-based loss (BB-loss).
Here the residual-cos-based loss encodes ∆θ of residualbased loss by (cos(∆θ), sin(∆θ)) to eliminate the ambiguity of angle regression.
RB-Loss(iou=0.5)
RCB-Loss(iou=0.5)
CN-loss(iou=0.5)
PBB-loss(iou=0.5)
BB-loss(iou=0.5)
RB-Loss(iou=0.7)
RCB-Loss(iou=0.7)
CN-loss(iou=0.7)
PBB-loss(iou=0.7)
BB-loss(iou=0.7)
Figure 5. Recall curves of applying different bounding box regression loss function.
The ﬁnal recall (IoU thresholds 0.5 and 0.7) with 100
proposals from stage-1 are used as the evaluation metric,
which are shown in Fig. 5. The plot reveals the effectiveness of our full bin-based 3D bounding box regression loss.
Speciﬁcally, stage-1 sub-network with our full bin-based
loss function achieves higher recall and converges much
faster than all other loss functions, which beneﬁts from constraining the targets, especially the localization, with prior
knowledge. The partial-bin-based loss achieves similar recall but the convergence speed is much slower than ours.
Both full and partial bin-based loss have signiﬁcantly higher
recall than other loss functions, especially at IoU threshold
0.7. The improved residual-cos-based loss also obtains better recall than residual-based loss by improving the angle
regression targets.
4.4. Qualitative Results
Fig. 6 shows some qualitative results of our proposed
PointRCNN on the test split of KITTI dataset. Note that
the image is just for better visualization and our PointR-
CNN takes only the point cloud as input to generation 3D
detection results.
5. Conclusion
We have presented PointRCNN, a novel 3D object detector for detecting 3D objects from raw point cloud. The
proposed stage-1 network directly generates 3D proposals
from point cloud in a bottom-up manner, which achieves
signiﬁcantly higher recall than previous proposal generation
methods. The stage-2 network reﬁnes the proposals in the
canonical coordinate by combining semantic features and
local spatial features. Moreover, the newly proposed binbased loss has demonstrated its efﬁciency and effectiveness
for 3D bounding box regression. The experiments show that
PointRCNN outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods
with remarkable margins on the challenging 3D detection
benchmark of KITTI dataset.
Figure 6. Qualitative results of PointRCNN on the KITTI test split. For each sample, the upper part is the image and the lower part is a
representative view of the corresponding point cloud. The detected objects are shown with green 3D bounding boxes, and the orientation
(driving direction) of each object is speciﬁed by a X in the upper part and a red tube in the lower part. (Best viewed with zoom-in.)
Acknowledgment
This work is supported in part by SenseTime Group
Limited, in part by the General Research Fund through
the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong under Grants
CUHK14202217,
CUHK14203118,
CUHK14205615,
CUHK14207814,
CUHK14213616,
CUHK14208417,
CUHK14239816, and in part by CUHK Direct Grant.