10 Years of GWAS Discovery:
Biology, Function, and Translation
Peter M. Visscher,1,2,* Naomi R. Wray,1,2 Qian Zhang,1 Pamela Sklar,3 Mark I. McCarthy,4,5,6
Matthew A. Brown,7 and Jian Yang1,2
Application of the experimental design of genome-wide association studies (GWASs) is now 10 years old (young), and here we review the
remarkable range of discoveries it has facilitated in population and complex-trait genetics, the biology of diseases, and translation toward
new therapeutics. We predict the likely discoveries in the next 10 years, when GWASs will be based on millions of samples with array data
imputed to a large fully sequenced reference panel and on hundreds of thousands of samples with whole-genome sequencing data.
Introduction
Here, we review the remarkable range of discoveries that
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have facilitated
in population and complex-trait genetics, the biology of
diseases, and translation toward new therapeutics. In the
introductory sections, we provide a background for this
review, summarize its scope and layout, and revisit the scientiﬁc rationale for GWASs. We then review general conclusions that can be drawn from GWAS discoveries across
a wide range of traits. We subsequently highlight more speciﬁc results of discoveries and methods on the path from
GWAS to biology and review progress in three exemplar
diseases, namely type 2 diabetes (T2D [MIM: 125853]),
auto-immune diseases (MIM: 109100), and schizophrenia
(MIM: 181500). We end the review with a number of sections on the limitations of current experimental designs
and possible ways to overcome these and a prediction on
the future of GWASs for human traits.
Background
Five years ago, a number of us reviewed (and gave our
opinion on) the ﬁrst 5 years of discoveries that came
from the experimental design of the GWAS.1 That review
sought to set the record straight on the discoveries made
by GWASs because at that time, there was still a level of
misunderstanding and distrust about the purpose of and
discoveries made by GWASs. There is now much more
acceptance of the experimental design because the empirical results have been robust and overwhelming, as reviewed here.
Scope and Framework
Data generated from genome-wide SNP surveys have been
exploited for addressing many scientiﬁc questions other
than SNP-trait associations. We do not have the space to
give adequate coverage of discoveries in evolutionary and
population genetics, nor can we fully cover the many developments in analytic methods, although we will brieﬂy
mention some recent developments. The scope of our review is novel discoveries on the genetics and resulting
biology of common adult diseases (auto-immune, metabolic, and psychiatric disease in particular) and their risk
factors and the wider implications of those discoveries.
GWAS discoveries have and are affecting a wide variety of
diseases and traits, many of which have been covered in
other in-depth reviews. Our focus is on associations between complex traits and SNPs, but we note that there
have been many reported associations between traits and
copy-number variants (CNVs) and that there are known
mechanisms by which CNVs can be associated with disease.2 Results from other genome-wide surveys, including
exome and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) studies, are
not reviewed here.
GWAS Rationale and Scientiﬁc Basis
The GWAS is an experimental design used to detect associations between genetic variants and traits in samples from
populations. The primary goal of these studies is to better
understand the biology of disease, under the assumption
that a better understanding will lead to prevention or better treatment. The path from GWAS to biology is not
straightforward because an association between a genetic
variant at a genomic locus and a trait is not directly informative with respect to the target gene or the mechanism
whereby the variant is associated with phenotypic differences. However, as reviewed herein, new types of data,
new molecular technologies, and new analytical methods
have provided opportunities to bridge the knowledge gap
from sequence to consequence. GWASs have also been successfully implemented for better deﬁning the relative role
of genes and the environment in disease risk, assisting in
risk prediction , and investigating natural selection and population differences (Table 1).
GWASs to date rely on and exploit linkage disequilibrium (LD), the correlation structure that exists among
DNA variants in the current human genome as a result of
historical evolutionary forces, particularly ﬁnite population size, mutation, recombination rate, and natural selection. The statistical power to detect associations between
DNA variants and a trait depends on the experimental
sample size, the distribution of effect sizes of (unknown)
causal genetic variants that are segregating in the population, the frequency of those variants, and the LD between
observed genotyped DNA variants and the unknown
causal variants. Therefore, the potential of a GWAS to succeed for a particular trait or disease depends on (1) how
many loci affecting the trait segregate in the population,
(2) the joint distribution of effect size and allele frequency
at those loci (sometimes called genetic architecture), (3)
the experimental sample size, (4) the panel of genomewide variants that are used in the GWAS, and (5) how
heterogeneous the trait or disease being studied is. The
last relates to both the biology of the trait and the ability
to diagnose or measure it with precision.
If the genetic architecture of a particular trait or disease
were known, the optimum experiments could be designed
to detect speciﬁc variants. However, despite many theoretical studies on the likely relationship between allele frequency and trait loci, until the onset of GWASs, there
was very little empirical data to validate prediction from
theoretical models.
GWASs have been facilitated by the development of relatively inexpensive SNP arrays. Commonly used SNP arrays
vary in their content, but they broadly contain 200,000 to
more than 2,000,000 SNPs. To date, most genetic variants
that have been surveyed through GWASs are common
in the population, in that they have a minor allele frequency (MAF) typically larger than 1%. For the purpose
of this review, we arbitrarily deﬁne common variants to
have MAF R 1% and rare variants to have MAF < 1%.
The GWAS as an experimental design is more than just
an array-based study of common variants. For example, association studies using WGS data are also GWASs. There is
a continuum from GWASs based on SNP arrays to those using WGS, and the only difference (apart from cost) is the
density of coverage of variation in the genome and the
MAF spectrum of the variants.
LD between genetic variants is commonly measured as
a squared correlation (r2) because this measure is linear in
the sample size required for detecting association between
an observed genotyped and an unobserved causal variant.
LD r2 can be large only if the allele frequencies at the
two loci match,3,4 and this is the reason why GWASs
from common SNP arrays are not powerful enough to
detect associations due to rare causal variants (in addition
to sample-size considerations; see below). Statistical imputation5–7 of unobserved variants can recover some of
the information lost because of imperfect LD between
unobserved
Imputation is enabled by the fact that the genotypes of
unobserved genetic variants can be predicted by the haplotypes inferred from multiple observed SNPs and the
haplotypes observed from a fully sequenced reference
In Figure 1, we summarize power calculations (see Appendix A for theory) of the minimum sample size required
for detecting an association as a function of genotype
method (SNP array plus imputation or WGS), allele frequency, and effect size. Given that statistical imputation
The Role of GWAS SNP Arrays in Human Genetic Discoveries
Discoveries
detecting trait-SNP associations
10,000 robust associations with diseases and
disorders, quantitative traits, and genomic traits
Genome-wide CNV analysis
detecting trait-CNV associations
hundreds of associations with diseases and disorders
Genome-wide assessment of LD
quantifying genome architecture
large variation in LD in the genome
Estimation of SNP heritabilitya
genetic architecture
large proportion of genetic variation captured by
common SNPs
Estimation of genetic correlationa
detecting and quantifying pleiotropy
pleiotropy is ubiquitous
Polygenic risk scoresa
detecting pleiotropy; validating GWAS discoveries
out-of-sample prediction works as expected;
detection of novel trait associations
Mendelian randomizationa
testing causal relationships
replication of known causal relationships; empirical
evidence of observational associations that are not
Population differences in allele
frequencies
reconstructing human population history;
detecting selection
genetic structure can mimic geographical structure;
evidence of natural selection
Trait GWAS with -omics GWASa
ﬁne-mapping; detecting target genes; function
two-thirds of GWAS-associated loci implicate a
gene that is not the nearest gene to the most
associated SNP
aThese analyses can be performed with GWAS summary statistics.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
of variants as infrequent as 1/1,000 is still reasonably accurate,8 not much power of detection can be gained from
WGS. For ultra-rare variants, for example, those with a frequency of 1/100,000, WGS can identify associations but
only when the effect sizes of the polymorphisms (mutations) are very large. For example, for such rare variants
with an effect size of 1 phenotypic standard deviation
unit (about 7 cm for height or 5 BMI units), a sample
size of more than one million is required (i.e., an allelic
count of ten). For case-control studies of disease, the effects
sizes of b ¼ 0.01, 0.1, and 1 phenotypic standard deviation
in Figure 1 correspond approximately to odds ratios of
1.02, 1.2, and 4, respectively, if we assume that both allele
frequency and population prevalence are 0.01 or lower.9
Segregation of rare variants with very large effects might
be observable in certain families, and then a family-based
experimental design would be more efﬁcient at locating
and identifying such (near) monogenic traits. In addition,
other genome-wide scans, such as WES and WGS studies,
allow testing for a burden of rare variants across shared
functional units (e.g., genes) in a way that is not accessible
Results in Figure 1 are based on unselected population
samples or population-based case-control samples and
the detection of association between the trait or disease
and the same genetic variant. Power will be increased for
highly ascertained cases and enrichment of extreme cases
or family-based studies with multiple cases of a rare disease. Furthermore, using WGS data for association analysis
of rare variants has the potential to boost power through
the combination of alleles of similar impact (e.g., via
burden tests across a gene) under the assumption of
multiple independent causative variants in a gene region.
This strategy is justiﬁed from knowledge of monogenic
disorders, where it is typical for different variants of the
same gene to segregate with disease in different families.
However, such tests also have challenges because prior
knowledge about function or frequency is required for
determining which alleles in a gene should be included
in the burden count.
General Results
Complex Traits Are Highly Polygenic
GWAS results have now been reported for hundreds of
complex traits across a wide range of domains, including
common diseases, quantitative traits that are risk factors
for disease, brain imaging phenotypes, genomic measures
such as gene expression and DNA methylation, and social
and behavioral traits such as subjective well-being and
educational attainment. About 10,000 strong associations
have been reported between genetic variants and one or
more complex traits,10 where ‘‘strong’’ is deﬁned as statistically signiﬁcant at the genome-wide p value threshold of
5 3 108, excluding other genome-wide-signiﬁcant SNPs
in LD (r2 > 0.5) with the strongest association (Figure 2).
GWAS associations have proven highly replicable, both
Minimum Sample Sizes for Detecting Trait-SNP Associations from Imputed and WGS Data
Required sample sizes for detecting association were calculated with Equations A1–A5 under the assumption of a type I error rate of 5 3
108, 80% power, and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Effect sizes (b) are in phenotypic standard deviation units. For genotyped SNPs
imputed to a fully sequenced reference, we have used the average imputation Rimp
2 values reported by the Haplotype Reference Consortium8 in their Figure S3. This is a conservative estimate of imputation accuracy because it is based on a less dense genotyping array.
For the WGS data, we have assumed no sequencing errors. Note that for some combinations of allele frequency and effect size, the
required minimum number of individuals for detecting association exceeds 100 million.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
within and between populations,11,12 under the assumption of adequate sample sizes.
One unambiguous conclusion from GWASs is that for
almost any complex trait that has been studied, many
loci contribute to standing genetic variation. In other
words, for most traits and diseases studied, the mutational
target in the genome appears large so that polymorphisms
in many genes contribute to genetic variation in the population. This means that, on average, the proportion of
variance explained at the individual variants is small.
Conversely, as predicted previously,1,13 this observation
implies that larger experimental sample sizes will lead to
new discoveries, and that is exactly what has occurred
over the last decade. For example, in 2009 the ﬁrst
genomic locus robustly associated with liability to schizophrenia was discovered with a sample of 3,000 cases;14 by
2014, this had increased to 108 with a sample size of
35,000 cases.15 Similarly, when the concept of ‘‘missing
heritability’’16 was introduced, it highlighted that in
2008, only 40 genome-wide-signiﬁcant SNPs had been
identiﬁed for height, and together these explained about
5% of heritability.17 In 2014, the number of associated
SNPs had increased to 700, explaining more than 20%
of heritability,18 and from the relationship between sample size and discoveries in the last 10 years, it is reasonable
to predict that in the next few years, this will increase
to thousands of variants, which will cumulatively explain
a substantial proportion (e.g., more than one-third) of
heritability.
The term polygenic describes the genetic architecture
underpinning variation in a trait between individuals in
a population, but what does it mean for each individual?
It means that each individual will carry a number of alleles
that increase (þ) and a number of alleles that decrease ()
the trait or disease risk. There are so many possible combinations of these sets of alleles that each individual is likely
to have a unique combination, and in studies designed
to detect associated loci, the effect size of each allele is
measured across the context of an averaged background,
and the effect size of each locus is found to be small.
Pleiotropy Is Pervasive
The number of segregating variants in the human population is large but ﬁnite. It is not known what proportion of
the segregating variants are associated with complex-trait
genetic variation, but the fact that each of the many studied traits is associated with variants at hundreds to thousands of loci in the genome strongly suggests that some
of the underlying causal variants are the same. Multiple
lines of evidence are consistent with widespread pleiotropy
for complex traits. First, Mendelian mutations that cause
speciﬁc syndromes or diseases are frequently associated
with multiple phenotypes in an affected individual. Second, pedigree studies have reported genetic correlations
between traits, implying that a number of the same variants affect two or more traits in a consistent direction.19
Third, GWASs have shown that the same genetic variants
can be signiﬁcantly associated with multiple diseases and
GWAS SNP-Trait Discovery Timeline
Data used for generating the graph were taken from the GWAS Catalogue.10 SNPs and traits were selected according to the following
ﬁlters. SNPs were selected with a p value < 5 3 108. For each trait with two or more selected SNPs, SNPs were removed if they had
an LD r2 > 0.5 (calculated from 1000 Genomes phase 3 data) with another selected SNPs and their p value was larger. For each year
of discovery, only the top three traits and diseases with the largest number of SNPs are labeled in the circle.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
traits when the phenotypes are measured on different individuals (so that no environmental associations are driving
the results).20–22 In the case of auto-immune diseases, evidence implies that at some loci, the same causal variants
are driving the observations of associations across diseases.23–25 Fourth, analytical methods that estimate genetic correlations from GWAS data have provided evidence
for widespread pleiotropy.20,26
The corollary of pervasive pleiotropy for complex traits is
that the paradigm of ‘‘one gene, one function, one trait’’ is
the wrong way to view genetic variation in the human
genome (and the same applies for studying disease in
experimental organisms).27 It also implies that studying
traits or disease in isolation with respect to past or present
natural selection might lead to the wrong inference. The
true nature of the pleiotropy is currently unknown but,
in some cases, could imply an impact of the variants on
different tissues and/or at different ages.
New Analysis Methodology Underpinning New Discovery
GWAS data have led to new analysis methods that fall into
a number of categories depending on their purpose: (1)
methods of better modeling population structure and
relatedness between individuals in a sample during association analyses,28–34 (2) methods of detecting novel
variants and gene loci on the basis of GWAS summary statistics,35–37 (3) methods of estimating and partitioning
genetic (co)variance,38,39 and (4) methods of inferring
causality.40–42 In addition, GWAS discoveries and interpretation have beneﬁted substantially from improved algorithms in statistical imputation of unobserved genotypes
and statistical imputation of human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) genes and amino acid polymorphisms.43–46
Common Variants Together Tag a Substantial Proportion of
Additive Genetic Variance
In addition to enabling the discovery of speciﬁc trait-locus
associations, GWASs have facilitated estimation of how
much of the total additive genetic variation due to segregating variants in the population is tagged by genotyped
and imputed SNPs. This quantiﬁcation of ‘‘SNP heritability’’ is informative with respect to the unknown genetic
architecture of the trait. SNP heritability has provided
objective guidance to inform decisions about which experimental designs are most efﬁcient at detecting novel traitlocus associations on the basis of empirical data, i.e.,
increasing sample size of GWASs. Classical estimation of
total narrow-sense heritability (estimated from phenotypic
records of samples that include family members) captures
the total amount of additive genetic variance in the population irrespectively of the joint distribution of allele frequency and effect size47 (we acknowledge a potential for
bias by common environmental effects and non-additive
genetic variation). In contrast, SNP heritability (estimated
from tiny genetic relationships from unrelated individuals)
captures only the proportion of additive genetic variance
due to LD between the assayed and imputed SNPs and
the unknown causal variants. Estimation and partitioning
of additive genetic variation for quantitative traits and liability to disease have implied that one-third to two-thirds
of genetic variation at causal variants can be tagged by
common genotyped and imputed SNPs through LD.1,48
At present, it is not known how much of the total additive
genetic variation is due to causal variants with frequencies
less than 1%. Evidence from imputed genotype data for
height implies that more additive genetic variation is explained by variants with MAF < 10% than expected under
an evolutionary neutral model, consistent with purifying
selection of the height-associated loci.49 In the near future,
when additive genetic variance will be estimated from
WGS data in large samples, the contribution of observed
rare and low-frequency variants will be estimated explicitly. Estimates from data available to date provide the ﬁrst
evidence for different genetic architectures between diseases,50 for example, there is more signal from rare variants
for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (motor neuron disease
[MIM: 105400]) than for schizophrenia51 and more predicted loci for schizophrenia than for immune disorders52 and hypertension.53
Theoretical and empirical observations suggest a place
for non-additive genetic variation, and there have been
many largely unsuccessful attempts to detect epistasis
with GWAS data. There are a number of likely explanations. First, there is limited evidence that non-additive genetic variation makes up a large fraction of the total
genetic variation, so detection requires larger sample sizes
than those necessary for main effects. Second, the loss of
information due to imperfect LD between genotyped
SNPs and causal variants is larger for interactions than
for main effects. For example, loss of information for additive effects is proportional to the LD r2, whereas information loss for dominance and additive-additive interaction
effects is proportional to r4. The ﬁrst observation also applies to interactions between genes and environmental factors. One replicable example of epistatic interaction is the
ERAP1-HLA interaction for psoriasis (MIM: 177900) and
ankylosing spondylitis (MIM: 106300).54
The Utility of GWAS-Derived Genetic Predictors
In 2007, it was shown that one could use GWAS data from
human studies to create genetic predictors for disease and
other complex traits by estimating the effect size at multiple
loci in a discovery sample and using those estimated SNP effects in independent samples13,55 to generate a polygenic
risk score (PRS) per individual. A thorough review of
different methods of generating PRSs is outside the scope
of this review, but currently the key driving force inﬂuencing prediction accuracy is the size of the discovery sample used for estimating the effects of individual variants.
PRSs have been applied extensively over the last 5 years,
not in a clinical setting for the prediction of a healthy individual’s risk of disease but in applications that facilitate new
experimental designs and discoveries. Polygenic predictions are not particularly informative for an individual,
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
but they do explain a sufﬁcient proportion of variation (between 1% and 15% at present for highly polygenic traits
without a major gene) to separate groups, for example, samples with the highest and lowest risk. They are also useful for
detecting new trait associations by correlating observed
phenotypes in a sample or cohort with the genetic prediction of another trait. This design is powerful, because if
the discovery sample is fully independent of the new sample, an observed association between a complex trait and
a genetic predictor from the discovery sample must be due
to genetic factors, given that there are no shared environmental factors. The paradigm of PRSs can also be applied
to the prediction of molecular phenotypes such as gene
expression, even when they are not observed,56 for mining
the human ‘‘phenome’’ for association with predictors
derived from diseases and other traits57 or investigating genotype (proxied by PRS) by environment interaction.58
The Public Availability of Data Has Enabled Novel Research
and Discoveries
Sharing of genetic data in the gene-mapping community
has been a major enabling factor in gene-mapping success.
At this point, the vast majority of the available data are
from studies of populations of European descent, and it
is hoped that data from other ethnic groups will be deposited more extensively in years to come.
The availability of GWAS summary statistics (the effect
sizes and their standard errors or p values on millions of
SNPs) in the public domain has increased dramatically in
the last 5 years, and in 2017 hundreds of such datasets
are publicly available.59 There are a number of reasons
for this. Previous concerns about potential individual identiﬁcation from GWAS summary data have proven to be
unfounded, either because the sample size from GWAS
summary statistics is typically very large or because a simple step such as providing average allele frequencies from
a reference sample negates potential identiﬁcation. The
entire genomics ﬁeld beneﬁts from wide availability of genetic data. When a GWAS is published, full genome-wide
summary statistics (at the very least) should be available
for uncontrolled download. Funding bodies and journals
could play a stronger role in enforcing such a requirement.
The availability of summary statistics in the public domain
discoveries
associations,37,60–62
estimation of SNP-based heritability,63 quantiﬁcation of
pleiotropy across many traits,20,21,38 and creation of more
accurate prediction scores, as well as follow-up with
computational tools, functional assays, and model systems
for the identiﬁcation of candidate genes.
For the near future, the UK Biobank is pushing the barriers further by releasing both genome-wide genotypes
and rich phenotypic data on 500,000 people to the international research community.
From GWAS to Biology
By design, associations detected by GWASs do not yield a
particular gene target or mechanism. This is in contrast
to the detection of Mendelian coding mutations in family
studies, where the variant, target gene, and mechanism
(change in protein) are identiﬁed simultaneously. Moreover, the sheer number of associated variants means that
the battery of follow-up functional studies traditionally
applied to new discoveries from Mendelian disease is not
appropriate or achievable for discoveries of genes associated with complex traits. It should be noted that although
the effect sizes of individual genetic variants are small in
populations, their effect sizes on molecular phenotypes
can be large, and the drug effects of gene targets can also
be magniﬁed (e.g., statins). Notably, the last 5 years have
witnessed some clever laboratory experiments that have
followed up on GWAS association, and these have led to
the discovery of the target gene, for example, the targets
of the associations between FTO (MIM: 610966) and
obesity (MIM: 601665)64 and between the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and schizophrenia.65 Performing similar or new laboratory experiments for many
loci could be possible but would be time consuming and
expensive.
Until recently, efforts to understand the biological
mechanisms through which these various risk variants
act have been thwarted by limitations in the capacity to
perform large-scale evaluation of functional impact.66
The advent of sequence-based -omic analyses have been
transformative by allowing functional analyses of risk
variants to be pursued on the same genome scale (which
has fueled their discovery) and allowing mechanistic
inferences to be based on the behavior of the full set
of risk loci for a given trait.67 The maps of regulatory
annotations and connections in disease-relevant tissues,
generated by projects such as ENCODE,68 Epigenome
RoadMap,69 and GTEx,70 have been crucial to interpretation of the non-coding variants that account for the
majority of GWAS-identiﬁed risk alleles. Tissue-speciﬁc
resources could become increasingly important, and for
neuro-psychiatric disorders in particular, appropriate human brain resources are essential. New initiatives such as
CommonMind and PsychENCODE are providing data
and tools for the neuro-psychiatry research community
to follow up on GWAS signals. New analytical methods
provide the ﬁrst
functional in silico
follow-up by exploiting the availability of resource datasets detailing gene expression, epigenetic marks, 3D
chromatin contacts,71 or other genomic annotations,
including drug targets. One fertile area of method development is integrating data from GWASs and expression
quantitative trait locus (eQTL) studies to identify associations
transcripts
traits.56,61,62
These methods are useful for prioritizing genes from
known GWAS loci for functional follow-up, detecting
novel gene-trait associations, and inferring the directions
of associations.21,27,62 The analytical results that only
about one-third of the associated genes are the nearest
genes61,62 are informative for the design of ﬁne-mapping
experiments.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
One of the ultimate objectives of genetic research is to
drive translational advances that enable more effective prevention and/or treatment of disease. Despite the inevitable
time lag between basic research discoveries and clinical implementation, a growing number of examples highlight
the diverse routes by which human genetics can inform
translational medicine.
Three Exemplars of GWAS Success
Here, we focus on three examples of adult-onset disease to
demonstrate some of the signiﬁcant advances that have
followed as a direct result of GWASs. Figure 3 illustrates
examples of an overlap between GWAS signals that are
known drug targets. In general, drug targets that are genetically informed have a higher probability of making it to
phase III trial or to market, implying potential huge cost
savings to the pharmaceutical industry.72
Type 2 Diabetes
Variant and Gene Discovery. Scores of genes have been
causally implicated in monogenic forms of diabetes
(e.g., neonatal diabetes mellitus [MIM: 601410]73), but
GWASs have now identiﬁed over 100 common variant signals.74–76 Recent efforts to extend GWASs beyond arraybased genotyping and to access a broader range of variants
through sequencing (particularly those of lower frequency)
have revealed that most genetic variation inﬂuencing T2D
appears to reside at common variant sites.74,77 This chimes
with the view of T2D as a largely post-reproductive trait and
is consistent with a failure to detect compelling empirical
evidence that T2D risk alleles have been subject to marked
purifying selection.78,79 In keeping with the age of these
common risk alleles (which predates the diaspora of
modern humans out of Africa), most common variant
associations for T2D are replicated across major ethnic
groups.75,80 However, as increasingly diverse populations
are genotyped and sequenced, more ethnic-speciﬁc alleles
Examples of Links between
GWAS Discoveries and Drugs
are being identiﬁed. Several of these
alleles have a relatively large phenotypic impact and have risen to high
populations,
including variants in PAX4 (MIM:
TBC1D4 (MIM: 612465) in Inuit.81 Efforts to identify compelling evidence
for gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions have been largely unsuccessful.82
From GWAS to Biology. Regulatory
information on the key tissues of
liver)82,83 and equivalent data from
pancreatic islet material67,84 have provided compelling evidence that the variants most strongly associated with T2D
(as well as fasting glucose and other related quantitative
traits) are preferentially located at active enhancers (particularly stretch enhancers) in pancreatic islets67,84 and, to
a lesser extent, at enhancers active in fat, muscle, and
liver.83,85 Increasing reﬁnement of regulatory annotation
has brought more precise localization of these global regulatory effects, for example, emphasizing speciﬁc transcription factor genes (such as FOXA2 [MIM: 600288]).86 These
patterns of tissue-speciﬁc genomic enrichment tie in with
studies of the physiological correlates of T2D risk alleles, as
observed in physiological data from non-diabetic subjects;
these have indicated that, whereas some T2D risk alleles
have a primary effect on insulin action, most appear
to be associated with reduced insulin secretion.87 These
approaches have generated some notable advances, for
example, cis-expression mapping has highlighted KLF14
(MIM: 609393) as the mediator of a chromosome 7 T2D
signal that is associated with insulin resistance and hyperlipidemia (appropriately, this expression signal is speciﬁc
to adipose tissue).85 Equivalent data from human islets
have characterized the likely effector transcripts at several
T2D GWAS loci (such as ZMIZ1 [MIM: 607159], MTNR1B
[MIM: 600804], and ADCY5 [MIM: 600293]), where the
major impact is to reduce insulin secretion.86,88 Additional
clues to the identiﬁcation of the causal transcripts at
certain GWAS loci have come from examining the credentials of the regional transcripts themselves, assigning candidacy on the basis of known biology (e.g., NOTCH2
[MIM: 600275] and GIPR [MIM: 137241]),89 involvement
in related monogenic conditions (WFS1 [MIM: 606201],
HNF1 [MIM: 142410], and HNF4A [MIM: 600281]),90,91
or data from animal models (CDKAL1 [MIM: 611259]).92
Finally, the accumulation of data on coding variants
(via exome sequencing and/or exome array genotyping)
has highlighted several instances where GWAS signals
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
previously attributed to non-coding variants can be reassigned to causal coding variants (e.g., TM6SF2 [MIM:
606563] 74). For others, such as RREB1 (MIM: 602209),
identiﬁcation of T2D-associated coding variants, statistically independent of the original GWAS signal, ﬂags the
likely effector transcripts.74 All in all, it is possible to point
to a compelling effector transcript at around one-third of
the 100 T2D loci identiﬁed by GWASs. These genes represent legitimate targets for detailed empirical validation
and mechanistic exploration. They also support efforts,
via network-based approaches, to establish the extent to
which the biology of T2D predisposition converges onto
a restricted set of pathways.
Translation. Examples from T2D research highlight the
diverse routes by which human genetics can inform translational medicine: (1) the combination of common-variant
GWASs and candidate-gene resequencing has demonstrated
loss-of-function
(MIM: 611145; encoding a zinc transporter expressed in
pancreatic islets) are protective for T2D, leading to efforts
by several pharma companies to develop ZnT-8 antagonists;93 (2) the use of genetic variants as instruments that
‘‘simulate’’ variation in environmental and biochemical
exposures has clariﬁed the extent to which vitamin D
intake, early nutrition, circulating lipid levels, and chronic
inﬂammation play causal roles with respect to the development of T2D94–98 and has deﬁned the relationship between insulin resistance and the distribution of adipose
tissue;99 (3) the identiﬁcation of genetic variants associated
with individual variation in response to commonly used
therapeutic agents has reﬁned our understanding of the
mechanisms through which those agents operate100,101
and, in some instances, has led to therapeutic optimization
on the basis of genetic and/or clinical phenotype;102 and
(4) the combination of -omic measurements, longitudinal
clinical phenotypes, and GWAS data has highlighted sets
of molecules (e.g., branched-chain amino acids) that not
only are prospectively associated with T2D progression
but could also play a causal role in T2D development and
thereby provide valuable clinical tools for stratiﬁcation
and prognostication.103,104
Auto-immune Diseases
Variant and Gene Discovery. In the last 5 years, GWASs have
been undertaken for nearly all major immune-mediated
diseases (with sample sizes of tens of thousands of case
and control individuals for more common immune-mediated diseases studied either by GWASs or by more targeted
chips, such as Illumina’s Immunochip105), resulting in
hundreds of associated loci. The development of statistical
approaches for cross-disease studies to identify pleiotropic
loci has been particularly productive in identifying new
genes and in better understanding the pathogenic relatedness of immune-mediated diseases. A recent cross-disease
study involving the conditions ankylosing spondylitis
(AS [MIM: 106300]), inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD
[MIM: 266600]), primary sclerosing cholangitis (MIM:
613806), and psoriasis identiﬁed without any further genotyping 30 new loci at genome-wide signiﬁcance.24 Transethnic studies have demonstrated substantial genetic
overlap between ethnically remote populations;106–108 for
example, genetic correlations of 0.76 and 0.79 between
European and East Asians have been estimated for Crohn
disease and ulcerative colitis (UC).106 Trans-ethnic comparisons of associations at shared loci have been quite helpful
in pinpointing causal variants; for example, populationspeciﬁc variation in HLA-DRB1 (MIM: 142857) associations in rheumatoid arthritis (RA [MIM: 180300]) has
helped to deﬁne the key amino acids underpinning that
association.
From GWAS to Biology. GWAS results have made key contributions to deeper biological understanding of immunemediated diseases in the last 5 years. For example, in a
cross-disease study, new loci included genes that for the
ﬁrst time implicate pathogenesis associated with methylation variation (DNMT3A [MIM: 602769] and DNMT3B
[MIM: 602900]), bacteria-sensing genes (TLR4 [MIM:
603030]), genes inﬂuencing the host microbiome (FUT2
[MIM: 182100]), and NFKB pathway genes (NFKB1 [MIM:
191163]).24 Evidence of extensive pleiotropy includes
variants that have different directions of association in
different diseases or disease-speciﬁc variants at the same
loci. This has relevance for the likely impact of targeting
these loci therapeutically. For example, SNP rs1800693 in
the major TNF-receptor gene TNFR1 (MIM: 191190) is
associated in different directions with multiple sclerosis
(MS [MIM: 126200]) and AS.109 The SNP leads to loss of
the transmembrane domain of the receptor, and the risk
SNP for MS (protective for AS) leads to increased serum soluble TNF receptor.110 TNF inhibition, including by decoy
TNF receptor therapies, is highly effective for AS and
many other immune-mediated diseases, but its use can
be complicated by de novo development of MS, and in
MS itself, it can exacerbate disease. Although this is a retrospective example, it demonstrates the potential of using
genetics to predict toxicities. There are several agents in
development where the genetics would point to the likelihood of toxicities. Examples include CD40 and its ligand,
where SNP rs1883832 in the C allele of CD40 (MIM:
109535) is a risk factor for RA and auto-immune thyroid
disorder (AITD) but is protective against MS and IBD,
and the PTPN22 (MIM: 600716) variant c.1858C>T
(p.Arg620Trp), which increases the risk of type 1 diabetes
(MIM: 222100), systemic lupus erythematosus (MIM:
152700), vitiligo (MIM: 606579), AITD, and UC but is protective against Crohn disease.23 At the very least, this suggests that any clinical trials in these conditions should
carefully screen for the development of the diseases with
the converse genetic associations.
The MHC, as well as the HLA genes encoded within it, is
the major locus for the majority of immune-mediated diseases. Although the major highly penetrant HLA types
involved in different diseases have long been established,
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
in the last 5 years, the ability to impute the composite
amino acids and then test these for disease association
has enabled research that has better deﬁned the key components of the HLA proteins involved in disease. In RA,
it had been known for roughly 30 years that a sequence
of amino acids at positions 70–74 of HLA-DRB1 largely,
though not fully, determine the differential association
between HLA-DRB1 types and disease.111 Through the
use of amino acid imputation and association studies,
this ‘‘shared epitope’’ sequence was extended,112 and this
information used to provide a molecular explanation for
the propensity of peptides with citrullinated component
amino acids to induce disease.113 HLA variants have long
been known to be major determinants of severe immunologically mediated adverse drug reactions. For example,
toxicity to the anti-retroviral abacavir is largely restricted
to HLA-B57 carriers. With the use of GWAS and HLA imputation, an HLA-DQA1*0201-HLA-DRB1*0701 haplotype
has been shown to be strongly associated with the risk of
thiopurine-induced pancreatitis, such that homozygotes
for this haplotype have a 17% risk of this major side effect.114 It is likely that with the increasing use of genetic
proﬁling in clinical practice, further examples will be identiﬁed in coming years.
Translation. GWAS results have already proven highly
successful at initiating medication repositioning. For
example, GWAS discoveries triggered the repositioning of
biological medications targeting components of the IL-23
pathway (including IL-12p40, IL-17, and IL-23p19), and
now these are mainstay treatments for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis (MIM: 607507), are highly effective in AS, and
(with the exception of IL-17 blockade) are effective in IBD,
as suggested by early studies.115–117 The annual sales of
these medications alone are likely to be greater than the
total amount spent on GWASs in the past decade.
Many other GWAS discoveries have stimulated targeted therapy-development programs, a few of which are
described here. The discovery of the association between
PADI4 (MIM: 605347) and RA provided conclusive evidence that immunological reactions to epitopes that
had been citrullinated by PAD enzymes were causatively
involved in RA. This led to programs developing PAD
inhibitors in RA, and these have shown signiﬁcant
promise.118,119 Major drug-development programs have
been initiated to target the M1 aminopepidase genes
ERAP1 (MIM: 606832) and ERAP2 (MIM: 609497) because
of their genetic associations with AS, psoriasis, IBD, Behcet
disease (MIM: 109650), and the rare condition Birdshot
retinopathy (MIM: 605808).120
Bioinformatic follow-up of GWAS results has also been
fruitful. For example, Okada et al. screened the overlap between genetic associations and known drug targets to
demonstrate that existing RA therapies disproportionately
target RA-associated gene products and their interacting
protein partners.108 From this, they extrapolated that
other agents with high levels of effects on these proteins
would be enriched with potential new RA therapies and
provided suggestive evidence that CDK4 and CDK6 inhibitors already in use, particularly in oncology, could be
effective in RA. These agents have been shown to be effective in the collagen-induced arthritis model of RA and are
now in human trials in RA in Japan.
Schizophrenia
Variant and Gene Discovery. Although psychiatric diseases
had a slow start in GWAS locus identiﬁcation, more than
50,000 samples have been genotyped in the last 5 years;
the typical linear relationship between sample size and
number of loci has been observed, and more than 100
risk loci have been discovered to date. These risk loci
are enriched in genes containing de novo mutations in
schizophrenia, autism (MIM: 209850), and intellectual
disability,15 and several identiﬁed loci contain genes relevant to major hypotheses of schizophrenia etiology,
antipsychotic drugs) and genes involved in glutamatergic
neurotransmission
[MIM: 138253], and GRIA1 [MIM: 138248]), as well as
genes that extend previous observations of association
with voltage-gated calcium channel subunits (CACNA1C
[MIM: 114205], CACNB2 [MIM: 600003], and CACNA1I
[MIM: 608230]).15 One of the most striking ﬁndings that
emerged early in schizophrenia studies—at the stage where
there were only a handful of genome-wide-signiﬁcant
loci—was the highly polygenic nature of the common variants contributing to risk.14 This observation has been
widely replicated, and estimates are that 71% of 1 Mb
genomic regions have at least one variant inﬂuencing
schizophrenia risk,53 and there is evidence of substantial
pleiotropy with other psychiatric disorders.26 However,
genetic architecture, described as the mix of rare and common variants, is likely to differ between psychiatric disorders, as is already being observed for the higher rates of
rare, de novo penetrant CNVs and single-nucleotide variants found in autism than in schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.121–129 PRS studies are being utilized extensively to
investigate disease heterogeneity and contributions from
environmental risk factors.
From GWAS to Biology. Functional follow-up is necessarily
more difﬁcult for psychiatric disorders, and to date, bioinformatic analyses have been the key focus providing
strategies for prioritization of loci. Schizophrenia risk loci
are over-represented in regulatory regions active in the
brain15,130,131 and are enriched in genes from postsynaptic
density, postsynaptic membrane, dendritic spine, axon,
and voltage-gated potassium channel pathways, as well
as histone H3-K4 methylation132 overlap with pathways
identiﬁed in rare-variant studies of autism. Prioritization
of GWAS results has progressed through integration
with eQTL datasets, implicating synaptic genes (SNAP91
[MIM: 607923], TSNARE1, and CLCN4 [MIM 302910])
and genes with roles in neurodevelopment (FURIN [MIM:
136950] and CNTN4 [MIM: 607280]). 3D contacts between
risk variants and promoters, explored by chromosome
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
conformation capture (Hi-C) in the subcortical plate and
germinal zone of the developing human cortex, supported
putative interactions between causal risk variants and
promoters in glutamatergic and calcium signaling genes
(GRIA1 [MIM: 138248], NLGN1 [MIM: 600568], GRIN2A
several genes long implicated in schizophrenia (including
DRD2 and DRD6, encoding acetylcholine receptors subunits), and genes SNAP91, TSNARE1, CLCN4, FURIN, and
Fine-mapping has been accomplished for the strongest,
and ﬁrst identiﬁed, association with schizophrenia in the
MHC region, a challenge because of its high genic content
and high LD. The position of the association signal within
the MHC region led to investigation of common structural
haplotypes of complement factor 4 genes C4A (MIM:
120810) and C4B (MIM: 120820), combinations of which
correlated well with schizophrenia risk and increased C4
expression and showed differential brain expression between case and control individuals.65 Several other complement proteins play a role in synapse elimination, and
decreased numbers of synapses have long been suggested
as a primary abnormality in schizophrenia. Observations
that, in mice, a complement gene that shares features
with human C4A and C4B is expressed in neurons and promoted synapse elimination in a developmental brain circuit strongly implicate this gene and its protein.
Translation. No new molecular targets for schizophrenia
have been successfully identiﬁed since the ﬁrst antipsychotic drugs were identiﬁed several decades ago. The reasons are likely to be manifold, but most drug development
for schizophrenia has focused on achieving high-potency
methodology
successful
in many other areas of medicine—which necessitates a
choice between the competing hypotheses of schizophrenia pathophysiology. GWAS results have provided
unequivocal evidence of polygenicity, and because many
of the GWAS loci contain genes that code for proteins
among those indicated through multiple prior hypotheses,
e.g., dopamine, glutamate, immune modulation, calcium
signaling, and nicotinic cholinergic, future drug development could beneﬁt from taking a multi-target approach.
A proof-of-concept gene-set enrichment of schizophrenia
risk alleles in sets of genes for drug targets identiﬁed several
potential repurposing opportunities.133 Single-target medications could be appropriate for speciﬁc genetic subgroups, although identifying genetic subtypes is not yet
part of the clinical trial paradigm.
Discussion
The Present
We have summarized the major kinds of discoveries made
from GWASs focusing on adult traits and have reviewed
the new biology and emerging translational outcomes for
three diseases. Over the last decade, this experimental
design has delivered a remarkably diverse set of discoveries
in human genetics. For most traits and diseases studied,
the mutational target in the genome appears large, in
that polymorphisms in many genes contribute genetic
variation in the population. Furthermore, the empirical
evidence of widespread pleiotropy implies that many
segregating variants affect multiple traits. A precise estimate of the proportion of all segregating genetic variants
that are ‘‘functional’’ in the context of being associated
with one or more traits, conditional on all other causal variants, remains elusive. For the highlighted traits, disorders,
and diseases, we have given examples of routes from GWAS
to biology and translation. For an experimental design
only a decade old, this is an example of rapid translation
of genetic ﬁndings toward clinical application.
The relationship between sample size and number of risk
loci detected varies between traits, but all show a sharp increase at a critical sample size. To date, there has been no
trait with evidence of a plateau of the number of risk loci
discovered with increasing sample size. For some traits,
such as height, schizophrenia, and IBD, discovery samples
in the next 5 years are likely to continue to increase,
perhaps at a lower rate per additional sample. A diminishing rate of discovery of new loci will provide a more complete picture of genetic architecture and will best satisfy the
understanding of contributing biological pathways. According to the knowledge of Mendelian disease, the expectation is that multiple risk variants will be detected within
loci that have already been identiﬁed. Hence, as sample
sizes increase, the new discoveries of associated pathways
will be saturated ﬁrst, followed by genes and lastly variants.
GWASs have been successfully applied to molecular
traits such as gene expression, DNA methylation,134 and
metabolites.135 Conclusions from these studies are that
most molecular phenotypes are just like other complex
traits, in that differences between individuals are due to a
combination of genetic factors and environmental exposures and that genetic loci can be mapped by GWASs.136
This makes the discovery of causal pathways from genomes to phenomes challenging, in that variation between people in modiﬁable risk factors might be partially
anchored in DNA sequence variation for these ‘‘exposures.’’ Nevertheless, the combination of sequence variation with molecular phenotypes and disease data with
novel analytical methods, such as Mendelian randomization,42 has great potential to unravel cause and consequence and to improve phenotypic prediction.137
GWASs to date have been based on SNP arrays designed
to tag common variants in the genome. These arrays do
not cover all genetic variants in the population, and it
would seem natural that future GWASs will be based on
WGS. However, the price differential between SNP arrays
and WGS is still substantial, and array technology remains
more robust than sequencing. Nevertheless, now hundreds of thousands of genomes are being sequenced as
part of major initiatives, and the next 5 years will allow
direct comparisons of discoveries made from sequencing
and array studies. Interestingly, custom arrays without a
GWAS ‘‘backbone’’ have by and large failed to identify
rare (MAF < 1%) variants at loci that were initially discovered from a GWAS, one of their aims. The reason for this is
not clear. It could be because there are no rare variants of
major effect, because the sample size is too small for detecting rare variants and/or estimating their effect size, because
the chip coverage of rare variants is inadequate, or because
of a combination of these. However, these custom arrays
have led to the discovery of new loci and to ﬁne-mapping
at existing loci, mostly driven by increasing experimental
sample size (see Appendix A on the relationship between
sample size, imputation accuracy, and allele frequency on
power of detection). A recent study of height using exome
SNP arrays and a sample size of 700,000 reported 83
height-associated coding variants with a frequency of less
than 5% and effect sizes of up to 2 cm.138 These variants
each explain, on average, about the same amount of variation as common variants, whose effect sizes are of the order
of 1 mm, because it is the combination of frequency and
effect size that determines variation (Appendix A).
One limitation of both current array and WGS technology is that the precision of detection of structural variants
(indels or inversions > 50 bp) is less than that of SNP detection. New technologies that enable long-range haplotyping are helping to overcome the weakness of short-read
technologies, and cheap, genome-wide technologies for
structural variants would constitute an important advance.
Fine-mapping of SNP-trait associations is the attempt to
identify one or more causal variants that are responsible
for the observed GWAS signals. Fine-mapping solely by statistical association is limited by experimental sample size
and LD, given that the statistical evidence to separate a
causal variant from a variant in LD with it is proportional
to n(1 – r2) (see Equation A1 in Appendix A). If causal variants are not in the data (e.g., they have not been genotyped), then the imputation error also limits ﬁne-mapping.
With the likely availability of SNP-array-based GWAS data
on very large sample sizes and WGS data on large sample
sizes, statistical ﬁne-mapping power will improve, and a
small number of variants that are in extremely high LD
might be identiﬁed as a plausible set of variants with a
high probability of containing one or more causal variants.
The use of additional information, such as prior knowledge
of the likely function of speciﬁc variants given their location and surrounding DNA motif(s),139,140 could help to
reduce the set of statistical candidates to a smaller number.
This is already a fertile area of statistical and bioinformatic
research56,62,131,141,142 bringing together trait or disease
GWAS results with those of tissue gene expression. More
research on the resolution of ﬁne-mapping is warranted,
and this will be fueled by an expected increase in GWAS
data on tissue- and cell-speciﬁc gene expression.
Most GWASs to date have been conducted on individuals of European descent, but there is a growing number
of studies on populations of Asian and African ancestry.
Because common variants contribute to the genetic architecture of complex traits, the expectation is that these
common variants are evolutionarily old and shared across
ethnicities, which is encouraging for generalizing treatments. The clearest demonstration of this, as discussed
above, has been for IBD, for which the genetic correlation
between Asian and European samples is close to 0.8, even
though some individual risk loci differ in frequency or
effect size.106 A characteristic of GWAS analyses to date is
to strictly exclude individuals outside ethnicity boundaries
on the basis of standard deviation units in principalcomponent dimensions. However, as sample sizes become
larger, it is becoming possible to not only utilize but also
take advantage of mixed and admixed ethnicity. The
differing allele frequencies and LD structure across populations should aid in ﬁne-mapping causal variants. New
methods have emerged to deal with these data,75,143 and
we expect that this will be a fertile area of method development and discovery in the coming years.
The Future
Does the GWAS have a future? Extrapolating the discoveries from the last 10 years to the future, if we were to
keep with the current experimental strategy of SNP arrays
and imputation, then ever-increasing sample sizes would
undoubtedly lead to new genetic discoveries, particularly
(1) the discovery of more variants and more genes associated with one or more traits, (2) accounting for more genetic variation, (3) more accurate genetic predictors, and
(4) a greater ability to evaluate disease heterogeneity and
to derive genetically informed diagnoses that might be
more aligned to speciﬁc treatments. For biological enrichment analyses and the discovery or ﬁne-tuning of pathways involved in quantitative traits and disease, more
loci are likely to increase resolution. In ﬁelds where diagnostic criteria are not based on biological markers, such
as psychiatry, GWASs have turned the ﬁeld on its head
by, for the ﬁrst time, contributing quantitative data that
can be used for completely re-evaluating the relationship
of previously distinct disorders.
The future of GWASs will have old and new challenges.
With ever larger studies, the new loci identiﬁed will typically individually have smaller effect sizes (e.g., less than
0.5 mm for a trait such as height and an odds ratio of
1.01 for common disease) or, for rare variants, will be at
very low frequency.138 For disorders with population prevalence of the order of 0.1%, discovery will still be limited
by experimental sample size, given that it will take many
years to accumulate sample sizes of 100,000 cases or
more. One challenge is how such loci can be ﬁne-mapped
or studied for mechanism. Upscaling of technology, either
through interfacing with sequenced-based -omic data or
through upscaling by experimental perturbations (e.g.,
multiple-locus or genome-wide CRISPR) are likely to be
key to overcoming the challenges of small effect size.
What is likely to change in the near future is that GWASs
by SNP arrays will be gradually replaced by GWASs by
WGS, particularly for quantitative traits and very common
diseases. Nonetheless, given a ﬁnite budget, larger sample
The American Journal of Human Genetics 101, 5–22, July 6, 2017
phenotypically
informative
genotyped on a SNP chip remain a powerful strategy
for maximizing discovery. Fifteen years ago, genotyping
technology was the limiting step to discovery, but now discovery is limited by phenotypic descriptors that could
link with genetic data to allow disease stratiﬁcation that
might be more aligned with treatments. Furthermore, the
emphasis in research will need to shift from gene discovery
to translation into biological understanding and patientfocused outcomes, such as better diagnostic tests and
novel treatments.
In conclusion, the experimental design of GWASs has
led to a remarkable range of discoveries in human genetics
over the last decade. It has delivered on its original aim of
detecting associations between common DNA variants and
human disease and disorders. It has led to a better understanding of the genetic architecture of complex traits and
therefore of past natural selection on traits associated
with ﬁtness. It has led to the discovery of variants, genes,
and biological pathways that play a role in speciﬁc diseases
and disorders. It has led to new discoveries in disease epidemiology and to the discovery or repurposing of candidate
therapeutics. As foreshadowed in 2007, it has indeed
been a case of drinking from the ﬁre hose.144 For the future,
the combination of whole-genome surveys of genetic variation and detailed phenotypic and -omics data on millions
of individuals will be a treasure trove for making new
fundamental discoveries in human genetics. Some of those
discoveries will be wholly unexpected, and others will
detect or unravel biological mechanisms. Disease-speciﬁc
discoveries will continue to spur the development and trials of new therapeutics, the understanding of pathways
from sequence to consequence, and for some diseases, prevention or early intervention. In 10 years from now,
genomic ‘‘personalized’’ or ‘‘precision’’ medicine is likely
to be widespread and will include some applications
to common diseases either directly through risk stratiﬁcation for targeted prevention or intervention strategies or
indirectly through new treatments where GWAS results
provide the ﬁrst step in the discovery pipeline. The experimental design of GWASs, which started as a theoretical
exercise more than 20 years ago,145 has matured and
delivered.
Appendix A: Experimental Power to Detect
Association
We re-visit statistical power because the interplay of experimental sample size, causal variant frequency and effect
size, and platform (genotypes, imputed genotypes, and
whole-genome sequence) remains essential to judging
the optimum experimental design for discovery. The power to detect a variant-trait association from LD between
an unobserved causal variant and an observed genotype
can be quantiﬁed in the non-centrality parameter (NCP)
of a statistical test to detect association (i.e., the expected
value of the test statistic under the alternative hypothesis).
It is deﬁned as
NCP ¼ n 3 r2 3 q2
(Equation A1)
where n is the experimental sample size, q2 is the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by a causal variant
in the population, and r2 is the squared LD correlation between the causal variant and a genotyped SNP. This can
also be expressed as the proportion of variance explained
by the genotyped SNP in the population (R2 ¼ r2q2),
NCP ¼ n 3 R2
(Equation A2)
If the genotypes at the causal locus are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, then
q2 ¼ 2 3 MAF 3 ð1  MAFÞ 3 b2;
(Equation A3)
where b is the effect size of an allele on the phenotype in
standard deviation units. This assumes that the analysis
for detecting an association is by regression of the phenotype on the genotype count (e.g., zero, one, or two minor
alleles). Therefore, when q2 is small,
NCP ¼ n 3 r2 3 2 3 MAF 3 ð1  MAFÞ 3 b2:
(Equation A4)
The power to detect an association between a trait and an
ungenotyped but imputed causal variant is, similarly,
NCP ¼ n 3 R2
imp 3 2 3 MAF 3 ð1  MAFÞ 3 b2;
(Equation A5)
where Rimp
2 is the squared correlation between the actual
and imputed genotypes at the locus. These power calculations illustrate the trade-off between sample size, allele frequency, and effect size. In the future, when GWASs are
likely to be performed by WGS, the r2 and Rimp
in Equations A4 and A5 will be 1 if the causal variant is
sequenced without error, and considerable power can
be gained to detect association between a trait and a
sequenced variant in comparison to having array-based
genotyped or imputed data if r2 or Rimp
2 is small to modest,
but only when the experimental sample size is kept constant. The equation above also demonstrates that the power to detect the association for a rare variant is limited
because of its low allele frequency, even if the effect size
is larger than that of a common variant. This means that
for rare-variant associations, the sample sizes need to be
very large or at least comparable to those used for GWASs
with common variants, even with WGS data.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Australian National Health
and Medical Research Council (1107258, 1078901, 1078037,
1056929, 1048853, and 1113400), the gs2:Sylvia and Charles Viertel Charitable Foundation, the NIH , the Wellcome Trust (090532, 090367, 098381, and
106130), the UK Medical Research Council (L020149, 004422,
and J010642), the Innovative Medicines Initiative, and the Accelerating Medicines Partnership (via the Foundation for the NIH).
M.I.M. is a Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator. We thank the reviewers for their many helpful comments, which improved the paper. Because of space limitations, we were unable to do full justice
to all relevant and important GWAS articles that have been published in the last 10 years. We apologize to many of our colleagues
whose work is not cited.
Web Resources
GWAS Catalog, 
OMIM,