Regression networks for robust win-rates
predictions of AI gaming bots
EBTIC, Khalifa University,
 
Andrzej Ruta
ING Bank Slaski,
Katowice, Poland
 
Dymitr Ruta
EBTIC, Khalifa University,
 
Quang Hieu Vu
 
Abstract—Designing a robust and adaptable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) opponent in a computer game would ensure the game
continues to challenge, immerse and excite the players at any
stage. The outcomes of card based games such as "Heartstone:
Heroes of Warcraft", aside the player skills, heavily depend on
the initial composition of player card decks. To evaluate this
impact we have developed a new robust regression network in a
context of the AAIA Data Mining Competition 2018, which tries
to predict the average win-rates of the speciﬁc combinations of
bot-player and card decks. Our network is composed of 2 levels:
the entry level with an array of ﬁnely optimized state of the art
regression models including Extreme Learning Machines (ELM),
Extreme Gradient Boosted decision tree (XGBOOST), and Least
Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) regression
trained via supervised learning on the labeled training dataset;
and just a single ELM at the 2nd level installed to learn to correct
the predictions from the 1st level. The ﬁnal solution received the
root of the mean squared error (RMSE) of just 5.65% and scored
the 2nd place in AAIA’2018 competition. This paper also presents
two other runner-up models receiving RMSE of 5.7% and 5.86%,
scoring the 4th and the 6th place respectively.
I. INTRODUCTION
Computer games, or more precisely computer-controlled
games where players interact with objects displayed on computer screens, provide entertainment and challenge players’
physical and mental abilities. Beside entertainment, playing
computer games has been found to combat stress, promote
health and keep brain ﬁt and active . In recent years, fast
development and penetration of Internet, multi-medial graphic
devices, emergence of virtual reality, on-line open games led
to the rapid growth of gaming popularity and combined with
improved affordability, accessibility, ease and customization of
gameplay, opponents choices, have driven the game industry
to the enormous success and a bright future ahead .
To keep players interested and enthralled, computer games
usually offer various stages and complexity levels to suit
people from beginners to masters, and keeping them equally
entertained for as long as possible. The fun of computer games
is magniﬁed when players play against their friends or other
opponents from all over the world in on-line games since human opponents guarantee fresh, distinctive and engaging challenge . With the recent advancement in Machine Learning
(ML) and the Internet of Things (IoT), Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) has attracted increasing attention and heavily penetrated
many industries including gaming industry. In many computer
games, designing a robust and adaptable AI opponent would
ensure the games continues to challenge, immerse and excite
the players at any stage, which is one of the most important
aspects of success.
In the card based games such as Heartstone: Heros of
Warcraft, aside the player skills, the outcomes heavily depend
on the initial composition of card decks. To evaluate this impact, 2018 Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications
(AAIA) Data Mining Competition was proposed and focused
on the prediction of win-rates of 4 AI bot players, playing the
Heartstone game among each other with different initial decks
of cards and hero characters. The objective of the competition
was to use these data to build the prediction model capable
of accurately estimating win-rates of the same 4 AI bots but
playing with one of the 200 new test card decks, gameplay of
which and their results were not available to the contestants.
This paper presents a new robust shallow regression network
to predict the average win-rates of the speciﬁc combinations
of bot-player and card decks in a response to the context
of AAIA Data Mining Competition 2018. Our network is
composed of two levels. The ﬁrst level is built with an array
of individually trained regression models that have proven to
be effective for sparse binary regression problems, including
Extreme Learning Machine (ELM), Extreme Gradient Boosted
Decision Tree (XGBOOST) and the Least Absolute Shrinkage
and Selection Operator (LASSO) regression models, while
the second level contains only a single ELM that learns to
correct the predictions from the preceding level. The ﬁnal
solution submitted as a competitive entry in the AAIA’2018
Data Mining Competition received the RMSE of 5.65% and
scored the 2nd place, marginally trailing the winning solution.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. AAIA
Data Mining Competition 2018 is introduced in Section II.
The feature extraction method and regression network for
predicting the average win-rates of the speciﬁc combinations
of bot-player and card decks are presented in Sections III and
IV, respectively. The experimental results obtained through
model evaluation are summarized in Section V, followed with
a discussion in VI and the concluding remarks provided in
Section VII.
Proceedings of the Federated Conference on
Computer Science and Information Systems pp. 181–184
DOI: 10.15439/2018F364
ISSN 2300-5963 ACSIS, Vol. 15
IEEE Catalog Number: CFP1885N-ART c⃝2018, PTI
II. COMPETITION DESCRIPTION
The AAIA Data Mining Competition 2018 is related to the
turn-based card game of "Heartstone: Heros of Warcraft". In
this game, two players choose their heroes with a unique
power and compose a deck of thirty cards that represent
various spells, weapons, and minions, and can be summoned
in order to attack the opponent with the goal of reducing the
opponent’s health to zero and win the game. The outcomes of
the game, aside the player skills, heavily depend on the initial
composition of player card decks. To evaluate this impact, the
competitors were expected to predict win-rates of four AI bot
players, automatically playing many games against each other
with different initial decks of cards and hero characters.
The training data provided by the competition contained a
collection of JSON ﬁles describing in detail more than 300k
games played by all pairs from the set of 4 different bots,
each starting with one of 400 unique Hearthstone card decks.
The data included the initial composition of card decks, heroes
selected, the results of each game, and detailed turn-by-turn
gameplay states and related statistics. The objective of the
competition was to utilize these datasets to build the prediction
model capable of accurately predicting win-rates of the 4 AI
bots assigned to any previously unseen composition of card
decks and related class of hero character. To evaluate the
competitive models the win rates of all 4 bots were tested in
combinations with speciﬁc 200 new test decks, however this
time provided without any gameplay nor game results details
to the contestants to properly simulate realistic predictive
power of competing win-rates prediction models.
The solutions were evaluated using the root of the mean
squared error (RMSE) measure. The preliminary score of each
submitted solution was evaluated externally on a ﬁxed 10%
subset of the full test records and published on the competition
leaderboard. The ﬁnal evaluation on the complete testing set
was performed after the completion, i.e. when the competitors
submitted their ﬁnal solutions with no further changes allowed.
III. FEATURE ENGINEERING
Estimation of average win-rates of the speciﬁc combination
of bot-player and card decks can be solved via regression
analysis that is a methodology for estimating the relationships
between a dependent variable (response) and one or multiple
independent variables (predictors). The dependent variable
here was the win-rate expressed as a continuous real number
from the interval.
From the outset it has been decided, that since no gameplay
details, beyond the initial deck, was available in the test stage,
the training data need to be trimmed consistently down to the
same content. It included the id of the player-bot and the initial
Heartstone deck composition, i.e. the id of one of the 9 distinct
hero characters and the cardinalities (0,1, or 2) of other cards
from the pool of over 300 available card types. All above were
cascaded to form a feature vector as shown in Fig. 1.
The initial modeling tasks involved generating features from
the available data and after a brief experimentation with simple
Figure 1. Feature representation.
linear regression models, the highest predictive power associated with the win-rate predictions appeared to come from
numerical encoding of raw categorical features. The player id
took the values of representing the 4 bot-players, and
the hero card took the values of [1,2,...,9] representing the 9
hero characters. The remaining card features took the values
of depending on the cardinality of speciﬁc card types
in the decks. For each data record associated with a single
game, this formed a sparse 348-dimensional vector describing
the cardinalities of card types appearing both in the training
and test sets. The ﬁnal feature set included 1+1+348 = 350
features as shown in Fig. 1.
Initial feature selection experiments did not result in any
improvement of the cross-validated performance measure,
although in-sample (training-set) RMSE was reduced signiﬁcantly after selection of around 100 greedily found card features. To prevent model overﬁtting, it was decided to include
all 350 features in the model building phase. With these
features, a robust regression network has been developed for
predicting win-rates of four AI bots playing the "Heartstone:
Heros of Warcraft" game against each other with different
initial decks of cards and hero characters, which will be
elaborated further in the following section.
IV. REGRESSION NETWORKS
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) have been successfully
applied in various ﬁelds due to their ability to approximate
complex nonlinear mappings directly from input samples as
well as model natural and artiﬁcial phenomena that are difﬁcult
to express using classical parametric techniques. Gradientbased learning algorithms are commonly used to train neural
networks and tune the parameters iteratively, which, however,
requires long training time.
To improve learning efﬁciency of neural networks, Huang
and his colleagues proposed extreme learning machines
(ELMs) that are feed-forward neural networks with a single
or multiple layers of hidden nodes. Instead of tuning the
parameters of hidden nodes, the ELMs randomly choose
hidden nodes and analytically determine the output weights of
the network . In Comparison to many state-of-the-art computational intelligence methods, such as the conventional backpropagation (BP) algorithm and Support Vector Machines
PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. POZNA ´N, 2018
(SVM), ELMs have the advantage of much faster learning
rate, ease of implementation, the least human intervention, and
better generalization performance in terms of lower training
error and smaller norm of weights. It has been reported by
Huang et al. based on their experimental results that ELMs
are able to achieve better generalization performance and learn
thousands of times faster than traditional learning algorithms
for feed-forward neural networks .
In order to extend the generalization performance of the
ELM, a novel shallow regression network composed of 2
stages has been developed. In the ﬁrst stage an array of
ﬁnely optimized state-of-the-art regression models are trained
directly on the input data to predict the desired regression outputs. The models shortlisted for this stage based on best preliminary ad-hoc evaluation included beside kernelized ELMs,
XGBOOST, LASSO, SVM, Gaussian process (GP) and simple
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) models.
The outputs of all base models, i.e. the proposed regression
outputs are passed on to the second and ﬁnal stage of the
shallow network in which just a single or multiple regression
are trained again, however this time their inputs are multiple
propositions of the predicted outputs, hence their role is just
to learn to optimally correct multiple predictions to minimize
ﬁnal regression error. The decision to limit such corrective
layers to just a single 2nd layer follows from extensive
experimentations which conﬁrmed that adding more corrective
layers does not improve the performance but only contributes
to the network complexity.
We have dedicated a lot of experimentation to the selection
of the best subset of primary regressors as well as the ﬁnal
stage corrective models. We have, however consistently received ELM to be the single most effective 2nd stage corrective
regressor, while also in the primary ﬁrst layer ELM appeared
to dominate in terms of performance but showed the best
overall results if combined in the ﬁrst layer with XGBOOST
and LASSO regression models only.
A structure of the best performing network with 9 base
kernelized ELMs, 1 LASSO and 1 XGBOOST models in the
primary layer and a single ELM in the ﬁnal layer is shown in
Figure 2. A sample structure of the learning model.
Multiple ELM models with radial-basis-kernels of increasing width parameter (gamma) from 20 to 60 dominated the
ﬁrst layer of the network. The RBF kernel is deﬁned as 
KRBF(x, x′) = exp(−||x −x′||2
where γ = 2σ2.
As mentioned above, these 9 ELM models in the optimized
network setup have been complemented with just a single
XGBOOST and LASSO models, therefore for completeness
few details on only the added models are provided below.
• A decision tree builds a regression model in the form of a
tree structure, which breaks down a dataset into multiple
smaller subsets and incrementally builds a tree with decision nodes and leaf nodes for the purpose of classiﬁcation
or regression. XGBOOST, based on Extreme Gradient
Boosting model , is an implementation of the gradient
boosted decision trees algorithm with a goal of pushing
the limit of compute resources for boosted tree algorithms
 . In recent years, XGBOOST, due to its advantages of
fast processing speed and high prediction accuracy, has
been employed by many winning teams of a number of
machine learning competitions, e.g. .
• LASSO regression is a shrinkage and variable selection
technique aimed at enhancing the prediction accuracy and
interpretability of the linear regression model it produces
 , , . It attempts to ﬁnd a subset of predictors that
minimize the prediction error of the response variable,
which is achieved by imposing a constraint on model
parameters to make regression coefﬁcients for some
predictor variables shrink down to 0. Given the feature
vectors encoding cardinalities of cards are very sparse,
LASSO is employed as another base regression model in
the ﬁrst stage of our network. It attenuates and effectively
excludes certain variables from the model, while the
variables with non-zero coefﬁcients are considered as
strongly associated with the target variable.
Among other primary models that deserve some attention
despite not being selected to the ﬁnal network was a Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) with variable number of neurons.
Among a wide range of conﬁgurations trialled we found a
network with 50 input neurons, one hidden layer of size 20,
and a single linear-activation output neuron to be the best
performing model of this kind. Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation was set for all input- and hidden-layer neurons.
It should be noted however, that we managed to maximize
the generalization performance of this network only after
introduction of recently popular regularization techniques:
batch normalization and dropout after the ﬁrst two dense
layers. We decided to use this particular model as a benchmark
model for our regression network, yet did not include it in the
network itself.
Each of the base regression models in the ﬁrst stage was
individually trained over the whole training set. The second
stage was built on top of the ﬁrst stage with a goal of
learning to correct its predictions. Experimentations concluded
very decisively that just a single ELM with optimized hyperparameters is best at learning to correct the primary regressors’
LING CEN ET AL.: REGRESSION NETWORKS FOR ROBUST WIN-RATES PREDICTIONS OF AI GAMING BOTS
outputs and hence to further improve the generalization ability
of the whole network. As a result, the entire regression
network became a hybrid model with a decision level fusion in
the top layer realized using the ELMs. It was very important,
however, for the robustness of the emerging 2-level regression
network to train the second layer on the cross-validated outputs
of the ﬁrst layer such that the second layer regression used
only out-of-sample rather than in-sample prediction outputs.
V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
As already partly explained in the previous section, many
experimental trials were performed to determine the best
composition of the ﬁrst and the second stages of the regression
network as well as optimize all the individual and joint hyperparameters. All the experiments were based upon both kfold cross-validation over the training dataset and the external
feedback in a form of performance scores published in the
web-based KnowledgePit platform and calculated for only
10% of the test examples. Eventually, the best structure of
the network consists of 9 kernelized ELMs, an XGBOOST,
and a LASSO regression models in the ﬁrst level that are
connected to another ELM model in the 2nd level, is shown
schematically in Fig. 2.
The parameters of the individual regression models were
optimized over the k-fold cross-validated training set using
Bayesian or grid optimization. The optimal network setup
included 9 ELM models with radial-basis-function kernels of
width , XGBOOST model with
learning rate 0.01, re-sampling rate 0.2, maximum tree depth 2
and 100000 iterations, and the LASSO regression model with
100 lambdas and up to 100 non-zero weights. The ELM in
the second stage used RBF kernel with a small width γ < 1.
The ﬁnal solution that we submitted to the competition
received the RMSE of 5.0% based on the preliminary evaluation on the 10% of all test examples, and the ﬁnal score
of 5.65% on the whole test set. The best RMSE scores on
the preliminary leaderboard evaluation achieved individually
using each base regression model were 5.88% for ELM with
40-wide RBF kernel, 6.64% for XGBOOST, and 6.87% for
LASSO. For comparison, our benchmark single-stage MLP
regression model achieved RMSE of 5.69% on the same 10%
subset of the test set and 5.86% on the whole test set (6th best
score), showing robustness to over-ﬁtting yet still remaining
slightly behind the proposed two-level regression network.
The above ﬁgures prove that the introduction of the shallow
hierarchy with just a single regressor in the 2nd level was an
adequate choice leading to a noticeable performance improvement compared to the base models.
VI. DISCUSSION
It is found that better individual performers of base models
may not lead to better combined output. Indeed the removal of
GP and SVM regressors, although individually top in-sample
performers, surprisingly led to improved performance of the
whole network.
To further improve the network performance we have
introduce speciﬁc regularization ﬁlter applied on the ﬁnal
test outputs in order to enforce similar global (higher order)
statistics observed in the training set. The ﬁlter included
3 constraints: shift towards the desired mean, stretching or
compressing the variance around the desired mean and forcing
the shift of the differences among bot-player individual winrates towards the same relative differences observed in the
training set.
Deeper structures with multiple concatenated ELMs in the
2nd level have also been tested to no statistically signiﬁcant
improvement in the generalization ability of the network
compared to the architecture shown in Fig. 2. If 2 ELMs were
concatenated in the 2nd stage, with different kernel widths, the
resulting preliminary test RMSE was in a range of [5.05, 5.1].
Similarly, a network with a 4-ELMs chain in the second level
received the same RMSE of 5.1%. These observations indicate
that further attempts to correct regression errors bring no
additional value to the design instead just modeling propagated
noise and bringing re-optimization overhead.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The regression network presented in this paper has been
developed and submitted as a competitive entry to the AAIA
Data Mining Competition 2018, concerned with the prediction
of win-rates of four AI bot players, playing the game "Heartstone: Heros of Warcraft" among each other with different
initial decks of cards and hero characters. The proposed regression was hierarchically designed to combine the advantages
of Extreme Learning Machine and few other complementary
state-of-the-art regression models in the ﬁrst level and improve
the ﬁnal performance through supervised decision fusion and
error correction in the second level. Our solution received the
ﬁnal RMSE of 5.65% and scored the 2nd place in AAIA’2018
Data Mining Competition.