Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures
with Level Sets
C. Baillard and C. Barillot
IRISA-INRIA/CNRS, Campus de Beaulieu,
35042 Rennes cedex, France
{Caroline.Baillard,Christian.Barillot}@irisa.fr
Abstract This paper is concerned with the use of the level set formalism to segment anatomical structures in 3D medical images (ultrasound or magnetic resonance images). A closed 3D surface propagates towards the desired boundaries
through the iterative evolution of a 4D implicit function. The major contribution of this work is the design of a robust evolution model based on adaptive
parameters depending on the data. First the iteration step and the external propagation force, both usually constant, are automatically computed at each iteration.
Additionally, region-based information rather than the gradient is used, via an
estimation of intensity probability density functions over the image. As a result,
the method can be applied to various kinds of data. Quantitative and qualitative
results on brain MR images and 3D echographies of carotid arteries are discussed.
Introduction
The 3D segmentation of anatomical structures is crucial for many medical applications,
both for visualization and clinical diagnosis purposes. Due to the huge amount of data
and the complexity of anatomical structures, manual segmentation is extremely tedious
and often inconsistent. Automatic segmentation methods are required to fully exploit
3D data. It is a very challenging task because they can usually not rely on image information only. Anatomical tissues are generally not homogeneous and their boundaries
are not clearly deﬁned in the images. It is therefore often necessary to involve prior
knowledge about the shape or the radiometric behaviour of the structure of interest.
Deformable models deﬁne a powerful tool to accurately recover a structure using
very few assumptions about its shape . Such a model iteratively evolves towards the
desired location according to a global energy minimization process. The functional energy is based on external forces derived from the data and internal forces related to the
geometry of the contour. The limitations of this approach are well-known: the contour
must be initialized close to the desired boundaries, and it can not cope with signiﬁcant
protusions nor topological changes. In the last few years, segmentation methods based
on level sets have become very popular because they overcome classical limits of deformable models . The evolving surface can change topology and cope with
complex geometry, and the result is less dependent on initialization than with any other
iterative method. This kind of approach has already been applied within a wide range of
applications in computer vision. However, parametrization is still a limitation for practical use. Several evolution models have been proposed, but most of them include many
S.L. Delp, A.M. DiGioia, and B. Jaramaz (Eds.): MICCAI 2000, LNCS 1935, pp. 236–245, 2000.
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2000
Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures with Level Sets
parameters to be tuned: iteration step, weighting parameters, constant propagation term,
etc. The tuning of these parameters determines the success of the method.
This paper describes a robust evolution model which enables a volume to be segmented with almost no parameter setting. It involves adaptive parameters depending on
the data, and it relies on region-based information rather than gradient, via an estimation
of intensity probability density functions over the image. The versatility of the segmentation is demonstrated on both brain structures in MR images and carotid arteries in 3D
echography. Our strategy is presented in section 2. The two main stages of the method
- intensity distribution analysis and surface evolution - are described in sections 3 and
4. Experimental results are presented and discussed in section 5.
Segmentation Strategy Based on Level Sets
Within the level set formulation , the evolving surface S(t) is processed as a propagating front embedded as the zero level of a 4D scalar function Ψ(x, t). This hypersurface is usually deﬁned as the signed distance from x to the front S (negative inside the
object). The evolution rule for Ψ is:
∂t + F|∇Ψ| = 0,
where F is a scalar velocity function depending on the local geometric properties of the
front (local curvature) and external parameters related to the input data (image gradient
for instance). The hypersurface Ψ deforms iteratively according to F, and the position of the 3D front S(t) is deduced from Ψ at each iteration step using the relation
Ψ(x(t), t) = 0. Practically, the hypersurface Ψ n+1 at step n + 1 is computed from Ψ n
at step n using the relation:
Ψ n+1(x) = Ψ n(x) −∆t.F|∇Ψ n(x)|,
The design of the velocity function F plays the major role in the evolution process.
Several formulations have been proposed . We have chosen the original
formulation given by Malladi et.al. for its simplicity:
F = hI(ν −ρκ)
The term ν represents an external propagation force which makes the surface contract
or expand. The parameter κ represents the local curvature of the front and acts as a
regularization term. The weighting ρ expresses the importance given to regularization.
Finally, the term hI is the data consistency term: it depends on the intensity I of the
input data, and acts as a stopping factor at the location of the desired boundaries.
In the following, our deﬁnition of the parameters introduced in equations (2) and (3)
is presented. They are deﬁned with respect to the intensity probability density functions
(PDFs) estimated inside and outside the structure. These PDFs will be respectively denoted pi(I) and pe(I), and the prior probability for a voxel to be inside the structure
will be denoted αi. Our general strategy is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. The PDFs are ﬁrst estimated by using both the initial segmentation and given statistical distribution models.
This allows the parameters of the velocity function to be computed for the evolution of
the hypersurface. The two stages are further described in the next two sections.
C. Baillard and C. Barillot
Evolution of Ψ
Initial segmentation
Final segmentation
Intensity distribution
distribution
Statistical
Fig.1. Strategy for 3D segmentation. The velocity function controlling the surface evolution is computed according to the estimated intensity density functions inside and
outside the structure.
Estimation of Intensity Probability Density Functions
We assume that the intensity distribution of the input image can be written as a generalized mixture of n kernels. Furthermore, these kernels do not necessarily have the same
form. In this work, we have considered two kinds of laws: the Gaussian distribution and
the shifted Rayleigh distribution.
Each component k is associated to a class labelled by λk and described by the variable Φk, which characterizes the kernel distribution and the prior probability P(λk) =
πk of a voxel belonging to the class λk. The distribution mixture is thus described by
the variable Φ = {Φk, 1 ≤k ≤n}. We begin by estimating Φ using the Stochastic
Expectation-Maximisation (SEM) algorithm, which is a stochastic version of the EM
algorithm . Whilst the SEM algorithm is less sensitive to initialization than the EM
algorithm, it is not guaranteed to ﬁnd a local maximum of the likelihood surface, and
the initialization of Φk is still important. For this initialization, we have distinguished
two cases according to the value of n.
If n = 2, the distribution mixture is bimodal, i.e., the object to be segmented and
its background can each be approximated by a monomodal distribution. In this case,
the surface initializing the segmentation process is used to produce two independent
histograms from the input image: one for the initial segmentation and one for its background. The variables Φ0 and Φ1 characterizing the bimodal mixture are independently
estimated over these complete data, providing two coarse estimates ˆ
implicitely assumes that the intensity distribution inside and outside the initial segmentation are somehow representative of the distributions to be estimated. The bimodal
approach is depicted in ﬁgure 2. Figure 3 shows an example of PDFs estimated with
this method for the image shown in ﬁgure 6. The bimodal model is not perfect, but it is
good enough to separate the two main classes of the image.
If the distribution is not bimodal (case of brain MR images, see ﬁgure 5 for instance), the local maxima of the histogram are used as an initial guess for the center
of the kernels, and the prior probabilities πk are initialized equal to each other. This
initial guess of Φ is then processed by the SEM algorithm, providing an estimation of
πk and P(I|λk) for each class λk. Among these n classes, only one or two characterize the structure to be segmented; the set of these classes will be noted Λi, and the
complementary set of the classes exterior to the object will be noted Λe. The classes
deﬁning Λi can be given as input parameters of the algorithm (number of classes and
Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures with Level Sets
Distribution models
Complete data
Initial segmentation
+ input image
Fig.2. Estimation of the mixture model parameters when the distribution is bimodal.
Fig.3. Estimation of the intensity mixture model parameters on the ultrasound image of
ﬁgure 6 (bimodal case). The solid line represents the normalized histogram of the input
image. The dash line is the estimated PDF inside the carotid arterie and the dashdot line
is the estimated PDF outside it.
approximative mean value). Alternatively they can be automatically determined from
the initialization of the surface (required for the segmentation process): only the classes
highly represented inside the initial surface are said to belong to Λi. Once the sets Λi
and Λe have been deﬁned, the estimated intensity distributions inside and outside the
object can be deﬁned as:
pi(I) = 
k/λk∈Λi πkP(I|λk)
k/λk∈Λe πkP(I|λk),
and the prior probability for a voxel to be inside the structure:
An example of estimated multimodal distribution mixture is shown in ﬁgure 4.
The SEM algorithm does not guarantee the optimal solution, but in practice any
initial partition roughly representative of the inner and the outer distribution leads to a
correct solution. In particular, the initial surface does not need to be close to the real
boundaries.
C. Baillard and C. Barillot
Fig.4. Estimation of the intensity mixture model parameters on brain MRI. The solid
line represents the normalized histogram of the input image. The dash line is the estimated PDF inside the brain and the dashdot line is the estimated PDF outside the brain.
Evolution Model
External Propagation Term ν
In equation (3), the sign of ν determines the direction of the external propagation force.
Several approaches to 3D segmentation using this evolution model have imposed a oneway propagation force ν, which either contracts or expands the whole surface all along
the process . However, when the initial position of the surface can be predicted
(by tracking or by registration with an atlas for instance), the predicted and real positions usually overlap. It is therefore necessary to let the surface evolve in both directions. Some propagation models have been designed in order to solve this problem in
2D, by involving a local analysis of intensity .
The problem can be expressed as the classiﬁcation of each point of the current
interface S(t). If a point belongs to the object then the surface should locally extend; if it
does not, the surface should contract. We perform this classiﬁcation by maximizing the
a posteriori segmentation probability p(λ|I), where λ denotes the appartenance class
of the considered point. According to Bayes rule, the maximization of the posterior
distribution p(λ|I) is equivalent to the maximization of p(λ)p(I|λ), where p(λ) is the
prior of the class λ and p(I|λ) is the likelihood of intensity. The propagation term ν has
then been deﬁned as:
ν = Sign{αipi(I) −(1 −αi)pe(I)}
The propagation term ν is therefore positive if p(λi|I) > p(λe|I). The point is more
likely to be inside the object than outside, and the surface extends. Note, we always
have |ν| = 1. Experiments with a continous-varying function have not shown any improvement. Besides, this simple deﬁnition needs no tuning.
Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures with Level Sets
Curvature Term ρκ
The regularization parameter κ at a point x is the curvature of the interface, computed
at the closest point to x. This curvature is computed using the partial derivatives of Ψ.
The respective roles of the propagation and the regularization terms are entirely
determined by the weight ρ, which makes the process very easy to tune. The weighting
parameter ρ can be interpreted as the particular curvature radius leading to a stable
position (F = 0).
Stopping Factor h
The stopping factor is a data consistency term traditionally related to the intensity gradient ∇I of the input image . Since this gradient is only deﬁned for points belonging to
the interface (zero level set of the hypersurface), an extended gradient function needs to
be deﬁned over IR3 by the intensity gradient of the closest neighbour on the interface.
However, gradient information has no meaning for very noisy and/or low-contrasted
images (like ultrasound data). Besides, high gradients do not necessarily indicates a
relevant boundary between the structure to be segmented and its background.
Similarly to the approach described in in the 2D case, we have related this term
to the posterior probability of having a transition between the object and its background.
Let x be a voxel of the current interface, and λ the estimated class of x; the parameter
λ is supposed to be known here because it is taken into account via the sign of ν. The
posterior probability of x being a transition, given I and λ, is given by:
pT (x|I, λ) =
p(x −n ∈¯O|I)
p(x −n ∈O|I)
|∆Ψ| is the current normal vector of the hypersurface, O is the object to
be segmented and ¯O its complementary. If ν > 0, the posterior transition probability
of x is the probability of the neighbouring voxel x′ = x −n (located outside the
current volume) to be located outside the object to be segmented. Using Bayes rule, this
transition probability can be expressed as :
pT (x|I, λ) =
(1−αi)pe(I(x′))
αipi(I(x′))+(1−αi)pe(I(x′))
αipi(I(x′))
αipi(I(x′))+(1−αi)pe(I(x′))
The stopping factor hI at a point x belonging to the interface is ﬁnally deﬁned
as a decreasing function of pT (x|I, λ). Since this probability is only deﬁned on the
interface, it is extended to IR3 via the closest point on the current interface:
hI(x) = g(pT (˜x|I, λ))
where g is decreasing from [0; 1] to [0; 1], and ˜x is the closest point to x on the interface.
Iteration Step ∆t
The iteration step ∆t of equation (2) is usually constant and manually tuned. We propose to compute it automatically at each iteration in order to improve robustness.
C. Baillard and C. Barillot
The stability of the process requires a numerical scheme for the computation of
∆Ψ, called upwind sheme. This scheme induces a limit on the iteration step ∆t, called
the CFL restriction (Courant-Friedrichs-Levy). More precisely, writing equation (1) as
Ψt + H(Ψx, Ψy, Ψz) = 0, where H is the Hamiltonian deﬁned by:
H(u, v, w) =
u2 + v2 + w2.F,
the CFL restriction can be expressed in 3D as:
1 ≥∆t.(|Hu|
where Hu, Hv, Hw denote the partial derivatives of H with respect to u, v, w. Since we
work with a regular sampling grid, we can assume ∆x = ∆y = ∆z = 1. According
to equation (3) and the deﬁnition of the parameters involved, the velocity function F
is independent from u, v, w. The terms hI and ν only depends on the image data. The
curvature term κ is the curvature of the interface at the closest point, and it does not
depend on the local characteristics of Ψ. Therefore the partial derivatives of H can be
directly computed from (10) at each iteration of the process, and the best value for ∆t
which guarantees stability is given by:
∆t = min{ 1
u2 + v2 + w2
|u| + |v| + |w| }
Experimental Results
Segmentation of Brain MR Images
The segmentation algorithm was run on simulated data provided by the MNI . They
consist of a phantom collected with 3 levels of noise and inhomogeneity, associated
to a reference classiﬁcation. The method was applied to segment the whole brain (grey
matter + white matter) and numerically assessed with overlapping measures: sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, and total performance . The segmentation was initialized with a cube
100 × 70 × 70, and the classes of interest (grey matter + white matter) automatically
determined as described in section 3. It was compared with a segmentation method
based on morphological operators and tuned with a “best practice” parameter set. The
numerical results of both methods are summarized in table 1. The total performance
achieved with our algorithm is stable around 98.3%, even in critical conditions (9%
noise and 40% inhomogeneity). This is far better than the other method which is very
dependent on noise. The improvement mainly concerns the sensitivity of the detection.
Experiments have also been run on a database of 18 MR images (volume size
256 × 256 × 176). All the subjects have been processed in the same way, and using
exactly the same parameter set. The iteration step is automatically computed, as well as
the threshold on intensity values. The weighting parameter on regularization has been
set to ρ = 3 (see eq. 3), which has appeared to be a good compromise to avoid propagation out of the brain (possible when the cerebro-spinal ﬂuid area is thiner than the
image resolution), whilst preserving the highly convoluted characteristics of the cortical surface. Out of the 18 subjects, only 1 segmentation failed, and the failure could be
detected because the propagation speed started to increase (it should keep decreasing).
Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures with Level Sets
Levels sets
Morphological ﬁltering
Nb iter Sens.
Spec. Total
Sens. Spec.
0% noise, 0% inhom.
96.2% 99.0% 98.3% 86.7% 98.7%
3% noise, 20% inhom.
96.3% 98.9% 98.2% 83.5% 99%
9% noise, 40% inhom.
95.95% 98.9% 98.2% 69.8% 99.5%
Table1. Quantitative assessment on the phantom. The number of iterations, the sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and total performance measures are given for three levels of noise and
two segmentation methods: the method based on level sets (initialization with a cube
100 × 70 × 70) and a segmentation method based on morphological operators.
All the other 17 subjects were correctly segmented. Figure 5 shows the segmentation
results on two different subjects. Protusions of brain and ventricles are properly recovered, despite of the surface being initialized far away from it. The method can naturally
cope with change of topology: the ventricles inside the brain have also been recovered.
On average, 1000 iterations are necessary to segment the whole brain on real data starting from a 100 × 70 × 70 cube. The number of iterations can be reduced to 300 if the
surface is initialized close to the real boundaries by a registration technique (see for
Segmentation of 3D Ultrasound Images
The method has also been applied to 3D ultrasound images of carotid artery. This kind
of images is difﬁcult to segment automatically due to the speckle noise. The intensity
distribution inside the carotid has been modelized by a Gaussian (shadow area), whereas
the exterior is modelized by a Rayleigh distribution (reverberation area) . We have
used a weighting value of ρ = 10 for regularization. All the other parameters are the
same as for experiments on brain MRI. Figures 6 and 7 show the results of segmentation on two different images. They allow us to be very optimistic about the use of this
statistical variational approach to segment 3D ultrasound images.
Conclusion and Further Work
This paper has presented a robust evolution model for segmenting structures in 3D images using the level set formalism. The level set approach is very appropriate to segment
anatomical structures without strong prior information. The statistical analysis of intensity distributions provides relevant information about input data. The design of an adaptive evolution force and an adaptive iteration step provides a good trade-off between
convergence speed and stability. Almost no parameter needs to be tuned, only the regularization weight ρ has to be set depending on the data shape and noise. Good quality
results have been produced on brain MRI and 3D echographies of carotid. The results
demonstrate that a variational approach mixed with region-based analysis (statistical
models) signiﬁcantly improves the sensitivity and the robustness of the segmentation.
Thanks to the genericity of the method, the segmentation can be achieved for various
image modalities and various kinds of anatomical structure. Our goal is now to focus
on 3D ultrasound. Due to speckle noise, a method mixing variational and statistical
models should be particularly appropriate to achieve good automatic segmentation. For
C. Baillard and C. Barillot
Fig.5. Brain segmentation for two different subjects (initialization with a cube of size
70 × 100 × 100 located inside the brain). The ﬁrst three columns respectively show
axial, coronal and saggital planes, the last column shows 3-D views of the segmented
Fig.6. Segmentation result on a 256 × 256 × 80 ultrasound image of carotid (isotropic
voxels). (a): initialization of the segmentation with a 10 × 10 × 25 cube. (b,c,d): ﬁnal
segmentation (three visualization planes). (e) 3D view of the segmented carotid.
Fig.7. Three transaxial slices and a 3D view of a segmented subpart of carotid (non
isotropic voxels). The 256 × 256 × 36 input image was initialized with a 50 × 50 × 25
cube inside the carotid.
Robust 3D Segmentation of Anatomical Structures with Level Sets
this purpose, it will be necessary to involve more prior information about the shape of
the anatomic structure.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Drs L. Pourcelot and F. Tranquart from
Tours university hospital and Dr A. Fenster from RRI (London, Ontario) for providing the US
data, and the GIS “Sciences de la cognition” for granting the MR acquisition project.