PERSPECTIVE
The future of digital health with federated learning
Nicola Rieke
1,2✉, Jonny Hancox3, Wenqi Li
4, Fausto Milletarì1, Holger R. Roth
5, Shadi Albarqouni
2,6, Spyridon Bakas7,
Mathieu N. Galtier8, Bennett A. Landman
9, Klaus Maier-Hein
10,11, Sébastien Ourselin12, Micah Sheller13, Ronald M. Summers
Andrew Trask15,16,17, Daguang Xu5, Maximilian Baust1 and M. Jorge Cardoso
Data-driven machine learning (ML) has emerged as a promising approach for building accurate and robust statistical models from
medical data, which is collected in huge volumes by modern healthcare systems. Existing medical data is not fully exploited by ML
primarily because it sits in data silos and privacy concerns restrict access to this data. However, without access to sufﬁcient data, ML
will be prevented from reaching its full potential and, ultimately, from making the transition from research to clinical practice. This
paper considers key factors contributing to this issue, explores how federated learning (FL) may provide a solution for the future of
digital health and highlights the challenges and considerations that need to be addressed.
npj Digital Medicine 3:119 ; 
INTRODUCTION
Research on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and particularly the
advances in machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)1 have
led to disruptive innovations in radiology, pathology, genomics
and other ﬁelds. Modern DL models feature millions of parameters
that need to be learned from sufﬁciently large curated data sets in
order to achieve clinical-grade accuracy, while being safe, fair,
equitable and generalising well to unseen data2–5.
For example, training an AI-based tumour detector requires a
large database encompassing the full spectrum of possible
anatomies, pathologies, and input data types. Data like this is hard
to obtain, because health data is highly sensitive and its usage is
tightly regulated6. Even if data anonymisation could bypass these
limitations, it is now well understood that removing metadata such
as patient name or date of birth is often not enough to preserve
privacy7. It is, for example, possible to reconstruct a patient’s face
from computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) data8. Another reason why data sharing is not systematic in
healthcare is that collecting, curating, and maintaining a high-quality
data set takes considerable time, effort, and expense. Consequently
such data sets may have signiﬁcant business value, making it less
likely that they will be freely shared. Instead, data collectors often
retain ﬁne-grained control over the data that they have gathered.
Federated learning (FL)9–11 is a learning paradigm seeking to
address the problem of data governance and privacy by training
algorithms collaboratively without exchanging the data itself.
Originally developed for different domains, such as mobile and
edge device use cases12, it recently gained traction for healthcare
applications13–20. FL enables gaining insights collaboratively, e.g., in
the form of a consensus model, without moving patient data
beyond the ﬁrewalls of the institutions in which they reside. Instead,
the ML process occurs locally at each participating institution and
only model characteristics (e.g., parameters, gradients) are transferred as depicted in Fig. 1. Recent research has shown that models
trained by FL can achieve performance levels comparable to ones
trained on centrally hosted data sets and superior to models that
only see isolated single-institutional data16,17.
A successful implementation of FL could thus hold a signiﬁcant
potential for enabling precision medicine at large-scale, leading to
models that yield unbiased decisions, optimally reﬂect an
individual’s physiology, and are sensitive to rare diseases while
respecting governance and privacy concerns. However, FL still
requires rigorous technical consideration to ensure that the
algorithm is proceeding optimally without compromising safety
or patient privacy. Nevertheless, it has the potential to overcome
the limitations of approaches that require a single pool of
centralised data.
We envision a federated future for digital health and with this
perspective paper, we share our consensus view with the aim of
providing context and detail for the community regarding the
beneﬁts and impact of FL for medical applications (section “Datadriven medicine requires federated efforts”), as well as highlighting
key considerations and challenges of implementing FL for digital
health (section “Technical considerations”).
DATA-DRIVEN MEDICINE REQUIRES FEDERATED EFFORTS
ML and especially DL is becoming the de facto knowledge
discovery approach in many industries, but successfully implementing data-driven applications requires large and diverse data
sets. However, medical data sets are difﬁcult to obtain (subsection
“The reliance on data”). FL addresses this issue by enabling
collaborative learning without centralising data (subsection “The
promise of federated efforts”) and has already found its way to
digital health applications (subsection “Current FL efforts for
digital health”). This new learning paradigm requires consideration
from, but also offers beneﬁts to, various healthcare stakeholders
(section “Impact on stakeholders”).
The reliance on data
Data-driven approaches rely on data that truly represent the
underlying data distribution of the problem. While this is a wellknown
requirement,
state-of-the-art
algorithms
1NVIDIA GmbH, Munich, Germany. 2Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany. 3NVIDIA Ltd, Reading, UK. 4NVIDIA Ltd, Cambridge, UK. 5NVIDIA Corporation,
Bethesda, USA. 6Imperial College London, London, UK. 7University of Pennsylvania (UPenn), Philadelphia, PA, USA. 8Owkin, Paris, France. 9Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
10German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 11Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. 12King’s College London (KCL), London, UK. 13Intel
Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA. 14Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA. 15OpenMined, Oxford, UK. 16University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 17Centre for
the Governance of AI (GovAI), Oxford, UK. ✉email: 
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
1234567890():,;
evaluated on carefully curated data sets, often originating from
only a few sources. This can introduce biases where demographics
(e.g., gender, age) or technical imbalances (e.g., acquisition
manufacturer)
predictions
adversely affect the accuracy for certain groups or sites. However,
to capture subtle relationships between disease patterns, socioeconomic and genetic factors, as well as complex and rare cases, it
is crucial to expose a model to diverse cases.
The need for large databases for AI training has spawned many
initiatives seeking to pool data from multiple institutions. This data
is often amassed into so-called Data Lakes. These have been built
with the aim of leveraging either the commercial value of data, e.g.,
IBM’s Merge Healthcare acquisition21, or as a resource for economic
growth and scientiﬁc progress, e.g., NHS Scotland’s National Safe
Haven22, French Health Data Hub23, and Health Data Research UK24.
Substantial,
initiatives
Connectome25, the UK Biobank26, the Cancer Imaging Archive
(TCIA)27, NIH CXR828, NIH DeepLesion29, the Cancer Genome Atlas
Alzheimer’s
Neuroimaging
Initiative
(ADNI)31, as well as medical grand challenges32 such as the
CAMELYON challenge33, the International multimodal Brain Tumor
Segmentation (BraTS) challenge34–36 or the Medical Segmentation
Decathlon37. Public medical data is usually task- or disease-speciﬁc
and often released with varying degrees of license restrictions,
sometimes limiting its exploitation.
Centralising
regulatory, ethical and legal challenges, related to privacy and
data protection, but also technical ones. Anonymising, controlling
access and safely transferring healthcare data is a non-trivial, and
sometimes impossible task. Anonymised data from the electronic
health record can appear innocuous and GDPR/PHI compliant, but
just a few data elements may allow for patient reidentiﬁcation7.
The same applies to genomic data and medical images making
ﬁngerprint38.
Therefore,
anonymisation process destroys the ﬁdelity of the data, likely
reidentiﬁcation
information
leakage cannot be ruled out. Gated access for approved users is
often proposed as a putative solution to this issue. However,
besides limiting data availability, this is only practical for cases in
which the consent granted by the data owners is unconditional,
since recalling data from those who may have had access to the
data is practically unenforceable.
The promise of federated efforts
The promise of FL is simple—to address privacy and data
governance challenges by enabling ML from non-co-located data.
In a FL setting, each data controller not only deﬁnes its own
governance processes and associated privacy policies, but also
controls data access and has the ability to revoke it. This includes
both the training, as well as the validation phase. In this way, FL
could create new opportunities, e.g., by allowing large-scale, ininstitutional validation, or by enabling novel research on rare
diseases, where the incident rates are low and data sets at each
single institution are too small. Moving the model to the data and
not vice versa has another major advantage: high-dimensional,
storage-intense medical data does not have to be duplicated from
local institutions in a centralised pool and duplicated again by
every user that uses this data for local model training. As the
model is transferred to the local institutions, it can scale naturally
with a potentially growing global data set without disproportionately increasing data storage requirements.
As depicted in Fig. 2, a FL workﬂow can be realised with different
topologies and compute plans. The two most common ones for
healthcare applications are via an aggregation server16–18 and peer
to peer approaches15,39. In all cases, FL implicitly offers a certain
degree of privacy, as FL participants never directly access data from
other institutions and only receive model parameters that are
aggregated over several participants. In a FL workﬂow with
aggregation server, the participating institutions can even remain
unknown to each other. However, it has been shown that the models
Example federated learning (FL) workﬂows and difference to learning on a Centralised Data Lake. a FL aggregation server—the
typical FL workﬂow in which a federation of training nodes receive the global model, resubmit their partially trained models to a central server
intermittently for aggregation and then continue training on the consensus model that the server returns. b FL peer to peer—alternative
formulation of FL in which each training node exchanges its partially trained models with some or all of its peers and each does its own
aggregation. c Centralised training—the general non-FL training workﬂow in which data acquiring sites donate their data to a central Data
Lake from which they and others are able to extract data for local, independent training.
N. Rieke et al.
npj Digital Medicine 119
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
1234567890():,;
themselves can, under certain conditions, memorise information40–43.
Therefore, mechanisms such as differential privacy44,45 or learning
from encrypted data have been proposed to further enhance privacy
in a FL setting (c.f. section “Technical considerations”). Overall, the
potential of FL for healthcare applications has sparked interest in the
community46 and FL techniques are a growing area of research12,20.
Current FL efforts for digital health
Since FL is a general learning paradigm that removes the data
pooling requirement for AI model development, the application
range of FL spans the whole of AI for healthcare. By providing an
opportunity to capture larger data variability and to analyse
patients across different demographics, FL may enable disruptive
innovations for the future but is also being employed right now.
In the context of electronic health records (EHR), for example, FL
helps to represent and to ﬁnd clinically similar patients13,47, as well
as predicting hospitalisations due to cardiac events14, mortality
and ICU stay time19. The applicability and advantages of FL have
also been demonstrated in the ﬁeld of medical imaging, for
whole-brain segmentation in MRI15, as well as brain tumour
segmentation16,17. Recently, the technique has been employed for
fMRI classiﬁcation to ﬁnd reliable disease-related biomarkers18 and
suggested as a promising approach in the context of COVID-1948.
It is worth noting that FL efforts require agreements to deﬁne
the scope, aim and technologies used which, since it is still novel,
can be difﬁcult to pin down. In this context, today’s large-scale
initiatives really are the pioneers of tomorrow’s standards for safe,
fair and innovative collaboration in healthcare applications.
These include consortia that aim to advance academic research,
such as the Trustworthy Federated Data Analytics (TFDA) project49
and the German Cancer Consortium’s Joint Imaging Platform50,
which enable decentralised research across German medical
imaging research institutions. Another example is an international
research collaboration that uses FL for the development of AI
models for the assessment of mammograms51. The study showed
that the FL-generated models outperformed those trained on a
single institute’s data and were more generalisable, so that they
still performed well on other institutes’ data. However, FL is not
limited just to academic environments.
By linking healthcare institutions, not restricted to research
have direct
HealthChain project52, for example, aims to develop and deploy
a FL framework across four hospitals in France. This solution
generates common models that can predict treatment response
for breast cancer and melanoma patients. It helps oncologists to
determine the most effective treatment for each patient from their
histology slides or dermoscopy images. Another large-scale effort
is the Federated Tumour Segmentation (FeTS) initiative53, which is
an international federation of 30 committed healthcare institutions using an open-source FL framework with a graphical user
interface. The aim is to improve tumour boundary detection,
including brain glioma, breast tumours, liver tumours and bone
lesions from multiple myeloma patients.
Another area of impact is within industrial research and
translation. FL enables collaborative research for, even competing,
companies. In this context, one of the largest initiatives is the
Melloddy project54. It is a project aiming to deploy multi-task FL
across the data sets of 10 pharmaceutical companies. By training a
common predictive model, which infers how chemical compounds
bind to proteins, partners intend to optimise the drug discovery
process without revealing their highly valuable in-house data.
Impact on stakeholders
FL comprises a paradigm shift from centralised data lakes and it is
important to understand its impact on the various stakeholders in
a FL ecosystem.
Clinicians.
Clinicians are usually exposed to a sub-group of the
population based on their location and demographic environment, which may cause biased assumptions about the probability
of certain diseases or their interconnection. By using ML-based
systems, e.g., as a second reader, they can augment their own
expertise with expert knowledge from other institutions, ensuring
a consistency of diagnosis not attainable today. While this applies
to ML-based system in general, systems trained in a federated
fashion are potentially able to yield even less biased decisions and
higher sensitivity to rare cases as they were likely exposed to a
more complete data distribution. However, this demands some
compliance
agreements,
regarding the data structure, annotation and report protocol,
which is necessary to ensure that the information is presented to
collaborators in a commonly understood format.
Overview of different FL design choices. FL topologies—communication architecture of a federation. a Centralised: the aggregation
server coordinates the training iterations and collects, aggregates and distributes the models to and from the Training Nodes (Hub & Spoke).
b Decentralised: each training node is connected to one or more peers and aggregation occurs on each node in parallel. c Hierarchical:
federated networks can be composed from several sub-federations, which can be built from a mix of Peer to Peer and Aggregation Server
federations (d)). FL compute plans—trajectory of a model across several partners. e Sequential training/cyclic transfer learning. f Aggregation
server, g Peer to Peer.
N. Rieke et al.
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
npj Digital Medicine 119
Patients are usually treated locally. Establishing FL on a
global scale could ensure high quality of clinical decisions
regardless of the treatment location. In particular, patients
requiring medical attention in remote areas could beneﬁt from
the same high-quality ML-aided diagnoses that are available in
hospitals with a large number of cases. The same holds true for
rare, or geographically uncommon, diseases, that are likely to have
milder consequences if faster and more accurate diagnoses can be
made. FL may also lower the hurdle for becoming a data donor,
since patients can be reassured that the data remains with their
own institution and data access can be revoked.
Hospitals and practices.
Hospitals and practices can remain in full
control and possession of their patient data with complete
traceability of data access, limiting the risk of misuse by third
parties. However, this will require investment in on-premise
computing infrastructure or private-cloud service provision and
adherence to standardised and synoptic data formats so that ML
models can be trained and evaluated seamlessly. The amount of
necessary compute capability depends of course on whether a site
is only participating in evaluation and testing efforts or also in
training efforts. Even relatively small institutions can participate
and they will still beneﬁt from collective models generated.
Researchers and AI developers.
Researchers and AI developers
stand to beneﬁt from access to a potentially vast collection of realworld data, which will particularly impact smaller research labs
and start-ups. Thus, resources can be directed towards solving
clinical needs and associated technical problems rather than
relying on the limited supply of open data sets. At the same time,
it will be necessary to conduct research on algorithmic strategies
for federated training, e.g., how to combine models or updates
efﬁciently, how to be robust to distribution shifts11,12,20. FL-based
development implies also that the researcher or AI developer
cannot investigate or visualise all of the data on which the model
is trained, e.g., it is not possible to look at an individual failure case
to understand why the current model performs poorly on it.
Healthcare providers.
Healthcare providers in many countries are
affected by the on-going paradigm shift from volume-based, i.e.,
fee-for-service-based, to value-based healthcare, which is in turn
strongly connected to the successful establishment of precision
medicine. This is not about promoting more expensive individualised therapies but instead about achieving better outcomes
sooner through more focused treatment, thereby reducing the
cost. FL has the potential to increase the accuracy and robustness
of healthcare AI, while reducing costs and improving patient
outcomes, and may therefore be vital to precision medicine.
Manufacturers.
Manufacturers of healthcare software and hardware could beneﬁt from FL as well, since combining the learning
from many devices and applications, without revealing patientspeciﬁc information, can facilitate the continuous validation or
improvement of their ML-based systems. However, realising such
a capability may require signiﬁcant upgrades to local compute,
data storage, networking capabilities and associated software.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
FL is perhaps best-known from the work of Konečnỳet al.55, but
various other deﬁnitions have been proposed in the literature9,11,12,20. A FL workﬂow (Fig. 1) can be realised via different
topologies and compute plans (Fig. 2), but the goal remains the
same, i.e., to combine knowledge learned from non-co-located
data. In this section, we will discuss in more detail what FL is, as
well as highlighting the key challenges and technical considerations that arise when applying FL in digital health.
Federated learning deﬁnition
FL is a learning paradigm in which multiple parties train
collaboratively without the need to exchange or centralise data
sets. A general formulation of FL reads as follows: Let L denote a
global loss function obtained via a weighted combination of K local
losses fLkgK
k¼1, computed from private data Xk, which is residing at
the individual involved parties and never shared among them:
wk LkðXk; ϕÞ;
where wk > 0 denote the respective weight coefﬁcients.
In practice, each participant typically obtains and reﬁnes a global
consensus model by conducting a few rounds of optimisation
locally and before sharing updates, either directly or via a
parameter server. The more rounds of local training are performed,
the less it is guaranteed that the overall procedure is minimising
(Eq. 1)9,12. The actual process for aggregating parameters depends
on the network topology, as nodes might be segregated into subnetworks due to geographical or legal constraints (see Fig. 2).
Aggregation strategies can rely on a single aggregating node (hub
and spokes models), or on multiple nodes without any centralisation. An example is peer-to-peer FL, where connections exist
between all or a subset of the participants and model updates are
shared only between directly connected sites15,56, whereas an
example of centralised FL aggregation is given in Algorithm 1. Note
that aggregation strategies do not necessarily require information
about the full model update; clients might chose to share only a
subset of the model parameters for the sake of reducing
communication overhead, ensure better privacy preservation10 or
to produce multi-task learning algorithms having only part of their
parameters learned in a federated manner.
A unifying framework enabling various training schemes may
disentangle compute resources (data and servers) from the
compute plan, as depicted in Fig. 2. The latter deﬁnes the
trajectory of a model across several partners, to be trained and
evaluated on speciﬁc data sets.
Algorithm 1. Example of a FL algorithm16 via Hub & Spoke
(Centralised topology) with FedAvg aggregation9.
Require: num_federated_rounds T
1: procedure AGGREGATING
2: Initialise global model: W(0)
3: for t ←1 ⋯T do
4: for client k ←1 ⋯K do
⊳Run in parallel
5: Send W(t−1) to client k
6: Receive model updates and number of local training iterations
; NkÞ from client’s local training with LkðXk; Wðt1ÞÞ
7: end for
8: WðtÞ Wðt1Þ þ
kðNk  Wðt1Þ
9: end for
10: return W(t)
11: end procedure
Challenges and considerations
Despite the advantages of FL, it does not solve all issues that are
inherent to learning on medical data. A successful model training
still depends on factors like data quality, bias and standardisation2.
These issues have to be solved for both federated and nonfederated learning efforts via appropriate measures, such as
careful study design, common protocols for data acquisition,
structured reporting and sophisticated methodologies for discovering bias and hidden stratiﬁcation. In the following, we touch
N. Rieke et al.
npj Digital Medicine 119
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
upon the key aspects of FL that are of particular relevance when
applied to digital health and need to be taken into account when
establishing FL. For technical details and in-depth discussion, we
refer the reader to recent surveys11,12,20.
Data heterogeneity.
Medical data is particularly diverse—not only
modalities,
dimensionality
characteristics in general, but even within a speciﬁc protocol
due to factors such as acquisition differences, brand of the
medical device or local demographics. FL may help address
certain sources of bias through potentially increased diversity of
data sources, but inhomogeneous data distribution poses a
challenge for FL algorithms and strategies, as many are assuming
independently and identically distributed (IID) data across the
participants. In general, strategies such as FedAvg9 are prone to fail
under these conditions9,57,58, in part defeating the very purpose of
collaborative learning strategies. Recent results, however, indicate
that FL training is still feasible59, even if medical data is not
uniformly distributed across the institutions16,17 or includes a local
bias51. Research addressing this problem includes, for example,
FedProx57, part-data-sharing strategy58 and FL with domainadaptation18. Another challenge is that data heterogeneity may
lead to a situation in which the global optimal solution may not be
optimal for an individual local participant. The deﬁnition of model
training optimality should, therefore, be agreed by all participants
before training.
Privacy and security.
Healthcare data is highly sensitive and must
be protected accordingly, following appropriate conﬁdentiality
procedures. Therefore, some of the key considerations are the
trade-offs, strategies and remaining risks regarding the privacypreserving potential of FL.
Privacy vs. performance: It is important to note that FL does not
solve all potential privacy issues and—similar to ML algorithms in
general—will always carry some risks. Privacy-preserving techniques for FL offer levels of protection that exceed today’s current
commercially available ML models12. However, there is a trade-off
in terms of performance and these techniques may affect, for
example, the accuracy of the ﬁnal model10. Furthermore, future
techniques and/or ancillary data could be used to compromise a
model previously considered to be low-risk.
Level of trust: Broadly speaking, participating parties can enter
two types of FL collaboration:
Trusted—for FL consortia in which all parties are considered
trustworthy and are bound by an enforceable collaboration
agreement, we can eliminate many of the more nefarious
motivations, such as deliberate attempts to extract sensitive
information or to intentionally corrupt the model. This reduces the
need for sophisticated counter-measures, falling back to the
principles of standard collaborative research.
Non-trusted—in FL systems that operate on larger scales, it might
be impractical to establish an enforceable collaborative agreement.
Some clients may deliberately try to degrade performance, bring the
system down or extract information from other parties. Hence,
security strategies will be required to mitigate these risks such as,
advanced encryption of model submissions, secure authentication
of all parties, traceability of actions, differential privacy, veriﬁcation
systems, execution integrity, model conﬁdentiality and protections
against adversarial attacks.
Information leakage: By deﬁnition, FL systems avoid sharing
healthcare data among participating institutions. However, the
shared information may still indirectly expose private data used for
local training, e.g., by model inversion60 of the model updates, the
gradients themselves61 or adversarial attacks62,63. FL is different from
traditional training insofar as the training process is exposed to
multiple parties, thereby increasing the risk of leakage via reverseengineering if adversaries can observe model changes over time,
observe speciﬁc model updates (i.e., a single institution’s update), or
manipulate the model (e.g., induce additional memorisation by
others through gradient-ascent-style attacks). Developing countermeasures, such as limiting the granularity of the updates and adding
noise16,18 and ensuring adequate differential privacy44, may be
needed and is still an active area of research12.
Traceability and accountability.
As per all safety-critical applications, the reproducibility of a system is important for FL in
healthcare. In contrast to centralised training, FL requires multiparty computations in environments that exhibit considerable
variety in terms of hardware, software and networks. Traceability
access history,
conﬁgurations, and hyperparameter tuning throughout the training
processes is thus mandatory. In particular in non-trusted federations,
traceability and accountability processes require execution integrity.
After the training process reaches the mutually agreed model
optimality criteria, it may also be helpful to measure the amount of
contribution from each participant, such as computational resources
consumed, quality of the data used for local training, etc. These
measurements could then be used to determine relevant compensation, and establish a revenue model among the participants64.
One implication of FL is that researchers are not able to investigate
data upon which models are being trained to make sense of
unexpected results. Moreover, taking statistical measurements of
their training data as part of the model development workﬂow will
need to be approved by the collaborating parties as not violating
privacy. Although each site will have access to its own raw data,
federations may decide to provide some sort of secure intra-node
viewing facility to cater for this need or may provide some other way
to increase explainability and interpretability of the global model.
System architecture.
Unlike running large-scale FL amongst
consumer devices such as McMahan et al.9, healthcare institutional participants are equipped with relatively powerful computational
higher-throughput
enabling training of larger models with many more local training
steps, and sharing more model information between nodes. These
unique characteristics of FL in healthcare also bring challenges
such as ensuring data integrity when communicating by use of
redundant nodes, designing secure encryption methods to
prevent data leakage, or designing appropriate node schedulers
to make best-use of the distributed computational devices and
reduce idle time.
The administration of such a federation can be realised in
different ways. In situations requiring the most stringent data
privacy between parties, training may operate via some sort of
“honest broker” system, in which a trusted third party acts as the
intermediary and facilitates access to data. This setup requires an
independent entity controlling the overall system, which may not
always be desirable, since it could involve additional cost and
procedural viscosity. However, it has the advantage that the precise
internal mechanisms can be abstracted away from the clients,
making the system more agile and simpler to update. In a peer-topeer system each site interacts directly with some or all of the other
participants. In other words, there is no gatekeeper function, all
protocols must be agreed up-front, which requires signiﬁcant
agreement efforts, and changes must be made in a synchronised
fashion by all parties to avoid problems. Additionally, in a trustlessbased architecture the platform operator may be cryptographically
locked into being honest by means of a secure protocol, but this
may introduce signiﬁcant computational overheads.
CONCLUSION
ML, and particularly DL, has led to a wide range of innovations in
the area of digital healthcare. As all ML methods beneﬁt greatly
from the ability to access data that approximates the true global
distribution, FL is a promising approach to obtain powerful,
N. Rieke et al.
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
npj Digital Medicine 119
accurate, safe, robust and unbiased models. By enabling multiple
parties to train collaboratively without the need to exchange or
centralise data sets, FL neatly addresses issues related to egress of
sensitive medical data. As a consequence, it may open novel
research and business avenues and has the potential to improve
patient care globally. However, already today, FL has an impact on
nearly all stakeholders and the entire treatment cycle, ranging
from improved medical image analysis providing clinicians with
better diagnostic tools, over true precision medicine by helping to
ﬁnd similar patients, to collaborative and accelerated drug
decreasing
time-to-market
companies. Not all technical questions have been answered yet
and FL will certainly be an active research area throughout the
next decade 12. Despite this, we truly believe that its potential
impact on precision medicine and ultimately improving medical
care is very promising.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Received: 17 March 2020; Accepted: 12 August 2020;