A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political
mobilization
Robert M. Bond1, Christopher J. Fariss1, Jason J. Jones2, Adam D. I. Kramer3, Cameron
Marlow3, Jaime E. Settle1, and James H. Fowler1,4
1Political Science Department, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093,
2Psychology Department, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA
3Data Science, Facebook, Inc., Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
4Medical Genetics Division, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA
Human behaviour is thought to spread through face-to-face social networks, but it is difficult to
identify social influence effects in observational studies9–13, and it is unknown whether online
social networks operate in the same way14–19. Here we report results from a randomized
controlled trial of political mobilization messages delivered to 61 million Facebook users during
the 2010 US congressional elections. The results show that the messages directly influenced
political self-expression, information seeking and real-world voting behaviour of millions of
people. Furthermore, the messages not only influenced the users who received them but also the
users’ friends, and friends of friends. The effect of social transmission on real-world voting was
greater than the direct effect of the messages themselves, and nearly all the transmission occurred
between ‘close friends’ who were more likely to have a face-to-face relationship. These results
suggest that strong ties are instrumental for spreading both online and real-world behaviour in
human social networks.
Recent experimental studies6,14–16 have attempted to measure the causal effect of social
influence online. At the same time, there is increasing interest in the ability to use online
social networks to study and influence real-world behaviour17–19. However, online social
networks are also made up of many ‘weak-tie’ relationships20 that may not facilitate social
influence21, and some studies suggest that online communication may not be an effective
medium for influence22. An open question is whether online networks, which harness social
information from face-to-face networks, can be used effectively to increase the likelihood of
behaviour change and social contagion.
One behaviour that has been proposed to spread through networks is the act of voting in
national elections. Voter turnout is significantly correlated among friends, family members
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.H.F. ( ).
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions All authors contributed to study design, data collection, analysis and preparation of the manuscript. J.H.F.
secured funding.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 20.
 
Nature. 2012 September 13; 489(7415): . doi:10.1038/nature11421.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
and co-workers in observational studies23,24. Voter mobilization efforts are effective at
increasing turnout25, particularly those conducted face-to-face and those that appeal to social
pressure26 and social identity27. There is also evidence from one face-to-face field
experiment that voting is ‘contagious’, in the sense that mobilization can spread from person
to person within two-person households28. Although anecdotal accounts suggest that online
mobilization has made a big difference in recent elections21, a meta-analysis of email
experiments suggests that online appeals to vote are ineffective24.
Voter mobilization experiments26–28 have shown that most methods of contacting potential
voters have small effects (if any) on turnout rates, ranging from 1% to 10%. However, the
ability to reach large populations online means that even small effects could yield behaviour
changes for millions of people. Furthermore, as many elections are competitive, these
changes could affect electoral outcomes. For example, in the 2000 US presidential election,
George Bush beat Al Gore in Florida by 537 votes (less than 0.01% of votes cast in Florida).
Had Gore won Florida, he would have won the election.
To test the hypothesis that political behaviour can spread through an online social network,
we conducted a randomized controlled trial with all users of at least 18 years of age in the
United States who accessed the Facebook website on 2 November 2010, the day of the US
congressional elections. Users were randomly assigned to a ‘social message’ group, an
‘informational message’ group or a control group. The social message group (n =
60,055,176) was shown a statement at the top of their ‘News Feed’. This message
encouraged the user to vote, provided a link to find local polling places, showed a clickable
button reading ‘I Voted’, showed a counter indicating how many other Facebook users had
previously reported voting, and displayed up to six small randomly selected ‘profile
pictures’ of the user’s Facebook friends who had already clicked the I Voted button (Fig. 1).
The informational message group (n =611,044) was shown the message, poll information,
counter and button, but they were not shown any faces of friends. The control group (n
=613,096) did not receive any message at the top of their News Feed.
The design of the experiment allowed us to assess the impact that the treatments had on
three user actions; clicking the I Voted button, clicking the polling-place link and voting in
the election. Clicking the I Voted button is similar to traditional measures of self-reported
voting, but here users reported their vote to their social community rather than to a
researcher. We therefore use this action to measure political self-expression, as it is likely to
be affected by the extent to which a user desires to be seen as a voter by others. In contrast,
social desirability should not affect other user actions in the same way. Clicking the pollingplace link took users to a separate website that helped them to find a polling location, and
this action was not reported to the user’s social community. We therefore use this action to
measure a user’s desire to seek information about the election. Finally, we used a grouplevel process to study the validated voting behaviour of 6.3 million users matched to
publicly available voter records (see Supplementary Information).
We first analyse direct effects. We cannot compare the treatment groups with the control
group to assess the effect of the treatment on self-expression and information seeking,
because the control group did not have the option to click an I Voted button or click on a
polling-place link. However, we can compare the proportion of users between the two
treatment groups to estimate the causal effect of seeing the faces of friends who have
identified themselves as voters (Fig. 1). Users who received the social message were 2.08%
(s.e.m., 0.05%; t-test, P <0.01) more likely to click on the I Voted button than those who
received the informational message (20.04% in the social message group versus 17.96% in
the informational message group). Users who received the social message were also 0.26%
Bond et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 20.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(s.e.m., 0.02%; P <0.01) more likely to click the polling-place information link than users
who received the informational message (Fig. 1).
Although acts of political self-expression and information seeking are important in their own
right, they do not necessarily guarantee that a particular user will actually vote. As such, we
also measured the effect that the experimental treatment had on validated voting, through
examination of public voting records. The results show that users who received the social
message were 0.39% (s.e.m., 0.17%; t-test, P =0.02) more likely to vote than users who
received no message at all. Similarly, the difference in voting between those who received
the social message and those who received the informational message was 0.39% (s.e.m.,
0.17%; t-test, P =0.02), suggesting that seeing faces of friends significantly contributed to
the overall effect of the message on real-world voting. In fact, turnout among those who
received the informational message was identical to turnout among those in the control
group (treatment effect 0.00%, s.e.m., 0.28%; P =0.98), which raises doubts about the
effectiveness of information-only appeals to vote in this context.
These results show that online political mobilization can have a direct effect on political
self-expression, information seeking and real-world voting behaviour, and that messages
including cues from an individual’s social network are more effective than information-only
appeals. But what about indirect effects that spread from person to person in the social
network? Users in our sample had on average 149 Facebook friends, with whom they share
social information, although many of these relationships constitute ‘weak ties’. Past research
indicates that close friends have a stronger behavioural effect on each other than do
acquaintances or strangers9,11,13,21. We therefore expected mobilization to spread more
effectively online through ‘strong ties’.
To distinguish users who are likely to have close relationships, we used the degree to which
Facebook friends interacted with each other on the site (see Supplementary Information for
more detail). Higher levels of interaction indicate that friends are more likely to be
physically proximate and suggest a higher level of commitment to the friendship, more
positive affect between the friends, and a desire for the friendship to be socially
recognized29. We counted the number of interactions between each pair of friends and
categorized them by decile, ranking them from the lowest to highest percentage of
interactions. A validation study (see Supplementary Information) shows that friends in the
highest decile are those most likely to be close friends in real life (Fig. 2a).
We then used these categories to estimate the effect of the mobilization message on a user’s
friends. Random assignment means that any relationship between the message a user
receives and a friend’s behaviour is not due to shared attributes, as these attributes are not
correlated with the treatment (see Supplementary Information). To measure a per-friend
treatment effect, we compared behaviour in the friends connected to a user who received the
social message to behaviour in the friends connected to a user in the control group. To
account for dependencies in the network, we simulate the null distribution using a network
permutation method (see the Supplementary Information). Monte Carlo simulations suggest
that this method minimizes the risk of false positives and recovers true causal effects
without bias (see Supplementary Information).
Figure 2 shows that the observed per-friend treatment effects increase as tie-strength
increases. All of the observed treatment effects fall outside the null distribution for
expressed vote (Fig. 2b), suggesting that they are significantly different from chance
outcomes. For validated vote (Fig. 2c), the observed treatment effect is near zero for weak
ties, but it spikes upwards and falls outside the null distribution for the top two deciles. This
suggests that strong ties are important for the spread of real-world voting behaviour. Finally,
Bond et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 20.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the treatment effect for polling place search gradually increases (Fig. 2d), with several of the
effects falling outside the 95% confidence interval of the null distribution.
To simplify the analysis and reporting of results, we arbitrarily define ‘close friends’ as
people who were in the eightieth percentile or higher (decile 9) of frequency of interaction
among all friendships in the sample (see the Supplementary Information). ‘Friends’ are all
other Facebook friends who had less interaction. A total of 60,491,898 (98%) users in our
sample had at least 1 close friend, with the average user having about 10 close friends
(compared with an average of 139 friends who were not close).
The results suggest that users were about 0.011% (95% confidence interval (CI) of null
distribution −0.009% to 0.010%) more likely to engage in an act of political self-expression
by clicking on the I Voted button than they would have been had their friend seen no
message. Similarly, for each close friend who received the social message, an individual was
on average 0.099% (null 95% CI −0.042% to 0.048%) more likely to express voting.
We also found an effect in the validated vote sample. For each close friend who received the
social message, a user was 0.224% (null 95% CI −0.181% to 0.174%) more likely to vote
than they would have been had their close friend received no message. Similarly, for
information-seeking behaviour we found that for each close friend who received the social
message, a user was 0.012% (null 95% CI −0.012% to 0.012%) more likely to click the link
to find their polling place than they would have been had their close friends received no
message. In both cases there was no evidence that other friends had an effect (see
Supplementary Information). Thus, ordinary Facebook friends may affect online expressive
behaviour, but they do not seem to affect private or real-world political behaviours. In
contrast, close friends seem to have influenced all three.
The magnitude of these contagion effects are small per friend, but it is important to
remember that they result from a single message, and in many cases it was not possible to
change the target’s behaviour. For example, users may have already voted by absentee ballot
before Election Day, or they may have logged in to Facebook too late to vote or to influence
other users’ voting behaviour. In other words, all effects measured here are intent-to-treat
effects rather than treatment-on-treated effects, which would be greater if we had better
information about who was eligible to receive the treatment.
Moreover, the scale of the number of users, their friendship connections and the potential
voters in a given election is very large. We estimated the per-user effect (the per-friend
effect multiplied by the average number of friends per user) and the total effect (the per-user
effect multiplied by the total number of users) on the behaviour of everyone in the sample
(see Supplementary Information). The results suggest that friends generated an additional
886,000 expressed votes (+1.4%, null 95% CI −1.1% to 1.1%), and close friends generated a
further 559,000 votes (+0.9%, null 95% CI −0.3% to 0.3%). In the Supplementary
Information we also show that close friends of close friends (2 degrees of separation)
generated an additional 1 million expressed votes (+1.7%, null 95% CI −0.8% to 0.9%).
Thus, the treatment clearly had a significant impact on political self-expression and how it
spread through the network, and even weak ties seem to be relevant to its spread.
However, the effect of the social message on real-world validated vote behaviour and
polling-place search was more focused. The results suggest that close friends generated an
additional 282,000 validated votes (+1.8%, null 95% CI −1.3% to 1.2%) and an additional
74,000 polling-place searches (+0.1%, null 95% CI −0.1% to 0.1%), but there is no evidence
that ordinary friends had any effect on either of these two behaviours. In other words, close
friendships accounted for all of the significant contagion of these behaviours, in spite of the
fact that they make up only 7% of all friendships on Facebook.
Bond et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 20.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
To put these results in context, it is important to note that turnout has been steadily
increasing in recent US midterm elections, from 36.3% of the voting age population in 2002
to 37.2% in 2006, and to 37.8% in 2010. Our results suggest that the Facebook social
message increased turnout directly by about 60,000 voters and indirectly through social
contagion by another 280,000 voters, for a total of 340,000 additional votes. That represents
about 0.14% of the voting age population of about 236 million in 2010. However, this
estimate does not include the effect of the treatment on Facebook users who were registered
to vote but who we could not match because of nicknames, typographical errors, and so on.
It would be complex to estimate the number of users on Facebook who are in the voter
record but unmatchable, and it is not clear whether treatment effects would be of the same
magnitude for these individuals, so we restrict our estimate to the matched group that we
were able to sample and observe. This means it is possible that more of the 0.60% growth in
turnout between 2006 and 2010 might have been caused by a single message on Facebook.
The results of this study have many implications. First and foremost, online political
mobilization works. It induces political self-expression, but it also induces information
gathering and real, validated voter turnout. Although previous research suggested that online
messages do not work19, it is possible that conventional sample sizes may not be large
enough to detect the modest effect sizes shown here. We also show that social mobilization
in online networks is significantly more effective than informational mobilization alone.
Showing familiar faces to users can dramatically improve the effectiveness of a mobilization
Beyond the direct effects of online mobilization, we show the importance of social influence
for effecting behaviour change. Our validation study shows that close friends exerted about
four times more influence on the total number of validated voters mobilized than the
message itself. These results are similar to those from a prior network simulation study
based on observational data that suggested each act of voting on average generates an
additional three votes as this behaviour spreads through the network30. Thus, efforts to
influence behaviour should pay close attention not only to the effect a message will have on
those who receive it but also to the likelihood that the message and the behaviour it spurs
will spread from person to person through the social network. And, in contrast to the results
for close friends, we find that Facebook friends have less effect. Online mobilization works
because it primarily spreads through strong-tie networks that probably exist offline but have
an online representation. In fact, it is plausible that unobserved face-to-face interactions
account for at least some of the social influence that we observed in this experiment.
More broadly, the results suggest that online messages might influence a variety of offline
behaviours, and this has implications for our understanding of the role of online social media
in society. Experiments are expensive and have limited external validity, but the growing
availability of cheap and large-scale online social network data17 means that these
experiments can be easily conducted in the field. If we want to truly understand—and
improve—our society, wellbeing and the world around us, it will be important to use these
methods to identify which real world behaviours are amenable to online interventions.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to S. Aral, J. Berger, M. Cebrian, D. Centola, N. Christakis, C. Dawes, L. Gee, D. Green, C. Kam,
P. Loewen, P. Mucha, J. P. Onnela, M. Porter, O. Smirnov and C. Volden for comments on early drafts. This work
Bond et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 20.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
was supported in part by the James S. McDonnell Foundation, and the University of Notre Dame and the John
Templeton Foundation as part of the Science of Generosity Initiative.