Towards Human Understandable Explainable AI
Hani Hagras
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Wivenhoe
Park, Colchester, CO43SQ, UK
The recent increases in computing power coupled with rapid growth in the availability and
quantity of data have resulted in a resurgence of interest in the theory and applications of
Artificial intelligence (AI). However, the use of complex AI algorithms like Deep Learning,
Random Forests, etc., could result in a lack of transparency to users which is termed
black/opaque box models. Thus, For AI to be confidently rolled out by industries and
governments, there is a need for greater transparency in explaining the AI decision making
process to users to generate “White /Transparent Box” models which can also be termed
Explainable AI (XAI). The paper reviews the need for XAI, the efforts to realise XAI and
some areas which needs further exploration (like type-2 fuzzy logic systems) to realise XAI
systems which could be fully understood and analysed by the lay user.
1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to make machines capable of performing tasks which require
human intelligence. AI comprises all Machine Learning (ML) techniques besides other
techniques such as search, symbolic reasoning and logical reasoning, statistical techniques and
behaviour-based approaches. As technology, and, importantly, our understanding of how our
minds and nature surrounding us work has progressed, our concept of what constitutes AI has
With the huge increase in the amount of digital information being generated, stored,
and made available for analysis, AI will have an important role to play. One key reason for
building AI systems is not just to match human performance but in some cases exceed it. This
is evident in situations where hundreds of input are contributing to a given decision where the
human intuition will focus on a small set of inputs and small set of interactions due to the
difficulty in figuring out the complex relationship between numerous inputs and their
interaction. There are huge incentives to use AI for business needs including opportunities for
cost reduction, risk management, enhancing decision-making, productivity improvements as
well as developing new products and services. AI is a major disruptor and is anticipated to
transform many industries where it is being rapidly adopted for a range of applications in
various industries including mobile applications, security systems, speech recognition systems,
financial related industries, Internet of Things, smart cities, automotive, biological sciences,
pharmaceutics, etc.
AI is a technology revolution which the regulators and participants hope will be
inclusive and benefit everyone, not just a select few. However, the use of complex AI
algorithms like Deep Learning, Random Forests, Support Vector Machines (SVMs), etc., could
result in a lack of transparency to create ‘black/opaque box’ models . The lack of
transparency issues are not specific to deep learning, or complex models, where other
classifiers, such as kernel machines, linear or logistic regressions, or decision trees can also
become very difficult to interpret for high dimensional inputs . Such black/opaque box
models cannot tell why a system made a decision, they just provide an answer which the user
can take it or leave it .
According to the Financial Stability Board , in the financial sector, the widespread
use of opaque models (like Deep Learning techniques) can lead to the lack of interpretability
or 'auditability' which can contribute to macro-level risks . As stressed by the financial
stability board , it is important that progress in AI is accompanied with further progress in
the interpretation of algorithms' outputs and decisions. This may be important condition not
only for risk management but also for greater trust from the general public as well as regulators
and supervisors in financial services .
According to the UK Parliament AI committee “the development of intelligible AI
systems is a fundamental necessity if AI is to become an integral and trusted tool in our
society“. “Whether this takes the form of technical transparency, explainability, or indeed both,
will depend on the context and the stakes involved, but in most cases we believe explainability
will be a more useful approach for the citizen and the consumer” . They also mention, “We
believe it is not acceptable to deploy any artificial intelligence system which could have a
substantial impact on an individual’s life, unless it can generate a full and satisfactory
explanation for the decisions it will take” . “In cases such as deep neural networks, where
it is not yet possible to generate thorough explanations for the decisions that are made, this
may mean delaying their deployment for particular uses until alternative solutions are found
Hence, there is a need to move towards Explainable AI (XAI) to enable the widespread
of responsible and trusted AI to achieve the needed great positive impacts on communities and
industries all over the World.
2. What is Explainable AI
The concept of explainability sits at the intersection of several areas of active research in AI,
with a focus on the following areas :
Transparency: We have a right to have decisions affecting us explained to us in terms,
format and language we can understand .
Causality: If we can learn a model from data, can this model provide us not only correct
inferences but also some explanation for the underlying phenomena?
Bias: How can we ensure that the AI system hasn’t learned a biased view of the world
based on shortcomings of the training data or objective function?
Fairness: If decisions are made based on an AI system, can we verify that they were
made fairly?
Safety: Can we gain confidence in the reliability of our AI system without an
explanation of how it reaches conclusions?
An XAI or Transparent AI or Interpretable AI is an AI whose actions can be easily
understood and analysed by humans. XAI can be used to implement a social right to
explanation . Hence, XAI is envisaged to provide the following benefits:
 Transparency and Compliance: It provides an auditable record including all factors and
associations related with a given prediction. This enables a business to meet compliance
requirements and eliminates concern that the organisation is hiding or doesn’t know
how a machine is affecting an outcome of a critical decision
 Ensures that there is an auditable and provable way to defend algorithmic decisions as
being fair and ethical.
Transparency rarely comes for free; there are often tradeoffs between how accurate an AI
is and how transparent it is, and these tradeoffs are expected to grow larger as AI systems
increase in internal complexity. The technical challenge of explaining complex AI models
decisions is sometimes known as the interpretability problem according to . According to
 , XAI should aim to create a suite of machine learning techniques producing more
explainable models, while maintaining a high level of learning performance (high accuracy).
In addition, XAI should have the ability to explain their rationale, characterize their strengths
and weaknesses, and convey an understanding of how they will behave in the future. These
XAI models can be combined with state-of-the-art human-computer interface techniques
capable of translating models into understandable and useful explanation dialogues for the end
Producing formats which can only be understood and analysed by AI experts does not
address the abovementioned issues as this will not allow the stake holder to test and augment
the generated models with their experience. Hence, XAI should produce formats and outputs
which can be easily understood and analysed by the Lay user/expert in a given field. This will
allow domain experts to test the given the system and easily augment it with their expertise.
This will allow the users and stake holders to understand the AI's cognition and allow them to
determine when to trust or distrust the AI . This will allow to satisfy the abovementioned
points of transparency and causality and address the system bias, fairness and safety.
3. Previous and Current Work
XAI is one of DARPA (USA Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency) programs
expected to enable “third-wave AI systems” , where machines understand the context and
environment in which they operate, and over time build underlying explanatory models that
allow them to characterize real world phenomena. According to , the XAI concept is to
provide an explanation of individual decisions, enable understanding of overall strengths &
weaknesses, convey an understanding of how the system will behave in the future and convey
how to correct the system’s mistakes. Fig.1a shows a summary as provided by showing
the existing AI techniques performance vs explainability where it is shown that black box
models like Deep Learning give best prediction accuracy vs Decision Trees which provide
higher explainability contrasted by prediction accuracy.
Fig1. a) Existing AI techniques- Performance vs Explainability . b) The XAI explanation framework according to .
Decision Trees classify by step-wise assessment of a data point, one node at a time,
starting at the root node and ending with a terminal node. At each node, only two possibilities
are possible (left-right), hence there are some variable relationships that Decision Trees just
can't learn. Although decision trees are usually considered easy to interpret, preparing decision
trees, especially large ones with many branches, is complex and time-consuming. Large trees
are not easily interpretable and pose presentation difficulties where it is quite difficult to
analyse the common reasons and profiles pertaining to a decision where these entail the
analysis of various routes and sub routes of the decision trees where the decision maker (and
specifically the lay user) can be burdened with information slowing down decision-making
capacity. This can be complicated further where there might be a possibility of duplication with
the same sub-tree on different paths. Hence, although decision trees can be a good interpretable
tool for problems with small number of features, they tend to be not easily read, explained and
analysed (especially by the lay user) in problems with big number of features.
As shown in Fig 1a, in , they suggest various approaches to realise XAI, the first
approach applies to Deep Learning and Neural Networks (which according to Fig. 1a and 
have the highest predictive power) which is termed as deep explanation. This approach tries to
modify the deep learning (or neural network) techniques to learn explainable structures. Some
examples of such techniques can be found in including, the Layer-wise Relevance
Propagation (LRP) technique .
The second approach to XAI in Fig.1a is called interpretable models which are
techniques to learn more structured and interpretable casual models which could apply to
statistical models (e.g. logistic regression models, naïve bayes models, etc) , graphical models
(such as Hidden Markov Models, etc) or Random Forests. However, like the deep explanation
techniques, the output of these models could be analysed only by an expert in these techniques
and not by a lay user.
The third XAI approach is what is termed model induction which could be applied to
infer an interpretable model from any black box model . According to , although it is
often impossible for an explanation to be completely faithful unless it is the complete
description of the model itself, for an explanation to be meaningful it must at least be locally
faithful, i.e. it must correspond to how the model behaves in the vicinity of the instance being
predicted. As mentioned in , local fidelity does not imply global fidelity: features that are
globally important may not be important in the local context, and vice versa. While there are
models that are inherently interpretable, an explainer (or model induction) should be able to
explain any model, and thus be model-agnostic. An interpretable explanation need to use a
representation that is understandable to humans, regardless of the actual features used by the
model. In , a method was presented to explain a prediction output by sampling instances
around x’ (to create new point z’) by drawing nonzero elements of X uniformly at random. The
method then aims to generate a model which is to be trained with z and f(z) . In , they
used sparse linear explanations, which lack the explanation of the interconnection between the
various variables driving the given decision.
In , the same authors of mentioned that explanations such as sparse linear
models (used in ) can still exhibit high precision and low effort even for very complex
models by providing explanations that are local in their scope. However, the coverage of such
explanations are not explicit, which may lead to human error. As mentioned in , take the
example of explaining a prediction of a complex model which predicts that the person
described makes less than $50K. The linear explanation sheds some light into why, but it is not
clear whether we can apply the insights from this explanation to other instances . In other
words, even if the explanation is faithful locally, it is not easy to know what that local region
is . Furthermore, it is not clear when the linear approximation is more or less faithful, even
within the local region . Hence in , they introduced Anchor Local Interpretable Model-
Agnostic Explanations (aLIME) which is a system that explains individual predictions with
crisp logic IF-Then rules in a model-agnostic manner. Such IF-Then rules are intuitive to
humans, and usually require low effort to comprehend and apply . In particular, an aLIME
explanation (or an anchor) is a rule that sufficiently “anchors” a prediction – such that changes
to the rest of the instance do not matter. For example, the anchor for this example might state
that the model will almost always predict Salary < 50K if a person is not educated beyond high
school, regardless of the other features. It was shown in that the proposed approach
outperform the linear based Model presented in . However the IF-Then anchor model
presented in , use crisp logic and thus will struggle with variables which do not have clear
crisp boundaries, like income, age, etc. Also the approach in , will not be able to handle
models generated from big number of inputs. Furthermore, explaining the prediction with just
an anchor IF-Then rule does not give a full picture about the decision as for example in case of
classification problems, there are always pros and cons which humans weigh in their minds
and take a decision accordingly. Also, another major problem in an anchor approach, is the
inability to understand the model behaviour in the neighbourhood of this instance and how the
prediction can be changed if certain features could be changed, etc.
From the above discussion, it seems that offering the user with IF-Then rules which include
linguistic labels appears to be an approach which can facilitate the explainability of a model
output with the ability to explain and analyse the generated model as shown in Fig. 1b. One AI
technique which employs IF-Then rules and linguistic labels is the Fuzzy Logic System (FLS).
However, FLSs are not widely explored as an XAI technique and they donot appear in the
analysis shown in Fig.1a. One reason might be is that FLSs are associated with control
problems and they are not widely perceived as a ML tool as they need the help of other
techniques to learn their own parameters from data. The following subsection will give an
overview on FLSs and highlight their strengths and their misconceptions and present the type-
2 FLSs as an important component to consider in the XAI developments.
4. Fuzzy Logic Systems and Human Understandable AI
Fuzzy Logic Systems (FLSs) attempt to mimic human thinking, although rather than trying to
represent the brain’s architecture as you would with a neural network, the focus is on how
humans think in an approximate rather than an precise way. A key facet of FLSs is in modelling
and representing imprecise and uncertain linguistic concepts, creating a set of linguistic IF-
Then rules to describe a given behaviour in human-readable form.
A good example would be the decision making process that a human goes through when
they are driving a car. Rather than saying “if the distance to the car ahead is less than 2.5m
and the road is 10% slippery then reduce car speed by 25%”, we would approximate the
numerical elements with imprecise linguistic labels in the format of If the distance to the car
ahead is low and the road is slightly slippery Then slow down. The numerical meanings of
“low”, “close” and “slow down” will differ between drivers. Furthermore, if a driver was to be
interviewed about the exact numerical values connected with these linguistic labels they would
struggle to give a clear answer. Amazingly, humans are nevertheless able to communicate with
these ill-defined and vague linguistic labels and do not query the exact values when they discuss
them. In fact, these uncertain concepts allow humans to be able to perform very sophisticated
tasks such as driving cars or underwriting financial applications.
Fig.2. Representing the sets Low and High Annual Income using (a) Boolean sets. (b) Type-1 fuzzy sets.
Fuzzy Logic can model and represent imprecise and uncertain linguistic human
concepts such as Low, Medium, High, etc. For example if a group of people were asked about
the values they would associate with the linguistic concepts “Low” and “High” annual income
and if Boolean logic was employed as shown in Fig. 2a then we would have to choose a
threshold above which income values would be considered “High” and below which they
would be considered “Low”. The first problem encountered is to identify a threshold that most
people would agree on and this will be a problem as everyone has different idea what this
linguistic label constitute. Even if an agreement was reached (say using a threshold of
$100,000), will a value of $100,001 be considered “High” and will a value of $99,999 be
considered “Low” income. It is clear that the hard boundary between the Boolean sets does not
seem logical from a human point of view.
On the other hand the linguistic labels “Low” and “High” could be represented by
employing the type-1 fuzzy sets. In this representation, it can be seen that no sharp boundaries
exist between sets and that each value in the x axis can belong to more than one fuzzy set with
different membership values. For example using Boolean logic, $150,000 used to belong only
to the “High” set with a membership value of 1.0 in Fig. 2a. In Fig. 2b, using type-1 fuzzy
logic, $150,000 belongs now to the “Low” and “High” sets but to different degrees where its
membership value to “Low” is 0.3 and to “High” is 0.7. This can mean that if 10 people were
asked if $150,000 is Low or High income, 7 out of 10 would say “High”, (i.e. membership
value of 7/10=0.7) and 3 out of 10 would say “Low”, (i.e. membership value of 3/10=0.3).
Hence, fuzzy sets provide a means of calculating intermediate values between absolute true
and absolute false with resulting values ranging between 0.0 and 1.0, thus fuzzy logic allows
the calculation of the shades of grey between true/false. In addition, the smooth transition
between the fuzzy sets will give a good decision response when facing the noise and
uncertainties. Furthermore, FLSs employ linguistic IF-THEN rules which enable to represent
the information in a human readable form which could be easily read, interpreted and analysed
by the lay user.
The type-1 fuzzy sets (shown in Fig.2b) are crisp and precise; hence they can handle
only the slight uncertainties. However, different concepts mean different things to different
people and in different circumstances and the memberships functions shown in Fig. 2b might
vary in different countries, for different professions and across different underwriters in
different banks. So assume as shown in Fig. 3a, we asked three financial experts in three
different banks (Bank A, Bank B and Bank C) to cast their opinions about what are the
suggested ranges for “Low” income. As can be seen in Fig. 3a, each expert might come with
different type-1 fuzzy set to represent the “Low” linguistic label. Another way to represent
linguistic labels is by employing type-2 fuzzy sets as shown in Fig 3a which embeds all the
type-1 fuzzy sets for Bank A, Bank B and Bank C within the Footprint of Uncertainty (FoU)
of the type-2 fuzzy set (shaded in grey in Fig. 3a). Hence, a type-2 fuzzy set is characterized
by a fuzzy membership function, i.e. the membership value for each element of this set is a
fuzzy set in , unlike a type-1 fuzzy set where the membership value is a crisp number in
 . The membership functions of type-2 fuzzy sets are three dimensional and include a
Footprint Of Uncertainty (FOU), this provide additional degrees of freedom that can make it
possible to directly model and handle the uncertainties. In Fig. 3a, it can be seen that the
$150,000 membership value to the set “Low” is no longer a crisp value of 0.3 as shown in
Fig.2b, it is now a fuzzy function that takes values from 0.3 to 0.5 in the primary membership
domain as shown in Fig.3a. More information about type-2 fuzzy sets and systems can be found
in , .
One misconception about type-2 fuzzy sets is that they are difficult to understand by
the lay person. However, this is not the case as if experts are questioned about how to quantify
a linguistic label, they will be sure about a core value (which has a common consensus across
all experts), however they will struggle to give exact points of the boundaries of this linguistic
label and there will uncertainty about the end points of a given linguistic label. Hence, a
simplified version of a type-2 fuzzy set can be shown in Fig. 3b where for the linguistic label
“Low” income, there is a core value (shaded in solid green) of less than $80,000 which all
experts agrees on and there is grey area (of shades of green) which goes between $80,000 to
$180,000 of decreasing membership where there is uncertainty about the end points of the
linguistic label where points beyond $180,000 are not recognised as “Low” income anymore.
Another misconception of FLSs in general is that they are control mechanisms. This is
not true as the area of Fuzzy Rule-Based Systems (FRBSs) generated from data has been active
for more than 25 years. However, this was hindered by the FLSs incapability to handle systems
with big number of inputs due to the phenomena known as curse of dimensionality where the
FLS can generate long rules and huge rule bases which turn them to black boxes which are not
easy to understand or analyse. Furthermore, FRBSs werenot able to handle easily imbalanced
and skewed data (such as those present in fraud, bank default data, etc). However, recent work
such as , was able to use evolutionary systems to generate FRBSs with short IF-Then
rules and small number of rules in the rule base while maximizing the prediction accuracy. As
this created sparse rule base not covering the whole search space, they presented a similarity
technique to classify the incoming examples even if they do not match any fuzzy rule in the
generated rule base. To do so, the similarity among the uncovered example and the rules was
considered. They also presented multi-objective evolutionary optimization which was able to
increase the interpretability (by reducing the length of each rule to include between 3 and 6
antecedents even if the system had thousands of inputs as well as having a small rule base) and
maximize the accuracy of the FLS prediction. It was shown in , that such highly
interpretable systems outperform decision trees like C4.5 by a big margin in accuracy while
being easy to understand and analyze than the decision trees counterparts.
What is most important is that unlike other white box techniques, the FRBS generates
IF-Then rules using linguistic labels (which can better handle the uncertainty in information)
where for example in a bank lending application a rule might be: IF Income is High and Home
Owner and Time in Address is High Then Good Customer. Such rule can be read by any user
or analyst. What is more important is that such rules get the data to speak the same language
as humans. This allows humans to easily analyze and interpret the generated models and most
importantly augment such rule bases with rules which capture their expertise and might cover
gaps in the data (for example, human experience can augment such historically generated rules
with the human expertise to cover situations which did not happen before). This allows the user
to have full trust in the generated model and also cover all the XAI components mentioned in
Section (2) related to Transparency, Causality, Bias, Fairness and Safety. Unlike the anchor
rules mentioned in , humans do not make their decisions based on one single rule, they
usually have Pros and Cons linguistic rules which humans balance and weigh in their mind and
take a decision accordingly.
Hence, viewing Fig. 1a, it can be seen that type-2 FLS and FRBSs can be best in
explainability while striking a good balance to prediction accuracy when compared to other
black box techniques. Furthermore, the type-2 FLSs could be used to explain the decisions
achieved from more complex black box modelling techniques. Hence, the type-2 FLS and
FRBSs can offer a very good way forward to achieve XAI which can be understood, analysed
and augmented by the lay user.
Fig.3. a) A Type-2 fuzzy set embedding the type-1 fuzzy sets for the linguistic label “Low Income” from experts in three banks. B) A graphical
simplification of the type-2 fuzzy set in Fig. 3a.
Acknowledgement
I would like to acknowledge Dr Robert Decaux from Logical Glue Ltd for his feedback on the