Assessing Students’ Ability to Trace Matter in Dynamic
Systems in Cell Biology
Christopher D. Wilson, Charles W. Anderson, Merle Heidemann, John E. Merrill,
Brett W. Merritt, Gail Richmond, Duncan F. Sibley, and Joyce M. Parker
Division of Science and Mathematics Education, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
Submitted February 13, 2006; Accepted July 5, 2006
Monitoring Editor: Marshall Sundberg
College-level biology courses contain many complex processes that are often taught and learned
as detailed narratives. These processes can be better understood by perceiving them as dynamic
systems that are governed by common fundamental principles. Conservation of matter is such a
principle, and thus tracing matter is an essential step in learning to reason about biological
processes. We present here multiple-choice questions that measure students’ ability and inclination to trace matter through photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Data associated with each
question come from students in a large undergraduate biology course that was undergoing a
shift in instructional strategy toward making fundamental principles (such as tracing matter) a
central theme. We also present findings from interviews with students in the course. Our data
indicate that 1) many students are not using tracing matter as a tool to reason about biological
processes, 2) students have particular difficulties tracing matter between systems and have a
persistent tendency to interconvert matter and energy, and 3) instructional changes seem to be
effective in promoting application of the tracing matter principle. Using these items as diagnostic
tools allows instructors to be proactive in addressing students’ misconceptions and ineffective
reasoning.
INTRODUCTION
Reasoning in biology is being able to apply fundamental
principles and rules to complex dynamic systems. This article is about measuring students’ inclination and ability to
apply fundamental principles about conservation of matter
to the biological processes of photosynthesis and respiration.
We consistently see evidence that this essential practice is
absent from students’ reasoning. For example, after instruction on photosynthesis and cellular respiration, undergraduate students in a large introductory biology course for
science majors were asked to predict the change in dry mass
of 1.5 g of radish seeds placed in a dark closet, with water,
for 1 wk. The radish seed image in Figure 3 accompanied the
question. Table 1 shows the range of students’ initial responses (delivered via personal response systems [“clickers”]) and their second response to the question after discussing the problem with their peers.
The correct answer is “1.5 g.” Cellular respiration converted the chemical potential energy in the bonds of glucose
molecules into usable energy in the form of ATP and released CO2 and H2O (lost mass); no photosynthesis occurs in
the dark to replace the mass lost as CO2. In this example,
following the principle of conservation of matter through
this system leads the student to the correct answer. However, many students fail to use this principle when reasoning
within biology. The results in Table 1 suggest that some
students were even persuaded that their correct initial responses were wrong!
The content of college-level biology includes many complex processes that are often taught and learned as detailed
narratives. That is, instructors recount existing knowledge
about science that students interpret as series of loosely
connected facts. For example, a narrative description of the
conversion of sunlight to chemical energy might be as follows: “The absorption of light energy in the thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast takes place at groupings of chlorophylls and other pigments, proteins, and assorted small
molecules, together forming a photosystem. The various
photosystem pigments form the antenna complex, which
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.06–02–0142
Address correspondence to: John E. Merrill ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 5, 323–331, Winter 2006
© 2006 by The American Society for Cell Biology
harvests light energy, photons. The photons are passed to a
special chlorophyll a in the middle of the reaction center,
where the light reactions of photosynthesis begin.” However, a more powerful approach to these processes is to
view, teach, and learn them as dynamic systems to which
fundamental principles apply. Such an approach provides
ways of analyzing disparate processes from a common perspective. A key first step in understanding biological processes from this perspective is learning how to trace matter
by following inputs and outputs. When we refer to dynamic
systems in this article, we are almost exclusively talking
about open systems that exchange matter and energy across
defined boundaries. These boundaries may define the systems of interest as an organelle or a cell, or as larger systems
such as organisms or ecosystems.
Tracing matter within and between systems is fundamental to a scientific perspective across disciplines:
• Chemistry explains mass balance and predicts changes in
ions, molecules, and compounds during chemical reactions using balanced chemical equations.
• In the earth sciences, tracing matter through cycles is a
way of organizing global processes. We trace elements,
ions, molecules, and minerals through the processes of the
rock cycle. Carbon atoms and carbon-containing molecules, compounds, ions, and minerals are traced through
the biosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere.
Water molecules are traced through the hydrologic cycle.
• One of the fundamental tenets of biology is that sense can
be made of the complexity of the biosphere by viewing it
as a set of interrelated systems that can range in size from
the subcellular to the ecosystems level. We can trace matter and energy within these systems to understand them
individually and between these systems to understand
their interdependence.
• Among the fundamental principles useful in analyzing
biological systems, tracing matter has been and remains a
fruitful means of study. Calvin and Benson followed the
fate of 14C-labeled compounds to elucidate the metabolic
pathway that bears their name. Currently, studies measure
the capability of trees to take up carbon dioxide in response
to elevated atmospheric levels .
Tracing matter can also help students make sense of the
complexities of biology, giving them a common way of
analyzing disparate systems and finding patterns in details.
This approach to teaching and learning about systems, although not new, is not well established in science education.
The Project 2061 Benchmarks identify understanding systems as a common theme that crosses the disciplines of
science. They cite “detailed attention to inputs and outputs”
as part of that understanding (p. 262). Furthermore, Ben-Zvi
Assaraf and Orion identify eight characteristics of
systems thinking, two of which are “the ability to identify
the components of a system and processes” and “the ability
to organize the systems’ components and processes within a
framework of relationships.”
We think that tracing matter is a simple, particularly
powerful organizing principle for college-level biology.
Tracing matter can help students make sense of multistep
processes presented by instructors and textbooks. For example, in two widely used introductory textbooks 16–17 intermediates are
shown between glucose and carbon dioxide along with 10
proteins involved in electron transport in the presentation of
cellular respiration. This amount of detail can be overwhelming to students, and even those students who can
master it have nothing transferable to bring to related systems. In contrast, tracing elements such as carbon and oxygen through these processes helps students organize and
prioritize these details. An understanding based on tracing
matter can also help them make sense of other metabolic
processes, such as photosynthesis and the cycling of carbon
through ecosystems.
We know from research at the K–12 and college levels that
the ability to trace matter through simple physical and
chemical changes is a hard-won accomplishment, especially
for transformations between gases and solid or liquid substances . Students need to recognize gases as
forms of matter with mass and chemical identities; they need
to master key elements of the atomic molecular theory of
matter and its applications. They need to recognize mass as
a fundamental measure of the amount of matter . These foundational understandings are necessary, but
not sufficient, for students to use a matter-tracing strategy in
reasoning about living systems.
In this article, we report on the first steps in using tracing
matter as a theme for making sense of introductory biology.
We present a number of simple application questions
 that assess students’ ability and inclination to
trace matter through the processes of cellular respiration
and photosynthesis, accompanied by data collected across
three semesters. The application questions that we developed in our research serve two important functions. First,
they can be used to identify patterns in students’ reasoning
about biological systems. Our work indicates that students’
difficulties fall into three general categories: 1) students interconvert matter and energy, 2) students lose track of matter when it becomes a gas, and 3) students do not follow
matter and therefore do not catch obvious errors in their
thinking. Second, these questions can be used as tools to
measure the effectiveness of instructional practices aimed at
improving students’ ability to trace matter in metabolism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Our goal was to develop multiple-choice questions in which each
distractor represents a typical conceptual barrier that students
Table 1. Percentage of students selecting each response option
Initial response (%)
After discussion (%)
About 1.5 g
a Correct answer.
C. D. Wilson et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
encounter when tracing matter through metabolic processes. The
steps listed below show our design approach.
• Identified simple, familiar contexts involving organisms gaining
or losing weight (mass).
• Asked students in introductory biology courses for science majors
or a capstone course for senior secondary science teacher candidates (all science majors) to explain the weight gain or loss in each
context in an essay format after instruction.
• Interviewed eight randomly chosen students in the biology class
on their understanding of this content. The interviews were video- and audiotaped, transcribed, and analyzed by looking for
instances and patterns related to the students’ inclination and
ability to trace matter.
• Developed distractors for multiple-choice questions based on patterns in students’ open-ended responses.
• Used the multiple-choice questions in introductory biology
courses for science majors on pretests and exams after instruction.
This research took place at a large public university and focused
on an introductory biology course required for majors in the College
of Natural Science, plus many students in the Colleges of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Engineering. The course has a general
chemistry prerequisite. Enrollment is approximately 1600–1800 students per year, in lecture sections of 350–500 each. A companion
laboratory course is optional.
Item Development
The following results are divided into five groups of questions that focus on different aspects of metabolism in photosynthesizing and respiring organisms.
• Group 1. Application Questions on Weight Loss in Respiring Organisms
Application
through Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
• Group 3. Application Questions on Weight Gain in Photosynthesizing Organisms
• Group 4. Application Questions Involving Interpretation
of Complex Data
• Group 5. Application Questions Involving Both Matter
and Energy
Group 1. Application Questions on Weight Loss in Respiring Organisms
The first set of questions asks students to trace matter during
weight loss in respiring organisms. We began the process of
item development by asking the following question in essay
format to one class of senior science teacher candidates (n 
19) and one class of students in a senior physiology class
(n  14): Jared, the Subway man, lost a lot of weight eating
a low-calorie diet. Where did all the fat/mass go? Thoroughly explain your answer.
Sample student responses to this item are shown below
and are categorized in Table 2.
Best answer:
“The fat went through some metabolic processes and was
converted into sugar.1 The sugar was used in respiration and
was given off in the forms of CO2 and H2O and heat (and
energy for other human processes). Some may have been
given off as waste (urine and feces).”
Correct but no products named: “He exhaled it. . . . His
system began breaking down the fat stores for energy uses.
The by-product/waste products of this get put in his blood
stream, passed into his lungs, and was exhaled.”
“When the energy is extracted and used, the waste products are expelled from the body.”
“The fat was also deposited out of his system through
feces and excretion of sweat.”
Fat converted to energy, burned, or used as fuel—no products named:
“The fat was converted into useable energy and burned by
muscle contraction for movement.”
“I’m assuming that much of his fat was used up by his
body for energy to compensate for his lowered calorie intake.”
“The fat was metabolized and used for energy in the
Used the nature of fat as the explanation:
“I’m not sure, but isn’t fat a stored form of energy? . . . The
fat would be burned off.”
“Your body is born with a certain amount of fat cells,
therefore he did not technically lose any fat cells, he just lost
Incorrect matter-to-matter conversions:
“As he ran out of energy from the food he was ingesting,
his body began to break the bonds in his adipose cells to
mobilize polysaccharides. These polysaccharides were broken down into ketones, which were used to fuel his body.”
From the responses in Table 2, we developed distractors
for multiple-choice items built around the same and similar
contexts. The first two contexts ask students to trace matter
in heterotrophs through the process of cellular respiration.
We used several different wordings, all of which yielded
1 Even the single best student answer contained an incorrect matterto-matter conversion.
Table 2. Common responses to the “Jared” weight-loss essay
question (n  33)
Correct identification of products
Fat converted to glucose, which is used in
respiration
CO2  H2O produced
Correct, but incomplete
Mentions respiration without identifying
Exhaled, or in atmosphere, without
identifying products
Fat converted to energy, burned or used as
fuel; no products named
Use the nature of fat as the explanation
Fat is glycogen
Fat is stored energy
Don’t lose fat cells
Incorrect matter-to-matter conversions
Fat to muscle
Polysaccharides to ketones
Totals do not sum to 33 because some students used more than one
idea in their responses.
Tracing Matter in Dynamic Systems
Vol. 5, Winter 2006
similar results with different groups of students taking an
introductory biology course for science majors. The third
context deals with respiration in plants. In each context, one
distractor is meant to identify students who interconvert
matter and energy. The additional distractors allow students
to choose erroneous products of respiration that are solids
while ignoring the actual gaseous products, carbon dioxide
(and water).
Figure 1 shows the results from using these items in large
introductory biology courses and illustrates the pervasiveness of students’ not tracing matter. The data shown in the
figure also illustrate that we see consistent problems in
different semesters. It should be noted that all of the multiple-choice items discussed in this article in some way oversimplify the science underlying these systems, but these
oversimplifications are not why students are getting the
items wrong—it is the practice of tracing matter within and
between systems that is absent from students’ reasoning.
Group 2. Application Questions on Tracing Matter through
Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
The next item is an expanded version of the radish question
discussed in the introduction, this time in the context of a
potted geranium. The item requires the student to trace
matter between photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
Item development began with the following open-ended question being asked to 66 undergraduate students: A potted geranium plant sits in a windowsill, absorbing sunlight. After I put
this plant in a dark closet for a few days (but keeping it watered
as needed), will it weigh more or less (discounting the weight
of the water) than before I put it in the closet?
Sample student responses to this item are shown below
and are categorized in Table 3.
Weighs less—respiration:
“The plant will weigh less because it will be going
through cellular respiration. During cellular respiration CO2
(mass) is given off, therefore the plant weighs less.”
Weighs less—breakdown:
“It is lacking the sunlight for photosynthesis so therefore
it has to start relying on the energy already in its roots and
essentially would be breaking down its own mass.”
Weighs less—no photosynthesis:
“There was no sunlight energy coming into the plant
making energy. Without the energy source from the sun, the
plant will decrease in weight.”
Weighs less—no photosynthesis, so no respiration:
“Without light [the plant] will not be able to produce
glucose or finish the cycle and go on to cell respiration, so
there will be less products than if you had left it in the light.”
Group 1 application questions about
weight loss in animals and plants along with the
percentage of students choosing each response.
Data from summer and fall 2005.
C. D. Wilson et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Weighs more—dark reaction:
“The Calvin Cycle can still function in the absence of light.
Carbon fixation still takes places and the plant gains weight
by incorporating the carbons.”
Weighs more—no respiration:
“The organic materials that are needed to go through
cellular respiration would just continue to accumulate, since
there would be no sugar available for cellular respiration to
actually occur. The build-up of the organic materials would
cause an increase in weight.”
No difference:
“The plant will weigh exactly the same because mass is
never created nor destroyed.”
“After several days in the closet, the plant should weigh
nearly the same. No matter enters or leaves the plant.”
As before, the distractors for a multiple-choice item were
written based on the patterns in students’ open-ended responses shown in Table 3. The resulting item, along with
student data from 370 students in the introductory biology
course, are shown in Figure 2. This question was developed
and used during the second semester of this project, and
therefore only posttest data from that semester are reported
Group 3. Application Questions on Weight Gain in Photosynthesizing Organisms
The next set of questions (Figure 3) deals with weight gain in
plants via photosynthesis. The first context, the growth of a
tree from a seedling, is based on the Private Universe scenario , which illustrates the common misconception of mass gain in plants not being attributed to the intake of carbon via CO2. The radish seed context
is based on the work of Ebert-May et al. and builds
upon the radish clicker question discussed in the Introduction. The same distractors were used for each context with
similar results. The first two distractors draw on students’
desire to account for the mass gain as coming from solid or
liquid substances and on the common usage of plant “food”
to designate nutrients absorbed via the roots. The last distractor draws on students’ propensity to interconvert energy
and matter. As before, distractors for these items were developed from patterns in student ideas in open-ended items.
Group 4. Application Questions Involving Interpretation of
Complex Data
The next set of questions (Figure 4) assesses students’ ability
to use knowledge of inputs and outputs to make sense of
fairly complex data. Two versions of the question are shown
along with student responses from an introductory biology
course for science majors. The question can be reworked to
fit any of the subprocesses of photosynthesis or respiration.
Because these application questions require knowledge of
the stages of respiration, the data presented here are from
after instruction only.
Group 5. Application Questions Involving Both Matter and
The final group of items involves energy transformations
and highlights students’ persistent tendency to interconvert
matter and energy. Figure 5 shows student data from one of
these items, which required students to explain how respiring organisms obtain energy from food. This question was
developed and used during the second semester of this
project, and so only posttest data from that semester are
reported here.
These multiple-choice questions indicate that many students fail to use tracing matter or energy as a sense-making
strategy. Some students do not make a distinction between
chemical reactions that yield energy and mass being converted into energy. Others conserve energy, but look for
answers that involve liquids or solids, overlooking gases. In
interviews we found that this lack of inclination or ability to
trace matter meant that students were unable to catch obvious errors in their thinking, as shown in the next section.
Clinical Interviews
Clinical interviews conducted with students in the course
revealed consistent patterns in students’ use of tracing matter as a sense-making tool. Most students showed no desire
to trace matter within or between systems. For example,
when asked about the inputs and outputs of photosynthesis
and cellular respiration, Susan replied, “In photosynthesis
[coming in are] CO2, starch or glucose, coming out is oxy-
Table 3. Common responses to the geranium metabolism essay
question (n  66)
Weigh less
(n  49; 74.2%)
Did not give reason
Respiration
No photosynthesis
No photosynthesis
so no respiration
Weigh more
(n  12; 18.2%)
Did not give reason
Dark reactions
No respiration
No difference
(n  5; 7.6%)
Group 2 multiple-choice item requiring students to trace
matter through photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Data from
fall 2005. This item was not used in pretests or in earlier semesters.
Tracing Matter in Dynamic Systems
Vol. 5, Winter 2006
gen, water and energy. In cellular respiration, I think it’s just
oxygen, energy and water coming in, it gives off glucose and
starch.” Susan was clearly not concerned that the carbon
inputs and outputs were inconsistent in either system. Similarly, within photosynthesis, Todd described CO2 entering
the chloroplast and being broken down in the light reactions
but not moving to or entering the Calvin cycle: “The light
goes in, and the CO2 is broken down, the electron acceptor
is at each end that produces ATP. It’s kind of like the
electron transport chain in cellular respiration except this
comes first. And then, they use that to power the Calvin
cycle that produces glucose.” Without the sense-making tool
of tracing matter, Susan and Todd based their responses on
imperfect memorized representations.
Conversely, a few students did seem to use the tracing
matter principle as a sense-making tool. For example, while
filling in labels on a diagram of photosynthesis, Mark had
forgotten some of the narrative details of the process but
sought to understand the system by tracing matter. When
stuck trying to think of the Calvin cycle outputs, Mark
commented, “There must be some carbon compound [coming out], we’ve got CO2 coming in, I’m not quite sure,”
illustrating systems-level thinking and application of the
tracing matter rule. Other students, such as Lamar, demonstrated the ability to trace matter between systems when
describing the products of photosynthesis: “The oxygen is
just given off into the atmosphere, and also I think that can
be used as the oxygen in cellular respiration. The 6-carbon
sugar is the glucose needed for glycolysis in cellular respiration . . . CO2 [from cellular respiration] would be given off
into the atmosphere or recycled back and used in photosynthesis.”
In summary, the interviews revealed the same patterns as
we saw in the students’ responses to both the open-ended
and multiple-choice items. Most of the students, like Susan,
were inconsistent in accounting for all the matter in their
explanations and in using an “accounting system” based on
matter to evaluate their explanations.
DISCUSSION
Although we consistently observed that students were not
tracing matter through these systems, this result is not entirely inevitable. In response to this finding, several instructional changes were made in the large introductory biology
Group 3 items about weight gain in
plants along with the percentage of students choosing each response. Data from summer and fall 2005.
C. D. Wilson et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
course (from which our multiple-choice data in Figures 1–5
were obtained), making tracing matter more central and
giving students more opportunities to apply this principle.
These changes are part of ongoing research that is continuing to refine this approach from semester to semester and
have included the following:
• Textbook readings required before the lecture that cover
the basic principles, followed by lectures focused on application of these principles to natural systems.
• Online homework questions using the LON-CAPA assessment system completed before lecture to
assess required textbook content.
• Use of personal response clicker questions throughout the
lecture that require students to apply their understanding
and make predictions at the systems level. Mazur’s Peer
Instruction model was applied at this stage
to encourage student discussion and to help develop conceptual understanding. Mazur’s Peer Instruction model
aims to address the problems associated with large-group
instruction. In large classes, Mazur asserts that it is hard to
provide opportunities for students to practice reasoning
and receive feedback in class because interactions between
students and teacher are limited. To address this, Mazur
offers a three-step instructional model: 1) key ideas that
the instruction must address are identified, 2) conceptual
questions for these key ideas are identified, and 3) classroom time is devoted to demonstration in combination
with the administration of concept tests. We see the clicker
activities in our instruction as being analogous to Mazur’s
concept tests. With many of the clicker questions, students
first individually respond to the question and then discuss
the reasoning for their responses with their peers before
being prompted to answer the same or a similar question
again. The basis for this pedagogical move is the idea that
two students might come to the class with different
knowledge of the topic in question. The sharing of this
knowledge can lead to students’ constructing new understandings (or, as we found with the radish question described in the Introduction, new misunderstandings).
• Use of the items described in this article in a formative
assessment cycle as a benchmark for measuring student
Two Group 4 items requiring students to
apply their knowledge of inputs and outputs to
making sense of complex data. Data from summer
and fall 2005.
Tracing Matter in Dynamic Systems
Vol. 5, Winter 2006
• Instruction that makes explicit the importance of tracing
matter. For example, students are repeatedly encouraged
to consider “what goes in, what comes out, and what the
energy relationships are.” This is elaborated by showing
how to trace matter and energy and by discussing “energy
management molecules” (e.g., ATP and NADH).
Our efforts to implement these instructional changes from
semester to semester and to use these questions as benchmarks for measuring progress in helping students to take a
systems approach to biology by tracing matter have produced some positive results (Figures 1 and 3), but it is clear
from the data that we still have some significant challenges
to meet, especially when it comes to tracing matter between
systems (e.g., Figure 2) and to overcoming persistent matter–energy transformation misconceptions (Figure 5).
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Previous researchers have identified many student misconceptions about the processes of cellular respiration and photosynthesis . These misconceptions are
summarized below. Our framework allows us to group
these conceptual difficulties into a single category that may
be addressed by an emphasis on tracing matter. In addition,
it allows us to anticipate misconceptions related to other
Most of the previous research on this type of reasoning
and related misconceptions was conducted with K–12 students, but the same seems to be true of older students.
Anderson et al. found that nonmajor students in a
biology course were not committed to conserving matter
when describing and defining photosynthesis, respiration,
or food for plants and animals. Driver et al. report that
both Barker working with 8- to 17-yr-old students and
Driver et al. working with 15-yr-old students found
that most of those students who attempted to explain where
the biomass of plants comes from stated that it came from
the absorption of water and nutrients via the roots. Barker
 suggests that this is not a deeply held belief but an
on-the-spot response to a new question. “Plants were
thought to grow and this was accepted at its face value
rather than interpreted in terms of where additional material
comes from” . Either way, students
are not approaching the question with a desire to explain the
source of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen molecules that
make up the biomass of a plant. They state, “The universal
and very persistent intuitive conception, identified in all
studies with subjects of all ages, is that plants get their food
from their environment, specifically from the soil” (p. 30).
Driver et al. also report on the work of Leach et al.
 in which few 16-yr-olds applied conservation of matter to photosynthesis, respiration, and decay, and many did
not distinguish between matter and energy. This problem is
exacerbated when substances are invisible. In particular, the
idea that gases have weight is problematic for students.
Brook and Driver as reported in Driver et al. 
found that even at age 16, two-thirds of students think that
air has no weight or even negative weight. Driver et al.
 go on to report on several studies that indicate “an
intuitive disbelief in weight increase and growth due mainly
to the incorporation of matter from a gas” (p. 32). These
findings at the K–12 level illustrate that students are rarely
progressing to the undergraduate level with a set of sensemaking strategies that can be applied across a range of
systems. Our results certainly confirm this to be the case. It
is therefore essential that the focus of introductory undergraduate biology education is as much on understanding
and using fundamental scientific principles as it is on learning the characteristics of particular systems.
The work presented here illustrates that reforming undergraduate science education cannot proceed by merely
changing the content, or modifying the instruction, but
rather must involve both reconceptualizing what it means to
understand the content, and reframing the instruction accordingly. In helping students learn how to use the tracing
matter principle, instructors must be clear and explicit in the
need to account for matter, and to be consistent in applying
the rule across different topics. For example, in addition to
cellular respiration, the tracing matter principle can be usefully applied to understanding cell division, transcription
and translation, and cell signaling. The questions presented
here are necessary tools in helping students progress from
being memorizers of elaborate and detailed narrative accounts to being analyzers and pattern finders. We encourage
other researchers and instructors to use simple questions
such as ours to distinguish between students who are unaware of basic principles from those who are unable to apply
them. Modifying instruction based on such distinctions
promises to be an effective approach to helping students to
use their scientific understanding to effectively question and
reason about the natural world.
The items in this article represent part of the products of
an ongoing research project at Michigan State University
focused on developing Diagnostic Question Clusters designed to measure and diagnose undergraduate student understanding of dynamic biological and geological processes.
Once completed, the question clusters will be made available via the online LON-CAPA system and published in scholarly journals. Anyone interested in this project
One Group 5 item requiring students to explain how
respiring organisms obtain energy from food. Data from fall 2005.
This item was not used in pretests or in earlier semesters.
C. D. Wilson et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
or its products are encouraged to contact us for more information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Tammy Long and Mark Urban-Lurain for discussions and comments on the manuscript. We also acknowledge
the dedicated participation of Diane Ebert-May, Heejun Lim, and
Ron Patterson. This research was supported by National Science
Foundation Grant DUE-0243126, National Science Foundation Cooperative Agreement EHR 0314866, and Carnegie Corporation
Grant B7458.