European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education
Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016, 33‐43
How does grit impact college students’ academic achievement in
Paul Bazelais1,*, David John Lemay1 and Tenzin Doleck1
1 McGill University, Montréal , Canada
For correspondence: 
Research has suggested that achievement is not solely based on the cognitive abilities of the learner, but rather on the
combination of cognitive ability and personality traits. This paper explores how grit affects student academic
performance and success in first-year college physics students in the context of a Quebec Collège d'enseignement
général et professionnel (CEGEP). Two hierarchical linear regressions were performed using scores on a 12-item 5point Likert scale survey measure of Grit on student cumulative GPA and on final exam mark for a gateway physics
course, controlling for gender and high school GPA. Prior academic performance was found to be a significant
predictor of college performance, as well as success in the gateway physics course. Grit was not found to be a
significant predictor of student academic achievement or course success.
Keywords: Grit, Academic Achievement, Perseverance, Physics Performance, STEM Learning, CEGEP, Gender
Differences, Introductory Physics.
Introduction
The importance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) has been widely
acknowledged in a significant body of writing in both the educational literature and the media
because of its important role in shaping the workforce of the future. However, the stubbornly high
attrition rate in STEM majors remains a pressing problem that affects the pipeline of
graduates in STEM and consequently the technical labor force. Struggling to complete introductory
STEM courses can result in loss of confidence and motivation, eventually leading to a shift away from
STEM majors . In an intuitive sense, we tend to
attribute to individuals the quality of perseverance in determining who drops out and who is
persistent enough to stay the course. Thus, investigations of dispositions that affect student
persistence and achievement outcomes are increasingly receiving attention.
Intellectual ability is widely considered to predict academic achievement . Duckworth,
Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly note that the link between intellectual ability and achievement has
been well established. However, intellectual ability is no guarantor of success in completing college
programs or later in life. Some, such as Duckworth et al. have argued that these achievement
differences could be explained by personality variables such as trait-like perseverance, or what they
term ‘grit’; but the influence of these other individual differences or traits on achievement is unclear.
While the focus on intellectual ability on academic achievement has been understandable and even
necessary, there is a growing awareness of the inadequacy of intellectual ability to predict all facets of
academic achievement and success later in life. Thus, researchers have begun incorporating other
motivational and personality variables in order to explain academic achievement differences.
Personality variables such as grit could help shed light on academic success and, consequently, STEM
attrition.
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
Duckworth, et al. define grit as “perseverance and passion for long-term goals” and state that
grit “entails working strenuously toward challenges, maintaining effort and interest over years
despite failure, adversity, and plateaus in progress” (p.1087). Grit may be an important factor in
explaining achievement and persistence .
The Grit Scale and the Short Grit Scale are multiple-item self-report scales developed and validated
by Duckworth and colleagues and
contain questions geared toward eliciting perceptions about behaviors related to setting and pursuing
achievement goals (e.g., ‘‘I have overcome setbacks to conquer an important challenge’’, ‘‘I become
interested in new pursuits every few months’’, and “I am diligent”).
Past academic performance has been used both as a proxy for student persistence and for cognitive ability.
Measures like high school GPA have been widely used for predicting academic achievement
 . But past academic performance are retrospective indicators
and say nothing about prospective behaviors. Measures that can probe traits rather than states ought
to be better indicators of personality differences, such as trait-like perservance or grit. Training the
investigative lens on personality differences might reveal new insights on the link between such traits
and success and/or persistence, and help researchers and practitioners better understand why high
ability students drop out of STEM majors or why students of lesser ability sometimes perform better.
Although many studies have examined the role of the construct of grit in success, there have been no
studies heretofore that have examined the influence of grit on the academic achievement of Collège
d'enseignement général et professionnel (CEGEP) students. The CEGEP system is a unique postsecondary education system in the province of Quebec in Canada, and is similar to the US community
college system. Investigating grit’s predictive power in the academic achievement of CEGEP students
is important for a number of reasons. First, CEGEP’s serve as a gateway for students in Quebec
planning on entering a Quebec university. Second, the percentage of students completing the twoyear pre-university program within the two-year period is stubbornly low (<60%). It should be noted
that a majority of studies investigating the construct of grit have focused on populations identified as
high-achievers, gifted, and or talented. This article represents a first step toward achieving our aim to
test the predictive capacity of grit in the context of a more general ability-level, college-age
population. This study uses a subsample of CEGEP science students to examine the relationships
between grit and achievement. For our present study we operationalize achievement at both the
macro (CEGEP GPA) and micro (Physics course grade) level. Furthermore, we also examine if there
are gender differences in grit scores in this specific population since gender differences have been
observed in college science students .
The present study was conducted at John Abbott College, a CEGEP located in the West Island area of
Montreal, Quebec. CEGEPs are post-secondary institutions that offer general education at the preuniversity level and act as an intermediary between secondary school and university. In Quebec,
students intending to enroll in a Quebec university must pass through the CEGEP system and obtain
a Diploma of College Studies (DEC; Diplôme d’études collégiales). Along with serving as a springboard
for university studies, CEGEPs also prepare students studying a trade or profession for the workforce
via three-year technical programs leading to an Attestation of College Studies . The CEGEP system is composed of a mix of both public and private
and English and French colleges.
Electricity & Magnetism (E&M; Physics NYB) is the second of three required physics courses that preuniversity science students must take at John Abbott College. Electromagnetism is the most
challenging and content driven physics course at the CEGEP level and it is also associated with the
lowest success rate of the three required physics courses in the department. In 2013, less than 80% of
the original cohort of 530 students continued into the 2nd year of the program after taking the E&M
course. One reason for the low success rate and retention may be the abstract nature of the E&M
concepts for many students. Whereas the concepts of Newtonian physics can be very intuitive and
coherent for many students since they tend to build on real-world experiences, the concepts of E&M
such as electrostatic, moving charges, electric and magnetic fields phenomena, and circuit networks,
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
have no real world analog. These concepts tend to be hard to conceptualize and may even appear
counter-intuitive to many students. Another possible reason for the low success rate and high
attrition in these courses may be presence or absence of certain personality traits within the student
population. This study aims to analyze the impacts of trait-like perseverance or grit on academic
performance of CEGEP science students.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature. Section 3 outlines the
methods. Section 4 presents the results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper with a discussion of the
study’s results, its limitations, and future directions for research.
Grit and Academic Performance
Prior research has confirmed that grades and intelligence are the most reliable measure of student
persistence in college and universities . However, there is ample research that demonstrates that abilities
such as talent, intelligence, and IQ are not significant predictors of high achievement or later success
 . Current research posits that trait-like perseverance is related to better performance and greater
success in both academia and in the real-world setting . If students with less academic ability can perform equally well compared to
students with more academic ability then perhaps there exists other more reliable measures of
academic achievement or persistence in colleges.
Duckworth et al. argue that achievement results from a combination of innate talent and effort.
In other words, success is not solely based on the learner’s abilities but rather on the combination of
cognitive ability and personality traits, such as grit, as well as deliberate practice. Hogan & Wong
 argue that grittier individuals tend to work harder and longer and are more inclined to engage
in deliberate practice to enhance performance or success. Performances are limited by innate factors
and cognitive skills, and require deliberate efforts on the part of the individual to change or improve
particular characteristics of performance . Grittier individuals
are more persistent and diligent, not discouraged by setbacks or failure, more focused on a project or
goal, and more likely to complete tasks. In contrast, less gritty individuals aren’t as persistent or
diligent, they are easily distracted by new ideas or projects, unable to set long-term goals, and lack
motivation or focus for long-term projects. However, despite these findings there is a lack of research
on the role played by personality traits such as grittiness on the academic achievement or the later
success of the learner.
Current research tends to support the contention that grit is as important as grades and IQ for high
academic achievement and success . Grit-quality trait perseverance, more
than grades and IQ or conscientiousness, may even be responsible for explaining differences in the
ranks of high achieving and performing individuals. Duckworth et al. collected self-reporting
grit-scale data, as well as age and level of education from (n = 1,545) participants, aged 25 and older
(M = 45 years; 73% women, 27% men) through a noncommercial public website. A two-way analysis
was used to predict the variance in grit by education and age, while treating age and education as
categorical variables. Their study revealed that more educated adults had higher grit than less
educated adults of similar age. In addition, a post-hoc analysis showed that when age is controlled
for, post-college graduates had higher grit than most other groups. Furthermore, their finding
showed that when education is controlled for, grit increases with age. They reasoned that older adults
have more life experience, perseverance or passion for long-term goals, and that persistence and
diligence are key strategies for longtime success, though their study was limited due the crosssectional design in nature, which limited their capacity to make strong causal inferences between grit
Duckworth et al. also studied (n = 139) grit and academic achievement in a population of elite
undergraduate psychology students (69% women, 31% men) from an Ivy League University in the
United States. Their combined average SAT score was 1,415 – a score attained by less than 4% of
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
students who take the SAT. The authors found that grittier students got better results than less gritty
students, that is, grit scores were associated with high GPA, r = .25, p < .01. SAT scores were also
strongly correlated with GPA, r =.30, p<.001 but their study revealed that grit was related with lower
SAT scores r = -.20, p < .03 , who studied a
diverse sample of job applicants and showed that conscientiousness and general intelligence were
negatively correlated, r = .25, p < .01. It is plausible, as Moutafi et al. have proposed that among
quite intelligent individuals, those who are presumably less gifted than their peers compensate by
working harder and with more self-determination and drive.
Duckworth et al. , report on a third study of grit among first year cadets (n =1,218; 84% men,
16% women) who attended the elite United States Military Academy at West Point, in July 2004. They
conducted a binary logistic regression analysis with retention as DV, in order to determine the effects
of grit, self-control, and the whole candidate score, the criterion used by West Point to admit cadets.
The results showed that grit was a better predictor of completion rates for the rigorous summer
program than self-control or the whole candidate score. The results showed that grit was highly
related to self-control, r = .63, p < .001, yet results demonstrated that grittier cadets were more than
60% likelier to remain at the end of the program (β =.48, p < .001), whereas, those with high levels of
self-control were only 50% more likely to remain (β = .48, p < .001). The whole candidate score did not
significantly predict summer retention (β =.09, ns). However, self-control was a better predictor of
cumulative GPA (r = .13, p < .001) and Military Performance Score (r = .21, p < .001) than grit on
cumulative GPA (r = .06, p < .05) and Military Performance Score (r = .19, p < .001). These results tend
to show that perseverance of effort and self-control are key to retention and success in completing the
first summer training program at West Point Academy.
Jaeger, Freeman, Whalen, & Payne, studied the effects of grit in engineering students at
Northeastern University. Their study was guided by two main questions: 1) Is grit associated to
student characteristics such as gender, academic level, and SAT scores? 2) What is the effect of grit
over time when grit scores of first year students are compared to upperclassmen? Interestingly, their
results revealed significant gender differences in grit scores. There has been mixed results regarding
group differences in grit scores. For instance, Rojas, Reser, Usher, & Toland found that females
reported higher grit than males, while Batres reported no gender differences in grit scores. In
their study, Jaeger et al. found that female students were grittier than their male counterparts.
However, grit did not appear to predict either academic level or SAT score. Grit scores were further
discretized by student’s concentration or major within the engineering program, for example, honor
and non-honor students, athletes and non-athletes students, etc. The results revealed that Chemical
and Mechanical Engineering students were the grittiest, whereas Computer Engineering students
were the least. No significance difference was found in grit among honor and non-honor engineering
students and athlete or non-athlete engineering students though the study did show that non-honors
and athlete engineering students were grittier than honors and non-athlete engineering students.
Jaeger et al. conclude that more research on grit is needed in order to better understand the
effect of grit on academic performance or student success.
Chang studied the effects of grit on race, gender, and academic performance of a diverse
population of (n = 342, 67% female, 33% male) first year college students from a highly selective
private four-year college located in the Southern United States. The sample was drawn from
 incoming first year students for the 2013 academic year. 72% of
incoming students ranked in the top 10% of their high school class, with 51% ranked in the top 5%. Of
the incoming first year students, 55% were white, 9% black, 18% Hispanic, and 14% Asian/Pacific
islander. The data consisted of previous academic achievement (ACT/SAT scores and HSGPA), grit
survey data, and academic performance, namely first year cumulative GPA. All incoming first year
students were invited to take the grit scale survey through an online survey during the two weeks
period the survey was open to the students. Chang conducted a hierarchical multiple
regression analysis in order to determine the effects of grit, gender, race and previous academic
achievement (IVs) on academic performance (DV). The results showed that grit was not a significant
predictor of first year GPA, β = .07, p < .19. No significant differences were observed for any of the
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
racial groups, indicating no differences in first year GPA by race. However, the results showed first
year GPA differed by gender (β = .14, p < .05), indicating that females on average had significantly
higher first year GPA. Furthermore, Chang analyzed whether the grit subscales, consistency of
interest and perseverance of effort, were significant predictors of academic performance in first year
college students. The results showed that the perseverance subscales was a positive and significant
predictor of first year GPA, β = .22, p < .01, while controlling for the interest subscale, indicating that a
one standard deviation increase in perseverance subscale would increase first year GPA by .22.
Whereas, the interest subscale resulted in a negative and significant predictor of first GPA, β = -.11
p < .01, indicating that a one standard deviation increase of the interest subscale score would decrease
the first year GPA by .11. The interaction between the two grit subscales was not significant in
predicting first year GPA.
De Vera et al. conducted a qualitative study of management students (n = 25) in an Asian
graduate school to investigate the factors contributing to grit in a non-western context. The data
collected consisted of in-depth interviews from a diverse population (different ages and nationalities)
of randomly selected graduate management students in an Asian graduate school. De Vera et al.
found that social support was a crucial element to passion and perseverance in achieving personal
and work goals. Participants wrote that “grit is long-term” and “emphasizes steadfastness and
perseverance” . The authors posited that grit was related to “the ability to
continue, commitment to growth, consistency, determination, drive to succeed, firmness, passion to
excel, and personal commitment” . Participants reported that both inner and
personal strength forced them to perform better in order to make up for a lack of talent or inherent
ability. Consistent with Duckworth et al. , the findings suggest that intelligence and IQ are not
significant predictors of success. The participants further argued that grit was associated with
persistence, and the strong reliance on external or social support systems (such as family, friends,
significant others, superiors and co-workers), and as well as internal factors of motivation (such as
intrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, and self-regulation). De Vera et al. also investigated grit and
work performance of medical sales representatives (n = 408) of a global pharmaceutical company in
the Philippines. To investigate the effect of grit and work performance, the researchers conducted a
bi-variate analysis of grit and comparison measures targeted by the pharmaceutical company, which
included performance metrics such as appointment based-calls, call concentration, call rate
performance, FCT days, HCP reach, and sales performance based on existing company records.
Respondents who scored high on these metrics were considered as “high performers” and were
perceived as highly motivated individuals working in an extremely demanding and competitive
work environment. These individuals had high motivation, self-efficacy and regulation. Results
showed that there were no significant association between high performance and grit. De Vera et al.
 argue that sales representative performance may not be associated with long-term quality trait
of grit and that their performance depends on more immediate success or reward.
The purpose of this study was to examine whether grit is associated with academic performance in
pre-university science college students. The primary measure was the grit score, as measured by the
12-item, 5-point Likert-style Grit Scale Survey . Controlling for academic
ability using cumulative GPA and R-score, we examined whether grit could significantly predict the
variance in academic performance using final exam marks for E&M course.
Participants were (n = 156) first year, second semester pre-university science students (53% male, 47%
female) at John Abbott College, a CEGEP in Montreal. Participants were recruited from five sections
of the Electricity & Magnetism course. Student participation was voluntary. Participants of this study
had to be 18 years old to consent to be part of the research. Participants gave written informed
consent and were given the choice to withdraw or not submit their data. The participants were
informed of the confidential nature of the study and the data and were informed that study results
would not be linked to any student’s name or student ID number. An anonymous coding scheme was
used to ensure confidentiality.
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
In order to rule out systematic bias, we present comparative statistics on our sample and the 2014-
2015 Physics NYB cohort. We found no systematic difference between our sample and the cohort. The
E&M course average for our sample of 156 students was 72.27% while the E&M course average for
the rest of the cohort (excluding the sample) was 69.81%. The average GPA for the sample was
83.65%, while the GPA for the remainder of the cohort was 82.23%.
For Winter 2015, a total of 477 students were registered for E&M but only 468 took the final exam. The
E&M final exam average was 69.81 including Honors (sections 1 and 2, a total of 39 honors students).
However, note that no Honors student took the grit survey. The overall average excluding Honors
was 68.53. A total of 80 students failed the course, but no Honors student failed. Excluding the
Honors group (468 – 39 = 429), the exam pass-rate for Winter 2015 was (429-80)/429, or about 81%.
Research Questions.
This study was guided by the following research questions:
What is the effect of grit on CEGEP academic performance for pre-university college
science students?
What is the effect of grit on final exam performance in a pre-university college E&M
physics course?
Is there a significant difference in grit scores between males and females?
Research Question 1.
To answer question 1, a hierarchical multiple linear regression was performed to test for the effects of
grit scores on CEGEP academic performance, while controlling for gender and high school GPA. Prior
to conducting the hierarchical multiple regression, the relevant tests of assumptions of linearity,
normality, and homoscedasticity were performed and no violations were observed. In addition, both
the Tolerance and VIF values indicate that there is no multicollinearity.
Table 1. Correlations
Pearson Correlation
** p < .01, * p < .05
Gender and high school GPA were entered first into the model (controlling variables), followed with
the IV of interest (grit scores) was entered with academic performance (CEGEP GPA) as the DV. The
first block of IV (gender and high school GPA) explained approximately 43.8% of the variance in
academic performance (R2 = .438) and was found to be significant, F (2, 149) = 58.18, p < 0.001. When
the grit score was included in the second block, the model as a whole explained approximately 44.2%
of the variance in academic performance (R2 = .442) as displayed in Table 2. The results revealed that
grit was not a significant predictor of academic performance (R2 change = .004; F change (1, 148) =
1.043, p = .309). Whereas, the overall model was found to be significant, F (3, 148) = 39.145, p < 0.001.
Moreover, from the three IVs, only high school GPA was a significant predictor of academic
performance. A one-point change in high school GPA was related to a .420 increase in academic
performance as indicated in Table 3.
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
Table 2. Model Summary
Std. Error
Change Statistics
a. Predictors: (Constant), H.S. GPA, Gender
b. Predictors: (Constant), H.S. GPA, Gender, Grit
Table 3. Hierarchical Multiple Regression Analysis of Grit on Academic Performance while
controlling for Gender and High School GPA
Research Question 2.
To answer question 2, a hierarchical multiple linear regression was conducted in order to test for the
effects of grit scores on physics performance, while controlling for gender and high school GPA. Tests
of assumptions were performed, and all the assumptions were met in this data set, including
assumptions of linearity, normality, and homoscedasticity. No violations were observed.
Table 4. Correlations
Final Exam
Pearson Correlation Final Exam Score
** p < .01, * p < .05
Gender and High School GPA were entered first into the model (controlling variables), followed by
Grit as IV and Final Exam Score as the DV. The first block (Gender and H.S. GPA) explained
approximately 13.1% of the variance in academic performance (R2 = .131). These results were found to
be significant, F (2, 149) = 11.241, p < .001 as indicated in Table 3. When Grit was included in the
second block, the model as a whole explained approximately 13.6% of the variance in physics
performance (R2 = .136). As displayed in Table 7, grit was not a significant predictor of physics
performance (R2 change = .005; F change (1, 148) = .865, p = .354). Whereas, the overall model was
found to be significant, F (3, 148) = 7.775, p < 0.001.
Of the three IVs, only Gender and High School GPA were found to be significant predictors of
academic performance as indicated in Table 6. A one-point change in high school GPA was related to
a .937 increase in academic performance.
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
Table 5. Model Summary
Std. Error
Change Statistics
a. Predictors: (Constant), H.S. GPA, Gender
b. Predictors: (Constant), H.S. GPA, Gender, Grit
Table 6. Hierarchical Multiple Regression Analysis of Grit on Academic Performance while
controlling for Gender and High School GPA
Research Question 3.
In order to answer question 3, an independent t-test was conducted to examine whether there were
significant gender differences in grit scores. The results of test are presented in Table 9. The analysis
failed to reveal a significant difference between the two groups, t(154) = 1.630, p = .105. The sample
means show that females had grit scores which were quite similar to males (for females, M = 3.4967,
SD = .53769; for males, M = 3.3576, SD = .52651).
Discussion
There was no significant relationship found between grit and student achievement in a gateway
college physics course. Grit provided no incremental predictive validity over past student
achievement as measured by high school GPA.
In previous studies, grit only explained a very small amount of total variance explained when age,
SAT scores, and/or GPA were accounted for or did not significantly predict
student achievement . Further, Duckworth et al. found that grit
varied with age. Therefore, it is likely that grit doesn't provide enough discriminant power among
younger students, perhaps because their interests are not stable yet and the benefits of persistent
effort had not yet made themselves readily apparent. From an evolutionary perspective, novelty
seeking behavior can be considered adaptive among young adults, who are many still trying to
discover what they are good at and what they enjoy doing. Hence, grit may have better postdictive
power especially among older populations.
The conjectured greater postdictive power of grit raises the issue of social desirability. The advantages
of consistent interests and persistent efforts are not necessarily clear to younger populations, at least
not in the same way as for older ones who can point to examples of successful people who 'stuck to it
in the face of insurmountable odds'. However, while not only being susceptible to social desirability
bias, grit as it described here may also suffer from the halo effect or even the availability bias . It is indeed very easy to point to examples of entrepreneurs who overcame
important obstacles and early failures to come to know great success. Yet, for every successful
business there are hundreds of failures. And not every success is on the order of Elon Musk. In other
words, it is simply untrue that persistent effort is always and necessarily adaptive in every situation.
In fact, sometimes the best strategy is to walk away and try something different. In fact, real
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
'grittiness' is being able to get up even when you've failed; it's knowing when to admit defeat and
always being ready to try something new. Triumphing over adversity doesn't mean beating your
head against the wall when the game is already lost. This speaks to the contingent nature of
achievement in a spectrum of human pursuits, where success is not just a matter of ability and effort,
but also a host of situational factors that frame individual action. It speaks to a very different kind of
grittiness than that exhibited by high performing individuals who expend tremendous effort in
deliberate practice in a fairly constrained activity context. Even in the relatively transparent context of
academic achievement, where performance measures abound, it is not immediately obvious that all
students stand on equal footing or that they face the same challenges and obstacles to success,
differences in level of perseverance or expenditure of effort notwithstanding. As noted by the
participants interviewed by De Vera et al. , grit also depends on your social support network.
Whereas grit appears to evolve over time , there is a similar construct,
work ethic, which seems to be a trait that is set early . Work ethic appears to be a stable
individual difference across cultural groups and genders. Meriac argues that the negative
correlation between hard work and GPA can be accounted by the fact that students may be “working
harder, but not working smarter (p.533)”. The absence of a relationship between grit and GPA for
military officers and of mediation of study hours for spelling bee contestants in Duckworth et al
 may also result from the fact that persistence of effort says nothing about the quality of the
exertion. Also, as noted by Chang , the dimensions of consistency of interest and persistence of
effort may be at odds with each other. At the college-level, it becomes salient for students to ask
themselves whether the incremental benefit of the expenditure of increased effort is the best course of
action, when extra effort does not always entail greater success – especially in the short time frames of
an individual course at the outset of one’s academic career.
In a mixed, multi-dimensional regression study of motivation and self-regulation effects on dropping
out of high school, only perseverance of effort dimension and not consistency of interests dimension
of the GRIT-S scale distinguished between anticipated school outcomes . There were significant intercorrelatations between most measures. Persistence of
effort was highly correlated, yet consistency of interests was not significantly correlated with other
measures of motivation, to the exception of a negative correlation with amotivation. Consistency of
interests is not necessarily adaptive in all situations and for all age groups. Novelty seeking is an
important albeit risky pursuit for young people, but sticking to an out-dated and dying field of work
is not always a good professional strategy either. Studying grit in relatively constrained fields or
disciplines as opposed to more generalized achievement contexts such as high school or college may
be confounding participants’ preexisting interest for their chosen field with retrospective selfevaluations of the consistency of their interests over time. Echoing Duckworth et al. , it is
important to match the Grit Scale with other measures and with other populations, to further validate
and generalize these findings.
Finally, cultural factors are important to consider above and beyond personal differences in
achievement contexts . Clearly lower SES are not systematically less gritty than their peers,
only that there are institutional biases that can impede equality of opportunity. Lower SES may face
greater challenges than their peers and, as discussed above, changing tack can indeed be more
adaptive in some situations. Focusing on individual differences at the expense of social-institutional
factors runs the risk of biasing analyses from the very start and ignores the pernicious effects wrought
by the systemic inequities which often plague our institutions.
Thus, the absence of any incremental predictive validity for grit over and above GPA can possibly be
accounted for by population differences due to maturational variables and to the stability of the grit
trait over time. Social desirability and availability bias, and cultural factors are also possible
confounds. Persistence of effort and consistency of interests may not be the most salient factors in
determining short-term achievement profiles in college-level students who have yet to really discover
their passion.
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016
Conclusion
This study was an effort to extend the grit construct of Duckworth et al. to pre-university
science students at the two-year college or CEGEP level. This study builds on current research on the
grit-like personality trait. Our results showed grit was not a significant predictor of academic
achievement in pre-university college-level physics program. These findings appear to be contrary to
findings by Duckworth et al. . Our study supports earlier findings that prior academic
achievement is the most reliable predictor of student success in college, especially at the two-year
college or CEGEP level . As previously documented by Duckworth et al. , more educated
adults had higher grit than less educated adults of similar age, and when age is controlled for, postcollege graduates had higher grit than most other groups. Furthermore, their study showed that
when education is controlled for, grit increases with age. Consequently, grit may be less effective in
predicting academic achievement in a selective program, which may dissuade less motivated and less
self-regulated students in the first place. Further, maturational factors may also attenuate the effects
of individual trait-like perserverance, which may only become salient in more specialized contexts,
among higher performing populations.
This study is limited by its case study design and its use of a convenience sample. Findings cannot be
generalized to college-level student populations. We did not examine the relationship between grit
scores and student retention in the physics program. More research among different populations
employing a greater diversity of measures for triangulation is necessary to further describe the grit
construct and to better understand its relationship to other achievement-related measures and the
roles they play in student retention and academic success. Future studies should inquire whether
gritty people in fact: (a) prioritize long-term stamina over short-term intensity, (b) specify consistent
goals and interests over time, and/or (c) set extreme long term goals, and do not swerve. Studies will
require mixed-method, longitudinal designs in order to answer these questions.
Acknowledgements
Include any acknowledgements here.