IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
System Analysis via Integral Quadratic Constraints
Alexandre Megretski, Member, IEEE, and Anders Rantzer, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper introduces a uniﬁed approach to robustness analysis with respect to nonlinearities, time variations, and
uncertain parameters. From an original idea by Yakubovich, the
approach has been developed under a combination of inﬂuences
from the Western and Russian traditions of control theory.
It is shown how a complex system can be described, using
integral quadratic constraints (IQC’s) for its elementary components. A stability theorem for systems described by IQC’s is
presented that covers classical passivity/dissipativity arguments
but simpliﬁes the use of multipliers and the treatment of causality.
A systematic computational approach is described, and relations
to other methods of stability analysis are discussed. Last, but
not least, the paper contains a summarizing list of IQC’s for
important types of system components.
Index Terms—Nonlinearity, robustness, stability analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
T IS common engineering practice to work with the simplest possible models in design of control systems. In
particular, one often uses linear time-invariant plant models,
for which there exist a well-established theory and commercially available computer tools that help in the design.
Experiments, often preceded by simulations with more accurate models, are used to verify that the design also works
well in practice. There is also a strong need for more formal
ways to analyze the systems. Such analysis can help to identify
critical experimental circumstances or parameter combinations
and estimate the power of the models.
In the 1960–70’s, a large body of results was developed in
this direction, often referred to as “absolute stability theory.”
The basic idea was to partition the system into a feedback
interconnection of two positive operators; see – and the
references therein. To improve the ﬂexibility of the approach,
so-called multipliers were used to select proper variables for
the partitioning. The absolute stability theory is now considered a fundamental component of the theory for nonlinear
systems. However, the applicability of many of the results
has been limited by computational problems and by restrictive
causality conditions used in the multiplier theory.
For computation of multipliers, substantial progress has
been made in the last decade, the most evident example being
algorithms for computation of structured singular values .
A. Rantzer is with the Department of Automatic Control, Lund Institute of
Technology, S-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 0018-9286(97)04274-8.
analysis) . As a result, robustness analysis with respect
to uncertain parameters and unmodeled dynamics can be
performed with great accuracy. An even more fundamental
breakthrough in this direction is the development of polynomial time algorithms for convex optimization with constraints
deﬁned by linear matrix inequalities , . Such problems
appear not only in
-analysis but also in almost any analysis
setup based on concepts of passivity-type.
The purpose of this paper is to address the second obstacle to
efﬁcient analysis by proving that multipliers can be introduced
in a less restrictive manner, without causality constraints.
Not only does this make the theory more accessible by
simpliﬁcation of proofs, but it also enhances the development
of computer tools that support the transformation of model
structure assumptions into numerically tractable optimization
The concept integral quadratic constraint (IQC) is used for
several purposes:
• to exploit structural information about perturbations;
• to characterize properties of external signals;
• to analyze combinations of several perturbations and
external signals.
Implicitly, IQC’s have always been used in stability theory.
For example, positivity of an operator
can be expressed by
In the 1960’s, most of the stability theory was devoted to
scalar feedback systems. This led to conveniently visualizable
stability criteria based on the Nyquist diagram, which was
particularly important in times when computers were less
accessible.
In the 1970’s, IQC’s were explicitly used by Yakubovich
to treat the stability problem for systems with advanced
nonlinearities, including amplitude and frequency modulation
systems. Some new IQC’s were introduced, and the so-called
-procedure was applied to the case of multiple constraints
 . Willems also gave an energy-related interpretation of the
stability results, in terms of dissipativity, storage functions,
and supply rates . Later on, Safonov interpreted the stability
results geometrically, in terms of separation of the graphs of
the two operators in the feedback loop.
An important step in further development was the introduction of analysis methods which essentially rely on the use of
computers. One example is the theory for quadratic stabilization , , and another is the multiloop generalization of
the circle criterion based on D-scaling , . Both search
for a Lyapunov function, and the search for D-scales can be
0018–9286/97$10.00 1997 IEEE
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
interpreted as optimization of parameters in an IQC. Another
direction was the introduction of
optimization for the
synthesis of robust controllers , . Again, the results
can be viewed in terms of IQC’s, since optimal design with
respect to an IQC leads to
optimization.
During the last decade, a variety of methods has been
developed within the area of robust control. As was pointed
out in , many of them can be reformulated to fall within
the framework of IQC’s. This will be further demonstrated
in the current paper, which presents a minimal framework for
the stability analysis of feedback interconnections described in
terms of IQC’s. In Section II, deﬁnitions and a main theorem
are given in detail. They are illustrated in Section III by an
extensive example, analyzing a system with saturation and
an uncertain delay. Then, follow sections with discussions
and comparisons to well-known results. Finally, we give a
summarizing list of IQC’s for important types of system
components.
A. Notation
be the set of proper (bounded at inﬁnity) rational
functions with real coefﬁcients. The subset consisting of functions without poles in the closed right-half plane is denoted
. The set of
matrices with elements in
) will be denoted
can be thought of as the space of
of ﬁnite energy
This is a subset of the space
, whose members only
need to be square integrable on ﬁnite intervals. The Fourier
transform of
is denoted by
By an operator we mean a function
space to another. The gain of
an operator
is given by
An important example of an operator is given by the past
projection (truncation)
, which leaves a function unchanged
on the interval
and gives the value zero on
Causality of an operator
means that
B. What Is an IQC?
IQC’s provide a way of representing relationships between
processes evolving in a complex dynamical system, in a form
that is convenient for analysis.
Depending on the particular application, various versions
of IQC’s are available. Two signals
are said to satisfy the IQC deﬁned by
Basic feedback conﬁguration.
(absolute integrability is assumed). Here the Fourier transforms
represent the harmonic spectrum of the
at the frequency
, and (1) describes the
energy distribution in the spectrum of
. In principle,
can be any measurable Hermitianvalued function. In most situations, however, it is sufﬁcient to
use rational functions that are bounded on the imaginary axis.
A time-domain form of (1) is
is a quadratic form, and
is deﬁned by
is a Hurwitz matrix. Intuitively, this state-space form
IQC is a combination of a linear ﬁlter (3) and a “correlator”
(2). For any bounded rational weighting function
, (1) can be
expressed in the form (2), (3) by ﬁrst factorizing
, then deﬁning
In system analysis, IQC’s are useful to describe relations
between signals in a system component. For example, to
describe the saturation
, one can use the IQC
deﬁned by (1) with
, which holds for any
square summable signals
related by
general, a bounded operator
is said to satisfy the IQC deﬁned by
if (1) holds for all
There is, however, an evident problem in using IQC’s in
stability analysis. This is because both (1) and (2), (3) make
sense only if the signals
are square summable. If it is not
known a priori that the system is stable, then the signals might
not be square summable.1 This will be resolved as follows.
First, the system is considered as depending on a parameter
, such that stability is obvious for
gives the system to be studied. Then, the IQC’s are used to
show that as
increases from zero to one, there can be no
transition from stability to instability.
II. A BASIC STABILITY THEOREM
The following feedback conﬁguration, illustrated in Fig. 1,
is the basic object of study in this paper:
1One could suggest using integrals “from 0 to T” in (2) instead of the
integrals “from 0 to 1,” as is often done in the literature. It can be shown,
however, that for many important components (such as a saturation), some
useful IQC’s hold in the form (2), but their counterparts “from 0 to T” are
not valid (see Section IV).
MEGRETSKI AND RANTZER: INTEGRAL QUADRATIC CONSTRAINTS
represent the “interconnection noise,” and
are the two causal operators on
, respectively. It is assumed that
is a linear time-invariant operator with the transfer function
has bounded gain.
In applications,
will be used to describe the “troublemaking” (nonlinear, time-varying, or uncertain) components of
a system. The notation
will either denote a linear operator
or a rational transfer matrix, depending on the context. The
following deﬁnitions will be convenient.
Deﬁnition: We say that the feedback interconnection of
is well-posed if the map
(4) has a causal inverse on
. The interconnection
is stable if, in addition, the inverse is bounded, i.e., if there
exists a constant
and for any solution of (4).
is linear, as will be the case below, well-posedness
means that
is causally invertible. From boundedness
, it also follows that the interconnection is stable
if and only if
is a bounded causal operator on
In most applications, well-posedness is equivalent to the
existence, uniqueness, and continuability of solutions of the
underlying differential equations and is relatively easy to
verify. Regarding stability, it is often desirable to verify
some kind of
exponential stability. However, for general
classes of ordinary differential equations, exponential stability
is equivalent to the input/output stability introduced above
(compare [39, sec. 6.3]).
Proposition 1: Consider
. Assume that for any
the system
has a solution
. Then the following two conditions are
equivalent.
1) There exists a constant
for any solution of (6) with
2) There exist
for any solution
Proof: Parts, if not all, of this result can be found in
standard references on nonlinear systems. A complete proof
is also included in the technical report that contains an
early version of this paper.
We are now ready to state our main theorem.
Theorem 1: Let
be a bounded
causal operator. Assume that:
i) for every
, the interconnection of
is well-posed;
ii) for every
, the IQC deﬁned by
is satisﬁed
iii) there exists
Then, the feedback interconnection of
is stable.
Remark 1: The values
recover versions of the small gain theorem and the
passivity theorem.
Remark 2: In many applications (see for example the previous remark), the upper left corner of
is positive
semi-deﬁnite, and the lower right corner is negative semideﬁnite so
satisﬁes the IQC deﬁned by
and only if
does so. This simpliﬁes Assumption ii).
Remark 3: The theorem remains true if the right-hand side
of (9) is replaced by
. This is obtained by
The corresponding IQC for
is valid by deﬁnition of
Remark 4: It is important to note that if
satisﬁes several
IQC’s, deﬁned by
then a sufﬁcient condition for
stability is the existence of
such that (9) holds
. Hence, the more IQC’s that
can be veriﬁed for
, the better. Furthermore, the condition
is necessary in the following sense. If it fails for all
then (5) fails for some signals
satisfying all the IQC’s , .
Proof of Theorem 1 (Step 1): Show
Introduce the notation
be the norms
for the matrix blocks of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
. Note that (9) implies
satisﬁes the IQC deﬁned by
Step 2: Show that if
is bounded for some
is bounded for any
. By the well-posedness assumption,
the inverse
is well deﬁned on
Boundedness of
follows, as
Step 3: Now, since
is bounded for
Step 2 shows that
is bounded for
smaller than
, then for
induction, it is bounded for all
III. APPLICATION TO ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS
In robustness analysis based on the feedback conﬁguration
illustrated in Fig. 1, it is natural to assume that
known, and
describes the “trouble-making” (nonlinear,
time-varying, or uncertain) components of the system.
First, we describe
as accurately as possible by IQC’s.
of all rational Hermitian matrix functions
deﬁne a valid IQC for a given
is convex, and it is usually
inﬁnite-dimensional. For a large number of simple system
components, a corresponding class
is readily available in
the literature. In fact, IQC’s are implicitly present in many
results on robust/nonlinear/time-varying stability. A list of
System with saturation and delay.
such IQC’s has been appended to this paper in Section VI.
consists of a combination of several simple blocks,
IQC’s can be generated by convex combinations of constraints
for the simpler components.
Next, we search for a matrix function
that satisﬁes
Theorem 1. The search for a suitable
can be carried out
by numerical optimization, restricted to a ﬁnite-dimensional
can be written on the form
are positive real parameters. Usually
proper rational functions with no poles on the imaginary axis,
so there exists
, a Hurwitz matrix
, and a set of symmetric real matrices
, such that
. By application of the Kalman–Yakubovich–Popov
lemma – , it follows that (9) is equivalent to the
existence of a symmetric
Hence the search for
that produces a
satisfying (9) (i.e.,
proving the stability) takes the form of a convex optimization
problem deﬁned by a linear matrix inequality (LMI) in the
. Such problems can be solved very efﬁciently
using the recently developed numerical algorithms based on
interior point methods , .
A. Example with Saturation and Delay
Consider the following feedback system with control saturation and an uncertain delay:
is an unknown constant
is the transfer function of the controlled plant (see the Nyquist
plot on Fig. 3), and
is the function that represents the saturation. The setup is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
MEGRETSKI AND RANTZER: INTEGRAL QUADRATIC CONSTRAINTS
Nyquist plot for P (j!) (solid line).
Let us ﬁrst consider stability analysis for the case of no
delay. Then let
be the saturation, while
Application of the circle criterion
gives stability for
(see dashed line in Fig. 3). This corresponds to a
containing only the matrix
In the Popov criterion,
consists of all linear combinations
and the resulting inequality (9) gives the minor improvement
A Popov plot is shown in Fig. 4.
Furthermore, because the saturation is monotone and odd, it
is possible to apply a much stronger result, obtained by Zames
and Falb . By their statement, a sufﬁcient condition for
stability is the existence of a function
This extends the class of valid IQC’s further, by allowing all
matrix functions of the form
has an impulse response of
norm no greater than
one. For our problem,
This shows that the feedback system is indeed stable for all
and concludes the stability analysis in the undelayed
Popov plot for P (j!) with stabilizing gain k.
Considering also the delay uncertainty, the problem is to ﬁnd
a bound on the maximal stabilizing feedback gain for a given
delay bound. A crude bound can be received directly from the
small gain theorem, stating that, because of the gain bound
, the feedback interconnection of
is stable, provided that
Not surprisingly, this condition is conservative. For example,
it does not utilize any bound on the delay. In order to do that,
it is useful to generate more IQC’s for the delay component.
First, we rewrite (12) as a feedback interconnection on Fig. 1,
With external signals
as in (4), the equations are
. One can see that
(16) is equivalent to the equations from (12), disturbed by the
“interconnection noise”
For the uncertain time delay, several types of IQC’s are
given in the list. Here we shall use a simple (and not complete)
set of IQC’s for the uncertain delay
based on the bounds
is chosen as a rational upper bound (see Fig. 5) of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
Comparison of 0(!) and (j!).
Bounds on stabilizing gain k versus delay uncertainty 0.
By integrating the point-wise inequalities (17) with some
nonnegative rational functions, one can obtain a huge set of
IQC’s valid for the uncertain delay. Using these in combination
with some set of IQC’s for the saturation nonlinearity, one can
estimate the region of stability for the system given in (12).
In Fig. 6, the “x”-marks denote parameter values for which
stability has been proved using (17) for the delay and (15)
for the saturation.
The parameter
was optimized by convex optimization.
The guaranteed instability region was obtained analytically
by considering the behavior of the system in the linear
“unsaturated” region around the origin.
IV. HARD AND SOFT IQC’S
As a rule, an IQC is an inequality describing correlation
between the input and output signals of a causal block
Verifying an IQC can be viewed as a virtual experiment with
the setup shown on Fig. 7, where
is the block tested for
is the test signal of ﬁnite energy, and
stable linear transfer matrix with two vector inputs, two vector
outputs, and zero initial data. The blocks with
calculation of the energy integral of the signal. We say that
satisﬁes the IQC described by the test setup if the energy
of the second output of
is always at least as large as the
energy of the ﬁrst output. Then the IQC can be represented
in the form (1), where
The most commonly used IQC is the one that expresses a
gain bound on the operator
. For example
corresponds to the bound
. The energy bounds have the
Testing a block  for an IQC.
particular property that the energy difference until time
be nonnegative at any moment
, not just
. Such IQC’s
are called hard IQC’s, in contrast to the more general soft
IQC’s, which need not hold for ﬁnite-time intervals. Some of
the most simple IQC’s are hard, but the “generic” ones are not.
Example: A simple example of a soft IQC is the one used
in the Popov criterion. If
Clearly, the integral on
is nonnegative for every
but not necessarily zero. Hence the IQC
but the IQC
In the theory of absolute stability, the use of soft IQC’s
was often referred to as allowing “noncausal multipliers.”
While for scalar systems this was usually not a serious
problem, the known conditions for applicability of noncausal
multipliers were far too restrictive for multivariable systems.
The formulation of Theorem 1 makes it possible (and easy)
to use soft IQC’s in a very general situation. For example,
consider the following corollary.
Corollary 1 (Noncausal Multipliers): Assume that Condition i) of Theorem 1 is satisﬁed. If there exist some
then the feedback interconnection of
is input/output
Proof: This is Theorem 1 with
. The IQC for
follows as
For multivariable systems, the above conditions on
are much weaker than factorizability as
all being stable, which is
required, for example, in and . The price paid for this
in Theorem 1 is the very mild assumption that the feedback
loop is well posed not only for
, but for all
Another example is provided by the classical Popov criterion.
MEGRETSKI AND RANTZER: INTEGRAL QUADRATIC CONSTRAINTS
Testing a signal f for an IQC.
Corollary 2 (Popov Criterion): Assume that
is such that
is Hurwitz. Assume that
the system
has unique solution on
and for any
square summable
. If for some
then (19) with
is exponentially stable.
Proof: For
and a differentiable
have the soft IQC
Application of Corollary 1 with
shows that the conditions of Proposition 8 hold, which ensures
the exponential stability.
IQC’s can be used to describe an external signal (noise or a
reference) entering the system. The “virtual experiment” setup
for a signal
is shown on Fig. 8. The setup clearly shows
the “spectral analysis” nature of IQC’s describing the signals.
Mathematically, the resulting IQC has the form
is given by (18).
Performance analysis of systems can be made with both
interior blocks and external signals described in terms of
V. IQC’S AND QUADRATIC STABILITY
There is a close relationship between quadratic stability and
stability analysis based on IQC’s. As a rule, if a system is
quadratically stable, then its stability can also be proved by
using a simple IQC. Conversely, a system that can be proved to
be stable via IQC’s always has a quadratic Lyapunov function
in some generalized sense. However, to actually present this
Lyapunov function, one has to extend the state space of the
system (by adding the states of
from Fig. 7). Even then,
in the case of soft IQC’s, the Lyapunov function does not need
to be sign-deﬁnite and may not decrease monotonically along
the system trajectories. In any case, use of IQC’s replaces
the “blind” search for a quadratic Lyapunov function, which
is typical for the quadratic stability, by a more sophisticated
search. In general, for example in the case of so-called
“parameter-dependent” Lyapunov functions, the relationship
with the IQC type analysis has yet to be clariﬁed.
Below we formulate and prove a result on the relationship
between a simple version of quadratic stability and IQC’s. Let
be a polytope of
, containing the zero
be the extremal points of
Consider the system of differential equations
are given matrices of appropriate size, and
is a Hurwitz
matrix. (The most often considered
case of (21) is obtained when
is the set of
all diagonal matrices with the norm not exceeding
are the diagonal matrices with
diagonal.) The system is called stable if
solution of (21), where
is a measurable function and
for all . There are no efﬁcient general conditions
that are both necessary and sufﬁcient for the stability of (21).
Instead, we will be concerned with stability conditions that
are only sufﬁcient.
System (21) is called quadratically stable if there exists a
Note that since
is a Hurwitz matrix, this
condition implies that
. It follows that
is a Lyapunov function for (21) in the sense that
positive deﬁnite and
is negative deﬁnite on the
trajectories. Quadratic stability is a sufﬁcient condition for
stability of the system, and (22) can be solved efﬁciently with
respect to
as a system of linear matrix inequalities.
An IQC-based approach to stability analysis of (21) can be
formulated as follows. Note that stability of (21) is equivalent
to stability of the feedback interconnection (4), where
is the linear time-invariant operator with transfer function
is the operator of multiplication
. One can apply Theorem 1, using the fact that
satisﬁes the IQC’s given by the constant multiplier matrix
are real matrices such that
For a ﬁxed matrix
satisfying (23), a sufﬁcient condition of
stability given by Theorem 1 is
which is equivalent (by the Kalman–Yakubovich–Popov
lemma) to the existence of a matrix
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
For an indeﬁnite matrix
, (23) may be difﬁcult to verify.
However, (24) yields
. In that case, it is sufﬁcient to
check (23) at the vertices
only, i.e., (23) can
be replaced by
It is easy to see that the existence of the matrices
, such that (24), (25) hold, is a
sufﬁcient condition of stability of (21).
Now we have the two seemingly different conditions for
stability of (21), both expressed in terms of systems of LMI’s:
quadratic stability (22) and IQC-stability (24), (25). The ﬁrst
condition has
-free variables (the components
of the matrix
), while the second condition has
-free variables. However,
the advantage of using the IQC condition is that the overall
“size” of the corresponding LMI is
, while the
total “size” of the condition for quadratic stability is
is a large number and
is signiﬁcantly larger than
, a modest (about two times) increase of the number of free
variables in (24), (25) results in a signiﬁcant (about
decrease in the size of the corresponding LMI. The following
result shows that the two sufﬁcient conditions of stability (24),
(25) and (22) are equivalent from the theoretical point of view.
Theorem 2: Assume that
is a Hurwitz matrix and that
zero belongs to the convex hull of matrices
Then, a given symmetric matrix
solves the system of
LMI’s (22), if and only if
together with some matrices
solve (24) and (25).
Proof: The sufﬁciency is straightforward: multiplying
from the left, and by
the right yields
which implies (22) because of the inequality in (25).
To prove the necessity, let
satisfy (22). Let
be the quadratic form
is a small parameter. Deﬁne
where the inﬁmum is taken over all
Since the zero matrix belongs to the convex hull of
implies that
. Hence, for a sufﬁciently small
is strictly convex in the ﬁrst argument, and a ﬁnite
minimum in (26) exists. Moreover, since
is a quadratic
form, the same is true for
and the matrices
introduced by
Let us show that the inequalities (24), (25) are satisﬁed. First,
by (22), for any
(provided that
are sufﬁciently small). Hence (25)
holds. Similarly, for any
and hence (24) holds, since the matrix in (24) is the matrix of
the quadratic form
VI. A LIST OF IQC’S
The collection of IQC’s presented in this section is far
from being complete. However, the authors hope it will
support the idea that many important properties of basic system
interconnections used in stability analysis can be characterized
A. Uncertain Linear Time-Invariant Dynamics
be any linear time-invariant operator with gain (
norm) less than one. Then
satisﬁes all IQC’s of the form
is a bounded measurable function.
B. Constant Real Scalar
is deﬁned by multiplication with a real number of
absolute value
1, then it satisﬁes all IQC’s deﬁned by matrix
functions of the form
bounded and measurable matrix functions.
This IQC and the previous one are the basis for standard
upper bounds for structured singular values , .
C. Time-Varying Real Scalar
be deﬁned by multiplication in the time-domain with
a scalar function
IQC’s deﬁned by a matrix of the form
are real matrices.
MEGRETSKI AND RANTZER: INTEGRAL QUADRATIC CONSTRAINTS
D. Coefﬁcients from a Polytope
be deﬁned by multiplication in the time-domain with
a measurable matrix
is a polytope of matrices with the extremal points
(vertices)
satisﬁes the IQC’s given by the
constant weight matrices
are real matrices such that
This IQC corresponds to quadratic stability and was studied
in Section V.
E. Periodic Real Scalar
be deﬁned by multiplication in the time-domain with
a periodic scalar function
and period
satisﬁes IQC’s deﬁned by (27), where
are bounded, measurable matrix functions satisfying
This set of IQC’s gives the result by Willems on stability of
systems with uncertain periodic gains .
F. Multiplication by a Harmonic Oscillation
satisﬁes the IQC’s
is any bounded matrixvalued rational function. Multiplication by a more complicated
(almost periodic) function can be represented as a sum of
several multiplications by a harmonic oscillation with the
IQC’s derived for each of them separately. For example
G. Slowly Time-Varying Real Scalar
is the operator of multiplication by a slowly timevarying scalar,
Since the 1960’s, various IQC’s have been discovered that
hold for such time variations; see, for example, – .
Here we describe a simple but representative family of
IQC’s describing the redistribution of energy among frequencies, caused by the multiplication by a slowly time-varying
coefﬁcient. For any transfer matrix
is a constant, let
be an upper bound of the norm of the commutator
, for example
The following weighting matrices then deﬁne valid IQC’s:
is a parameter, and
is a causal transfer function
). Another set of IQC’s is given by
is skew-Hermitian along the imaginary axis (i.e.,
) but not necessarily causal. Since
, the constraints used in the “ ”
case (multiplication by a constant gain
recovered from (28) and (29) as
. Similarly, the “timevarying real scalar” IQC’s will be recovered as
using constant transfer matrices
In and , IQC’s are instead derived for uncertain
time-varying parameters with bounds on the support of the
Fourier transform
. Slow variation then means that
zero except for
in some small interval
The uncertain bounded delay operator
, satisﬁes the “point-wise” quadratic
constraints in the frequency domain
are the functions deﬁned by
Note that (31) is just a sector inequality for the relation
Multiplying (30) by any rational function and integrating
over the imaginary axis yields a set of IQC’s for the delay.
Unfortunately, these IQC’s do not utilize the bound on the
delay. To improve the IQC-description, one can multiply
(31) by any nonnegative weight function and integrate over
the imaginary axis. The resulting IQC’s, however, will have
nonrational weight matrices
. Instead, one should use a
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 1997
rational upper bound
and rational lower bounds
, respectively. For example, a reasonably
good approximation is given by
Then the point-wise inequality (31) holds with
replaced by
, and with
replaced by
(the upper bound for the
multiplier, the lower bound for the
multiplier),
respectively, and can be integrated with a nonnegative rational
weight function to get rational IQC’s utilizing the upper bound
on the delay.
A simpler, but less informative, set of IQC’s is deﬁned for
is any nonnegative rational weighting function, and
is any rational upper bound of
for example
I. Memoryless Nonlinearity in a Sector
is a function
then obviously the IQC with
J. The “Popov” IQC
continuous function,
, and both
square summable, then
In the frequency domain, this looks like an IQC with
However, this is not a “proper” IQC, because
bounded on the imaginary axis. To ﬁx the problem, consider
instead of
satisﬁes the
Together with the IQC for a memoryless nonlinearity in a
sector, this IQC yields the well-known Popov criterion.
K. Monotonic Odd Nonlinearity
operates on scalar signals according to the
nonlinear map
is an odd function
for some constant
satisﬁes the IQC’s deﬁned by
is arbitrary except that the
-norm of its
impulse response is no larger than one .
L. IQC’s for Signals
Performance of a linear control system is often measured in
terms of disturbance attenuation. An important issue is then the
deﬁnition of the set of expected external signals. Here again,
IQC’s can be used as a ﬂexible tool, for example to specify
bounds on auto correlation, frequency distribution, or even to
characterize a given ﬁnite set of signals. Then, the information
given by the IQC’s can be used in the performance analysis,
along the lines discussed in and .
M. IQC’s from Robust Performance
One of the most appealing features of IQC’s is their ability
to widen the ﬁeld of application of already existing results.
This means that almost any robustness result derived by some
method (possibly unrelated to the IQC techniques) for a special
class of systems can be translated into an IQC.
As an example of such a “translation,” consider the feedback
interconnection of a particular linear time-invariant system
with an “uncertain” block
is the external disturbance. Assume that stability
of this interconnection (i.e., the invertibility of the operator
) is already proved, and, moreover, an upper bound
on the induced
gain “from
” (“robust performance”)
for any square summable
satisfying (32). Then, since for any square summable
exists a square summable
satisfying (32),
satisﬁes the IQC given by
This IQC implies stability of system (32) via Theorem 1 but
can also be used in the analysis of systems with additional
feedback blocks, as well as with different nominal transfer
functions.
For example, consider the uncertain block
which represents multiplication of a scalar input by a scalar time-varying
MEGRETSKI AND RANTZER: INTEGRAL QUADRATIC CONSTRAINTS
coefﬁcient
, such that
. There is one
obvious IQC for this block, stating that the
-induced norm
is not greater than one. Let us show how additional
nontrivial IQC’s can be derived, based on a particular robust
performance result. Consider the feedback interconnection of
with a given linear time-invariant block with a stable
transfer function
. This is the case
of a system with one uncertain fast time-varying parameter
are given constant matrices,
is a Hurwitz
is the external disturbance. It is known that,
for this system, the norm bound
the circle stability criterion
, which gives only
sufﬁcient conditions of stability. Nevertheless, for a large class
of transfer functions
, not satisfying the circle criterion,
(34) is robustly stable. A proof of such stability usually
involves using a nonquadratic Lyapunov function
and provides an upper bound
of the worst-case
gain “from
”. This upper bound, in turn, yields
the IQC given by (33), describing the uncertain block
fact that stability of (34) can be proved from this new IQC, but
not from the simple norm bound
, shows that
the new IQC indeed carries additional information about
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The objective of the paper was to give an overview of the
IQC-based stability analysis, featuring a basic stability theorem
and a list of the most important IQC’s. Depending on the
application, several modiﬁcations of the basic framework can
be used, providing more ﬂexibility in the analysis as well as
open problems for future research.
Unconditional and Conditional IQC’s: In this paper, an
was said to satisfy an IQC if (1) was satisﬁed for
. Such an IQC can
be called “unconditional,” because it does not depend on the
environment in which the block
is being used. Using such
IQC’s is easy and convenient, in particular because they can
be derived independently of the system setup (or be found
in the literature). Sometimes, however, unconditional IQC’s
lead to unjustiﬁed conservatism in the analysis. Consider, for
simplicity, the system
is a given nonlinear function. Here the set of possible
is relatively small [it is parameterized by the
initial data parameter
]. Therefore, it may be an “overkill”
to consider the relation between
for all square
summable . It should be sufﬁcient to look only at those
may be produced by (35). For example, if
the “unconditional” IQC (2) with
does not hold for any
. However, it holds (with
sufﬁciently small ) as a conditional IQC whenever
is a nonsingular matrix.
Average IQC’s: The “average” IQC’s are especially useful
in their conditional form when one is working with stochastic
system models. These IQC’s are deﬁned by replacing (2) with
Incremental IQC’s: For nonlinear systems, as a rule, the
standard IQC’s (1) are good only for showing that the signals
within the system are “small” (are square summable, tend to
zero, etc.) However, many interesting questions, for example the study of the existence and properties of a globally
attractive periodic response to any periodic input, require
deeper information about the system. This can be supplied
by incremental IQC’s. An unconditional incremental IQC
describing the operator
has the form (1), where
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to many people, in particular to K.
J. ˚Astr¨om, J. C. Doyle, U. J¨onsson, and V. A. Yakubovich for
comments and suggestions about this work.