f you want to predict
how tall your children
might one day be, a
good bet would be to
look in the mirror, and at
your mate. Studies going
back almost a century have
estimated that height is 80–90% heritable. So
if 29 centimetres separate the tallest 5% of a
population from the shortest, then genetics
would account for as many as 27 of them1.
This year, three groups of researchers2–4
scoured the genomes of huge populations
(the largest study4 looked at more than 30,000
people) for genetic variants associated with the
height differences. More than 40 turned up.
But there was a problem: the variants had
tiny effects. Altogether, they accounted for
little more than 5% of height’s heritability —
just 6 centimetres by the calculations above.
Even though these genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) turned up dozens of variants,
they did “very little of the prediction that you
would do just by asking people how tall their
parents are”, says Joel Hirschhorn at the Broad
Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, who
led one of the studies3.
Height isn’t the only trait in which genes
have gone missing, nor is it the most important. Studies looking at similarities between
identical and fraternal twins estimate heritability at more than 90% for autism5 and more
than 80% for schizophrenia6. And genetics
makes a major contribution to disorders such
as obesity, diabetes and heart disease. GWAS,
one of the most celebrated techniques of the
past five years, promised to deliver many of
the genes involved (see ‘Where’s the reward?’,
page 20). And to some extent they have, identifying more than 400 genetic variants that
contribute to a variety of traits and common
diseases. But even when dozens of genes have
been linked to a trait, both the individual
and cumulative effects are disappointingly
small and nowhere near enough to explain
earlier estimates of heritability. “It is the big
topic in the genetics of common disease right
now,” says Francis Collins, former head of the
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) in Bethesda, Maryland. The
unexpected results left researchers at a point
“where we all had to scratch our heads and
say, ‘Huh?’”, he says.
Although flummoxed by this missing heritability, geneticists remain optimistic that they
can find more of it. “These are very early days,
and there are things that are doable in the next
year or two that may well explain another sizeable chunk of heritability,” says Hirschhorn. So
where might it be hiding?
When scientists opened up the human genome, they expected to find the genetic components of
common traits and diseases. But they were nowhere to be seen. Brendan Maher shines a light on
six places where the missing loot could be stashed away.
The case of the missing heritability
ILLUSTRATIONS BY D. PARKINS
NATURE|Vol 456|6 November 2008
NEWS FEATURE PERSONAL GENOMES
Researchers will need to sequence candidate
genes and their surrounding regions in thousands of people if they are to unearth more
associations with the disease.
Helen Hobbs and Jonathan Cohen of the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center in Dallas did this in an attempt to
capture all the variation in ANGPTL4, a gene
their studies had linked to cholesterol and
triglyceride concentrations. They sequenced
the gene in around 3,500 individuals from
the Dallas Heart Study and found that some
previously unknown variants had dramatic
effects on the concentration of these lipids
in the blood7. Mark McCarthy of Britain’s
Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism says that such studies could
reveal much of the missing heritability, but
not a lot of people have had the enthusiasm
to do them. This could change as the cost of
sequencing falls.
Out of sight
Other variants, for which GWAS haven’t
even begun to provide clues, will prove even
harder to find. In the past, conventional
genetic studies for inherited diseases such as
cystic fibrosis identified rare, mutated genes
that have a high penetrance, meaning that the
gene has an effect in almost everyone who
carries it. But it quickly became apparent that
high-penetrance variants would not underlie most common diseases because evolution
largely keeps them in check.
What powered the push into
genome-wide association was a
hypothesis that common diseases
would be caused by common,
low-penetrance variants when
enough of them showed up in the
same unlucky person. Now that
hypothesis is being questioned. “A
lot of people are recognizing that
screening for common variation has delivered less than
we had hoped,” says David
Goldstein, professor of
genetics at Duke University
in Durham, North Carolina.
But between those variants that
stick out like a sore thumb, and those
common enough to be dredged up by
the wide net of GWAS, there is a
potential middle ground of variants that are moderately penetrant but are rare enough
that they are missed by the
net. There’s also the possibility that there are many
more-frequent variants
that have such a low penetrance that GWAS can’t statistically link them
to a disease.
These very-low-penetrance variants pose
some problems, says Leonid Kruglyak professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at
Princeton University in New Jersey. “You’re
talking about thousands of variants that you
would have to invoke to get near 80% or 90%
heritability.” Taken to the extreme, practically every gene in the genome could have a
variant that affects height, for example. “You
don’t like to think about models like that,”
Kruglyak says.
If rare, moderately penetrant or common,
weakly penetrant variants are the culprits,
then bumping up the number of people in
existing association studies could help find
previously missed genetic associations. Peter
Visscher of the Queensland Institute of Medical Research in Brisbane, Australia, says that
a meta-analysis of height studies covering
roughly 100,000 people is in the works. Lowering the stringency with which an association
is made could drag up more, but confidence in
the hits would drop.
At some point it might make sense to stop
using SNPs, and start sequencing whole
genomes. Collins suggests that the NHGRI’s
1,000 genomes project, which aims to sequence
the genomes of at least 1,000 people from all
over the world, could go a long way towards
finding hidden heritability, and many more
genomes may become possible as the price of
sequencing falls.
Not everyone supports
an all-out sequencing
onslaught. Goldstein warns against
Right under everyone’s noses
The inability to find some genes could be
explained by the limitations of GWAS. These
studies have identified numerous one-letter
variations in DNA called single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that co-occur with a
disease or other trait in thousands of people.
But a given SNP represents a much bigger
block of genetic material. So, for example, if
two people share one of these variants at a
key location, both may be scored as having
the same version of any height-related gene
in that area, even though one person actually has a relatively rare mutation that has a
huge effect on height. The association study
might identify a variant responsible for the
height difference, says Teri Manolio, director of the Office of Population Genomics at
the NHGRI, but averaging across hundreds
of people could give the appearance that its
effects are pretty wimpy. “It’s going to be
diluted,” she says.
Finding this type of missing heritability is
conceptually easy, because it involves closer
scrutiny of the genes already in hand. “Just
exploring, in a very dense way, genetic variation at the loci that have been discovered is
probably going to [explain] another increment of missing heritability,” Hirschhorn says.
NATURE|Vol 456|6 November 2008
PERSONAL GENOMES NEWS FEATURE
continuing to “turn the crank” without devising
a more rational approach, such as sequencing
the genomes of people who exhibit extreme
manifestations of diseases. “I’m not really sold
on doing the sequencing version of what we did
with [GWAS],” he says. “It’s a big enough, costly
enough job, that I think we want to think a little
bit harder about exactly who gets re-sequenced.”
In the architecture
Some researchers are now homing in on
copy-number variations (CNVs), stretches of
DNA tens or hundreds of base pairs long that
are deleted or duplicated between individuals. Variations in these features could begin
to explain missing heritability in disorders
such as schizophrenia and autism, for which
GWAS have turned up almost nothing. Two
recent studies looked at hundreds of CNVs in
normal people and in those with schizophrenia, and found strong associations between the
disease and several CNVs8,9. They commonly
arise de novo — in an individual without any
family history of the mutation.
These structural variants might account for
a lot of the genetic variability from person to
person and could account for some of those
rare ‘out-of-sight’ mutations with moderate
penetrance that GWAS can’t pick up. Many
CNVs go undetected because they don’t alter
SNP sequences. Duplicated regions can also
be difficult to sequence.
A standard technology for uncovering
CNVs is array comparative genomic hybridization, in which scientists examine how genetic
material from different individuals hybridizes
to a micro array. If certain spots on an array
pick up more or less DNA, it could indicate
that there’s a CNV. This and several other
techniques are being tested by a consortium
called the Copy Number Variation Project, run
out of the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in
Cambridge, UK. The consortium is dedicated
to characterizing as many CNVs as possible so
that associations can be made between them
and diseases. McCarthy says that the role hidden CNVs have in heritability “should play out
in the next six months to a year”. But Goldstein argues that current technologies will miss
many of the smaller CNVs, from 50 base pairs
down to repeats of just two bases. “All we’ll have
verification of is the big whopping CNVs that
are identifiable, and they clearly do not account
for much of the missing heritability.”
In underground networks
Most genes work together with close partners,
and it is possible that the effects of one on
heritability cannot be found without knowing
the effects of the others. This is an example of
epistasis, in which one gene masks the effect of
another, or where several genes work together.
Two genes may each add a centimetre to height
on their own, for example, but together they
could add five. GWAS don’t cope with epistasis
very well, and efforts to find these interactions
usually require good up-front guesses about
the interacting partners.
Joseph Nadeau, a geneticist at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio,
says that ‘modifier’ genes act even in some
straightforward single-gene diseases. “That’s a
simple kind of epistasis,” he says. Cystic fibrosis, for example, is usually caused by mutations in one gene, CFTR, yet can vary greatly
in symptoms and severity. The suspicion has
been that modifier genes are one cause of this
variability.
But despite the years of study, researchers
still struggle to pin down these genes. “People
haven’t modelled truly the effect of epistasis,”
says population geneticist Sarah Tishkoff at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
It’s no surprise that genetics is more complicated than one gene, one phenotype, or
even several genes, one phenotype, but it’s
humbling to realize how much more complex
There is more riding on the
case of missing heritability than
academic satisfaction. By finding
variants related to common
disease, genome-wide association
studies promised to deliver
meaningful medical information
and justify the US$3 billion spent
on the human genome and the
multimillion-dollar effort to map
human variation. “The reason for
spending so much money was
that the bulk of the heritability
would be discovered,” says Joseph
Nadeau, a geneticist at Case
Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Ohio.
The ability to predict someone’s
height from their genes would
be a pretty trivial carnival trick,
but it represents a mastery
over the language of life that
could potentially spill into
most areas of medicine. Aside
from some surprises, though,
such as mutations in immunesystem genes being tied to an
eye disorder called age-related
macular degeneration, many of
the variants found
have only modest effects on
human characteristics. For now,
genetics rarely provides a clearer
predictive answer than a good
family history. And the path to
therapy is not straightforward,
says David Goldstein of Duke
University in Durham, North
Carolina. “This talk about
personalized risk profiles, using
genetics, for most common
diseases, and this talk about a
whole flood of new drug targets. I
think that that’s now pretty clearly
wishful thinking.”
Francis Collins, former head of
the National Human Genome
Research Institute in Bethesda,
Maryland, agrees that the picture
for disease prediction remains
bleak, but is still optimistic about
therapeutic intervention. Most
genetic variants found by genomewide
association
“contribute
a relatively modest risk, but
that in no way says the genes
aren’t important,” he says. “The
opportunity for therapy here is
breathtaking.”
Peter Visscher, a geneticist at the
Queensland Institute of Medical
Research in Brisbane, Australia,
agrees. “It would be easy to
knock [genome-wide association
studies] and say everything
was promised and nothing
was delivered. But in terms of
identifying genes and pathways for
disease, it’s been very successful.
I would feel it’s moved the field
forwards tremendously.”
Ultimately, the clinical value of
the variants that
genome-wide association
studies have turned up
may differ from disease
to disease. Still, some say
that the field is too fixated
on clinical application,
be it through prediction,
personalization or identifying
drug targets. Robert Nussbaum of
the University of California, San
Francisco, puts it bluntly: “Human
genetics research always assumes
too quickly that it has to be
translational. They’re doing basic
research.”
Where’s the reward?
NATURE|Vol 456|6 November 2008
NEWS FEATURE PERSONAL GENOMES
things are starting to look. In a now classic
study10, Kruglyak and his colleagues found
that expression of most yeast genes is controlled by several variants, often more than five.
To fill in all the heritability blanks, researchers may need better and more varied models
of the entire network of genes and regulatory
sequences, and of how they act together to
produce a phenotype. At some point this
process starts to look more like systems biology, and researchers are already applying
systems methods to humans and other organisms (see page 26). “What we’re learning from
these studies is that we need to think about the
more complex of the complex models rather
than the more simple of the complex models,”
Kruglyak says.
The great beyond
What if heritability estimates were wrong
in the first place? Heritability of height was initially measured by taking the mean height
of parents and comparing that value
to the adult height of their offspring. As the average heights of
parents increase, researchers
found, so too does the average height of their children,
hence the calculated 80–90%
heritability.
Environment, especially factors such as
nutrients or toxins present during important
growth phases, can affect the mean height of
a population considerably — but researchers
have controlled for environment in estimates
of heritability by, for example, comparing
genetically identical twins raised together
with those raised apart. Most
researchers are confident
that the heritability estimates are sound. “I don’t
think anyone’s going to
say that the heritability of
height is 10% and let environment get you closer to
the answer,” Kruglyak says. “I
don’t think you can explain it
But there are lingering doubts
about how precisely environment has been accounted for
in heritability studies. Adverse
experiences in utero could lead
to lifelong health disparities,
according to David Barker
from the University of Southampton, UK, and yet a shared
womb is an aspect of the environment that would not be
factored into such studies.
“Heritability estimates are basically what clusters
in families, and
environment clusters in families,” says
Epigenetics, changes
in gene expression that are
inherited but not caused by
changes in genetic sequence,
confuses things further. Feeding a
mouse a certain diet, for example,
can alter the coat colour not only in
its children, but also in its children’s
children11. Here, the expression of
a coat-colour gene is controlled by
a type of DNA modification called
methylation, but it’s not completely
clear how that methylation pattern is
‘remembered’ by the next generation.
The idea that grandma’s environment
could affect future generations is controversial — and such effects would have been
included in the heritability normally attributed
“This complicates everything,” says
Nadeau. “How do we sort out what greatgrandfather and great-grandmother were
exposed to when they were young and having children?” Model organisms might help.
Nadeau has investigated testicular germcell tumours in mice that are analogous to
a highly heritable cancer in humans. His
group found that the effects of one weak,
cancer-promoting gene, Dnd1Ter, are greatly
enhanced by several other gene variants,
and the boosted effects are passed on even if
the genes that cause them are not12.
“It’s presumably transmitting
its presence in some epigenetic way,” says Nadeau.
The mechanisms by which
epigenetic inheritance
might work are still disputed, though; marks
such as methylation that
direct gene expression during someone’s life seem to be
wiped clean in a new embryo.
One possible explanation for
Nadeau’s observation, he says, is
that RNA is being inherited alongside
DNA through sperm or eggs.
Collins is not convinced that epigenetics will play a big part in missing
heritability in humans. “It just doesn’t
look likely outside of one or two examples to suggest that this is the case.”
Nadeau disagrees. “It’s hard to imagine that every other organism works
one way and humans are the exception,” he says.
Lost in diagnosis
There is a nagging worry as
researchers hunt for heritability:
that common diseases might
not, in fact, be common.
Medicine tries hard to lump
together a complex collection of symptoms and call
it a disease. But if thousands of rare genetic variants contribute to a single
disease, and the genetic
underpinnings can vary
radically for different
people, how common is
it? Are these, in fact, different diseases?
GWAS could actually
be proving so difficult
because researchers are
seeking shared susceptibility
genes in a group of people who
may share few, if any. And yet without a more refined understanding of genetics, it could be impossible to categorize them
any better. “It may be rare variants, common
disease. And that’s kind of scary to people
because it’s much, much harder to find those,”
says Tishkoff.
There could be scarier and more intractable
reasons for unaccounted-for heritability that
are not even being discussed. “It’s a possibility
that there’s something we just don’t fundamentally understand,” Kruglyak says. “That it’s so
different from what we’re thinking about that
we’re not thinking about it yet.”
Still the mystery continues to draw its
sleuths, for Kruglyak as for many other basicresearch scientists. “You have this clear, tangible phenomenon in which children resemble
their parents,” he says. “Despite what students
get told in elementary-school science, we just
don’t know how that works.”
Brendan Maher is a Features editor for Nature.
1. Visscher, P. M. Nature Genet. 40, 489–490 .
2. Weedon, M. N. et al. Nature Genet. 40, 575–583 .
3. Lettre, G. et al. Nature Genet. 40, 584–591 .
4. Gudbjartsson, D. F. et al. Nature Genet. 40, 609–615
5. Sullivan, P. F. PLoS Med. 2, e212 .
6. Freitag, C. M. Mol. Psychiatr. 12, 2–22 .
7. Romeo, S. et al. Nature Genet. 39, 513–516 .
8. Stefansson, H. et al. Nature 455, 232–237 .
9. The International Schizophrenia Consortium Nature 455,
237–241 .
10. Brem, R. B., Yvert, G., Clinton, R. & Kruglyak, L. Science 296,
752–755 .
11. Waterland, R. A. & Jirtle, R. L. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 5293–
5300 .
12. Lam, M. Y., Heaney, J. D., Youngren, K. K., Kawasoe, J. H. &
Nadeau, J. H. Hum. Mol. Genet. 16, 2233–2240 .
See Editorial, page 1, and News Feature, page 26.
NATURE|Vol 456|6 November 2008
PERSONAL GENOMES NEWS FEATURE