Practical Black-Box Attacks against Machine Learning
Nicolas Papernot
Pennsylvania State University
 
Patrick McDaniel
Pennsylvania State University
 
Ian Goodfellow
 
Somesh Jha
University of Wisconsin
 
Z. Berkay Celik
Pennsylvania State University
 
Ananthram Swami
US Army Research Laboratory
 
Machine learning (ML) models, e.g., deep neural networks
(DNNs), are vulnerable to adversarial examples: malicious
inputs modiﬁed to yield erroneous model outputs, while appearing unmodiﬁed to human observers. Potential attacks
include having malicious content like malware identiﬁed as
legitimate or controlling vehicle behavior. Yet, all existing
adversarial example attacks require knowledge of either the
model internals or its training data. We introduce the ﬁrst
practical demonstration of an attacker controlling a remotely
hosted DNN with no such knowledge. Indeed, the only capability of our black-box adversary is to observe labels given
by the DNN to chosen inputs. Our attack strategy consists
in training a local model to substitute for the target DNN,
using inputs synthetically generated by an adversary and
labeled by the target DNN. We use the local substitute to
craft adversarial examples, and ﬁnd that they are misclassiﬁed by the targeted DNN. To perform a real-world and
properly-blinded evaluation, we attack a DNN hosted by
MetaMind, an online deep learning API. We ﬁnd that their
DNN misclassiﬁes 84.24% of the adversarial examples crafted
with our substitute. We demonstrate the general applicability of our strategy to many ML techniques by conducting the
same attack against models hosted by Amazon and Google,
using logistic regression substitutes. They yield adversarial
examples misclassiﬁed by Amazon and Google at rates of
96.19% and 88.94%. We also ﬁnd that this black-box attack
strategy is capable of evading defense strategies previously
found to make adversarial example crafting harder.
INTRODUCTION
A classiﬁer is a ML model that learns a mapping between
inputs and a set of classes. For instance, a malware detector
is a classiﬁer taking executables as inputs and assigning them
to the benign or malware class. Eﬀorts in the security and machine learning communities exposed the
∗Work done while the author was at Google.
Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM acknowledges that this contribution was
authored or co-authored by an employee, contractor or afﬁliate of the United States
government. As such, the Government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to
publish or reproduce this article, or to allow others to do so, for Government purposes
ASIA CCS ’17, April 02 - 06, 2017, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
c⃝2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4944-4/17/04...$15.00
DOI: 
vulnerability of classiﬁers to integrity attacks. Such attacks
are often instantiated by adversarial examples: legitimate
inputs altered by adding small, often imperceptible, perturbations to force a learned classiﬁer to misclassify the resulting
adversarial inputs, while remaining correctly classiﬁed by a
human observer. To illustrate, consider the following images,
potentially consumed by an autonomous vehicle :
To humans, these images appear to be the same: our biological classiﬁers (vision) identify each image as a stop sign.
The image on the left is indeed an ordinary image of a
stop sign. We produced the image on the right by adding
a precise perturbation that forces a particular DNN to classify it as a yield sign, as described in Section 5.2. Here, an
adversary could potentially use the altered image to cause
a car without failsafes to behave dangerously. This attack
would require modifying the image used internally by the car
through transformations of the physical traﬃc sign. Related
works showed the feasibility of such physical transformations
for a state-of-the-art vision classiﬁer and face recognition
model . It is thus conceivable that physical adversarial
traﬃc signs could be generated by maliciously modifying the
sign itself, e.g., with stickers or paint.
In this paper, we introduce the ﬁrst demonstration that
black-box attacks against DNN classiﬁers are practical for
real-world adversaries with no knowledge about the model.
We assume the adversary (a) has no information about the
structure or parameters of the DNN, and (b) does not have
access to any large training dataset. The adversary’s only
capability is to observe labels assigned by the DNN for chosen
inputs, in a manner analog to a cryptographic oracle.
Our novel attack strategy is to train a local substitute
DNN with a synthetic dataset: the inputs are synthetic and
generated by the adversary, while the outputs are labels
assigned by the target DNN and observed by the adversary.
Adversarial examples are crafted using the substitute parameters, which are known to us. They are not only misclassiﬁed
by the substitute but also by the target DNN, because both
models have similar decision boundaries.
This is a considerable departure from previous work, which
evaluated perturbations required to craft adversarial examples using either: (a) detailed knowledge of the DNN architecture and parameters , or (b) an independently
collected training set to ﬁt an auxiliary model . This
 
limited their applicability to strong adversaries capable of
gaining insider knowledge of the targeted ML model, or collecting large labeled training sets. We release assumption (a)
by learning a substitute: it gives us the beneﬁt of having full
access to the model and apply previous adversarial example
crafting methods. We release assumption (b) by replacing
the independently collected training set with a synthetic
dataset constructed by the adversary with synthetic inputs
and labeled by observing the target DNN’s output.
Our threat model thus corresponds to the real-world scenario of users interacting with classiﬁers hosted remotely by
a third-party keeping the model internals secret. In fact,
we instantiate our attack against classiﬁers automatically
trained by MetaMind, Amazon, and Google. We are able
to access them only after training is completed. Thus, we
provide the ﬁrst correctly blinded experiments concerning
adversarial examples as a security risk.
We show that our black-box attack is applicable to many
remote systems taking decisions based on ML, because it
combines three key properties: (a) the capabilities required
are limited to observing output class labels, (b) the number
of labels queried is limited, and (c) the approach applies
and scales to diﬀerent ML classiﬁer types (see Section 7),
in addition to state-of-the-art DNNs. In contrast, previous
work failed to simultaneously provide all of these three key
properties . Our contributions are:
• We introduce in Section 4 an attack against black-box
DNN classiﬁers. It crafts adversarial examples without
knowledge of the classiﬁer training data or model. To do
so, a synthetic dataset is constructed by the adversary
to train a substitute for the targeted DNN classiﬁer.
• In Section 5, we instantiate the attack against a remote DNN classiﬁer hosted by MetaMind. The DNN
misclassiﬁes 84.24% of the adversarial inputs crafted.
• The attack is calibrated in Section 6 to (a) reduce the
number of queries made to the target model and (b)
maximize misclassiﬁcation of adversarial examples.
• We generalize the attack to other ML classiﬁers like logistic regression. In Section 7, we target models hosted
by Amazon and Google. They misclassify adversarial
examples at rates of 96.19% and 88.94%.
• Section 8 shows that our attack evades defenses proposed in the literature because the substitute trained
by the adversary is unaﬀected by defenses deployed on
the targeted oracle model to reduce its vulnerability.
• In Appendix B, we provide an intuition of why adversarial examples crafted with the substitute also mislead
target models by empirically observing that substitutes
have gradients correlated to the target’s.
Disclosure: We disclosed our attacks to MetaMind, Amazon, and Google. Note that no damage was caused as we
demonstrated control of models created for our own account.
ABOUT DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
We provide preliminaries of deep learning to enable understanding of our threat model and attack. We refer readers
interested to the more detailed presentation in .
A deep neural network (DNN), as illustrated in Figure 1,
is a ML technique that uses a hierarchical composition of n
parametric functions to model an input ⃗x. Each function fi
Input Layer
Output Layer
Hidden Layers
(e.g., convolutional, rectiﬁed linear, …)
M components
N components
Weighted Link (weight is a parameter part of )
Figure 1: DNN Classiﬁer: the model processes an image
of a handwritten digit and outputs the probility of it being
in one of the N = 10 classes for digits 0 to 9 (from ).
for i ∈1..n is modeled using a layer of neurons, which are
elementary computing units applying an activation function
to the previous layer’s weighted representation of the input to
generate a new representation. Each layer is parameterized
by a weight vector θi (we omit the vector notation) impacting
each neuron’s activation. Such weights hold the knowledge of
a DNN model F and are evaluated during its training phase,
as detailed below. Thus, a DNN deﬁnes and computes:
F(⃗x) = fn (θn, fn−1 (θn−1, ... f2 (θ2, f1 (θ1, ⃗x))))
The training phase of a DNN F learns values for its parameters θF = {θ1, ..., θn}. We focus on classiﬁcation tasks,
where the goal is to assign inputs a label among a prede-
ﬁned set of labels. The DNN is given a large set of known
input-output pairs (⃗x, ⃗y) and it adjusts weight parameters to
reduce a cost quantifying the prediction error between the
prediction F(⃗x) and the correct output ⃗y. The adjustment is
typically performed using techniques derived from the backpropagation algorithm. Brieﬂy, such techniques successively
propagate error gradients with respect to network parameters
from the network’s output layer to its input layer.
During the test phase, the DNN is deployed with a ﬁxed
set of parameters θF to make predictions on inputs unseen
during training. We consider classiﬁers: the DNN produces
a probability vector F(⃗x) encoding its belief of input ⃗x being
in each of the classes (cf. Figure 1). The weight parameters
θF hold the model knowledge acquired by training. Ideally,
the model should generalize and make accurate predictions
for inputs outside of the domain explored during training.
However, attacks manipulating DNN inputs with adversarial
examples showed this is not the case in practice .
THREAT MODEL
A taxonomy of adversaries against DNN classiﬁers is found
in . In our work, the adversary seeks to force a classiﬁer
to misclassify inputs in any class diﬀerent from their correct
class. To achieve this, we consider a weak adversary with
access to the DNN output only. The adversary has no knowledge of the architectural choices made to design the DNN,
which include the number, type, and size of layers, nor of
the training data used to learn the DNN’s parameters. Such
attacks are referred to as black box, where adversaries need
not know internal details of a system to compromise it.
MNIST Dataset
GTSRD Dataset
Figure 2: Adversarial samples (misclassiﬁed) in the bottom row are created from the legitimate samples in the
top row. The DNN outputs are identiﬁed below the samples.
Targeted Model: We consider attackers targeting a multiclass DNN classiﬁer. It outputs probability vectors, where
each vector component encodes the DNN’s belief of the input
being part of one of the predeﬁned classes. We consider the
ongoing example of a DNN classifying images, as shown in
Figure 1. Such DNNs can be used to classify handwritten
digits into classes associated with digits from 0 to 9, images
of objects in a ﬁxed number of categories, or images of traﬃc
signs into classes identifying its type (STOP, yield, ...).
Adversarial Capabilities: The oracle O is the targeted
DNN. Its name refers to the only capability of the adversary:
accessing the label ˜O(⃗x) for any input ⃗x by querying oracle
O. The output label ˜O(⃗x) is the index of the class assigned
the largest probability by the DNN:
˜O(⃗x) = arg
j∈0..N−1 Oj(⃗x)
where Oj(⃗x) is the j-th component of the probability vector
O(⃗x) output by DNN O. Distinguishing between labels and
probabilities makes adversaries realistic (they more often
have access to labels than probabilities) but weaker: labels
encode less information about the model’s learned behavior.
Accessing labels ˜O produced by the DNN O is the
only capability assumed in our threat model. We do
not have access to the oracle internals or training data.
Adversarial Goal: We want to produce a minimally altered version of any input ⃗x, named adversarial sample, and
denoted ⃗x∗, misclassiﬁed by oracle O: ˜O( ⃗x∗) ̸= ˜O(⃗x). This
corresponds to an attack on the oracle’s output integrity. Adversarial samples solve the following optimization problem:
⃗x∗= ⃗x + arg min{⃗z : ˜O(⃗x + ⃗z) ̸= ˜O(⃗x)} = ⃗x + δ⃗x
Examples of adversarial samples can be found in Figure 2.
The ﬁrst row contains legitimate samples and the second corresponding adversarial samples that are misclassiﬁed. This
misclassiﬁcation must be achieved by adding a minimal perturbation δ⃗x so as to evade human detection. Even with total
knowledge of the architecture used to train model O and its
parameters resulting from training, ﬁnding such a minimal
perturbation is not trivial, as properties of DNNs preclude
the optimization problem from being linear or convex. This
is exacerbated by our threat model: removing knowledge of
model O’s architecture and training data makes it harder to
ﬁnd a perturbation such that ˜O(⃗x + δ⃗x) ̸= ˜O(⃗x) holds.
In Appendix C, we give a presentation of attacks conducted
in related threat models—with stronger assumptions.
BLACK-BOX ATTACK STRATEGY
We introduce our black-box attack. As stated in Section 3,
the adversary wants to craft inputs misclassiﬁed by the ML
model using the sole capability of accessing the label ˜O(⃗x)
assigned by classiﬁer for any chosen input ⃗x. The strategy is
to learn a substitute for the target model using a synthetic
dataset generated by the adversary and labeled by observing
the oracle output. Then, adversarial examples are crafted using this substitute. We expect the target DNN to misclassify
them due to transferability between architectures 
To understand the diﬃculty of conducting the attack under
this threat model, recall Equation 3 formalizing the adversarial goal of ﬁnding a minimal perturbation that forces the
targeted oracle to misclassify. A closed form solution cannot
be found when the target is a non-convex ML model: e.g., a
DNN. The basis for most adversarial attacks is to
approximate its solution using gradient-based optimization
on functions deﬁned by a DNN. Because evaluating these
functions and their gradients requires knowledge of the DNN
architecture and parameters, such an attack is not possible
under our black-box scenario. It was shown that adversaries
with access to an independently collected labeled training set
from the same population distribution than the oracle could
train a model with a diﬀerent architecture and use it as a
substitute : adversarial examples designed to manipulate
the substitute are often misclassiﬁed by the targeted model.
However, many modern machine learning systems require
large and expensive training sets for training. For instance,
we consider models trained with several tens of thousands of
labeled examples. This makes attacks based on this paradigm
unfeasible for adversaries without large labeled datasets.
In this paper, we show black-box attacks can be accomplished at a much lower cost, without labeling an independent
training set. In our approach, to enable the adversary to
train a substitute model without a real labeled dataset, we
use the target DNN as an oracle to construct a synthetic
dataset. The inputs are synthetically generated and the outputs are labels observed from the oracle. Using this synthetic
dataset, the attacker builds an approximation F of the model
O learned by the oracle. This substitute network F is then
used to craft adversarial samples misclassiﬁed by F Indeed,
with its full knowledge of the substitute DNN F parameters, the adversary can use one of the previously described
attacks to craft adversarial samples misclassiﬁed by F.
As long as the transferability property holds between F and
O, adversarial samples crafted for F will also be misclassiﬁed
by O. This leads us to propose the following strategy:
1. Substitute Model Training: the attacker queries
the oracle with synthetic inputs selected by a Jacobianbased heuristic to build a model F approximating the
oracle model O’s decision boundaries.
2. Adversarial Sample Crafting: the attacker uses
substitute network F to craft adversarial samples, which
are then misclassiﬁed by oracle O due to the transferability of adversarial samples.
Substitute Model Training
Training a substitute model F approximating oracle O is
challenging because we must: (1) select an architecture for
our substitute without knowledge of the targeted oracle’s
architecture, and (2) limit the number of queries made to the
oracle in order to ensure that the approach is tractable. Our
approach, illustrated in Figure 3, overcomes these challenges
mainly by introducing a synthetic data generation technique,
the Jacobian-based Dataset Augmentation. We emphasize
that this technique is not designed to maximize the substitute
DNN’s accuracy but rather ensure that it approximates the
oracle’s decision boundaries with few label queries.
Substitute Architecture: This factor is not the most
limiting as the adversary must at least have some partial
knowledge of the oracle input (e.g., images, text) and expected output (e.g., classiﬁcation). The adversary can thus
use an architecture adapted to the input-output relation. For
instance, a convolutional neural network is suitable for image
classiﬁcation. Furthermore, we show in Section 6 that the
type, number, and size of layers used in the substitute DNN
have relatively little impact on the success of the attack.
Adversaries can also consider performing an architecture exploration and train several substitute models before selecting
the one yielding the highest attack success.
Generating a Synthetic Dataset: To better understand
the need for synthetic data, note that we could potentially
make an inﬁnite number of queries to obtain the oracle’s
output O(⃗x) for any input ⃗x belonging to the input domain.
This would provide us with a copy of the oracle. However,
this is simply not tractable: consider a DNN with M input
components, each taking discrete values among a set of K
possible values, the number of possible inputs to be queried
is KM. The intractability is even more apparent for inputs in
the continuous domain. Furthermore, making a large number
of queries renders the adversarial behavior easy to detect.
A natural alternative is to resort to randomly selecting
additional points to be queried. For instance, we tried using
Gaussian noise to select points on which to train substitutes.
However, the resulting models were not able to learn by
querying the oracle. This is likely due to noise not being
representative of the input distribution. To address this issue,
we thus introduce a heuristic eﬃciently exploring the input
domain and, as shown in Sections 5 and 6, drastically limits
the number of oracle queries. Furthermore, our technique
also ensures that the substitute DNN is an approximation of
the targeted DNN i.e. it learns similar decision boundaries.
The heuristic used to generate synthetic training inputs is
based on identifying directions in which the model’s output is
varying, around an initial set of training points. Such directions intuitively require more input-output pairs to capture
the output variations of the target DNN O. Therefore, to
get a substitute DNN accurately approximating the oracle’s
decision boundaries, the heuristic prioritizes these samples
when querying the oracle for labels. These directions are
identiﬁed with the substitute DNN’s Jacobian matrix JF ,
which is evaluated at several input points ⃗x (how these
points are chosen is described below). Precisely, the adversary evaluates the sign of the Jacobian matrix dimension
corresponding to the label assigned to input ⃗x by the oracle: sgn
JF (⃗x)[ ˜O(⃗x)]
. To obtain a new synthetic training
point, a term λ · sgn
JF (⃗x)[ ˜O(⃗x)]
is added to the original
point ⃗x. We name this technique Jacobian-based Dataset
Augmentation. We base our substitute training algorithm
on the idea of iteratively reﬁning the model in directions
identiﬁed using the Jacobian.
Substitute DNN Training Algorithm: We now describe
Algorithm 1 - Substitute DNN Training: for oracle ˜O,
a maximum number maxρ of substitute training epochs, a
substitute architecture F, and an initial training set S0.
Input: ˜O, maxρ, S0, λ
1: Deﬁne architecture F
2: for ρ ∈0 .. maxρ −1 do
// Label the substitute training set
(⃗x, ˜O(⃗x)) : ⃗x ∈Sρ
// Train F on D to evaluate parameters θF
θF ←train(F, D)
// Perform Jacobian-based dataset augmentation
Sρ+1 ←{⃗x + λ · sgn(JF [ ˜O(⃗x)]) : ⃗x ∈Sρ} ∪Sρ
9: end for
10: return θF
the ﬁve-step training procedure outlined in Algorithm 1:
• Initial Collection (1): The adversary collects a very
small set S0 of inputs representative of the input domain. For instance, if the targeted oracle O classiﬁes
handwritten digits, the adversary collects 10 images of
each digit 0 through 9. We show in Section 5 that this
set does not necessarily have to come from the distribution from which the targeted oracle was trained.
• Architecture Selection (2): The adversary selects
an architecture to be trained as the substitute F. Again,
this can be done using high-level knowledge of the classiﬁcation task performed by the oracle (e.g., convolutional networks are appropriate for vision)
• Substitute Training: The adversary iteratively trains
more accurate substitute DNNs Fρ by repeating the
following for ρ ∈0..ρmax:
– Labeling (3): By querying for the labels ˜O(⃗x)
output by oracle O, the adversary labels each
sample ⃗x ∈Sρ in its initial substitute training set
– Training (4): The adversary trains the architecture chosen at step (2) using substitute training
set Sρ in conjunction with classical training techniques.
– Augmentation (5): The adversary applies our
augmentation technique on the initial substitute
training set Sρ to produce a larger substitute training set Sρ+1 with more synthetic training points.
This new training set better represents the model’s
decision boundaries. The adversary repeats steps
(3) and (4) with the augmented set Sρ+1.
Step (3) is repeated several times to increase the substitute
DNN’s accuracy and the similarity of its decision boundaries
with the oracle. We introduce the term substitute training
epoch, indexed with ρ, to refer to each iteration performed.
This leads to this formalization of the Jacobian-based Dataset
Augmentation performed at step (5) of our substitute training
algorithm to ﬁnd more synthetic training points:
Sρ+1 = {⃗x + λ · sgn(JF [ ˜O(⃗x)]) : ⃗x ∈Sρ} ∪Sρ
where λ is a parameter of the augmentation: it deﬁnes the
size of the step taken in the sensitive direction identiﬁed by
the Jacobian matrix to augment the set Sρ into Sρ+1.
Oracle DNN O
Substitute DNN F
Substitute Dataset
Jacobian-based
Dataset Augmentation
Substitute Training
Dataset Collection
Substitute DNN
Architecture Selection
S⇢+1 = {~x + λ⇢+1 · sgn(JF [ ˜O(~x)]) : ~x 2 S⇢} [ S⇢
Figure 3: Training of the substitute DNN F: the attacker (1) collects an initial substitute training set S0 and (2) selects
an architecture F. Using oracle ˜O, the attacker (3) labels S0 and (4) trains substitute F. After (5) Jacobian-based dataset
augmentation, steps (3) through (5) are repeated for several substitute epochs ρ.
Adversarial Sample Crafting
Once the adversary trained a substitute DNN, it uses it to
craft adversarial samples. This is performed by implementing
two previously introduced approaches described in .
We provide an overview of the two approaches, namely the
Goodfellow et al. algorithm and the Papernot et al. algorithm.
Both techniques share a similar intuition of evaluating the
model’s sensitivity to input modiﬁcations in order to select
a small perturbation achieving the misclassiﬁcation goal1.
Goodfellow et al.
algorithm: This algorithm is also
known as the fast gradient sign method . Given a model
F with an associated cost function c(F, ⃗x, y), the adversary
crafts an adversarial sample ⃗x∗= ⃗x+δ⃗x for a given legitimate
sample ⃗x by computing the following perturbation:
δ⃗x = ε sgn(∇⃗xc(F, ⃗x, y))
where perturbation sgn(∇⃗xc(F, ⃗x, y)) is the sign of the model’s
cost function 2 gradient. The cost gradient is computed with
respect to ⃗x using sample ⃗x and label y as inputs. The value
of the input variation parameter ε factoring the sign matrix
controls the perturbation’s amplitude. Increasing its value
increases the likelihood of ⃗x∗being misclassiﬁed by model
F but on the contrary makes adversarial samples easier to
detect by humans. In Section 6, we evaluate the impact of
parameter ε on the successfulness of our attack.
Papernot et al. algorithm: This algorithm is suitable
for source-target misclassiﬁcation attacks where adversaries
seek to take samples from any legitimate source class to any
chosen target class . Misclassiﬁcation attacks are a special
case of source-target misclassiﬁcations, where the target class
can be any class diﬀerent from the legitimate source class.
Given model F, the adversary crafts an adversarial sample
⃗x∗= ⃗x + δ⃗x for a given legitimate sample ⃗x by adding a
perturbation δ⃗x to a subset of the input components ⃗xi.
To choose input components forming perturbation δ⃗x, components are sorted by decreasing adversarial saliency value.
The adversarial saliency value S(⃗x, t)[i] of component i for
an adversarial target class t is deﬁned as:
S(⃗x, t)[i] =
∂⃗xi (⃗x) < 0 or P
∂⃗xi (⃗x) > 0
1Our attack can be implemented with other adversarial example algorithms. We focus on these two in our evaluation.
2As described here, the method causes simple misclassiﬁcation. It has been extended to achieve chosen target classes.
where matrix JF =
ij is the model’s Jacobian matrix.
Input components i are added to perturbation δ⃗x in order
of decreasing adversarial saliency value S(⃗x, t)[i] until the
resulting adversarial sample ⃗x∗= ⃗x + δ⃗x is misclassiﬁed
by F. The perturbation introduced for each selected input
component can vary: greater perturbation reduce the number
of components perturbed to achieve misclassiﬁcation.
Each algorithm has its beneﬁts and drawbacks. The Goodfellow algorithm is well suited for fast crafting of many adversarial samples with relatively large perturbations thus
potentially easier to detect. The Papernot algorithm reduces
perturbations at the expense of a greater computing cost.
VALIDATION OF THE ATTACK
We validate our attack against remote and local classiﬁers.
We ﬁrst apply it to target a DNN remotely provided by
MetaMind, through their API3 that allows a user to train
classiﬁers using deep learning. The API returns labels produced by the DNN for any given input but does not provide
access to the DNN. This corresponds to the oracle described
in our threat model. We show that:
• An adversary using our attack can reliably force the
DNN trained using MetaMind on MNIST to misclassify 84.24% of adversarial examples crafted with a
perturbation not aﬀecting human recognition.
• A second oracle trained locally with the German Traﬃc
Signs Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB) , can be
forced to misclassify more than 64.24% of altered inputs
without aﬀecting human recognition.
Attack against the MetaMind Oracle
Description of the Oracle: We used the MNIST handwritten digit dataset to train the DNN . It comprises
60, 000 training and 10, 000 test images of handwritten digits.
The task associated with the dataset is to identify the digit
corresponding to each image. Each 28x28 grayscale sample
is encoded as a vector of pixel intensities in the interval 
and obtained by reading the image pixel matrix row-wise.
We registered for an API key on MetaMind’s website,
which gave us access to three functionalities: dataset upload,
automated model training, and model prediction querying.
We uploaded the 50, 000 samples included in the MNIST
3The API can be accessed online at www.metamind.io
training set to MetaMind and then used the API to train
a classiﬁer on the dataset. We emphasize that training is
automated: we have no access to the training algorithm,
model architecture, or model parameters. All we are given is
the accuracy of the resulting model, computed by MetaMind
using a validation set created by isolating 10% of the training
samples. Details can be found on MetaMind’s website.
Training took 36 hours to return a classiﬁer with a 94.97%
accuracy. This performance cannot be improved as we cannot
access or modify the model’s speciﬁcations and training
algorithm.
Once training is completed, we could access
the model predictions, for any input of our choice, through
the API. Predictions take the form of a class label. This
corresponds to the threat model described in Section 3.
Initial Substitute Training Sets: First, the adversary
collects an initial substitute training set. We describe two
such sets used to attack the MetaMind oracle:
• MNIST subset: This initial substitute training set is
made of 150 samples from the MNIST test set. They
diﬀer from those used by the oracle for training as test
and training sets are distinct. We assume adversaries
can collect such a limited sample set under the threat
model described in Section 3 with minimal knowledge
of the oracle task: here, handwritten digit classiﬁcation.
• Handcrafted set: To ensure our results do not stem from
similarities between the MNIST test and training sets,
we also consider a handcrafted initial substitute training
set. We handcrafted 100 samples by handwriting 10
digits for each class between 0 and 9 with a laptop
trackpad. We then adapted them to the MNIST format
of 28x28 grayscale pixels. Some are shown below.
Substitute DNN Training: The adversary uses the initial
substitute training sets and the oracle to train subsitute
DNNs. Our substitute architecture A, a standard for image
classiﬁcation, is described in Table 13 (cf. appendix). The
substitute DNN is trained on our machine for 6 substitute
epochs. During each of these 6 epochs, the model is trained
for 10 epochs from scratch with a learning rate of 10−2 and
momentum of 0.9. Between substitute epochs, we perform
a Jacobian-based dataset augmentation with a step size of
λ = 0.1 to generate additional synthetic training data, which
we label using the MetaMind oracle.
The accuracy of the two substitute DNNs is reported in
Figure 4. It is computed with the MNIST test set (minus
the 150 samples used in the ﬁrst initial substitute training
set). The adversary does not have access to this full test set:
we solely use it to analyze our results. The two substitute
DNNs respectively achieve a 81.20% and 67.00% accuracy on
the MNIST test set after 6 substitute training epochs. These
accuracies fall short of current state-of-the-art accuracies on
this task. However, the adversary has access to a limited
number of samples (in this case 6, 400 = 100 × 26 instead
of 50, 000 for state-of-the-art models).
Furthermore, the
adversarial goal is to craft adversarial samples misclassiﬁed by
the oracle. Instead of learning a substitute DNN with optimal
accuracy, the adversary is interested in learning a substitute
capable of mimicking the oracle decision boundaries.
Substitute
Initial Substitute Training Set from
MNIST test set
Handcrafted digits
Figure 4: Substitute DNN Accuracies: each column
corresponds to an initial substitute training set: 150 MNIST
test samples, and handcrafted digits. Accuracy is reported
on the unused 9,850 MNIST test samples.
Success Rate
Transferability
Success Rate
Transferability
MNIST-based substitute
Handcrafted substitute
Figure 5: Success Rate and Transferability of Adversarial Samples for the MetaMind attacks: performed
using MNIST-based and handcrafted substitutes: each bar
corresponds to a diﬀerent perturbation input variation.
Adversarial Sample Crafting: Using the substitute DNNs,
we then craft adversarial samples using Goodfellow’s algorithm.
We decided to use the 10, 000 samples from the
MNIST test set as our legitimate samples.4 We evaluate
sample crafting using two metrics: success rate and transferability. The success rate is the proportion of adversarial
samples misclassiﬁed by the substitute DNN. Our goal is
to verify whether these samples are also misclassiﬁed by
the oracle or not. Therefore, the transferability of adversarial samples refers to the oracle misclassiﬁcation rate of
adversarial samples crafted using the substitute DNN.
Figure 5 details both metrics for each substitute DNN and
for several values of the input variation ε (cf. Equation 5).
Transferability reaches 84.24% for the ﬁrst substitute DNN
and 78.72% for the second, with input variations of ε = 0.3.
Our attack strategy is thus eﬀectively able to severely damage
the output integrity of the MetaMind oracle.
substitute training set handcrafted by the adversary limits
the transferability of adversarial samples when compared to
the substitute set extracted from MNIST data, for all input
variations except ε = 0.2. Yet, the transferability of both
substitutes is similar, corroborating that our attack can be
executed without access to any of the oracle’s training data.
To analyze the labels assigned by the MetaMind oracle, we
4Again, adversaries do not need access to the dataset and can
use any legitimate sample of their choice to craft adversarial
samples. We use it in order to show that expected inputs
can be misclassiﬁed on a large scale.
Figure 6: MetaMind Oracle Confusion Matrices for
diﬀerent input variations ε.
Cell (x, y) indicates the
share of digit y instances classiﬁed by the oracle as digit x.
plot confusion matrices for adversarial samples crafted using
the ﬁrst substitute DNN with 4 values of ε. In Figure 6,
rates on the diagonal indicate the proportion of samples
correctly classiﬁed by the oracle for each of the 10 classes. Oﬀdiagonal values are the proportion of samples misclassiﬁed
in a wrong class. For instance, cell (8, 3) in the third matrix
indicates that 89% instances of a 3 are classiﬁed as a 8 by the
oracle when perturbed with an input variation of ε = 0.25.
Confusion matrices converge to most samples being classiﬁed
as 4s and 8s as ε increases. This could be due to DNNs more
easily classifying inputs in these classes .
Attacking an oracle for the GTSRB
We now validate our attack on a diﬀerent dataset, using an
oracle trained locally to recognize traﬃc signs on the GTSRB
dataset. The attack achieves higher transferability rates at
lower distortions compared to the MNIST oracle.
Oracle Description: The GTSRB dataset is an image
collection consisting of 43 traﬃc signs . Images vary in
size and are RGB-encoded. To simplify, we resize images
to 32x32 pixels, recenter them by subtracting the mean
component, and rescale them by factoring their standard
deviations out. We keep 35, 000 images for our training set
and 4, 000 for our validation set (out of the 39, 209 available),
and 10, 000 for our test set (out of 12, 630). We train the
oracle on our machine, using the DNN B from Table 13 (cf.
appendix), for 50 epochs with a learning rate of 10−2 and a
momentum of 0.9 (both decayed by 0.5 every 10 epochs).
Substitute DNN Training: The adversary uses two initial
substitute training sets extracted from the GTSRB test set.
The ﬁrst includes the ﬁrst 1, 000 samples and the second the
ﬁrst 500. The number of initial samples is higher than for
Success Rate Transferability Success Rate Transferability Success Rate Transferability
Figure 7: Success Rate and Transferability of Adversarial Samples crafted on the GTRSRB dataset: each
bar corresponds to a diﬀerent input variation.
MNIST substitutes as inputs have a higher dimensionality.
We train three substitute architectures C, D, and E (cf.
Table 13) using the oracle for 6 substitute training epochs
with a Jacobian-based dataset augmentation parameter of
λ = 0.1. Substitute C and E where trained with the 1, 000
sample initial substitute training set and achieve a 71.42%
accuracy. Substitute D was trained with the initial set of
500 samples. Its accuracy of 60.12% is lower than C and E.
Adversarial Crafting:
We use Goodfellow’s algorithm
with ε between 0.01 and 0.5 to craft adversarial samples
from the test set. Results are shown in Figure 7. Adversarial
samples crafted with variations ε < 0.3 are more transferable
than those crafted with the same ε for MNIST models. This
is likely due to the higher input dimensionality—3, 072 components instead of 784—which means almost 4 times more
perturbation is applied with the same ε. Nevertheless, with
success rates higher than 98.98% and transferability rates
ranging from 64.24% to 69.03% for ε = 0.3, which is hard to
distinguish for humans, the attack is successful. The transferability of adversarial samples crafted using substitute DNN
D is comparable or higher than corresponding samples for
DNNs C and E, despite being less accurate (trained with less
samples). This emphasizes that there is no strong correlation
between substitute accuracy and transferability.
ATTACK ALGORITHM CALIBRATION
Having shown in Section 5 that an adversary can force an
MNIST oracle from MetaMind, and a GTSRB oracle trained
locally, to misclassify inputs, we now perform a parameter
space exploration of both attack steps–the substitute DNN
training and the adversarial sample crafting. We explore the
following questions: “(1) How can substitute training be ﬁnetuned to improve adversarial sample transferability?” and
(2) “For each adversarial sample crafting strategies, which
parameters optimize transferability?”. We found that:
• In Section 6.1, we show that the choice of substitute DNN
architecture (number of layers, size, activation function,
type) has a limited impact on adversarial sample transferability. Increasing the number of epochs, after the
substitute DNN has reached an asymptotic accuracy,
does not improve adversarial sample transferability.
• At comparable input perturbation magnitude, the Goodfellow and Papernot algorithms have similar transferability rates (see Section 6.2).
Transferability
Table 1: Substitute Accuracy at ρ = 2 and ρ = 6 substitute epochs and Transferability of Adversarial Samples:
for ε = 0.4 after ρ = 6 substitute epochs.
In this section, we use an oracle trained locally to limit
querying of the MetaMind API. We train architecture A (cf.
Table 13) for 50 epochs with a learning parameter 10−2 and
a momentum 0.9 (both decayed by 0.5 every 10 epochs).
Calibrating Substitute DNN Training
We ﬁrst seek to quantify the impact of substitute training
algorithm parameters on adversarial sample transferability
and introduce a reﬁnement to reduce oracle querying.
Choosing an Architecture: We train substitute DNNs A
and F to M (cf. Table 13) using 150 samples from the MNIST
test set as the substitute training set. During each of the 6
substitute training epochs, the DNN is trained for 5 epochs
from scratch. Between epochs, synthetic data is added to
the training set using Jacobian-based dataset augmentations
with step λ = 0.1. The substitute architectures diﬀer from
the oracle’s by the type, number, and size of layers.
Table 1, we report the accuracy of each architecture after 2
and 6 substitute training epochs, as well as the adversarial
sample transferability after 6 epochs. Adversarial samples
are crafted using the Goodfellow algorithm with an input
variation of ε = 0.4 (which we justify later). The last column
of Table 1 shows that the choice of architecture has a limited
impact on adversarial sample transferability, and therefore on
the attack success. The most important transferability drop
follows from removing all convolutional layers. Changing the
hidden layer activation function from rectiﬁed linear to a
sigmoid does not impact transferability signiﬁcantly.
Choosing the number of substitute epochs: Another
tunable parameter is the number of epochs for which substitute DNNs are trained. Intuitively, one would hypothesize
that the longer we train the substitute, the more samples labeled using the oracle are included in the substitute training
set, thus the higher the transferability of adversarial samples
will be. This intuition is conﬁrmed only partially by our
experiments on substitute DNN A. We ﬁnd that for for input
variations ε ≤0.3, the transferability is slightly improved by
a rate between +3% to +9%, but for variations ε ≥0.4, the
transferability is slightly degraded by less than 1%.
Setting the step size: We trained substitute A using different Jacobian-based dataset augmentation step sizes λ. Increasing or decreasing the step size (from λ = 0.1 used in the
rest of this paper) does not modify the substitute accuracy
by more than 3%. Larger step sizes decrease convergence stability while smaller values yield slower convergence. However,
increasing step size λ negatively impacts adversarial sample
transferability : for instance with a step size of 0.3 compared
to 0.1, the transferability rate for ε = 0.25 is 10.82% instead
of 22.35% and for ε = 0.5, 82.07% instead of 85.22%.
However, having the step size periodically alternating between positive and negative values improves the quality of
the oracle approximation made by the substitute. This could
be explained by the fact that after a few substitute epochs,
synthetic inputs are outside of the input domain and are
thus clipped to produce an acceptable input. We introduce
an iteration period τ after which the step size is multiplied
by −1. Thus, the step size λ is now replaced by:
λρ = λ · (−1)⌊ρ
where τ is set to be the number of epochs after which the
Jacobian-based dataset augmentation does not lead any substantial improvement in the substitute. A grid search can
also be performed to ﬁnd an optimal value for the period τ.
We also experimented with a decreasing grid step amplitude
λ, but did not ﬁnd that it yielded substantial improvements.
Reducing Oracle Querying: We apply reservoir sampling to reduce the number of queries made to the oracle.
This is useful when learning substitutes in realistic environments, or when interacting with paid APIs, where the number
of label queries an adversary can make without exceeding a
quota or being detected by a defender is limited. Reservoir
sampling is a technique that randomly select κ samples from
a list of samples. The total number of samples in the list
can be both very large and unknown. We use it to select κ
new inputs before a Jacobian-based dataset augmentation.
This prevents the exponential growth of queries made to
the oracle at each augmentation. At iterations ρ > σ (the
ﬁrst σ iterations are performed normally), when considering the previous set Sρ−1 of substitute training inputs, we
select κ inputs from Sρ−1 to be augmented in Sρ. Using
reservoir sampling ensures that each input in Sρ−1 has an
equal probability
|Sρ−1| to be augmented in Sρ. The number
of queries made to the oracle is reduced from n · 2ρ for the
vanilla Jacobian-based augmentation to n · 2σ + κ · (ρ −σ)
with reservoir sampling. In Section 7, we show that using
reservoir sampling to reduce the number of synthetic training
inputs does not signiﬁcantly degrade the substitute accuracy.
Adversarial Sample Crafting
We compare the transferability of adversarial samples produced by each algorithm introduced previously , to elect
the strongest technique under our threat model.
Goodfellow’s algorithm: Recall from Equation 5 the perturbation computed in the Goodfellow attack. Its only parameter is the variation ε added in the direction of the gradient
sign. We use the same architecture set as before to quantify
the impact of ε on adversarial sample transferability. In Figure 8, architecture A outperforms all others: it is a copy of
the oracle’s and acts as a baseline. Other architectures have
asymptotic transferability rates ranging between 72.24% and
80.21%, conﬁrming that the substitute architecture choice
has a limited impact on transferability. Increasing the value
of ε above 0.4 yields little improvement in transferability
and should be avoided to guarantee indistinguishability of
adversarial samples to humans.
Adversarial SampleTransferability
Input variation parameter
Figure 8: Impact of input variation ε in the Goodfellow crafting algorithm on the transferability of
adversarial samples: for architectures from Table 1.
Papernot’s algorithm: This algorithm is ﬁne-tuned by
two parameters: the maximum distortion Υ and the input
variation ε. The maximum distortion5 deﬁnes the number of
input components that are altered in perturbation δ⃗x. The input variation, similarly to the Goodfellow algorithm, controls
the amount of change induced to altered input components.
We ﬁrst evaluate the impact of the maximum distortion Υ
on adversarial sample transferability. For now, components
selected to be perturbed are increased by ε = 1.
Intuitively, increasing the maximum distortion makes adversarial
samples more transferable. Higher distortions increase the
misclassiﬁcation conﬁdence of the substitute DNN, and also
increases the likelihood of the oracle misclassifying the same
sample. These results are reported in Figure 9. Increasing
distortion Υ from 7.14% to 28.57% improves transferability:
at a 7.14% distortion, the average transferability across all
architectures is 14.70% whereas at a 28.57% distortion, the
average transferability is at 55.53%.
We now quantify the impact of the variation ε introduced
to each input component selected in δ⃗x. We ﬁnd that reducing
the input variation from 1 to 0.7 signiﬁcantly degrades adversarial sample transferability, approximatively by a factor
of 2 (cf. Figure 10). This is explained by the ﬁxed distortion
parameter Υ, which prevents the crafting algorithm from
increasing the number of components altered to compensate
for the reduced eﬀectiveness yielded by the smaller ε.
Comparing Crafting Algorithms: To compare the two
crafting strategies and their diﬀering perturbation styles
fairly, we compare their success rate given a ﬁxed L1 norm
of the introduced perturbation δ⃗x, which can be deﬁned as:
∥δ⃗x∥1 = ε · ∥δ⃗x∥0
where ∥δ⃗x∥0 is the number of input components selected in
the perturbation δ⃗x, and ε the input variation introduced to
each component perturbed. For the Goodfellow algorithm,
we always have ∥δ⃗x∥0 = 1, whereas for the Papernot algorithm, values vary for both ε and ∥δ⃗x∥0. For instance,
∥δ⃗x∥1 = 0.4 corresponds to a Goodfellow algorithm with
ε = 0.4 and a Papernot algorithm with ε = 1 and Υ = 40%.
Corresponding transferability rates can be found in Table 1
and Figure 9 for our running set of architectures. Performances are comparable with some DNNs performing better
5In , the algorithm stopped perturbing when the input
reached the target class. Here, we force the algorithm to
continue perturbing until it changed Υ input components.
Success Transfer. Success Transfer. Success Transfer. Success Transfer.
Distortion 7.18%
Distortion 14.28%
Distortion 28.57%
Distortion 39.80%
Figure 9: Impact of the maximum distortion Υ in
the Papernot algorithm on success rate and transferability of adversarial samples: increasing Υ yields
higher transferability rates across DNNs.
Transferability
Transferability
Transferability
Figure 10: Impact of the input variation ε in the Papernot algorithm on the success rate and adversarial
sample transferability computed for ε ∈{0.5, 0.7, 1} on
DNNs from Table 1 with distortion Υ = 39.80%.
with one algorithm and others with the other. Thus, the
choice of algorithm depends on acceptable perturbations:
e.g., all features perturbed a little vs. few features perturbed
a lot. Indeed, the Goodfellow algorithm gives more control
on ε while the Papernot algorithm gives more control on Υ.
GENERALIZATION OF THE ATTACK
So far, all substitutes and oracles considered were learned
with DNNs. However, no part of the attack limits its applicability to other ML techniques. For instance, we show
that the attack generalizes to non-diﬀerentiable target oracles like decision trees. As pointed out by Equation 4, the
only limitation is placed on the substitute: it must model
a diﬀerentiable function—to allow for synthetic data to be
generated with its Jacobian matrix. We show below that:
• Substitutes can also be learned with logistic regression.
• The attack generalizes to additional ML models by:
(1) learning substitutes of 4 classiﬁer types (logistic
regression, SVM, decision tree, nearest neighbors) in
addition to DNNs, and (2) targeting remote models
hosted by Amazon Web Services and Google Cloud
Prediction with success rates of 96.19% and 88.94%
after 800 queries to train the substitute.
Generalizing Substitute Learning
We here show that our approach generalizes to ML models that are not DNNs. Indeed, we learn substitutes for 4
representative types of ML classiﬁers in addition to DNNs:
logistic regression (LR), support vector machines (SVM), decision trees (DT), and nearest neighbor (kNN). All of these
classiﬁers are trained on MNIST, with no feature engineering
(i.e. directly on raw pixel values) as done in Section 5.
Whereas we previously trained all of our substitutes using
DNNs only, we now use both DNNs and LR as substitute
models. The Jacobian-based dataset augmentation described
in the context of DNNs is easily adapted to logistic regression:
the later is analog to the softmax layer frequently used
by the former when outputting probability vectors.
use 100 samples from the MNIST test set as the initial
substitute training set and use the two reﬁnements introduced
in Section 6: a periodic step size and reservoir sampling.
Figure 11(a) and 11(b) plot for each iteration ρ the share
of samples on which the substitute DNNs and LRs agree with
predictions made by the oracle they are approximating. This
proportion is estimated by comparing labels assigned to the
test set by the substitutes and oracles before each iteration ρ
of the Jacobian-based dataset augmentation. All substitutes
are able to approximate the corresponding oracle at rates
higher between 77% and 83% after ρ = 10 iterations (to the
exception of the decision tree oracle, which could be due to
its non-continuity). LR substitute accuracies are generally
lower than those of DNN substitutes, except when targeting
the LR and SVM oracles where LR substitutes outperform
DNN ones. However, LR substitutes are computationally
more eﬃcient and reach their asymptotic match rate faster,
after ρ = 3 iterations, corresponding to 800 oracle queries.
Table 2 quantiﬁes the impact of reﬁnements introduced in
Section 6 on results reported in Figure 11(a) and 11(b). The
periodic step size (PSS) increases the oracle approximation
accuracy of substitutes. After ρ = 9 epochs, a substitute
DNN trained with PSS matches 89.28% of the DNN oracle
labels, whereas the vanilla substitute DNN matches only
Similarly, the LR substitute with PSS matches
84.01% of the LR oracle labels while the vanilla substitute
matched 72.00%. Using reservoir sampling (RS) reduces
oracle querying. For instance, 10 iterations with RS (σ = 3
and κ = 400) make 100 · 23 + 400(10 −3) = 3, 600 queries to
the oracle instead of 102, 400 without RS. This decreases the
substitute accuracy, but when combined with PSS it remains
superior to the vanilla substitutes. For instance, the vanilla
substitute matched 7, 801 of the DNN oracle labels, the PSS
one 8, 928, and the PSS with RS one 8, 290. Simarly, the
vanilla LR substitute matched 71.56% of the SVM oracle
labels, the PSS one 82.19%, and the PSS with RS 79.20%.
Attacks against Amazon & Google oracles
Amazon oracle: To train a classiﬁer on Amazon Machine
Learning,6, we uploaded a CSV version of the MNIST dataset
to a S3 bucket. We then loaded the data, selected the multiclass model type, and keept default conﬁguration settings.
The process took a few minutes and produced a classiﬁer
achieving a 92.17% test set accuracy. We cannot improve the
accuracy due to the automated nature of training. We then
activate real-time predictions to query the model for labels
from our machine with the provided API. Although probabilities are returned, we discard them and retain only the
most likely label—as stated in our threat model (Section 3).
Google oracle:
The procedure to train a classiﬁer on
Google’s Cloud Prediction API7 is similar to Amazon’s. We
6 
7 
(a) DNN substitutes
(b) LR substitutes
Figure 11: Label predictions matched between the substitutes (DNN and LR) and their target oracles on test data.
Substitute
DNN+PSS+RS
Table 2: Impact of our reﬁnements, Periodic Step Size
(PSS) and Reservoir Sampling (RS), on the percentage of
label predictions matched between the substitutes and their
target classiﬁers on test data after ρ = 9 substitute iterations.
Table 3: Misclassiﬁcation rates (%) of the Amazon
and Google oracles on adversarial samples produced with
DNN and LR substitutes after ρ = 3, 6 epochs. The 2nd
column is the number of queries during substitute training.
Last row uses a periodic step size and reservoir sampling.
upload the CSV ﬁle with the MNIST training data to Google
Cloud Storage. We then train a model using the Prediction
API. The only property we can specify is the expected multiclass nature of our model. We then evaluate the resulting
model on the MNIST test set. The API reports an accuracy
of 92% on this test set for the model trained.
Substitute Training: By augmenting an initial training
set of 100 test set samples, we train a DNN and LR substitute
for each of the two oracles. We measure success as the rate of
adversarial samples misclassiﬁed by the corresponding oracle,
among the 10, 000 produced from the test set using the fast
gradient sign method with parameter ε = 0.3. These rates,
computed after ρ ∈{3, 6} dataset augmentation iterations,
are reported in Table 3. Results reported in the last row use
both a periodic step size and reservoir sampling (hence the
reduced number of queries made to train the substitute).
Experimental Results: With a 96.19% misclassiﬁcation
rate for a perturbation ε = 0.3 crafted using a LR substitute
trained with 800 oracle queries, the model hosted by Amazon
is easily misled. The model trained by Google is somewhat
more robust to adversarial samples, but is still vulnerable to
a large proportion of samples: 88.94% of adversarial samples
produced in the same conditions are misclassiﬁed. A careful
read of the documentation indicated that the model trained
by Amazon is a multinomial logistic regression.8 As pointed
out in , shallow models like logistic regression are unable
to cope with adversarial samples and learn robust classiﬁers.
This explains why the attack is very successful and the LR
substitute performs better than the DNN substitute. We
were however not able to ﬁnd the ML technique Google uses.
The last row of Table 3 shows how combining periodic step
sizes with reservoir sampling allow us to reduce querying
of both oracles during substitute training, while crafting
adversarial samples with higher transferability to the target
classiﬁer.
Indeed, querying is reduced by a factor larger
than 3 from 6, 400 to 2, 000 queries, while misclassiﬁcation
decreases only from 96.78% to 95.68% for the Amazon DNN
substitute. It is still larger than the rate of 87.44% achieved
after 800 queries by the substitute learned without the reﬁnements. Similarly, the misclassiﬁcation rate of the Google LR
substitute is 97.72%—compared to 92.05% with the original
method after ρ = 6 epochs, conﬁrming the result.
DEFENSE STRATEGIES
The two types of defense strategies are: (1) reactive where
one seeks to detect adversarial examples, and (2) proactive
where one makes the model itself more robust. Our attack is
not more easily detectable than a classic adversarial example
attack. Indeed, oracle queries may be distributed among a
set of colluding users, and as such remain hard to detect. The
defender may increase the attacker’s cost by training models
with higher input dimensionality or modeling complexity,
as our experimental results indicate that these two factors
increase the number of queries required to train substitutes.
In the following, we thus only analyze our attack in the face
of defenses that seek to make the (oracle) model robust.
Many potential defense mechanisms fall into a category we
call gradient masking. These techniques construct a model
that does not have useful gradients, e.g., by using a nearest
neighbor classiﬁer instead of a DNN. Such methods make
8docs.aws.amazon.com/machine-learning
Training ε
Table 4: Evaluation of adversarial training: the columns
indicate the input variation parameter used to inject adversarial examples during training and to compute the attacks, the
attack success rate when examples crafted on the (O)racle are
deployed against the (O)racle, the attack success rate when
examples crafted on the (S)ubstitute are deployed against
the (S)ubstitute, and the attack success rate when examples
crafted on the (S)ubstitute are deployed against the (O)racle.
it diﬃcult to construct an adversarial example directly, due
to the absence of a gradient, but are often still vulnerable
to the adversarial examples that aﬀect a smooth version of
the same model. Previously, it has been shown that nearest
neighbor was vulnerable to attacks based on transferring
adversarial examples from smoothed nearest neighbors .
We show a more general ﬂaw in the category of gradient
masking. Even if the defender attempts to prevent attacks by
not publishing the directions in which the model is sensitive,
these directions can be discovered by other means, in which
case the same attack can still succeed. We show that the
black-box attack based on transfer from a substitute model
overcomes gradient masking defenses.
No fully eﬀective
defense mechanism is known, but we study the two with the
greatest empirical success so far: adversarial training ,
and defensive distillation for DNNs .
Adversarial training: It was shown that injecting adversarial examples throughout training increases the robustness
of signiﬁcantly descriptive models, such as DNNs .
We implemented an approximation of this defense using the
Google Prediction API. Since the API does not support the
generation of adversarial examples at every step of training,
as a correct implementation of adversarial training would
do, we instead inject a large amount of adversarial examples
infrequently. After training in this way, the model has a
misclassiﬁcation rate of 8.75% on the unperturbed test set,
but the adversarial misclassiﬁcation rate rises to 100% when
ρ = 6. To evaluate this defense strategy using a correct
implementation, we resort to training the oracle locally, using our own codebase that includes support for generating
adversarial examples at each step. After each training batch,
we compute and train on adversarial examples generated
with the fast gradient sign method before starting training
on the next batch of the original training data. Results are
given in Table 4. We observe that for ε = 0.15, the defense
can be evaded using the black-box attack with adversarial
examples crafted on the substitute and misclassiﬁed by the
oracle at rates up to 71.25%. However, for ε = 0.3, the
black-box attack is not eﬀective anymore. Therefore, making
a machine learning model robust to small and inﬁnitesimal
perturbations of its inputs is an example of gradient masking and can be evaded using our substitute-based black-box
approach. However, making the model robust to larger and
ﬁnite perturbations prevents the black-box attack. To con-
ﬁrm this hypothesis, we now show that defensive distillation,
which makes the model robust to inﬁnitesimal perturbations,
can be evaded by the black-box approach.
Adversarial examples misclassified by oracle
Goodfellow attack input variation parameter
no distillation
T=5 (direct)
T=10 (direct)
T=100 (direct)
Figure 12: Evaluation of defensive distillation: Percentage of adversarial examples crafted using the Goodfellow
algorithm at varying ε misclassiﬁed by the oracle. T is the
temperature of distillation . Curves marked by (direct)
indicate baseline attacks computed on the oracle, all other
curves where computed using a substitute, as described in
Section 4. Despite distillation preventing the attack on the
oracle directly, using a substitute allows us to evade it.
Defensive distillation: Due to space constraints, we refer
readers to for a detailed presentation of defensive distillation, which is an alternative defense. Because the remotely
hosted APIs we study here do not implement defensive distillation or provide primitives that could be used to implement
it, we are forced to evaluate this defense on a locally trained
oracle. Therefore, we train a distilled model as described
in to act as our MNIST oracle.
We train several variants of the DNN architecture A at
diﬀerent distillation temperatures T = 5, 10, 100. For each
of them, we measure the success of the fast gradient sign
attack (i.e., the Goodfellow et al. algorithm) directly performed on the distilled oracle—as a baseline corresponding
to a white-box attack—and using a substitute DNN trained
with synthetic data as described throughout the present paper. The results are reported in Figure 12 for diﬀerent values
of the input variation parameter ε on the horizontal axis.
We ﬁnd that defensive distillation defends against the fast
gradient sign method when the attack is performed directly
on the distilled model, i.e. in white-box settings. However, in
black-box settings using the attack introduced in the present
paper, the fast gradient sign method is found to be successful
regardless of the distillation temperature used by the oracle. We hypothesize that this is due to the way distillation
defends against the attack: it reduces the gradients in local
neighborhoods of training points. However, our substitute
model is not distilled, and as such possesses the gradients
required for the fast gradient sign method to be successful
when computing adversarial examples.
Defenses which make models robust in a small neighborhood of the training manifold perform gradient masking: they
smooth the decision surface and reduce gradients used by adversarial crafting in small neighborhoods. However, using a
substitute and our black-box approach evades these defenses,
as the substitute model is not trained to be robust to the
said small perturbations. We conclude that defending against
ﬁnite perturbations is a more promising avenue for future
work than defending against inﬁnitesimal perturbations.
CONCLUSIONS
We introduced an attack, based on a novel substitute
training algorithm using synthetic data generation, to craft
adversarial examples misclassiﬁed by black-box DNNs. Our
work is a signiﬁcant step towards relaxing strong assumptions about adversarial capabilities made by previous attacks.
We assumed only that the adversary is capable of observing
labels assigned by the model to inputs of its choice. We validated our attack design by targeting a remote DNN served
by MetaMind, forcing it to misclassify 84.24% of our adversarial samples. We also conducted an extensive calibration
of our algorithm and generalized it to other ML models by
instantiating it against classiﬁers hosted by Amazon and
Google, with success rates of 96.19% and 88.94%. Our attack
evades a category of defenses, which we call gradient masking, previously proposed to increase resilience to adversarial
examples. Finally, we provided an intuition for adversarial
sample transferability across DNNs in Appendix B.