An Empirical Evaluation of Deep Learning on
Highway Driving
Brody Huval∗, Tao Wang∗, Sameep Tandon∗, Jeff Kiske∗, Will Song∗, Joel Pazhayampallil∗,
Mykhaylo Andriluka∗, Pranav Rajpurkar∗, Toki Migimatsu∗, Royce Cheng-Yue†,
Fernando Mujica‡, Adam Coates§, Andrew Y. Ng∗
∗Stanford University
‡Texas Instruments
§Baidu Research
Abstract—Numerous groups have applied a variety of deep
learning techniques to computer vision problems in highway
perception scenarios. In this paper, we presented a number of
empirical evaluations of recent deep learning advances. Computer vision, combined with deep learning, has the potential
to bring about a relatively inexpensive, robust solution to autonomous driving. To prepare deep learning for industry uptake
and practical applications, neural networks will require large
data sets that represent all possible driving environments and
scenarios. We collect a large data set of highway data and apply
deep learning and computer vision algorithms to problems such
as car and lane detection. We show how existing convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) can be used to perform lane and vehicle
detection while running at frame rates required for a real-time
system. Our results lend credence to the hypothesis that deep
learning holds promise for autonomous driving.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the DARPA Grand Challenges for autonomous vehicles, there has been an explosion in applications and research
for self-driving cars. Among the different environments for
self-driving cars, highway and urban roads are on opposite
ends of the spectrum. In general, highways tend to be more
predictable and orderly, with road surfaces typically wellmaintained and lanes well-marked. In contrast, residential or
urban driving environments feature a much higher degree of
unpredictability with many generic objects, inconsistent lanemarkings, and elaborate trafﬁc ﬂow patterns. The relative
regularity and structure of highways has facilitated some of the
ﬁrst practical applications of autonomous driving technology.
Many automakers have begun pursuing highway auto-pilot
solutions designed to mitigate driver stress and fatigue and
to provide additional safety features; for example, certain
advanced-driver assistance systems (ADAS) can both keep
cars within their lane and perform front-view car detection.
Currently, the human drivers retain liability and, as such,
must keep their hands on the steering wheel and prepare to
control the vehicle in the event of any unexpected obstacle or
catastrophic incident. Financial considerations contribute to a
substantial performance gap between commercially available
auto-pilot systems and fully self-driving cars developed by
Google and others. Namely, today’s self-driving cars are
equipped with expensive but critical sensors, such as LIDAR,
radar and high-precision GPS coupled with highly detailed
In today’s production-grade autonomous vehicles, critical
sensors include radar, sonar, and cameras. Long-range vehicle
Fig. 1: Sample output from our neural network capable of lane
and vehicle detection.
detection typically requires radar, while nearby car detection
can be solved with sonar. Computer vision can play an
important a role in lane detection as well as redundant object
detection at moderate distances. Radar works reasonably well
for detecting vehicles, but has difﬁculty distinguishing between
different metal objects and thus can register false positives on
objects such as tin cans. Also, radar provides little orientation
information and has a higher variance on the lateral position
of objects, making the localization difﬁcult on sharp bends.
The utility of sonar is both compromised at high speeds and,
even at slow speeds, is limited to a working distance of about
2 meters. Compared to sonar and radar, cameras generate a
richer set of features at a fraction of the cost. By advancing
computer vision, cameras could serve as a reliable redundant
sensor for autonomous driving. Despite its potential, computer
vision has yet to assume a signiﬁcant role in today’s selfdriving cars. Classic computer vision techniques simply have
not provided the robustness required for production grade
automotives; these techniques require intensive hand engineering, road modeling, and special case handling. Considering
the seemingly inﬁnite number of speciﬁc driving situations,
environments, and unexpected obstacles, the task of scaling
classic computer vision to robust, human-level performance
would prove monumental and is likely to be unrealistic.
Deep learning, or neural networks, represents an alternative
 
approach to computer vision. It shows considerable promise
as a solution to the shortcomings of classic computer vision.
Recent progress in the ﬁeld has advanced the feasibility
of deep learning applications to solve complex, real-world
problems; industry has responded by increasing uptake of such
technology. Deep learning is data centric, requiring heavy
computation but minimal hand-engineering. In the last few
years, an increase in available storage and compute capabilities
have enabled deep learning to achieve success in supervised
perception tasks, such as image detection. A neural network,
after training for days or even weeks on a large data set, can
be capable of inference in real-time with a model size that is
no larger than a few hundred MB . State-of-the-art neural
networks for computer vision require very large training sets
coupled with extensive networks capable of modeling such
immense volumes of data. For example, the ILSRVC data-set,
where neural networks achieve top results, contains 1.2 million
images in over 1000 categories.
By using expensive existing sensors which are currently
used for self-driving applications, such as LIDAR and mmaccurate GPS, and calibrating them with cameras, we can
create a video data set containing labeled lane-markings and
annotated vehicles with location and relative speed. By building a labeled data set in all types of driving situations (rain,
snow, night, day, etc.), we can evaluate neural networks on this
data to determine if it is robust in every driving environment
and situation for which we have training data.
In this paper, we detail empirical evaluation on the data set
we collect. In addition, we explain the neural network that we
applied for detecting lanes and cars, as shown in Figure 1.
II. RELATED WORK
Recently, computer vision has been expected to player a
larger role within autonomous driving. However, due to its
history of relatively low precision, it is typically used in
conjunction with either other sensors or other road models
 , , , . Cho et al. uses multiple sensors, such
as LIDAR, radar, and computer vision for object detection.
They then fuse these sensors together in a Kalman ﬁlter using
motion models on the objects. Held et al. , uses only a
deformable parts based model on images to get the detections,
then uses road models to ﬁlter out false positives. Caraﬁi et al.
 uses a WaldBoost detector along with a tracker to generate
pixel space detections in real time. Jazayeri et al. relies on
temporal information of features for detection, and then ﬁlters
out false positives with a front-view motion model.
In contrast to these object detectors, we do not use any
road or motion-based models; instead we rely only on the
robustness of a neural network to make reasonable predictions.
In addition, we currently do not rely on any temporal features,
and the detector operates independently on single frames from
a monocular camera. To make up for the lack of other sensors,
which estimate object depth, we train the neural network to
predict depth based on labels extracted from radar returns.
Although the model only predicts a single depth value for
each object, Eigen et al. have shown how a neural network
can predict entire depth maps from single images . The
network we train likely learns some model of the road for
object detection and depth predictions, but it is never explicitly
engineered and instead learns from the annotations alone.
Before the wide spread adoption of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) within computer vision, deformable
parts based models were the most successful methods for
detection . After the popular CNN model AlexNet 
was proposed, state-of-the-art detection shifted towards CNNs
for feature extraction , , , . Girshick et al.
developed R-CNN, a two part system which used Selective
Search to propose regions and AlexNet to classify them.
R-CNN achieved state-of-the-art on Pascal by a large margin;
however, due to its nearly 1000 classiﬁcation queries and
inefﬁcient re-use of convolutions, it remains impractical for
real-time implementations. Szegedy et al. presented a more
scalable alternative to R-CNN, that relies on the CNN to
propose higher quality regions compared to Selective Search.
This reduces the number of region proposals down to as low as
79 while keeping the mAP competitive with Selective Search.
An even faster approach to image detection called Overfeat
was presented by Sermanet et al. . By using a regular
pattern of “region proposals”, Overfeat can efﬁciently reuse
convolution computations from each layer, requiring only a
single forward pass for inference.
For our empirical evaluation, we use a straight-forward
application of Overfeat, due to its efﬁciencies, and combine
this with labels similar to the ones proposed by Szegedy et al..
We describe the model and similarities in the next section.
III. REAL TIME VEHICLE DETECTION
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have had the
largest success in image recognition in the past 3 years ,
 , , . From these image recognition systems, a
number of detection networks were adapted, leading to further
advances in image detection. While the improvements have
been staggering, not much consideration had been given to
the real-time detection performance required for some applications. In this paper, we present a detection system capable
of operating at greater than 10Hz using nothing but a laptop
GPU. Due to the requirements of highway driving, we need
to ensure that the system used can detect cars more than
100m away and can operate at speeds greater than 10Hz; this
distance requires higher image resolutions than is typically
used, and in our case is 640 × 480. We use the Overfeat
CNN detector, which is very scalable, and simulates a sliding
window detector in a single forward pass in the network by
efﬁciently reusing convolutional results on each layer .
Other detection systems, such as R-CNN, rely on selecting
as many as 1000 candidate windows, where each is evaluated
independently and does not reuse convolutional results.
In our implementation, we make a few minor modiﬁcations
to Overfeat’s labels in order to handle occlusions of cars, predictions of lanes, and accelerate performance during inference.
We will ﬁrst provide a brief overview of the original implementation and will then address the modiﬁcations. Overfeat
converts an image recognition CNN into a “sliding window”
detector by providing a larger resolution image and transforming the fully connected layers into convolutional layers.
Then, after converting the fully connected layer, which would
have produced a single ﬁnal feature vector, to a convolutional
layer, a grid of ﬁnal feature vectors is produced. Each of the
resulting feature vectors represents a slightly different context
view location within the original pixel space. To determine
the stride of this window in pixel space, it is possible to
simply multiply the strides on each convolutional or pool layer
together. The network we used has a stride size of 32 pixels.
Each ﬁnal feature vector in this grid can predict the presence
of an object; once an object is detected, those same features are
then used to predict a single bounding box through regression.
The classiﬁer will predict “no-object” if it can not discern any
part of an object within its entire input view. This causes large
ambiguities for the classiﬁer, which can only predict a single
object, as two different objects could can easily appear in the
context view of the ﬁnal feature vector, which is typically
larger than 50% of the input image resolution.
The network we used has a context view of 355×355 pixels
in size. To ensure that all objects in the image are classiﬁed
at least once, many different context views are taken of the
image by using skip gram kernels to reduce the stride of the
context views and by using up to four different scales of the
input image. The classiﬁer is then trained to activate when an
object appears anywhere within its entire context view. In the
original Overfeat paper, this results in 1575 different context
views (or ﬁnal feature vectors), where each one is likely to
become active (create a bounding box).
This creates two problems for our empirical evaluation. Due
to the L2 loss between the predicted bounding box and actual
bounding proposed by Sermanet et al., the ambiguity of having
two valid bounding box locations to predict when two objects
appear, is incorrectly handled by the network by predicting a
box in the center of the two objects to minimize its expected
loss. These boxes tend to cause a problem for the bounding
box merging algorithm, which incorrectly decides that there
must be a third object between the two ground truth objects.
This could cause problems for an ADAS system which falsely
believes there is a car where there is not, and emergency
breaking is falsely applied. In addition, the merging algorithm,
used only during inference, operates in O(n2) where n is the
number of bounding boxes proposed. Because the bounding
box merging is not as easily parallelizable as the CNN, this
merging may become the bottleneck of a real-time system in
the case of an inefﬁcient implementation or too many predicted
bounding boxes.
In our evaluations, we use a mask detector as described
in Szegedy et al. to improve some of the issues with
Overfeat as described above. Szegedy et al. proposes a CNN
that takes an image as input and outputs an object mask
through regression, highlighting the object location. The idea
of a mask detector is shown in Fig 2. To distinguish multiple
nearby objects, different part-detectors output object masks,
from which bounding boxes are then extracted. The detector
they propose must take many crops of the image, and run
multiple CNNs for each part on every crop. Their resulting
implementation takes roughly 5-6 seconds per frame per class
using a 12-core machine, which would be too slow for our
application.
Fig. 2: mask detector
We combine these ideas by using the efﬁcient “sliding
window” detector of Overfeat to produce an object mask and
perform bounding box regression. This is shown in Fig 3.
In this implementation, we use a single image resolution of
640 × 480 with no skip gram kernels. To help the ambiguity
problem, and reduce the number of bounding boxes predicted,
we alter the detector on the top layer to only activate within
a 4 × 4 pixel region at the center of its context view, as
shown in the ﬁrst box in Fig 3. Because it’s highly unlikely
that any two different object’s bounding boxes appear in a
4 × 4 pixel region, compared to the entire context view with
Overfeat, the bounding box regressor will no longer have to
arbitrarily choose between two valid objects in its context
view. In addition, because the requirement for the detector to
ﬁre is stricter, this produces many fewer bounding boxes which
greatly reduces our run-time performance during inference.
Although these changes helped, ambiguity was still a common problem on the border of bounding boxes in the cases of
occlusion. This ambiguity results in a false bounding box being
predicted between the two ground truth bounding boxes. To
ﬁx this problem, the bounding boxes were ﬁrst shrunk by 75%
before creating the detection mask label. This added the additional requirement that the center 4×4-pixel region of the detector window had to be within the center region of the object
before activating. The bounding box regressor however, still
predicts the original bounding box before shrinking. This also
further reduces the number of active bounding boxes as input
to our merging algorithm. We also found that switching from
L2 to L1 loss on the bounding box regressions results in better
performance. To merge the bounding boxes together, we used
OpenCV’s efﬁcient implementation of groupRectangles,
which clusters the bounding boxes based on a similarity metric
in O(n2) .
The lower layers of our CNN we use for feature extraction
is similar to the one proposed by Krizhevsky et al. . Our
modiﬁcations to the network occurs on the dense layers which
are converted to convolution, as described in Sermanet et
al. . When using our larger image sizes of 640 × 480
this changes the previous ﬁnal feature response maps of size
1 × 1 × 4096 to 20 × 15 × 4096. As stated earlier, each of
these feature vectors sees a context region of 355×355 pixels,
and the stride between them is 32 × 32 pixels; however, we
want each making predictions at a resolution of 4 × 4 pixels,
which would leave gaps in our input image. To ﬁx this, we use
each 4096 feature as input to 64 softmax classiﬁers, which are
arranged in an 8×8 grid each predicting if an object is within
a different 4×4 pixel region. This allows for the 4096 feature
vector to cover the full stride size of 32 × 32 pixels; the end
Mask Detector
Bounding Box
Regression
“Sliding Window”
Fig. 3: overfeat-mask
result is a grid mask detector of size 160 × 120 where each
element is 4×4 pixels which covers the entire input image of
size 640 × 480.
A. Lane Detection
The CNN used for vehicle detection can be easily extended
for lane boundary detection by adding an additional class.
Whereas the regression for the vehicle class predicts a ﬁve
dimensional value (four for the bounding box and one for
depth), the lane regression predicts six dimensions. Similar to
the vehicle detector, the ﬁrst four dimensions indicate the two
end points of a local line segment of the lane boundary. The
remaining two dimensions indicate the depth of the endpoints
with respect to the camera. Fig 4 visualizes the lane boundary
ground truth label overlaid on an example image. The green
tiles indicate locations where the detector is trained to ﬁre,
and the line segments represented by the regression labels are
explicitly drawn. The line segments have their ends connected
to form continuous splines. The depth of the line segments
are color-coded such that the closest segments are red and
the furthest ones are blue. Due to our data collection methods
for lane labels, we are able to obtain ground truth in spite of
objects that occlude them. This forces the neural network to
learn more than a simple paint detector, and must use context
to predict lanes where there are occlusions.
Similar to the vehicle detector, we use L1 loss to train
the regressor. We use mini-batch stochastic gradient descent
for optimization. The learning rate is controlled by a variant
of the momentum scheduler . To obtain semantic lane
information, we use DBSCAN to cluster the line segments
into lanes. Fig 5 shows our lane predictions after DBSCAN
clustering. Different lanes are represented by different colors.
Since our regressor outputs depths as well, we can predict the
lane shapes in 3D using inverse camera perspective mapping.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Data Collection
Our Research Vehicle is a 2014 Inﬁniti Q50. The car
currently uses the following sensors: 6x Point Grey Flea3 cameras, 1x Velodyne HDL32E lidar, and 1x Novatel SPAN-SE
Fig. 4: Example of lane boundary ground truth
Fig. 5: Example output of lane detector after DBSCAN
clustering
Receiver. We also have access to the Q50 built-in Continental
mid-range radar system. The sensors are connected to a Linux
PC with a Core i7-4770k processor.
Once the raw videos are collected, we annotate the 3D
locations for vehicles and lanes as well as the relative speed
of all the vehicles. To get vehicle annotations, we follow the
conventional approach of using Amazon Mechanical Turk to
get accurate bounding box locations within pixel space. Then,
we match bounding boxes and radar returns to obtain the
distance and relative speed of the vehicles.
Unlike vehicles that can be annotated with bounding boxes,
highway lane borders often need to be annotated as curves
of various shapes. This makes frame-level labelling not only
tedious and inefﬁcient, but also prone to human errors. Fortunately, lane markings can be considered as static objects
that do not change their geolocations very often. We follow
the process descried in to create LIDAR maps of the
environment using the Velodyne and GNSS systems. Using
these maps, labeling is straight forward. First, we ﬁlter the
3D point clouds based on lidar return intensity and position
to obtain the left and right boundaries of the ego-lane. Then,
we replicate the left and right ego-lane boundaries to obtain
initial guesses for all the lane boundaries. A human annotator
inspects the generated lane boundaries and makes appropriate
corrections using our 3D labelling tool. For completeness, we
describe each of these steps in details.
1) Ego-lane boundary generation: Since we do not change
lanes during data collection drives, the GPS trajectory of our
research vehicle already gives a decent estimate of the shape
of the road. We can then easily locate the ego-lane boundaries
using a few heuristic ﬁlters. Noting that lane boundaries on
highways are usually marked with retro-reﬂective materials,
we ﬁrst ﬁlter out low-reﬂectivity surfaces such as asphalt
in our 3D point cloud maps and only consider points with
high enough laser return intensities. We then ﬁlter out other
reﬂective surfaces such as cars and trafﬁc signs by only considering points whose heights are close enough the ground plane.
Lastly, assuming our car drives close to the center of the lane,
we ﬁlter out ground paint other than the ego-lane boundaries,
such as other lane boundaries, car-pool or directional signs,
by only considering markings whose absolute lateral distances
from the car are smaller than 2.2 meters and greater than 1.4
meters. We can also distinguish the left boundary from the
right one using the sign of the lateral distance. After obtaining
the points in the left and right boundaries, we ﬁt a piecewise
linear curve similar to the GPS trajectory to each boundary.
2) Semi-automatic generation of multiple lane boundaries:
We observe that the width of lanes during a single data
collection run stays constant most of the time, with occasional
exceptions such as merges and splits. Therefore, if we prede-
ﬁne the number of lanes to the left and right of the car for a
single run, we can make a good initial guess of all the lane
boundaries by shifting the auto-generated ego-lane boundaries
laterally by multiples of the lane width. We will then rely on
human annotators to ﬁx the exception cases.
B. Data Set
At the time of this writing our annotated data-set consists
of 14 days of driving in the San Francisco Bay Area during
the months of April-June for a few hours each day. The
vehicle annotated data is sampled at 1/3Hz and contains nearly
17 thousand frames with 140 thousand bounding boxes. The
lane annotated data is sampled at 5Hz and contains over 616
thousand frames. During training, translation and 7 different
perspective distortions are applied to the raw data sets. Fig 6
shows an example image after perspective distortions are
applied. Note that we apply the same perspective distortion
Fig. 6: Image after perspective distortion
to the ground truth labels so that they match correctly with
the distorted image.
C. Results
The detection network used is capable of running at 44Hz
using a desktop PC equipped with a GTX 780 Ti. When using
a mobile GPU, such as the Tegra K1, we were capable of
running the network at 2.5Hz, and would expect the system
to run at 5Hz using the Nvidia PX1 chipset.
Our lane detection test set consists of 22 video clips
collected using both left and right cameras during 11 different
data collection runs, which correspond to about 50 minutes of
driving. We evaluate detection results for four lane boundaries,
namely, the left and right boundaries of the ego lane, plus
the outer boundaries of the two adjacent lanes. For each of
these lane boundaries, we further break down the evaluation
by longitudinal distances, which range from 15 to 80 meters
ahead of the car, spaced by 5 meters. Thus, there are at
maximum 4 × 14 = 56 positions at which we evaluate the
detection results. We pair up the prediction and ground truth
points at each of these locations using greedy nearest neighbor
matching. True positives, false positives and false negatives are
accumulated at every evaluation location in a standard way:
A true positive is counted when the matched prediction and
ground truth differ by less than 0.5 meter. If the matched
prediction and ground truth differ by more than 0.5 meter,
both false positive and false negative counts are incremented.
Fig 7 shows a visualization of this evaluation method on
one image. The blue dots are true positives. The red dots are
false positives, and the yellow ones are false negatives. Fig 8
shows the aggregated precision, recall and F1 score on all test
videos. For the ego-lane boundaries, we obtain 100% F1 score
up to 50 meters. Recall starts to drop fast beyond 65 meters,
mainly because the resolution of the image cannot capture the
width of the lane markings at that distance. For the adjacent
lanes, recall is low for the nearest point because it is outside
the ﬁeld of view of the camera.
The vehicle detection test set consists of 13 video clips
collected from a single day, which corresponds to 1 hour
Fig. 7: Left: lane prediction on test image. Right: Lane
detection evaluated in 3D
Fig. 8: Lane detection results on different lateral lanes. (a)
Ego-lane left border. (b) Ego-lane right border. (c) Left adjacent lane left border. (d) Right adjacent lane right border.
and 30 mins of driving. The accuracy of the vehicle bounding box predictions were measured using Intersection Over
Union (IOU) against the ground truth boxes from Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT). A bounding box prediction matched
with ground truth if IOU≥0.5. The performance of our
car detection as a function of depth can be seen in Fig 9.
Nearby false positives can cause the largest problems for
ADAS systems which could cause the system to needlessly
apply the brakes. In our system, we found overpasses and
shading effects to cause the largest problems. Two examples
of these situations are shown in Fig 10.
As a baseline to our car detector, we compared the detection
results to the Continental mid-range radar within our data
collection vehicle. While matching radar returns to ground
truth bounding boxes, we found that although radar had nearly
100% precision, false positives were being introduced through
errors in radar/camera calibration. Therefore, to ensure a fair
comparison we matched every radar return to a ground truth
bounding box even if IOU< 0.5, giving our radar returns 100%
precision. This comparison is shown in Fig 11, the F1 score
for radar is simply the recall.
In addition to the bounding box locations, we measured
the accuracy of the predicted depth by using radar returns as
Fig. 9: Car Detector Bounding Box Performance
(a) FP: tree
(b) FP: overpass
Fig. 10: Vehicle False Positives
ground truth. The standard error in the depth predictions as a
function of depth can be seen in Fig 12.
For a qualitative review of the detection system, we have
uploaded a 1.5 hour video of the vehicle detector ran on our
test set. This may be found at youtu.be/GJ0cZBkHoHc. A
short video of our lane detector may also be found online
at youtu.be/__f5pqqp6aM. In these videos, we evaluate the
detector on every frame independently and display the raw
detections, without the use of any Kalman ﬁlters or road
models. The red locations in the video correspond to the mask
detectors that are activated. This network was only trained on
the rear view of cars traveling in the same direction, which is
why cars across the highway barrier are commonly missed.
We have open sourced the code for the vehicle and lane
Fig. 11: Radar Comparison to Vehicle Detector
Fig. 12: Car Detector Depth Performance
detector online at github.com/brodyh/caffe. Our repository was
forked from the original Caffe code base from the BVLC
group .
V. CONCLUSION
By using Camera, Lidar, Radar, and GPS we built a highway
data set consisting of 17 thousand image frames with vehicle
bounding boxes and over 616 thousand image frames with
lane annotations. We then trained on this data using a CNN
architecture capable of detecting all lanes and cars in a single
forward pass. Using a single GTX 780 Ti our system runs
at 44Hz, which is more than adequate for real-time use. Our
results show existing CNN algorithms are capable of good
performance in highway lane and vehicle detection. Future
work will focus on acquiring frame level annotations that will
allow us to develop new neural networks capable of using
temporal information across frames.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded in part by Nissan who generously
donated the car used for data collection. We thank our colleagues Yuta Yoshihata from Nissan who provided technical
support and expertise on vehicles that assisted the research.
In addition, the authors would like to thank the author of
Overfeat, Pierre Sermanet, for their helpful suggestions on
image detection.