CONSUMER INFORMATION, PRODUCT QUALITY,
Carl hapiro
B.A., M.I.T.
M.A., University of California
at Berkeley 
-- SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT
OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF .TECHNOLOGY
October 10, 1980
Signature of Author..
Certified by.........
Accepted by..........
Signature redacted
Department of Economics,, Oc,;ober 10, 1980
Signature redacted
Thesis Supervisor
MASSACHUSETS INSTITUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY
Signature redacted
Chairman, D-spartment Comfiiitree
AND SELLER REPUTATION
Consumer Information, Product Quality.and Seller Reputation
Carl Shapiro
Submitted to the Department of Economics on October 10, 1980 in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor
of Philosophy
This thesis is concerned with the performance of markets in
which buyers are unable to observe the quality of the products they
buy prior to purchase.
In such environments there is a temptation
for sellers to reduce the quality of their items.
An important force
in such markets which gives firms an incentive to maintain quality is
the formation of firm-specific reputations.
The recurring theme of this thesis is that while reputation can
significantly prevent quality deterioration, it cannot work perfectly.
Since a seller can always cheat on his customers (cut quality) without detection, at least for a little while, the incentives to maintain quality are not as strong as they are under perfect information.
The first essay analyzes a monopoly seller in this imperfect
information environment.
Viewing reputation as consumers' expectations of quality, it is shown that any self-fulfilling quality level
is less than the perfect information quality level.
Likewise, in a
model where reputation adjusts towards previous quality, any steady
state quality level is lower than the perfect information quality
Furthermore, the slower is reputation adjustment, the
lower is the steady-state quality level.
Thesis Supervisors:
Richard Schmalensee, Professor of Applied Economics
Peter Diamond, Prbfessor of Economics
An analysis is also made of the pricing decisions of a monopolist
who faces initial misperceptions of the quality of his product.
shown that in many cases the initial imperfect information has lasting
There is a sharp distinction between initial over- and
under-estimates of product quality.
A welfare analysis is made of the effects of imperfect information.
Since monopoly power puts the analysis in a second-best world, the
addition of informational problems can in general provide welfare benefits.
The welfare effects of imperfect information are investigated
both on the path to steady-state (while consumers' expectations are
not fulfilled) and in the steady-state.
The second essay studies a perfectly competitive environment in
which reputations play an important role.
In this case, high quality
items sell at a premium above cost, despite perfect competition.
quasi-rents which firms with good reputations earn provide a competitive rate of return to the reputation which is viewed as an asset.
Since there is a divergence between price and cost for high quality
items, there are welfare losses as a result of the imperfect information.
An analysis is made of the welfare effects of various consumer
information remedies.
Finally, an analysis of minimum quality standards in a model
where producers choose what quality to produce is possible in the
second essay.
It is shown that raising the minimum quality standard
provides benefits for consumers who prefer to consume high quality
In general, optimal minimum quality standards exclude from
the market products which.some consumers would like to buy.
Acknowledgements
My greatest thanks for the successful and speedy completion of
this thesis go to my wife, Dawn.
She was there to soothe and comfort me when progress was most elusive.
She was there to support
me when I was too absorbed with working to tend to anything else.
And her smile is always a source of inspiration.
My thesis advisors have provided both support and direction
for this work.
Dick Schmalensee has been supportive when needed,
demanding when appropriate, and always approachable.
He has been
generous indeed, substantially improving the quality of this product
with his detailed comments and suggestions.
Peter Diamond has made
several insightful remarks which have helped direct my research
A number of other members of the M.I.T. faculty have played
vital roles in my development as an economist.
Stan Fischer is
ultimately responsible for all of this since it is largely due to
him that I chose to be an economist.
Paul Joskow introduced me to
industrial organization and impressed on me its rich mixture of
theory and policy.
Eric Maskin was often helpful, especially early
on when I really needed it.
Lastly, Joe Farrell, with his similar
interests and prejudices, was more than a teacher, more than a friend.
My fellow students have been a big part of what made M.I.T.
such a good place to learn.
I thank David Levine and Jean Tirole
for their suggestions and comments.
Randy Ellis, with his patience
and friendship has been invaluable.
Drew Fudenburg, by never letting me slip anything by him which wasn't airtight, has been a
great help in both the evolution and quality of this work.
Much of this work was supported by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Fellowship, for which I am grateful.
Partial financial support was also provided by the Federal Trade Commission. The FTC, and
Steve Salop in particular, provided an environment condusive to the
completion of this thesis, as well as the generation of new ideas,
for which I am thankful.
This Thesis is Dedicated to
My Parents
Table of Contents
Abstract .
Acknowledgements . . . .
Table of Contents
Consumer Information, Product Quality,
and Seller Reputation
Introduction .
General Formulation of Quality Choice by a
Monopolist Under Imperfect Information
Once and For All Quality Choice:
General Resul
Welfare Implications .
Personal Learning:
An Extended Example
A Continuous Time Example of Once and for All
Quality Choice
Product Quality Choice Over Time:
Remarks and
General, Results .
A continuous Time Model with Variable Quality
Conclusion .
Appendix .
References .
Premiums for High Quality Products
as Rents to Reputation
Introduction .
Derivation of Equilibrium Price-Quality Schedule .
Information Provision and the Interpretation of r
Description of Equilibrium p(q) Schedule .
Welfare Analysis of r
Welfare Analysis of q .
Continuous Time Model with Quality and Quantity as
Controls .
Conclusion .
o . . . . . .
References .
Consumer Information, Product Quality
and Seller Reputation
Carl Shapiro*
December 1979
Revised July 1980
* I would like to thank Peter Diamond, Joe Farrell, Drew Fudenberg,
Eric Maskin, Steve Salop, Richard Schmalensee, and Jean Tirole
for helpful comments and suggestions.
Economists are becoming increasingly aware of how imperfect
information can cause a wide range of market imperfections.
A great deal of effort has gone into careful analysis of
uncertainty about the various prices at which a homogeneous
product is being offered for sale.
Yet uncertainty about
price is relatively minor and inexpensive to eliminate in
comparison with uncertainty about other product characteristics
(e.g., durability, safety or taste).
This paper is concerned
with performance in markets where the products sold cannot
be evaluated fully and accurately prior to purchase.
analysis will center on how a profit-maximizing firm chooses
product quality in an environment where consumers cannot
observe quality prior to purchase.
I am particularly interested in how the quality of products provided depends on
the manner and speed with which consumers gather information
about products and how they enter and leave the market.
Qualitative uncertainty is a widespread and important
feature of markets for most firms' goods and services.
Virtually all services are impossible to evaluate until they
This includes ittedical and legal services, automobile repair, plumbing and electrical work, etc.
important class of products whose quality cannot easily be
judged prior to purchase is consumer durables.
In fact, when
a new model automobile comes out, there simply is no way of
knowing what its repair record will look like.
As a final
class of examples, there are many products which we buy
quite frequently which have unobservable attributes:
restaurant
meals (taste) and clothing (will it fade or shrink?) are two
examples. The rise in both the complexity of products (consider
hi fi equipment or ethical drugs) and the fraction of income
spent on services has increased the importance of these informational problems.
The performance of the market in such a setting is
essential to the evaluation of a wide variety of regulatory
initiatives. These include occupational licensing (or minimum
quality standards in general), occupational health regulations
(the worker taking the role of the consumer), automobile
safety rules, and a wide range of regulations by the Food
and Drug Administration, Federal Trade Commission, and Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Recent actions such as
the FTC's proposed used car rule are designed precisely to
improve the information in the market and thereby enhance
performance.
It is paramount, therefore, to describe market
performance in the absence of public policy interference to be able
to evaluate the worthiness of either mandatory standards
or public provision of information.
The analysis in this paper is restricted to the case
where a monopolist controls the quantity as well as quality
of the good in question.
Since imperfect information generally
leads to some market power, this analysis is a necessary
prerequisite to studying many suppliers in the presence of
qualitative uncertainty.
One treatment of such markets with
many sellers is Shapiro .
The paper is organized as follows: first I discuss a
variety of modelling problems which arise once the perfect
information assumption is removed.
This is meant both to
familiarize the reader with the problems and introduce some
proposed solutions.
Then I present the analysis in the case
where the seller sets quality once and for all (a new product,
for example).
Finally, I treat the case where sellers can
vary the quality of their products over time.
yraduct Characteristics and Quality
Sincex the issues described above revolve around product
choice by a seller rather than simply pricing or output
decisions, for a qiven. product, it is very useful to adopt
Lancaster's (196) framework and view products as bundles of
characteristics. When products are viewed in this way, one
question which arises is whether or not the market provides
the socially optimal mix of product characteristics.2
I wish to focus on product quality as opposed to product
variety, I restrict quality to a single dimension.
should be thought of as some product attribute which is
difficult or impossible to observe prior to purchase, but
which consumers all like to have more of.
Examples include
durability, safety (probability of no accident), or speed of
The restriction of quality to one dimension implies,
in particular, that any two consumers will agree which of two
products is preferred although they may disagree as to how
much the added quality is worth. 3
Enodenous Quality Choice:
A Dynamic Problem
To understand the problems which occur when product
quality is unobservable prior to purchase, it is important
to distinguish the case where sellers choose product quality
from the case where there is an exo.genous supply of products
of different qualities.
The latter case is the one introduced
by Akerlof in his seminal article .
Unfortunately, models
with exogenous quality supply are of limited usefulness in
product markets.
If the price offered depends only on
average quality in the market, and higher quality items are
more costly to produce, then in a static model there is no
incentive for a given producer to provide anything other than
minimal quality.
Consequently, the market will be overrun by
minimal quality items.
The same result occurs in a dynamic
model ifconsumers do not learn about the quality of individual
firms over time.
The incentive to producing high quality items
is that higher quality today will cause the demand curve in the
future to shift out.
So product quality choices by sellers
are fundamentally dynamic.
Information Flows
It is apparent from these considerations that the technology
of information flow will be essential to any story of market
equilibrium.
It is convenient to distinguish three facets of
this technology:
How information flows among consumers,
How much a consumer learns about the product's quality
from using it, and (3)
How consumers enter and leave the
Both the nature of the product and the institutions
surrounding the market for the good influence the way in which
information flows regarding each firm's products.
Personal Learning
The first stage in the process by which a firm's quality
today is transmitted to potential future buyers is through
the observations of those who have actually used the product.
Sa the ability of consumers to observe product characteristics
is crucial.
Product attributes which can be observed prior to purchase
have been called search attributes
(by Nelson
present the same informational problems as do prices.
opinion, these problems are minor in comparison with those
involving attributes which require use to be observed.
latter characteristics have been divided into two classes:
experience attributes which are observable after use (e.g.,
taste) and credence attributes which may remain unobservable
even after use.
(e.g., the structural integrity of an automobile).5
It is intuitively clear that consumer information
problems are most severe for credence properties of products.
In fact, most regulations regarding product attributes are
directed at credence attributes.
Licensing of doctors, most
regulations by the Food and Drug Administration and the Consumer Product Safety Commission are examples.
For most products the distinction between experience
and credence properties is probably overdrawn.
some learning about product attributes with use, but at
varying speeds for various products.
It is very useful
in this context to think of the consumer as observing some
outcome which depends on both the quality of the product and
some unobservable random variable.6 In the car safety example,
if a car holds up well in an accident it is not clear whether
the minimal damage is due to the type of accident or the way
the car was made.
A similar lack of observability holds true
for drugs, services, etc.
If a lawyer loses a case it is hard
to know if he was ineffective or if the case was weak.
One way to incorporate learning into consumer choice is
to assume that quality is positively related to the probability
of repeat purchase.
This approach has been taken in Schmalensee
 and Smallwood-Conlisk .
One problem with it is that
it gives no insight into how consumers respond to price.
I have taken a different approach in what follows.
any point in time a consumer has some expectations regarding
product quality.
This determines the position of his demand
The learning then corresponds to adjusting expected
quality 'towards true quality.
Products for which quality is
hard to observe even after use will display slow or lagged
adjustment of consumer expectations.
It should be noted that
the ability of consumers to draw inferences about the firm's
quality from using the product is not beyond the control of
To the extent that firms have imperfect quality
control, a consumer who gets a bad item may have difficulty
knowing whether its poor quality is representative of that firm
For the purposes of this discussion, I will avoid this
problem by assuming that all the products a firm sells on a
given date have uniform quality.
Interpersonal Learning and the Market for Information
There are quite a few potential sources of information
about product quality in addition to personal experience.
These are (1)
Experience of friends, (2)
Publications,
either public or private, such as Consumer Reports,8 (3)
Advertising, and (4)
Potential signals of quality such as
price, warranties, or advertising.
If the market for information about product attributes
worked well, the informational problems in the markets for
final goods and services would be substantially reduced or
eliminated.
There are several reasons why the information
market cannot be expected to work well, however.
The first two reasons relate to the public good nature
of information.
The first is that it is difficult to prevent
resale of information.
A private firm that sells information
may not be able to survive even though there is a substantial
value to the information, because there would be no restrictions on individuals who buy the information passing it along
(freely) to non-buyers.
The second reason is due to the
positive externality created by informed buyers which benefits
uninformed buyers through raising quality (similar to what
happens in Salop-Stiglitz ).
This quality influence is not
accounted for by consumers when considering whether to buy
information or not, and hence too little is purchased.
A final reason that private provision of information may
not be possible is due to credibility problems.
may fear that the information supplier is not entirely candid;
perhaps he is being bribed by some producers, or under the
influence of his advertisers.
A governmental provision of
information may be able to avoid these problems.
course depends on how such an agency is set up to provide
incentives for truthful provision of information.
In order to evaluate the desirability of information
activities by public authorities, it is necessary first to
understand the advantages which derive from improved information.
That is the goal of the analysis to follow.
comments above are intended to highlight why the laissezfaire level of information can be expected to be suboptimal.
The possibility that warranties may provide information
about quality will be ruled out in this paper.
[1977b] has shown that when quality refers to probability of
failure of an item, warranties may serve as signals of
For many goods this is possible only to a very
limited extent.
Take a washing machine, for example.
warranty may hold for 1 or 2 years,. but it is not possible
even for manufacturers of good machines to offer comprehensive
warranties.
This is because the manufacturer cannot monitor
maintenance or intensity of use.
Such moral hazard and
adverse selection problems are inevitable barriers to the
absorption of product quality risks by the producer.
the example of legal services, it is possible to write
incentive contracts, but adverse selection limits their
Finally, in this paper I do not include advertising,
although its virtues as well as faults must be analyzed
in the context of imperfect information.
Advertising
can be viewed as altering consumer's expectations of quality.
Since there is an obvious incentive for producers to overrate their product, the key question here is why consumers
pay any attention to such claims.
The ability of advertising
to convey information about product quality is something I
hope to treat in the future.
I have tried in this section to identify factors which
influence the speed of learning by consumers.
The analysis
below focuses on the relationship between that speed and
the quality of product chosen by the monopolist.
examples where the only learning is personal learning,
it is possible to be quite explicit about how the firm's
demand curve shifts in response to learning.
Such examples
place an upper bound on the informational problems in the
market, since there are in fact additional information
sources, as discussed above.
General Formulation of Quality Choice by a Monopolist Under
Imperfect Information
Consider the problem faced by a firm in setting its quality,
At any point in time the firm can reap extra profits by
cutting quality; there will be no loss in revenues until
consumers can respond to the quality change.
Since the problem is essentially dynamic, let t denote
time and call p(t) the price at time t, q(t) the quality, and
x(t) sales.
There is also a cost function c(x,q) in quantity
and quality.
There may also be costs to changing quality i.e., once
and for all costs to introducing a new quality line.
these for the most part, except to note that they justify
the attention paid to once-and-for-all quality choices below.
In fact we do not usually observe frequent quality changes
by sellers; price changes occur much more frequently.
is further justification for the treatment in the following
Profits at time t are given by
= p(t)x(t)
The crucial question is how x(t) depends on p(t) and previous
quality choices.10 One approach is to treat x(t) as the
state variable representing a loyal set of patrons.
the inflow of new customers and the outflow of dissatisfied
customers will in general depend on quality, price, and the
stock of customers itself.
Smallwood and Conlisk took
this approach .in. discrete time with .quality being the probability
any given customer would return the next period..
This requIred them to take price as fixed and exagenoaus,, and they
could not generally determine what quaTty a firm would
Furthermore,. they did not allow quality changes over
time.11 Farrell [19791 has also taken this approach and is
able to study the optimal qg(t) path for a firr, again taking
price as fixed and exogenous.
The approach in this paper is quite different since I
am interested in allowing price changes over time, and view
the firm's reputation as the state variable rather than its
In this view, previous quality and sales influence
what various consumers think about the quality of a firm's
product, and it is this reputation, R(t), which determines
the location of the firm's demand curve.
Consequently,
the firm's pricing decisions over time can be studied, and
consumers' individual demand curves can be derived from
utility functions and expectations of quality.1 2
This approach does require specifying the process by
which reputation adjusts over time.
I argue strongly for
adaptive expectations by consumers in response to quality
changes by a seller.
There is no evidence at all to support
a more sophisticated approach by consumers in which they
solve out the firm's optimal control problem to figure out
what to expect.
Instead, evidence on consumer behavior suggests
that to a large extent consumers extrapolate from recent experience to
predict future product performance.
This is a consequence
of the information processing behavior consumers employ.1 3
Viewing a firm's reputation as the state variable in the
dynamic setting outlined above, the firm's problem is:
e-rt[x(t)p(x(t), R(t))- c(x(t), q (t) )]dt
x(t), q(t) t=0
subject to
R(t) = f(x(t),
q(t), R(t)).
R(O) given.
Here the inverse demand curve the firm faces at time t is
p(x(t), R(t)); its location depends on reputation, not quality
at time t (since that will not be observed until later).
consumer learning will be embodied in the f(x, q, R) function.
The discussion above about information sources influences firm
behavior through f.
Consequently, it will be very important
to see how the optimal choice of q(t) and x(t) depend on the
specification of f.
Once and for All Quality Choice:
General Results
In this section I shall consider the problem faced by a
monopolist when he is choosing once and for all what quality
product to produce.
It is best thought of as introduction of
a new product, but applies at any point where a long-run
quality choice is being made.
Suppose consumers all expect the quality produced to be
That is, suppose the firm has an initial reputation of
R 0(R and q are measured in the same units).
Ro as beyond the control of the firm.
If advertising is
permitted, it may well operate through altering R .
study how much the firm would advertise to influence R
favorably.
Of course, such advertising need not be informative.
may also depend on the quality of products already in the
(see p. 56 below).
In the full model where quality
changes over time arO permitted, Rt will depend on previous
quality and sales choices by the firm itself.
Suppose, given initial reputation R the firm elects to
produce a product of quality q.
It then chooses an optimal
pricing path (and corresponding sales path) over time to
maximize the present value of its profit stream.
a path looks like will depend on how learning occurs by consumers.
To remain perfectly general, denote the optimized present value
of profits from choosing q given R by V(q, R .
So long as
there is discounting we expect this to he finite, and initial
reputation to be of some value, i.e.,
0 for all q, R
(here subscripts denote partial derivatives).
(A2) V(q, R ) is finite for all (q, R ) and is continuously
differentiable.
Such a V function permits very general learning behavior on the
part of consumers.
In order to discuss the firm's optimal quality choice when
facing initial reputation R0 , it is very useful to identify the
quality which would be chosen in a perfect information world.
W(q) = V(q, q).
This is the present discounted profits from choosing q under
perfect information. 1
I will assume
(A3) W' (0)
0, and W' (q) < 0 for q large.
Consequently, there will be an optimal quality choice under perfect information.
If we denote that by q*, then
(1) Wi (q*) = 0
(There may be several roots to (1), but q* is the best one).
Finally, I will bound the quality choice from below by assuming
that for q : 0 (this is just a normalization) consumers can detect
the poor quality and will not buy the product:
(A4) V(q, R0 ) = 0
It is now quite easy to identify one sense in which imperfect
information will lead the firm to shade on quality:
Theorem 1.
Under Al, A2, and A3 if consumers expect the firm
to produce at the perfect information profit maximizing quality level q*, it will be optimal for
the firm to produce a lower quality.
We know W'(q*) = v 1 (q*, q*) + V 2 (q*, q*) = 0
By Al we know V2 (q*, q*) > 0.
Consequently,
V 1 (q*, q*) <
Thus the curve V(q, q*), the relevant
one for a firm facing initial reputation q*, cuts
W(q) from above at q*.
Furthermore, again by Al,
for q>q*, W(q)
> V(q, q*) so W(q)
Similarly, for q<q*,V(q, q*)
consequence of these facts is that V(q, q*) must be as
shown in Figure 1.
Therefore the optimal choice of
quality facing initial reputation q*, q** in the Figure,
is less than q*. U
Note the great generality of Theorem 1.
In particPLi-r it
requires no concavity assumptions.
If we denote by B(R ) the firm's best choice 6f quality facing
initial reputation R0 , the above argument shows tUNdt&. for
R >q*, B(R )<R .
It is natural to ask whether there is some
quality level 4 such that B(q)=q.
That is, is there some
quality level such that if consumers expect the fitf to produce
at that quality level it will be optimal for the fIfth to do so?
Without making further assumption about the V fiutaction
it is not possible to conclude that such a quality level exists.
If V is concave in its first argument, however, there will be
such a self-fulfilling quality level:
Theorem 2.
Under Al-A4
if V is concave in its first argument
then there exists a quality level q<q* such that
if consumers expect the firm to produce q, it will
in fact be optimal for the firm to do so.
Consider the function V 1 (q, q).
V1(O, 0) + V2 (0, 0) = W'(0) >0.
Also V 2 (0, 0) = 0 by A4.
Therefore V 1 (0, 0) >
Also, by the argument above,
V 1 (q*, q*) <
So, since V1 (q, q) is continuous and
is positive at q=0 and negative at q=q* there must be
some qE(O, q*) such that V1 (q, q) = 0 by the intermediate value theorem. Now if V is concave in its first
argument and V (q, q) = 0, then q maximizes V(q, q),
so that facing initial reputation q the firm picks q=q.
It is instructive to cast these results in terms of the
B(R ) function mentioned above.
The concavity assumption guarantees that B(R ) is a continuous function.
Then Theorem 1 tells
us that B(R0 ) lies below the 450 line for R 0 >Q*.
Assumption A4
insures that B(O) > 0. The simplest case is when there is a single
solution to B(q) = q, as in Figure 2.
It is possible that B(R ) intersects the 450 line several
times, however.
There will always be an odd number of intersections, unless the B(R ) function happens to have a tangency with
the 450 line.
See Figure 3.
The shape of the V function corresponding to Figure 2 is shown in Figure 4.
This self-fulfilling guality level (any of them if several
exist) has some peculiar properties.
First of all, the monopolist does worse at q than he would under perfect information,
since W(q) < W(q*).
Therefore, if the monopolist could commit
himself to producing q* and convey this commitment to consumers,
he could do better.
This provides one justification for warranties; the monopolist could promise to pay customers if they get
a product of quality less than q*.
For example he could give a
money-back quarantee on items of quality less than q*.
then credibly commit himself to producing q* and could achieve
Without the warranty, however, after inducing expectations q* he would want to cut quality, by Theorem 1.
instructive to note that the incentive to provide warranties
does not arise from competitive pressures, but rather from a
desire by the monopolist to commit himself.
If consumers are sophisticated and solve out the firm's
optimal choice problem, we would expect to see q produced.
a rational expectations equilibrium quality level in the following sense:
if all consumers expect q the firm will fulfill their
expectations.17
Such calculations by consumers are not consistent with observed
consumer behavior, however, which is rather more adaptive and extrapolative.18 Without the self-fulfilling expectations requirement it
is not possible to pin down the quality that is chosen by the
monopolist, since R is exogenous.
One way to proceed is to
study activities such as advertising which influence R .
we will see below, however, this analysis as it stands has important implications for the case where quality changes over
time are permitted.
In that case Rt is endogenous; it depends
on quality choices in earlier periods.
It is possible to indicate in this framework how the speed
of learning by consumers affects the firm's optimal quality
Suppose all consumers hold their initial expectations
of q0 for K periods, after which they will learn the true
quality.1 9 Denote by u (q,q ) the profits earned in one period
when all consumers believe the quality is q0 but in fact it is
Clearly o <0, U2>0.
If all learning occurs after K periods
and the discount factor is p, O<p<l, then the present value of
profits from choosing q is
The first order condition for the choice of q is given by
q0 ,K) = 1-p
t1 (q, q0 ) + p W'(q) = 0
Defining s=p , the speed of learning (since when K rises s falls
because p<l)we can rewrite the first-order condition for q as
(1-s) 1J (q, q ) + s(l-p)W'(q) = 0
Differentiating with respect to s yields
Ul + (1-p)W' + s(l-p)W"
1 _ (-p)W' (q) - (q, q0
(q,q ) + s(l-p)W"(q)
From the first-order condition we know W'(q)>0 at the q chosen
(because u
1 <0 everywhere) so the numerator is positive.
denominator is negative by the second order condition defining
the optimal q, so we can conclude20 that -
> 0 and have proven
Theorem 3 In the case where all learning occurs after K periods,
as K increases the optimal quality level falls, for
any given initial reputation.
Consequently, the quality chosen approaches q* monotonically from
below as K falls to 0.
This comparative static result can be shown in a more general
Denote the present value of profits from choosing q
when the speed of learning is s by V(q, q0, s).
Then the first-
order condition for q is V (q; q0 , s) = 0 and the comparative
statics computation gives
> 0 if and only if V
>0 i.e., if increased
speed of learning increases the value of quality to the monopolist.
In the case where V(q, q , s) = (l-s)V(q, q0 ) + sW(q)
this will hold.
In general one would need to look to see how
s entered V to see if
It is only slightly more difficult to see how the selffulfilling quality level is influenced by the learning speed of
consumers.
Let me consider the case where this quality is
unique; uniqueness is guaranteed if we assume the function
V1 (q, q) is decreasing in q (so there can only be a single
root to- V (q, q) = 0).
This assumption is equivalent to
V1 1 (q, q) + V1 2 (q, q) < 0 for all q.
The self-fulfilling
quality level, q, is defined as a function of s by
V1 (q, q, s) = 0.
Differentiating with respect to s gives
So again we get d
>0 exactly when V1 s>0, under the additional
assumption of V 1(q, q) declining.
Welfare Implications
The analysis above indicates that imperfect information will
tend to cause a reduction in the quality of products provided.
This can lead to either a gain or loss in social welfare, using
the criterion of consumers surplus plus profits to judge welfare.
The welfare consequences of quality choice by a monopolist under
perfect information are studied in Spence and Sheshinski . The
conclusion of their analysis is that, depending on the shape of the inverse
demand curve in quantity and quality, p(x, q), a monopolist may
either under- or over-supply quality.
This is because the
monopolist considers the effect on the marginal buyer of a
change in quality, while social welfare requires looking at the
effect on the average buyer.
As a result, given the quantity
produced, the monopolist quality is too low if and only if
p <0, i.e., if and only if the marginal consumer's evaluation
of quality is less than the average consumer's.
(See Spence
 p.419).
Furthermore, the choice of quality may interact
with the severity of output restriction if price elasticity
is dependent on quality.
Consider the welfare consequences of the self-fulfilling
equilibrium quality choice.
If quality at the perfect information outcome, q* were less than is socially optimal, then the informational problems would exacerbate the welfare losses.
It is perfectly
possible, however, that q* exceeds the socially optimal quality level,
in which case the lack of information could help matters.
typical second-best example of two imperfections counteracting each
The welfare analysis along the path to a steady state, i.e.,
while consumers are learning the true quality, is considerably
more complex.
For example, some consumers may purchase the
product even though it in fact has little value to them, because
they overestimated the quality.
It is clear that the joint
distribution of valuations of quality and expectations of
quality, and how this distribution is updated, are central to
a welfare analysis.
Consider a special case:
everyone has common misperceptions
about quality, expecting R0 instead of q.
Suppose initially
that price elasticity of demand is unaffected.by expected
quality, so the firm's price is independent of reputation.21
Then if R >q more people will buy the product than would under
perfect information.
This seems like it would represent
a welfare gain, since monopoly output is too low.
Even though
some- of those who bought only because they expected R >q regret
having done so when they observe q, there is a social gain
to their having purchased the product if their valuation
exceeds the cost of production.
To sketch out this example more fully, assume constant
return to scale with unit cost function c(q).
Let consumers
be described by their valuation of quality 0 such that type
0 has utility function eq-p from buying a unit of quality q
at price p.2 2
The demand curve is generated by a distribution of
Suppose the monopolist sets price p, quality q, and has
initial reputation R .
Then 0 will buy if and only if OR >p.
From a social welfare point of view, 0 should buy if and only
if oq>c(q).
Depending on the relative size of c(g) and p
there may be too little or too much output.
See Figure 5, which
illustrates the case R0 > q.
Over-Estimates of Quality:
If R is in the interval A, then too many consumers purchase
the product.
This does not imply that the situation would be improved
by eliminating the informational problem, however.
We must compare
purchases by 0 > R with purchases by e > q.
The latter suffers from
the usual monopoly output restriction.
is in the interval B, too few consumers purchase under
imperfect information, but the imperfect information improves
In this case R. > q causes more consumers, but not too
many, to purchase the product.
This is a welfare gain because
too few consumers bought the product under perfect information,
for the usual reason of monopoly power causing output reduction.
So mild overestimates of quality improve welfare (under the assumption of price elasticity independent of reputation).
It is possible that the first best outcome is achieved under
monopoly and imperfect information if c(q) =
There will of
course be distributional consequences of the imperfections, but
those are not considered in our standard welfare measure.
The situation is quite different if R0 < q.
pessimistic misperceptions will reduce sales and exacerbate welfare problems.
See Figure 6 below.
Under-Estimates of Quality:
Now even fewer sales occur with expectations R than would under
perfect information; there is an unambiguous welfare loss.
first best occurs when 0 > c (q) purchase the product.
Under monoq
poly and perfect information fewer O's purchase since p > c(q);
only e > p/q purchase.
Adding under-estimates of quality further
reduces the set of e's who purchase to e > p/R .
This causes a
further reduction in welfare.
Allowing reputation to influence what price the firm charges
permits almost anything to occur.
For example, it could be the
case that pessimistic expectations increase demand elasticity,
and this causes price reductions which more than affect the losses
mentioned above due to such expectations. That is, if
, even though R <q, then there are welfare
gains to having misperceptions of R
(here p(q) is the price
charged when consumers all believe the quality is q). 23
Another welfare effect, explored in an example below,
is caused when the firm's pricing decisions are made with recognition that they affect the learning process and hence future
Supposing that higher sales lead
to more rapid learning
by the market about true quality, there is an incentive to cut
back on sales when reputation exceeds true quality.
This exacerbates the usual monopoly welfare losses.
Conversely, when
reputation is below true quality,there is a benefit in addition
to static marginal revenue from making another sale.
there is a more rapid expansion of demand due to the increased
speed of learning about the true quality.
This effect leads
the monopolist to expand output relative to its static profit
maximizing level, causing a welfare gain along the path as consumers
It is worth noting that these effects are not small,
because the monopolist is not at the social optimum in their
Personal Learning:
An Extended Example
section I analyze rrnopoly pricing and output decisions
over time as consumers learn. The learning is restricted in two
ways which limit the generality of the results:
All consumers
begin with the same expected quality,
learning occurs
only from personal experience:
a given consumer learns nothing
until he tries the product, at which time he learns its true quality.
Consumers differ in their tastes for quality.
A consumer of
type 0 has utility function 6q-p, 25as above.
Hence if all consumers
expect quality R, then those 6's who buy will be {e = 6 > p/R}
Denote by F() the number of consumers of types 6
Let the range,
of O's lie in the closed interval [6L,
6H] where 0 <OL; call F(OH)=N.
Suppose all consumers initially believe the quality to be R, when
in fact it is q.
The initial demand curve is thus s(p) = N-F(p/R).
Similarly, the fully informed demand curve is z(p) = N -
In the diagrams these are drawn as linear demand curves; that corresponds to taking F to be the uniform distribution, but is totally
unnecessary.
Under the type of learning assumed, the position of the current
demand curve depends only on which consumers have previously tried
the product (and therefore learned).
This in turn depends only on
the lowest price previously charged.
Each period the firm chooses a price.
Its. objective is the present value of profits.
In general the price charged will vary with
time as more consumers learn the true quality of the product.
price charged will not generally be the one which maximizes static
profits, because the firm must account for the effect of this period's
price on the demand curve in future periods.
Since the situation is fundamentally different depending upon
whether initial expectations are over- or under-estimates of true
quality, I separate the analysis into two cases:
R > q and R < q.
Initial Reputation Exceeds True Quality
R>q (Refer to Figure 7)
Call the price changed in period t, pt.
If for some T, PT
then Pt = PT for all t > T.
If PT > PT-1, then there is no shift in the demand curve
due to the sales made during period T.
This is because
no new people tried the product during period T.
Consequently, if it was optimal for the firm to charge PT
facing this demand curve during period T, it is optimal
for it to do the same thing again in period T+l.
Since we know the pricing sequence is monotonically decreasing
over tie except possibly for
a final jump in price, it is natural
to ask how low pt gets, and where it finally ends up.
It is at this point necessary to describe what the demand curve
looks like as a function of the lowest price previously charged,
Denote this demand curve by x(p,p).
We must distinguish two
(A) ^ > 6Hq and
(B) $ < 8Hq'
Case I-A =
The demand curve x(p,
A) in this case is shown in Figure 8.
is constructed as follows:
There are s(A) consumers who have previously tried the product.
Since they updated from R to q, their
demand is represented by the portion of the z(p) curve from x=0 to
x2s(P). Those who have yet to try the product have demand represented
by s(p) from x = s(p) to x = N.
By adding these two demand curves
together we get x(p, p).
For p >p no one will buy, since all those who previously did
now know better.
For eHq <p <pf
some uninformed consumers will
buy, namely those who value the product enough to buy but not
to have done so at p:
eH. < eR < p.
There are just
s(p)-s(p) of these, since s(p) have already learned.
z-'(s(p))<p<eHq some informed consumers will buy and some will not.
Exactly those 6 s.t.
6R>^ (informed) and Oq>p will do so.
are z(p) of these.
Also some uninformed buy:
those e s.t.
There are s(p)-s(p) of these.
Finally, for very low
p (p<z-1 (s(p))) all those who are informed buy,s(p), and some uninformed do as well:
z(p)-s(p) of these.
Summing up, we get the
demand curve x(p, ^) shown in Figure 8.
Algebraically, for
6Hq we have
s (p)-s ()
s (p)-s (P)+z (P)
Z-1 (s(P",) ) <p<Hq
p <Z-I(s (P^) )
The description of demand is somewhat simpler in the case where
P < 6Hq because those willing to pay the most are now the informed
who value quality the most, rather than the uninformed who are
overly optimistic.
See Figure 9 below for the shape of x(p,p) in
this case.
Again this curve is derived by adding two other curves
together horizontally:
the s(p) curve from s(p) to N and the z(p)
curve from 0 to s(p).
Algebraically, when P < 6Hq we get
z(p)+s(p)-s(p)
z (s(p))<p<p
Notice that even though both s(p) and z(p) exhibited declining
marginal revenue, x (p, p) need not.
Now we can proceed to analyze the optimal pricing sequence
{Ptl chosen by the monopolist.
Denote by p* the profit maximizing
price facing the fully informed demand curve z(p).
For some T, pt < p*
By Lemma 1, there are two cases to consider.
price falls monotonically, and another where price remains
the same after some date.
In the latter case, price could
not remain at
p > p* because the-firm could gain profits
both in the short- and long-run by charging p* instead of
p (charging p forever yields per period profits of
(p-c(q))z(p)<(p*-c(q))z(p*) and x(p,^) always lies on or
above z(p) so it is feasible to earn (p*-c(q))z(p*) every
In the case where {ptl declines monotonically,
it must approach some W.
Then if f>p* the per period profits
approach (P-c(q))z@()<(p*-c(q))z(p*) so approaching p
cannot 'be optimal.
For some t, pt <p*
Suppose not.
p* by Lemmas 1 and 2, and profits
approach (p*-c(q)) z(p*).
The demand curve approaches x(p,p*)
which looks like Figure 10 below.
I have drawn in the associated marginal revenue curve as well.
Since the curve
x(p,p*) has a kink at p*, the marginal revenue
is not defined there.
But the marginal revenue curve associated
with x(p,p*) is shown is MR
on Figure 10. It can be seen that
the firm can make one perioT profits in excess of (p*-c(q))z(p*)
by setting p<p* , since MR X(P*)>c(q)
In fact, it
could earn as much as the shaded triangle's area in a one-shot exploitation of consumer's initial misperceptions.
Whether it will
want to do this all at once depends on the exact shape of demand
and the discount rate, but the basic point is established:
point the price will fall below p* to reap some gains from the
misinformed.
When consumers learn only from personal experience
and begin with common overexpectations about product
quality, the monopolist's prices over time fall monotonically,27 eventually falling below the fully-informed
monopoly price,- and then jump back to that price forever after.
In view of the Lemmas, all that needs to be shown is that
price does eventually return to p* after it has fallen
If not, suppose
{pt} + p<p*.
Then profits
approach (P-c(q))z(p) < (]c(q))z(p*) and it would be better
for the firm to charge p* forever rather than p.
The situation is entirely different when consumers are skeptical
about a product's attributes.
Now the firm will tend to sell more
than the static monopoly profit maximizing level, because more sales
today shifts out the demand curve tomorrow.
While this might represent a welfare gain, it must be balanced against the fact that consumers are less likely to buy, even if the product is valuable to
them, because they underestimate its value.
The initial demand curve s(p) and the fully-informed demand
curve z(p) are shown below in Figure 11.
I have also drawn in
x(pp), the demand curve the firm faces when p is the lowest price
previously charged.
Quality Exceeds Initial Reputation
Let p*(R) be the static profit maximizing price facing common
expectations R (i.e.,facing s(p)), and p*(q) be the profit maximizing price facing perfect information demand, z(p).
Let x*(R) and
x*(q) be the corresponding levels of sales and ff*(R), ff*(q) the
profit levels.
Then there is a simple case which can be fully described:
If x*(R) > x*(q) then the monopolist first charges p*(R)
and forever after charges p* (q).
Observe that the monopolist cannot possibly make more
than w*(q)
during any- period, and cannot possibly make
more than ff*(R) the first period.
So if making T7*(R)
followed by f*(q)
...........
x*(R)>x*(q) then after making i'*(R) the first period
he faces a demand curve such that the quantity-price
combination (p*(q), x*(q)) is feasible.
Hence the proposed regime must be optimal.
While it is possible that x*(R)>x*(q),it does not seem to be
the usual case.
This is because such a relationship implies that
p*(R) is considerably below p*(q) i.e. the pessimistic expectations
cause much more elastic demand than accurate expectations.
inequality does not hold we can prove
If x*(R) < x*(q),then in the long run the monopolist
will not sell as many units when he faces initial
expectations R<q as he would under perfect information.
His long-run per period profits will be below their
perfect information level, and there will be an added
welfare loss as a result.
The analysis is significantly aided by reference to Figure 12
There I have drawn the initial and fully informed
profits as a function of sales.
w(x; R) = [s-'(x)-c(q)]x
[z 1'(x)-c(q)]x
Since R<q, or equivalently s(p)<z(p) so s~ (x)<z-1 (x), Tr(x,R)<
I have drawn the case to which this Theorem refers, namely
x* (R)<x*(q).
The profits obtainable as a function of sales when x is the
maximum number of sales previously made (alternatively: p=s-1(xi)
is the minimum price previously charged) is shown in Figure 13 as
Several points can now be made clear.
First of all, the monopolist will never sell more than x*(q) or less than x*(R).
because either of these actions loses money in both the short- and
Selling less than x*(R) sacrifices profits this period
and fails to inform very many consumers that the product is better
than they had thought.
Selling more than x*(q) sacrifices short-run
profits, whichever 7(x, x) the firm is facing, while informing customers whom the firm will not want to sell to anyway.
That is the
there is a cost to informing more customers that the product
is better than they had believed.
This is done through introductory
offers in this example.
I have implicitly assumed that it is impossible to cut price only to new customers; the firm sets one price
each period.
Once x*(q) customers are informed, there is no point in informing
more, because the firm does just as well facing 7(x, x*(q)) as facing
What will the actual sales path look like? Again, the tradeoffs to be made between short-run sacrifices and long-run gains.
depend on the discount rate.
But it is easy to see that, so long
as the discount rate lies between 0 and 1, (1) at some time the
firm will sell more than x*(R), and (2) the firm will never sell
as many as x*(q).
The firm will not repeatedly sell x*(R) because,
to the first-order, there are no losses from selling a bit more
(n (x*(R); R) = 0) but there are real long-run gains (Trr, (x*(R);q)>O).
Similarly, there is no point in pushing sales all the way up
to x*(q) because the long-run gains are
in (x*(q); q) = 0 and
the short run gains are n x (x*(q) x) <0
(i.e., there are short-run
losses from expanding output). Consequently, the monopolist will
utlimately sell xe(x*(R), x*(q)) forever after.
This provides less
profit than he would obtain under perfect information since
7r(x*(q); q)>( ,x).
And it entails a welfare loss since the monopolist
already has restricted output below its socially optimal level. 9
I should point out that this welfare loss is exacerbated by the
inability of the monopolist to provide selective discounts to new
customers.
If he could do that, he would find it profitable to
inform more consumers, through introductory offers, that the true
quality is q.
The results in this example of personal learning carry over
if learning is not immediate in response to use of the product,
so long as it takes only finitely long.
Slower learning will influence the optimal sales (price) path, but the qualitative conclusions of Theorems 4 and 5 carry over.
A Continuous Time Example of Once with For All Quality Choice
In this section I move away from studying how individual
consumers learn to focus on one aspect of the monopolist's optimal
sales path in the presence of aggregate consumer learning.
aspect, referred to above in the welfare section, is that when
sales levels influence learning, if reputation exceeds quality
the firm will cut back on sales relative to static profit
maximization. As in the above section, this model takes
quality choice as given and studies the sales path over time.
Denote quality by q, reputation by R, and sales by x.
inverse demand curve the firm faces depends on reputation,
and is written p(x,R).
The firm faces a control problem of
the type discussed in the introduction, with the restriction
that quality is a once-and-for-all choice.
This problem
fits precisely into the framework analyzed in Theorems 1 and
V(q, R(o)) = max
e-rt [p (x (t), R(t) ) x (t) c (x (t) , q) ] dt
R = sx(q-R)
R(o) given.
The analysis here will focus on what the path x(t) looks like.
To avoid other effects, I assume constant returns to scale:
c(q, x) = xc(q).
The specification of k is crucial to the optimal control
The idea behind the equati6n R = Sx(q -
R) is that
the speed with which reputation adjusts towards true quality
depends positively on the level of sales.
This occurs for
two reasons:
A given customer updates his expectations
more completely, the more experience he has with the product,
the more customers who try the product, the more
learning there will be regarding true quality (and the more
subsequent interpersonal communication about the firm's quality).
As we will see, this causes the monopolist to cut back on sales
when R>q in order to retard the deterioration of reputation.
The reverse effect occurs when R<q.
The parameter s measures
the speed with which consumers learn from using the product.
The present value Hamiltonian for the firm's
problem is
H(x, R, X) = p(x, R)x xc(q)
+ Xsx(q-R).
Assuming.PR (x, R) > 0, we know that reputation must have
positive shadow value, i.e,, X>O.
The assumption in Theorem 1
that V 2>0 is exactly that X>O.
Denote marginal revenue by MRN., R)
+ xp (x, R)).
Then,the necessary conditions for the optimal path include
xpR(x, R) -
Xsx = rX-A
We can see from the first equation that MR>c exactly when R>q.
Assuming declining MR (MR <0),this means that sales are cut
back relative to static maximization exactly when R>q.
Assuming that MR R>0, i.e, that increased reputation
increases marginal revenue, we know the curve in x-R space
along which MR(x, R) = c is upward sloping, as in Figure 14.
By the first equation above, since X>O we know that sqn(MR-c)=sqn(R-q),
so the optimal regime never enters the shaded regions.
M R(x,R) = c(q)
To investigate the dynamic system induced in x-R space by
the necessary conditions above, eliminate X and solve for x and
R as functions of x and R.
This is done in the Appendix.
resulting equations of motion are
(q-R) [xpxR
k = sx(q -
MR-c(q) r.
When PxR=0 , a central case, the x=O curve corresponds to MR=c.
This case is drawn in Figure 15 below.
Since MR-c
and R-q are of the same sign in the relevant regions, we then get
sqn (x) = sqn (q-R) outside the shaded regions.
This says that sales
levels will approach the perfect information level
notonically.
Unless pxr is a large negative number, the expression in brackets
in the x equation above will be positive and we will have sqn x
= sqn (q-R).
To complete the solution to the optimal control problem,
we must see which path is best, starting at a given R(O).
Fortunately, it is easy to rule out all paths except the one
leading to the steady state.
Begin with the case R(O)>q.
We know any path which enters the shaded regions from Figure 14
cannot be optimal.
Consider those paths which lead to the
x=0 boundary.
These involve closing down with a high reputation.
This cannot be optimal under the assumption that positive profits
can be earned in the steady-state, because a firm with R>q can
at least duplicate the actions of a firm with reputation q.
This proves that the optimal regime when R(O)>q involves following
the separatrix into steady state from where it intersects
The analysis is much the same when R(O)<q.
Now we must
rule out paths which lead off to x=cw as q>R.
These lead to
large losses as x grows and hence cannot be optimal.
the optimal regime goes to the point (x*, q) in the Figures.
The relationship between sales levels in the presence
of learning,x*(R), and under static profit maximization, xs R),
is depicted below.
The fact that x*(R) > xs(R) if and only if
R<q does not depend on the assumption that MR >0.
The welfare
consequences of this behavior were discussed in a previous
without learning
with learning
Product Quality Choice Over Time:
Remarks and General Results
While in some cases producers choose product attributes
once and for all, as studied above, in other cases it is
possible for them to change their quality over time.
section, I study the behavior of a monopolist who can alter
his quality each period.
This is one polar case no costs
to changing quality while the earlier analysis is the other
large costs to changing quality so that a once and for all
choice must be made.
A central issue in studying quality changes over time
is the following:
under what circumstances (cost functions,
demand functions, and consumer learning) will a monopolist
find it optimal to settle down to some steady-state quality
level? The alternative is to oscillate, repeatedly running
up a reputation and then milking it.
If the oscillations
were optimal, we might expect alternative mechanisms instead
of reputation to arise to certify or control the monopolis!s
product quality.
First I discuss the necessary conditions for a quality
level to constitute a steady state.
Again we see that imperfect information causes the monopolist to reduce quality.
The way in which consumers' expectation formation affects
the steady-state quality level is analyzed.
Finally I make
some observations on when the sufficient conditions will be
satisfied so that staying in or going to steady state is
The first main result regarding steady-state quality levels
is the analogue of Theorem 1 in a world where quality can be
changed over time:
Theorem 6.
So long as reputation has positive value, any steadystate quality level must lie below the perfect
information quality level.
One possible deviation from steady state is a once and
for all change in quality.
Since, by Theorem 1, for any
quality level at least as great as q* (the perfect
information quality level) it is preferable to cut
quality (forever) rather than to maintain quality,
such quality levels cannot be steady states. 3
To analyze more carefully what the steady state quality
level will be, consider the following set up:
Each year t
the firm.can choose a quality level qt.
Consumer expectations
at the beginning of the year are summarized in the reputation,
The firm can vary prices (and sales) throughout the year
if it desires.
The resulting profits during the year are
written V(qt Rt). 28
By the end of the year, reputation will
adjust to Rt+i in a manner yet to be specified.
The firm's
objective function is
W'= E p V(qt, Rt)
Theorem 7.
Let W(q) = V(q, q) be concave in q.
t-l+(1-y)qt-l
where O<y<l, then any steady-state quality level qs
must be less than the full information profit-
maximizing quality level q*, and greater than the lowest
self-fulfilling quality level q (this q* and q refers
to the given V function).
Suppose the firm is in steady-state at quality qs.
Consider a small one time increase in q during period 0,
followed by a return to qs forever.
The effect on the
stream of profits is
= V1 (q , q
Now R =yR + (l-y)q
dRd1 = l-y.
= yR1 + (1-y)q so
In general d
(l-y) , t>l.
If qs is to be a steady-state, it must be the case
= 0 at q=qs
Therefore we get
V (q , q) + V2(q5 rq5 )
V (q , q ) + 1-py
For q. q* we know V1 (q, q) + V 2 (q, q) < 0 since W(q) is concave.
Since V 2>0 and 0< 1-py <1 we then know V1 (q, q) + 1-py
V2 (q,q)<0
Therefore no quality level at or above q* can qualify
as a steady state.
(As we know from Theorem 6)
Next consider quality levels below the lowest self-filling
quality level 4.
They key thing about 4 is that for q<a we have
V1 (q,q)>O. Consequently we also have V1 (q,q) + 1-py V2 (q,q) > 0,
so these qualities cannot be steady-states.
Since the incentive to cut quality is greater when detection
is delayed, there is lower quality.in steady state under such
circumstances.
The self-fulfilling quality, q, is the one which
would be chosen if there were no future after this year.
were no learning about quality until the year was over, 4=0 (Akerlof).
In general, however, even ignoring future years it does not pay
to produce the lowest possible quality:
thinking of automobile
model years as an example, word may get out within the year that
the car performs poorly.
Since future years do matter, quality
chosen will exceed q; higher future reputation is of positive value.
At ' there is no loss, up to the first-order, of an increase in
quality, and there are real gains in the future.
Notice that as the interest rate approaches 0, ie., as p+l,
the solution
approaches q*.
Also, as p+0 so that future
years matter very little at all, the steady-state quality level
goes to q.
In fact, it is possible to see how the speed with
which consumers update their expectations influences the steadystate quality level:
Theorem 8.
When a steady state quality level exists in the context
of Theorem 7, it is higher (1)
the higher is the
weight placed on recent quality by consumers in
forming reputation and (2) the higher the discount
factor (i.e., the lower the interest rate). 2 9
The steady-state quality level, defined by (*) above,
depends on the factor s=1-py
Observe that
ds < 0 and !L > 0. So higher discount factor and more
weight on quality in reputation formation cause s to rise.
All that needs to be shown, therefore, is that
Differentiate (*) with respect to s yielding
*1 1+V1 2 +sV1 2 +sV
(1 +12+s12+22
s + V2 =0 or
V 1 1 +V 1 2+S(V 1 2+V2 2
If qs is a steady-state, the denominator is negative by
the second order conditions.'
s > 0 since
V 2 >0 and the Theorem is proven.
Suppose the firm produces one project each period so
that sales are not a control variable.
This would apply
to a lawyer, for example, who does one case each period
and can choose how hard to.work on the case.
price he can earn for one project be a function of his
reputation p(R).
Let the cost of producing a project
of quality q be c(q).
Assume p'>0, p"<0, c'>O, c">0.
Under perfect information the seller would choose
So q* satisfies
information we have V(q, R)
order condition is -c' (q)
+ (1-y) qt-l.
c'(q) = sp'(q),
<s<l we have
In the case y=O so Rt cItl we
See Figure 17 below.
Under imperfect
p(R) c (q)
so the first-
L-py p'(q) = 0
Writing this as
c" (q)ds = p'(q) + sp"(q)ds
get c'(q) = pp'(q).
In general there is no guarantee that an optimal steadystate quality level exists.
If V(q, R) is concave, then we can
be sure that it does.
Part of the problem, however, is that
the specification of how reputation changes which was used in
Theorems 7 and 8 does not incorporate a sales term in reputation
adjustment.
If the firm can build up a good reputation by selling
one good item and yet sell many poor items before reputation
diminishes, it will never be optimal to stay in steady state.
In general, oscillations will be desirable whenever a
firm can earn more in the process of running down its reputation
than it cost to build it up.
This will depend on the precise
mechanism by which reputation is formed.
I consider one
plausible specification of reputation adjustment in the model
An open problem is how the activities of individual
consumers both information gathering and expectation adjustmentinfluence the way in which reputation moves.
A model which
addressed that problem would be able to trace through the impact
of improved communication or information gathering on the
firm's steady-state quality level.
A Continuous Time Model with Variable Quality
In this section I analyze another model of the form discussed in the introduction.
It is very similar to the earlier
continuous
time model, with the addition of quality as a control
variable .
Formally, the monopolist faces the control problem
S e -rt [B(x,R) c(xq)] dt
q(t), x (t)
R = sx(q-R).
R(o) given.
The function B(x,R) is the benefit or revenue function; it is
xp(x,R) where p(x,R) is the inverse demand curve.
The reputation
adjustment equation was discussed above in the once and for all
quality choice model.
The current value Hamiltonian is H(x,q,R,X) = B(x,R) -C(x,q)
Xsx(q-'R).
The necessary conditions for the optimal regime include
B (x,R) c (x,q) + Xs(q-R) = 0
(2) -Cq(x,q)
(3) BR (x,R) -
R = sx(q-R)
I- consider the case with constant returns to scale so
C(x,q) =xc(q).
Then c (x,q)= xc' (q) and (2) gives us
c'(q) = Xs.
Therefore c"(q)q = Xs.
We can thus eliminate both X and X to' get
B (x, r) - c (q) + c' (q) (q-R) = 0
BR(x, R) - xc' (q)
Using (5) and (6), it
is easy to write down the equations which
must be satisfied by a steady state quantity quality pair (x,q).
In steady state q=R, R=O and we get
B (x, q) = c(q)
+ s c' (q).
It is very instructive to compare these steady-state
equations to the first-order conditions for quantity and quality
choice under perfect information.
With perfect information the
monopolist solves
B(x, q) - xc(q)
with first-order conditions
= xc ' (q)
Theorem 9.
So long as the perfect information .r'b-e
is concave, the steady-state cuality
level is strictly lower and is monotonically
decreasing in s.
That is, as the speed of learning
falls or the interest rate rises the firm's steady
state quality level declines.
Totally differentiate (7) and (8) to get
dq = c'dx + xc"dq + (s)c-"dq + c'd(s)
Rewriting, we have
The second-order condition, fulfilled by assumption, for the
perfect information problem is that the matrix
be negative definite.
The addition of the term (I)c" will preserve
negative definiteness since c">O.
Call the new matrix A.
Now, using Cramer's Rule,
since B <0.
We cannot generally sign dx/d
because the relationship
between x and R is ambiguous even in the perfect information
But by (7) and (9) we can see that in steady-state the
sales associated with a given quality are the same that would
prevail under perfect information.
The result of Theorem 9 is a very intuitive one: for high
speeds of learning the firm's incentives look much as they
do under perfect information.
Likewise, for low interest rates
the short-run gains from cutting quality are relatively unimportant
so quality in steady-state again nears its perfect information
This leaves us only with the question of whether it is in
fact optimal for the firm to go to a steady state.
special case where it is optimal to do so is when c(q)=cq.
this case we get a bang-bang solution to the control problem.
In such a case one would want to put an upper bound on q as well
as a lower bound of 0.
Call qs the quality level which satisfies
the steady-state equations.
Then if R(O)>qs the firm sets q=O
until R-qS at which point it sets q=qs forever.
The opposite
result occurs when R(O)<qs.
By the theorems above we know
The bang-bang example does not give any insight into the
Fortunately, since there is only one state variable,
it is possible to eliminate oscillations and be guaranteed
of convergence to some steady-state.
The key is that the
Hamiltonian is jointly concave in the control variables:
= -c'(q) + As = 0 by (2).
So the second derivative matrix is
which is negative
definite. As a result, the optimal controls are continuous
functions of the state variable:
x*(R) and q*(R).
(As in any
control problem, we can "synthesize" the problem and write the
optimal controls as a function of the state variables alone.
Along the optimal path we also can write X = X*(R)).
Now there are two fundamentally different possibilities.
Case A is when q*(Q)>Q; Case B is when q*(Q)=Q.
Consider the function q* (R). We know that for R large
enough it cannot pay to keep building up reputation.
is, for R large q*(R)<R.
Since q*(R) is a continuous function,
and it starts above q=R at R=O and eventually falls below
q=R, at some point it must cross q=R.
That is, for some q s
See Figure 18.
FIGURE 18-
Steady-State at qs
The steady-state at qS is stable.
Since the perfect
information problem has a unique solution, there will be only
one such steady state.
Theorem 9 has analyzed the position
of the steady state.
Case B q*(O)=0
It is possible that it is always optimal for the firm to
run down its reputation.
This corresponds to Figure 19 below.
This would occur if
learning were very slow or the interest
rate high.
The firm simply runs down its reputation, eventually
going out of business when R=0 (assuming p(x,O) = 0 for all x)
It is interesting to note that just because a firm is intending
to run down its reputation does not imply it
will necessarily
set q=0 while doing so.
After all, since c(q) is convex, there
is little cost to improving quality slightly from 0, and it
may significantly retard the deterioration of reputation.
Conclusions
This paper has presented a number of models which describe
a monopolist's behavior when consumers cannot observe all the
relevant attributes of his product prior to purchase.
very general setting it has been shown that the quality the
firm chooses to produce is lower under such circumstances than
in a perfect information setting.
The welfare consequences of
this reduction in quality are generally ambiguous because we
are in a second best world due to monopoly power.
The outstanding issues are many:
How is product quality
choice related to the information gathering activities of
individual consumers or the information flows in the marketplace
generally?
Directly related to this is the question of under
what circumstances a firm would find it profitable to alternately
run up and then milk its reputation.
Finally, firms themselves
engage in a host of information-providing activities.
is no reason that they will provide information with socially
desirable content or format.
The relation between advertising
and quality must be explored in an information environment
of the type presented in this paper.
The desirability of public information provision can be
evaluated using the results above.
Improved information
increases the speed of learning by consumers; the effect this
has on quality has been treated above.
Equipped with this
relationship and an estimate of consumers' preferences over
quality as well as quantity, a welfare analysis of information
provision can be made.
fe, far example, Salop-Stiglitz, or Wilde-Schwartz.
See Lancaster attributes, consumers can disagree which
of two products is preferred:
one may prefer the restaurant
with good food but slow service (sensitive taste but not in
& rush) while another may prefer a fast food option.
Imagine that there is a minimal quality below which consumers
can tell the product is shoddy.
See Darby and Karni and Nelson for a fuller discussion of
these terms.
A treatment along these lines is given in Grossman, Kihlstrom,
and Mirman.
And in fact the models mentioned take price as fixed and
exogenous.
Interestingly enough, there does exist at least one regular
publication providing information on the local level about
Washington Checkbook.
It is yet not possible to provide such a service without
outside funding, however, due to public goods problems
discussed below.
For very low qualities,malpractice suits may become relevant.
In most cases, however, consumers respond to low quality by
simply not buying the product again or by lowering their
reservation price for it.
I ignore product liability below.
In general x(t) may depend on the history of prices as well,
since price changes may signal quality changes.
Also, in a
fully general formulation one would certainly want to include
advertising.
Although they have a computation to show the firm's best
choice of quality, I believe it is in error.
because they ignore the effect quality has on the inflow
of new consumers through its effect on market share.
This is in contrast to the approach with x(t) as the state
Following the rule:
"Switch brands if the product fails" is a useful rule of thumb but hardly optimal.
See, for example, Bettman or the consumer behavior or
marketing literature.
I am assuming that under imperfect information consumers
act as though their expectations were known with certainty.
That is, Ro
is a point expectation.
I have ruled out the possibility that the firm always
want to produce minimal quality by assuming V(O, R ) = 0.
This requires some ability of consumers to observe0
quality if it is very low.
Without this assumption it
could well be the case that the choice for the firm is
"minimal quality", whatever that may mean.
This would hold
for attributes which are completely unobserable (e.g.,
automobile safety features if no one took the trouble
to run tests on new models) .
Theorem 2 still
holds without
assuming that v(o,R)=o so long as v 1 (o,o)>O. This condition
would be guaranteed, for example, by assuming that there are
no cost savings to be had from reducing quality below o.
I have shown above that B(q*)<q*.
To see that B(R )< R
for R0>q*, notice that for q>R0, V(q,R0)<V(qq)<V(c*,q*4
<V(q*,R9)which is a feasible present value of profits for a
firm facing initial reputation R
Individual consumers cannot "game" with the firm by changing
their expectations because there are many consumers so that any
one consumer cannot influence the firm's choice.
18. Such sophistication would not be logically inconsistent with
the type of learning embodied in V, but is implausible.
This is of course a very special case of learning.
well hold for attributes which no one can observe for some
time (e.g., durability) but which then become public
knowledge, perhaps through publication.
Automobile repair
records or other durability characteristics may fit this
type of learning well.
This and the following comparative statics computation assume
that the optimal q is unique so that dj exists and the argument
goes through.
This is relaxed below.
I stick to {Ol} demands for simplicity.
Permitting diverse expectation among consumers further
complicates the analysis and can lead to welfare gains or
losses from the misinformation as well.
As discussed above, in general, the joint distribution of
expectations and valuations of quality determine demand.
The updating which occurs as consumers buy and learn in
that more general context is considerably more complex.
I make some remarks about it below.
25. Again, consumers have {0,1} demands.
This is not essential
for the analysis, but provides a substantial simplification.
I treat consumers as having point estimates of 'quality,
thereby assuming away the possibility of the consumer's
buying a product he expects will not be worth the price
in order to learn about its quality.
If the monopolist initially charges a price below p*, he could
then jump immediately to p* forever.
In this case the "monotonically delining" part of the price path is the single price
charged during the first
So this V(q,R) function is a truncated version of the one
used in the once and for all quality choice problem.
In general, I can permit Rt
This has no effect on
the qualitative results
The factor Ep Ak is the relevant speed of expectation formation.
It cannot pay to continually build up higher and higher
reputation.
Here is why:
suppose q*(R)>R for all R.
Then R(t) would be strictly increasing.
But when R>q*
(the perfect information level of quality) we have
< B(x, q*) c(x, q*).
Furthermore, if
B(x, R) c(x, q)< B(x, R) c(x, R).
Therefore, So long as q>R>q* we know the flow of profits
is less than the perfect information profit flow.
R>q* the firm could achieve at least B(x, q*) c(x, q*)
Hence continual building of reputation cannot
be optimal.
The attractiveness of minimum quality standards, however,
should not be treated in a monopoly model. This is because
only one quality is provided, so the policymaker could
just specify the socially optimal quality.
quality standards must face the issue of diversity of
preferences in the presence of many suppliers.
Shapiro .
We begin from
MR(x,R) c(q)
x p (x, R)
R = sx(q -
From A.1, when q$R
[ MR x + MRRk
Substituting for A into (A.2) gives
Multiply by s( R q) and substitute for X*to get
(R q) pR -
= r[MR c] -
[MR x + MRR
From (A.3) the last term is just -sx(MR c) and thus
cancels the last term on the left
hand-side to give
sx(R q) pR = r(MR c) - MR x -MRR
Solving for x, using (A.3) to substitute for Rgives
sx(R q) (MRR -
This can be rewritten as
[ ~ I (q - R) [+MRR R +
Finally, MR = p + p
MRR PR + PxR or
)[xp x r + MR -c ..
We might expect
the capital
goods to signal quality
in such cases-..
I rule them
out to focus only on a capital
good on the demand side, namely
reputation.
Similarly, a product line of high quality may already be
designed and in production. This reduces the savings from a
reduction in quality (which would involve some redesign efforts).
This latter could be modelled as a cost to changing quality.
However, so long as the firm can exit the market without taking
losses, it will have to be the rents to reputation which forestall
the temptation to do so.
Firm specific capital other than reputation could serve some of this function as well.
Finally, I rule out guarantees as a quality-assuring
mechanism.
This is not because I believe them to be unimportant,
but simply imperfect.
A washing machine may have a one year
guarantee, but the consumer is expecting a lifetime of 10
years from it.
Therefore, there is room for potential quality
cutting by the seller, the guarantee not withstanding.
For a variety
of moral hazard and adverse selection reasons, perfect guarantees are
not feasible.
Anytime the sellers could make some quick profits by
reducing quality the analysis below will apply.
The paper is organized as follows:
first I analyze in full
the case where the seller chooses a quality of product each
period but does not also have sales as a control variable.
After defining and computing the equilibr'ium here, I analyze
the welfare effects of improved information and minimum quality
standards.
Then I present a continuous time model where firms
can choose sales as well as quality levels.
This permits
identification of some additional effects of imperfect information.
In particular, firms do not operate at efficient scale.
I provide a summary and conclusion.
General Set-Up and Definition of Equilibrium
The model to follow describes the situation discussed above.
It is necessarily dynamic, since reputation formation occurs
over time.
It is set in discrete time, where the period is the
length of production.
For example, if the product is constructing
a building, the period of time is however long it takes to put
one building up.
Each period each seller can choose what quality product to
In this model the number of products a given firm
produces per period is held fixed (at one).
For a model where
quantity is also a control variable of the firm, see the final
-The price a seller can charge is determined by his reputa-
R, and is denoted by p(R).
This emodies the perfect competition assumption.
Since in equilibrium consumers know the pricequality schedule, no firm can exert control over its price; consumers will not purchase from any firm which offers a pricereputation pair above the schedule.
The cost of production
depends on quality and is called c(q).
I assume c'(q) > 0 and
Sellers choose quality over time to maximize the
present value of their profits.
Reputation formation will initially be assumed to be of
a very simple form:
a seller's reputation this period is
exactly his quality last period:
Rt = qt-l.
I will discuss modifications of (1) below.
It simply reflects
the fact that quality cannot be observed prior to purchase, and
hence sellers can, at least for one period, cheat on their
customers by reducing quality.
Consumers differ in both their taste for quality, 0, and in
their underlying evaluation of the good v.
,Consumers purchase
either 0 or 1 unit of the good.
If a consumer of type (0,v)
consumes a unit of quality q he achieves net utility eq + v p,
where p is the price paid.
Finally, there is a minimum quality q0 .
This may be given
several interpretations, but the simplest is that it is illegal
to sell items of quality below q0 .
I will discuss q0 at
length below. The distribution of demands is such that q is
actually produced (we will see below that this will be the case for
the optimal minimum quality standard).
Entry is permitted, but new firms must prove themselves in
order to build up a reputation.
Initially, they must sell
product at price p(q
0 ). This assumption is necessary for any
equilibrium to exist.
In fact if new firms could sell for any price
higher than the cost of producing minimum quality items, then entrants
could make positive profits by producing items of quality q0 and selling them for one period and then exiting.
Equilibrium
Equilibrium is a price-quality (or, equivalently, a price-reputation) schedule p(q) such that
Each consumer, knowing p(q), chooses his most preferred
product on the schedule to consune (if he uses the product at a,
markets clear at every quality level (this determines
the number of active firms in equilibrium).
& firm with reputation R finds it optimal to produce
qtality q7=R rather than to deviate
(that is, consumers' expectations regarding quality are
fulfiUled).
D o n-w entry is attractive.
Heuristic Derivation of Equilibrium Price-Quality Schedule
In this section I will derive the equilibrium price-quality
schedule from elementary arguments. Just as the price of a
good in perfect competition (in the long run, with perfectly
elastic input supplies) is determined by.the supply side alone
namely minimum average cost so is the price which prevails at
each quality level determined solely on the supply side in this model.
There are two conditions which are used to derive the scheduleconditions C. and D. from the definition of equilibrium above.
First consider the condition that a firm with reputation q does not
wish to milk its reputation.
One way to milk reputation is to
cut quaLty toz the minimum,
short-run gains, and exit the
This would yield profits of p(q) c(q ).
The alternative strategy of maintaining quality forever yields present
discounted profits of r
(p(q) c(q)).
In order that milking
not be- a traczive we must have
[p(q) c(q)] > p(q) c(q )
p(q) > cq) +- r(c(q) c (q)).
As expected, the firm must be able to earn profits by maintaining
quality in order not to wish to run down its reputation.
Turning to the free-entry condition, equilibrium requires
that entry not be attractive.
The profits to an entrant who
produces quality q forever are
p(q0 ) c(q) + r[p(q) c(q)].
Condition D then becomes
p(q0 ) c(q) + r[p(q) c(q)] <
p(q) < c(q) + r[c(q) p(q0 )].
Finally, it must be the case that
p(q0 ) = c(q0 ).
Basically, there is no informational problem for products of
quality q0 .
If p(q ) < c(q ) no firm would supply quality q0.
If p(q0 ) > c(q0 ) any entrant could profitably undercut sellers
of quality q0 by simply offering a product of quality q0 at
a price between p(q ) and c(q ).
Since consumers of quality q0
know they will not face lower quality than q0 , they will be
happy to buy from the entrant at the lower price.
Substituting p(q0 ) = c(q0 ) into (3), we see that (3) is the
reverse inequality of (2).
Therefore, these two conditions
tgether fully determine p(q), which is given by
p(q) = c(q) + r(c(q) c(q0 )).
Figure 1 shows the equilibrium p(q) schedule and its relationship
to the perfect information schedule c(q).
premium of
Equilibrium p(q) Schedule
Formal Derivation of p(q)
Consider a firm with initial reputation R .
The firm can
choose quality in each period to maximize present discounted
q 0 , q1 , . .
such that R =gt-1
is the discount factor.
This problem can be re-written
got qJ100 t=O
with q_1 given.
Differentiating with respect to qt gives
- t+1 P I(t _ ptc (qt) = 0
p'(q t) = (1+r)c'(qt
For an arbitrary p(q) schedule, so long as the second-order
conditions held everywhere, there would be a unique solution to (6)
and all firms would choose to produce the quality which yielded the
Such a price schedule could not be an equilibrium because it would violate market clearing at other quality levels.
If (6) is used to define p(q), however, then all quality
levels will by definition satisfy the steady-state condition.
Therefore for any initial reputation, a firm would find it
optimal to maintain its reputation.
This is exactly the condition needed for an equilibrium in which a variety of products
The differential equation for p(q) given by (6), along
with the boundary condition (4) admits only (5) as its unique
Since it is optimal for a firm with reputation R0 to maintain
quality, it is easy to figure out the asset value of reputation.
This is just the present value of profits accruing to having the
reputation, when the firm follows its optimal regime from that point
We can compute this value as
1+r [p(R0 ) c(R)]
[r(c(R0 ) c(qM))]
V(R ) = (1+r) (c(R) c (q0)).
Of course this is increasing in R .
Also, V(q0 ) = 0 as is necestitated by free- entry with initial reputation q0 .
Note that it is
also increasing in r; we will see below that this implies that
improved information decreases the asset 'value of reputation.
Finally it is decreasing in q
so an increase in the minimum
quality standard would cause a capital loss for firms with good
reputations.
I should emphasize that these profits are only ex-post
The asset value of reputation R0 exactly equals the
cost of building up that reputation.
Ex ante there are zero
information Provision and the Interpretation of r
At this point I would like to indicate how the equilibrium
schedule depends on information flows in the market.
will be important for studying the welfare consequences of
imprcved information.
Information in this model is embodied in the reputation
adjustment equation.
As alternatives to (1), consider
Rt yRt-1 + (1-y) q
To see how these specifications alter the equilibrium schedule,
I simply restate the optimal control problem discussed above
with these alternative equations of motion of the state variable,
Looking first at (7) we get
E p [p(Rt)
q0'ql,...t=t
re-writing we have
E PL'[p(q)
%gj,.. .t0
Differentiate with respect to qt to get
p'(qt) -Pc ()
= (l+r) nc '(qt).
This replaces (6) when Rt
1c x small we get the approximation
Therefore increasing r in equation (5) can be thought of as
increasing the length of time before quality is observed.
While (7) reflects a lag in observing quality,
(8) captures
two possible effects in reputation formation: The first is
that consumers do not completely alter their judgment of the
firm on the basis of one period's quality.
Rather they may
slowly adjust reputation towards observed quality.
The second
concerns the probability of observing true quality.
product attributes are difficult to detect even after purchase
e.g., safety features.
If y is the probability that the true qua
is not observed (in which case reputation is unaltered) then
(8) will hold.
The earlier case, (1), corresponds to y=O so that
there is rapid or certain reputation adjustment.
To derive the steady-state necessary condition when O<y<l,
it is enough to compute the change in profits from a one-shot
blip in quality at time 0 followed by a return to producing q
every period.
The effect of such a deviation is:
pt [p(Rt) c(q t
+ pp" (q)dq0 + p p'(q)dq0
.-c*t(q) + pp"(q)
Substituting into dg0 we have
E p (1-y)y
- -c'(q) + (1-y)pp'(q)E
= -c'(q) + (1-y)pp'(q)
If q is to be a steady-state quality level this expression must
p'(q) = p(l-y)
[1 + p(l-y) ]c'(q)
(1 + 1-y)c'(q).
When y=0 this reduces to-our original expression.
Slow reputation adjustment (forgiving consumers) or difficult to detect
attributes raise y and, in the analysis below, can be treated
by raising r.
Finally, perhaps the most important interpretation of r is
as frequency of purchase.
Taking as given the market discount
rate per unit time, i, if the period is of length T, then p=e
Large T, namely infrequent production periods, is another
interpretation of a large r.
As one would expect, informational
problems are more severe the larger is r.
Summarizing, large values of r can be interpreted as
Infrequent production (i.e., lengthy production process)
Long lags in detection of quality
Slow updating of reputations or
Difficult to detect quality attributes.
In the welfare analysis of r below, r can be thought of as a
policy variable since information provision activities can
influence r through several of the above channels.
Description of Equilirbium p(q) Schedule.
From Figure 1 and equation (5) it is easy to see some of
the qualitative characteristics of the equilibrium price
quality schedule.
First notice that the premium paid for high
quality products, r(c(q.) c(q0 ))
is larger the higher the
quality involved.
So the imperfect operation of reputation as
a quality conveying mechanism is more severe for higher
quality items.
Notice also
Theorem 1.
As r+O, the equilibrium price-quality schedule
approaches the perfect information schedule.
This reflects the fact that as r-O 'the flow of profits necessary
to forestall cheating on quality becomes smaller.
For r=O any
positive flow of profits would be more than enough to cause a
firm to prefer to maintain quality.
Viewed differently, any
positive flow of profits would be more than enough to compensate
an entrant for the finite one-period loss involved in building
up the reputation.
Keeping in mind the interpretations of r noted above, the
larger is r the more of a gap between p(q) and c(q).
The welfare
consequences of this will be explored below..See Figure 2.
It is also easy to see how q0 affects p(q).
An increase
in q0 simply shifts the whole schedule down by a fixed amount
without affecting the slope.
Of course the schedule starts at
q=q0, so an increase in q0 reduces the spectrum of products
available in the market. See Figure 3.
Effect of r on p(q):
q0 FIGURE 3
In this section I look more closely at how various consumers
respond to a given p(q) schedule.
This is necessary in order to
perform a welfare analysis.
As mentioned above, each consumer is described by two parameters, 0 and v.
A consumer of type (0, v) achieves utility
Oq + v p from purchasing one unit of quality q at price p.
Consumers buy either 0 or 1 unit of the good.
a given distribution of types of consumers f(G, v).
This distribution is confined to the box [0 x ] x [v x v] where 6
(Multiunit demands for the same quality can be treated via the f function).
Consumer (0, v), when facing the price-quality schedule p(q),
solves the following problem:
max Oq + v p(q).
Differentiating with respect to q we have
unless 0 < p' (q0 ),
in which case q=q .
These describe the choice
of q by 0 if the product is purchased.
So long as p" (q) > 0, which follows from the assumption that
C"(q)>O, we know that consumers with a greater taste for quality,
higher e's, consume higher quality items:
Substituting our formula (5) for p(q) into (11) we have the
quality choice by G given r, denoted q(O, r), defined by
e = (1 + r) c'(q(G, r))
if G > (1 + r) c'(q ).
q(O, r) = q0
if e < (1 + r) c'(q ).
It is important to note that q
does not affect the slope of
p(q) and thus does not affect q(O, r) except for those who choose
to consume q0 .
It will, however, affect the set of consumers who
buy at all.
eq + v p = constan
Ke's indifference curve
q 0q(E,r)7q
Choice of Quality by (0, v)
Type (9, v) will purchase the product if and only if
Oq(9, r) + v p(q(9, r))> 0.
Subtituting for p(q) this becomes
Oq(9, r) + v -
[(1 + r) c(q(9, r)) rc(q 0)] > 0
Rewriting, we have:
(9, v) purchases the product if and only if
v > ( 1 + r) c(q(G, r)) rc(q0 ) -
Denote the right-hand side by v(O; q , r).
Differentiating -(13)
with respect to q and using (12) we have
vq (9; q0, r) = -rc'(q)
if q(9, r) > q
if q(9, r) = q0
This is to be interpreted as follows: when q rises the p(q)
schedule shifts down (by rc'(q0 )).
This causes consumers with high
valuations of quality Ce) to face a more attractive opportunity set
and more of them buy.
This is represented by region B in Figure 5
(v(Q; q0 , r) falls for high e's).
On the other hand low G's (e < c'(q
would like to consume products of quality less than q
0 , so raising q0
makes them worse off, and only higher v's will purchase as a result.
Those in region D leave the market when q0 is raised to q0.
EE(c'(q0), (1+r)c'(q0), (, v) would like to purchase q>q0 if he only
had to pay the cost.
He is unwilling to pay the premium as well, however, so purchases q0.
Since q sells at price c(q ), he prefers q0
to be raised.
This is all summarized in Figure 5 below.
v(G, q , r) is declining in 0 since higher S's derive strictly greater
utility from any given quality product, and thus would certainly buy
a unit if lower O's did.)
v (q; q , r)
Bbuy when q'*
v(q; q', r)
v(G, q0 , r)0
Having described how (0, v) 's response depends on q , let me
look more closely at the effects of r.
When r goes up any consumer who -purchases q>q finds he must pay more.
Consequently,
he is worse off; furthermore, since r affects the marginal cost
of quality, (1+r) c'(q), it will affect his quality choice, via
Differentiating (12) with respect to r we have (for
e > (1+r) c' (q0 ),
(1+r) c"(q(O, r))
r (0, r) + c(q(G, r))
-c''(N(0, r)
(ieiTc"(q(0, r))
As expected, increased r causes a given type of consumer to substitute towardz lIower- quality products (unless 0 was using q0 already,
be- tbe= cqsem for 0 < (1+r) c' (q)).
See Figure 6.
(1+r)c'(q0)
(1+r')c(q0)
Furthermore, the less favorable p(q) schedule which results
from increased r causes fewer consumers of a given G-type to consume at all.
Differentiate (13) with respect to r to get
vr (0 q , r) = (l+r) c ' (q(G, r) ) qr (0, r) + c (q (E, r) ) -c (q0)
(l+r) c'(q(0, r)) -
0] qg(O, r) + c(q(0, r)) c(q0)
By (12) the first term in brackets is zero for 0 > (1+r) c'(q ) and so
vr (0; q , r) = c(q(0, r)) c(q0 ) > 0
for those 0's.
For 0 < (l+r) c' (q ) , q(0, r)
= q0 , qr(0, r)
vr(0; q0 , r) = 0.
This is because low G's continue to use q
price c(q ), whatever r is.
See Figure 7. Those consumers inbetween the two curves drop out of the market when r rises to r'.
v(E; q , r'
only for r
v(0; q 0, r)
(1+r)c' (q
v(O; q 0, r):
Welfare Analysis of r
Utilizing the analysis of consumer behavior above, we can
determine the welfare effects of changing r and q0 .
This section
studies r; the next will treat q0 .
Keep in mind the section on
the interpretation of r when considering changing r in this section.
Since q0 will be fixed in this section, it is suppressed in the
notation when possible.
The idea behind the welfare theorem in this section is this:
r increases, the wedge between price and cost for high quality products rises.
This is like a tax on high quality items.
in r lead to increases in the "tax", with associated distortions.
Of course, information costs are as "real" as production costs, so
this should not be viewed as a market failure so much as a cost due
to imperfect information.
The welfare measure used is aggregate consumer surplus plus profits.
Equivalently, I will write down expressions for gross utility
minus the costs of production.
Since producers earn zero profits
ex ante, we can identify this aggregate welfare measure with consumer
This requires inclusion of the transition period, during
which 'firms take losses to build.up reputations, in the welfare
The easiest way to treat this period is to assume2 that
it differs from the steady-state only in the prices charged (all items
sell at c(a )).
With this convention there is no difference in social
welfare between the transition period and the steady-state, because
the same allocation prevails.
Consequently, we can identify steadystate aggregate welfare with consumer surplus, by using the zero
profit condition.
Look first at the set of all consumers of type 0 .
0 < (1+r) c'(q0 type 0 either uses q=q or stays our of the market.
The aggregate welfare of type 0 consumers is
W (0, r) =
f(0, v) [Og0 + v c (q ] dv.
For 0 < (1+r) c' (q , q(E, r) = q
v(0, r) = c(q0 ) -
f(0, v) [E9q
+ v c(q 0 )]dv.
c (q0 )-Gq0
Evidently, r has no influence on these consumers' utility since it
neither affects the quality chosen (q ) nor its price (and
The situation is very different for 0 > (1+r) c' (q ).
W(0, r) = 5
f(G, r) [Gq(0, r) + v c(q(0, r))]dv
Differentiating with respect to r we have
Wr (0,- r) = 5
f (G, v) [Eq r c r] dv
vrf(O, v(0, r)) [q(0, r) + v(0, r) c(q(0,r))J
Using (12) to substitute for c', and (13) for v(0, r) we have
Wr (0, r) = S
f (0 , v) qr(0-1+ir) dv
v f(0, v(0, r))r[c(q(G, r)) c(q0 )]
Finally, substituting for qr and vr from (15) and (16) we get
-c(q(0, r))
W r (0, r) =(1+r)
c "(q (O, r) ) _f
-f (E, v(E, r) ) r [c (q(0, r)) c (q)
The first term here indicates the welfare loss due to the
further distortion in quality choice by type O's as r increases.
The second term reflects the fact that some type O's (namely type
(0, v(0, r))) are forced out of the market by the increase in r.
There is an unambiguous welfare loss as r increases.
from reducing r should be weighed against the costs of any information provision activities which could do so.
This welfare analysis
is summarized in
Theorem 2.
There is a welfare loss as r increases for all consumers
who consume qualities above q0 , given r.
Increases in
r also cause more consumers to leave the market
altogether, with additional welfare losses resulting.
Changes in r have no effect on consumers who purchase
quality q .
In general consumers substitute to lower
quality items as r rises.
Notice that Wr (0, 0)
0; this reflects the fact that there
is no loss, to the first order, from imperfect information when
we first move away from perfect information (r=0). Notice also
that the per-capita welfare losses as r increases tend to be greater
for those who value quality the highest (high 0).
Finally, the
curvative of the cost function, c", enters into the welfare loss.
This is because it determines how severe is the substitution towards
lower quality items as a consequence of the premiums for higher
quality products.
Welfare Analysis of q
In a perfect information world there is no justification
for a minimum quality standard.. After all, its only effect
would be to artificially restrict the range of products offered
When product quality cannot be observed prior to purchase,
however, there may well be justification for such standards.
The usual story is that the minimum standard or licensing protects consumers from quacks, frauds, and rip-offs generally.
This refers to a disequilibrium situation where consumers
may be unpleasantly surprised by the quality of the product
While such a story is perfectly plausible, it is not the
one I am telling in this paper.
Rather, I am concerned with
the desirability of a minimum quality standard, where the
standard influences the equilibrium price-quality schedule.
So, even granting that consumers are never surprised (in equilibrium) i.e., that their expectations of quality are fulfilled,
it is desirable to impose a minimum standard.
There are, as far as I know, no other formal analyses of
minimum quality standards where the supply of products of
various qualities is endogenous.
The case with exogenous
supplies has been treated by Leland .
Since I have already shown how the minimum standard o,
influences the equilibrium p(q) schedule, (5), and how consumers
respond to this, it is relatively easy to do the welfare
analysis to determine the optimal minimum quality standard.
Looking at type 0 consumers, and taking r>0 as fixed, we
can write down welfare of type- O's (using the same convention as
above to identify consumer surplus and aggregate welfare) as
W(O, q0 ) =
f(0, v) [q
(0, r) + v c (q (0, r) )]dv.
Let me again consider the two classes of O's separately:
first 0 < (l+r) c'(q ) and
then 0 > (l+r) c'(q0 ).
For the first group, q(G, r) = q0 so v(O,q ) = c(q) eq and
W(0,q0 ) =
[Oq0 + v c(q0 )]dv
c(q 0 )-Oq0
f(O, v)[0 c'(q0 )]dv
c(q 0 )-G 0
W 0 (0, g)
= [0 c'(q)] 5
f(G, v)dv.
c(q0 )-Gq0
For 0 < c' (q0 ), consumer  would like to purchase q<q0 and so is
hurt by a rise in the standard.
For c'(q ) < 0 < (l+r)c'(q ),0
is happy to see q0
raised: so long as he only has to pay the cost
of the item and not the premium payment he prefers q > q
Since minimum quality items sell at cost, these O's prefer to see the standard
For the second group, (0 > (l+r) c'(q)), we have
f(0, v)[Oq(0, r) + v c(q(E, r))]dv
Since q0 does not influence the quality choice q(O, r), it has
an impact only through the number of consumers who purchase the
(0, q0 ) =
Vq (0, q0 )f(G, v(O, q 0 ))[q(0, r) +v(0, q)
c(q(0. r))]
From (14) we have v q (0, q0 ) =-rc' (q ) so
(0, q ) = rc'(q0 )f(0, v(0, q0 ))
[Gq(O, r) + v(G,q0 )
- c(q(O, r))1
Now use (13) to substitute for v(O, qO) to get
(0, q) = rc'(q )f(0, v(0, q0 ))r(c(q(0, r) c(q ))
Rewriting this we have
r2 c (q )[c(q(O, r)) c(q )]f(EG, v(O, q0 ))
As expected, this is positive.
Since p(q)>c(q) for q>q , some
consumers who would purchase the product under perfect information
drop out of the market rather than pay the premium.
As q increases
the premium falls, and some of these consumers, whose valuation of the
product exceeds its cost, re-enter the market.
This constitutes a
welfare gain.
The calculations above can be summarized in
Theorem 3.
Given some minimum quality standard q0 , all consuimors
of type 0 such that 0 > c' (q) enjoy a welfare gaih
from raising qo , while those G's for which 0 < c' (q 6)
suffer as a result.
The calculation of the optimal minimum quality standard is
not hard, now that we have computed the welfare achieved in
supplying type 0 for every 0.
W(q 0 ) = S
(0, q0 )dO
0 Wq (0, q )d0 +
W q(0, q 0 )dO
We know the integrand is always negative in the first integral,
and always positive in the second.
The optimal q , q *,
WO(q*) = 0.
For q0 such that c' (q ) < 0 we know W' (q) > 0.
f or q, such that
Theorem 4.
The optimal minimum quality standard is such that
tlhere are some consumers who cannot get as low
a quality item as they would prefer under perfect
information, and (2)'
some aonsumers would~ prefer
a higher standard
e..,, woudl& prefer a better product
perfect (or imperfect) information.
In particular, setting a minimum quality standard q such
that e =c' (q), so that no one would want to buy a lower quality
than q, is not optimal.
Continuous Time Model with Quality and Quantity as Controls
In this section I present a model in which firms can choose
a sales level, x, as well as a quality-,q, at each point in time.
When sales are a control variable, the reputation adjustment
process must be changed to reflect this fact.5
specification in which the speed of adjustment of reputation
depends positively on the sales level.
The resulting model is naturally more complex than the one in
which quality is the only control variable.
The main reasons for
presenting it are two:
Firstly, it indicates that the qualitative
characterization of the price-quality schedule derived above is not
peculiar to a model in which quantity variables are absent.
many producers of consumer goods can vary their sales over time as
well as quality, this is important.
Secondly, it allows us to identify an additional welfare loss which is a consequence of imperfect
information:
there is a production inefficiency induced by the fact
that prices for high quality items sell above their minimum average
Specifically, active firms operate at above efficient scale.
In equilibrium there are too few firms, each producing too much.
In particular, each firm faces an optimal control problem
of the following form:
e-rt[p(R)x c(x, q)]dt
x(t), q(t)
R = sx(q -
R(O) given.
Here c((x, q) is the cost function in quantity and quality; I
assume c >0, c
>0, and that we have U-shaped average cost
curves for any q.
The parameter s represents the speed of
learning by consumers, and p(R) is the price a firm can charge
if its reputation is R.
Again we have perfect competition, so
the firm faces a perfectly elastic demand curve at price p (R).
The current value Hamiltonian for this control problem is
H (x, q, X, R) = p(R)x - c(x, q) + Xsx(q-R).
The necessary conditions for an optimal regime include
= p(R) c (x, q) + Xs(q-R) = 0
H = c (x, q) + Xsx = 0
HR'= p'(R)x -
We can solve for the steady-state conditions by putting
A=0, q=R to get
p(q) = c (x, q)
c (x, q) = Xsx
p'(q)x = rX + Xsx
Solve for X using (24) to get, finally,
Notice the similarity between (26) and (6).
The reasoning now parallels the formal derviation of p(q) in
the case where x was not a control variable:
For an arbitrary
p(q) schedule (23) and (26) would imply a unique steady state (x,q)
pair, at which all firms would choose to produce (if they settle
down at all).
This would not satisfy the equilibrium conditions
for the same reasons as in the earlier case.
But if (23) and
(26) are used to define p(q), with the auxilliary variable x(q)
as well, then any firm would find it optimal to maintain q=R rather
than to deviate. 6
Before looking more closely at the solution to (23) and (26),
it is helpful to define the perfect-information price-quality
It is given by
i.e. quality q is supplied at its minimum average cost.
associated scale at which firms operate, z(q), satisfies
c (z(q), q) =
since MC=AC at minimum AC.
Returning to the imperfect information case, we must add the
natural boundary condition to solve the differential equation for
p(q) given by (26), namely
p(qg) = $(
This is analogous to p(q) = c(q ) in the earlier case.
Theorem 5 As r+O or s-*
the equilibrium p(q) schedule approaches
the perfect information schedule $(q).
For (s) > 0
p(q) > $(q)
for all q>q
Let me first show that when s = 0 ,($ (q), z (q)) solves
the system given by (23), (26) and (28).
Note that for
any set of parameters the system has a unique solution.
Well, $ (q)
= c(z(q), q)
by the definition
of $ (q) , and
that equals c (z(q), q) by the definition of z(q) so (23)
is satisfied.
To verify (26) simply differentiate the
equation defining $ (q), to get
z(q)[c z' + c
But C (z, q)
= c(z, q) so
Cq (z(q), q)
which is exactly (26) when x=z, (s) = 0.
Now, since the
solution to the differential equation is continuous in s,
we have proven the first part of the Theorem.
The second
part of the Theorem can be shown by a more basic argument.
If p(q) < $(q)
firms selling quality q would be losing
money and it could not be optimal to continue doing so.
If p(q) = $(q)
they are breaking even, but they could make
positive profits (at least for a little while if s<w) by
running down reputation.
Therefore maintaining quality
can only be optimal if p(q) > f(q).
interesting to note how r and s enter only through their
This is very intuitive:
for low interest rates or high
learning speeds the informational problems are less important.
There is an interesting effect which comes up in this model
which could not arise in the earlier model:
since p(q) > $(q)
firms providing quality q operate at above efficient scale. 7
Theorem 6 For (s) > 0, all firms providing non-minimal quality
operate at a point above efficient scale.
addition to the welfare losses due to imperfect consumer
quality matching, and some consumers dropping out of the
market, there is a production inefficiency.
Since p(q) > f(q) for q>q0 by Theorem 5, we know that
x(q) > z(q) since cx >0 and x(q) is defined by (23).
See Figure 8 below.
So the number of products of quality
q which are sold in equilibrium is not produced in the
cost-minimizing manner.
There are too few firms, each of
which produces too much.
Since average cost is c(x(q),q) > *(q), some of the premium
to high quality items, p(q) -
is dissipated by the production
cost inefficiency.
Production Inefficienty due to p(q)j >
Produc tion
Ine ff icienty due to p)
Conclusions
This paper has investigated the implications of reputation in
a perfectly competitive environment.
It has been shown that reputation can operate only imperfectly as a mechanism for assuring quality.
High quality items sell for a premium above cost.
This premium
provides a flow of profits which compensate the seller for the
resources expended in building up the reputation.
Several common but informal notions relating to reputations
have been challenged by this analysis.
First, a good reputation need
not confer market power on its owner.
Indeed, firms face perfectly
elastic demand curves in the model presented above.
Second, reputations need not imply a barrier to entry either.
It is true that a
firm must expand resources initially to build up a reputation, but it
is not possible, at least in this model, to earn super-normal profits
by virtue of having built up a reputation.
In other models, which I
hope to explore, it may be the case that there are first-mover
advantages in reputation formation, and thus reputation could serve
as a barrier.
In this first simple model, however, it does not.
Finally, care must be taken in evaluating profit data for consumer
goods industries.
If reputation is not included in the set of assets
a firm owns, the calculations of its rate-of-return will exceed the
market rate of return.
This is misleading,'as would be the conclusion based upon it that the firm enjoyed some degree of market power.
Finally, a welfare analysis of information remedies and minimum
quality standards is made. There are welfare gains from improving
information transmission; these must be balanced against the costs of
such a program, of course.
Optimal minimum quality standards are
also studied.
In general it is optimal to exclude from the market
items which some consumers would like, to purchase, i.e., the standard
should be binding.
This is because there are welfare gains to consumers who like high quality items .which arise from raising the
These gains arise because a higher minimum quality standard reduces the premiums for high quality goods.
In fact, a firm would be indifferent to maintaining or deviating,
but stability would be provided by any positive adjustment
costs to changing quality.
Such indifference is inevitable in a
model in which identieal firms choose a variety of actions in
equilibrium.
The welfare theorems do not depend on this assumption.
require that a consistent description of what happens during the
transition period be maintained throughout the analysis.
Recall that is is really the curvative of c(q) relative to utility
in q, but q has been scaled such that utility is linear in quality.
This Theorem holds no matter what weights are placed on the utilities of different consumers in the welfare measure so long as the
weights are positive and finite.
It is not plausible that reputation adjustment is independent of
Furthermore, if it were, there would be no equilibrium.
This is because a firm could build up reputation by selling, say,
one good item and then sell a great many bad items when reputation is high.
Since this strategy gives more profits from running
down reputation than the costs of building it up, firms would
never maintain quality.
See Shapiro .
I have been unable to verify the sufficiency conditions for the
optimal control problem when sales levels are a control variable.
The maximized Hamiltonian is not concave, but that does not mean
the solution is not optimal.
This is in contrast to the traditional Chamberlinian result that
firms operate below efficient scale in monopolistic competition.