Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging
Alejandro F. Frangi [Fellow, IEEE]
CISTIB Centre for Computational Imaging and Simulation Technologies in Biomedicine, Electronic
& Electrical Engineering Department, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 3JD, U.K.
( ).
Sotirios A. Tsaftaris [Member, IEEE]
Institute of Digital Communications School of Engineering, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH9 3FB, U.K. ( ).
Jerry L. Prince [Fellow, IEEE]
Image Analysis and Communications Laboratory, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218-2608, USA.
This editorial introduces the Special Issue on Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging. In this
editorial, we define so-far ambiguous terms of simulation and synthesis in medical imaging. We
also briefly discuss the synergistic importance of mechanistic (hypothesis-driven) and
phenomenological (data-driven) models of medical image generation. Finally, we introduce the
twelve papers published in this issue covering both mechanistic (5) and phenomenological (7)
medical image generation. This rich selection of papers covers applications in cardiology,
retinopathy, histopathology, neurosciences, and oncology. It also covers all mainstream diagnostic
medical imaging modalities. We conclude the editorial with a personal view on the field and
highlight some existing challenges and future research opportunities.
Data-driven; hypothesis-driven; machine learning; modeling
I. INTRODUCTION
THE medical image community has always been fascinated by the possibility of creating
simulated or synthetic data upon which to understand, develop, assess, and validate image
analysis and reconstruction algorithms. From very basic digital phantoms all the way to very
realistic in silico models of medical imaging and physiology, our community has progressed
enormously in the available techniques and their applications. For instance, mechanistic
models (imaging simulations) emulating the geometrical and physical aspects of the
acquisition process have been used now for a long time. Advances on computational
anatomy and physiology have further enhanced the potential of such simulation platforms by
incorporating structural and functional realism to the simulations that can now account for
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2018 March ; 37(3): 673–679. doi:10.1109/TMI.2018.2800298.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
complex spatio-temporal dynamics due to changes in anatomy, physiology, disease
progression, patient and organ motion, etc.
More recently, developments in machine learning together with the growing availability of
ever larger-scale databases have provided the theoretical underpinning and the practical data
access to develop phenomenologic models (image synthesis) that learn models directly from
data associations across subjects, time, modalities, resolutions, etc. These techniques may
provide ways to address challenging tasks in medical image analysis such as cross-cohort
normalization, image imputation in the presence of missing or corrupted data, transfer of
knowledge across imaging modalities, views or domains.
To this date, however, these two main research avenues (simulation and synthesis) remain
independent efforts despite sharing common challenges. For instance, both modeling
approaches involve dealing with large scale optimization problems (e.g. in learning
processes or physical equations), involve the use of regularization and priors (e.g. either
based on mathematical or physical properties), need to generalize well, adapt to new
scenarios, and degrade gracefully beyond the original learning set or modeling assumptions,
require the definition of meaningful figures of merit to assess the quality, accuracy, or
realism of simulated/synthesized data, in both approaches there is a growing emphasis on
open source implementations, open data benchmarks, and evaluation challenges, just to
name a few. These and other challenges have been discussed at the successful SASHIMI
Satellite Workshop1 held in conjunction with the Medical Image Computing and Computer
Assisted Interventions (MICCAI) Conference in 2016 (Athens, Greece) and 2017 (Quebec,
Canada). We look forward to the future editions of this Workshop as a forum for identifying
new research challenges and avenues, and tackling them as a community.
This special issue provides an overview of the state-of-theart in methods and algorithms at
the bleeding edge of synthesis and simulation in/for medical imaging research. We hope this
collection will stimulate new ideas leading to theoretical links, practical synergies, and best
practices in evaluation and assessment common to these two research directions. We
solicited contributions from cross-disciplinary teams with expertise, among others, on
machine learning, statistical modeling, information theory, computational mechanics,
computational physics, computer graphics, applied mathematics, etc.
In the sequel, we first aim to formally define simulation and synthesis in medical imaging
and then discuss similarities and differences between simulation (mechanistic) vs. synthesis
(phenomenologic) approaches. We then give the main highlights of the published papers
within this issue and conclude by offering our perspective on some trends and challenges,
and point our to some open problems awaiting future research.
II. CONTEXT AND DEFINITIONS
It is helpful at this point to be specific about the concepts of simulation and synthesis in this
special issue, that is, in medical imaging and medical image computing. We found out that
1 
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the concept of simulation is, in general, very ample and unspecific to medical imaging, and
that there was virtually no formal definition of medical image synthesis. We could find none
of these terms defined in the Dictionary of Computer Vision and Image Processing [item 1)
in the Appendix].
The concepts of image simulation and synthesis can be ambiguous (or even interchangeable)
if one attends to dictionary definitions of these terms by authoritative references such as
Oxford (OED)2 and Merriam-Webster (MWD)3:
Simulation [OED] n • 3. The technique of imitating the behaviour of some situation
or process (whether economic, military, mechanical, etc.) by means of a suitably
analogous situation or apparatus, esp. for the purpose of study or personnel training.
Simulation [MWD] n • 3a: the imitative representation of the functioning of one
system or process by means of the functioning of another – a computer simulation of
an industrial process; b: examination of a problem often not subject to direct
experimentation by means of a simulating device.
Synthesis [OED] n • 1. Logic, Philos., etc.: a. The action of proceeding in thought
from causes to effects, or from laws or principles to their consequences. (Opposed to
analysis n. 3).
Synthesis [MWD] n • 1 a : the composition or combination of parts or elements so as
to form a whole.
The concept of synthesis currently in use in computer vision and medical image analysis
contrasts strikingly as almost opposite to that traditionally used in philosophy or science.4 In
computer graphics, the “goal in realistic image synthesis is to generate an image that evokes
from the visual perception system a response indistinguishable from that evoked by the
actual environment” [item 2) in the Appendix] [item 3) in the Appendix]. However,
computer graphics is focused on perceptual accuracy. Glassner, in his classical book states:
“our job as image synthesists is to create an illusion of reality – to make a picture that carries
our message, not necessarily one that matches some objective standard. It’s a creative job”
[item 4) in the Appendix]. While medical imaging does not neglect visual realism (e.g. for
conventional radiographic assessment this remains important), the key concern is one of
quantitative accuracy of the synthesised images or, at least, in accuracy in terms of figures of
merit that are meaningful for the intended task (e.g. diagnostics, planning, prognosis, etc.).
In the sequel, we attempt to provide some distinction between and propose a definition to the
concepts of image synthesis and image simulation based on the literature and praxis of our
medical imaging community.
2 
3 
4 The Oxford English Dictionary provides contextual quotes that illustrate this contrast. For instance, from T. Hobbes in Elements
Philos. iii. xx. 230, 1656: “Synthesis is Ratiocination from the first causes of the Construction, continued through all the middle causes
till we come to the thing itself which is constructed or generated.”, and from I. Newton in Opticks (ed. 2) iii. i. 380, 1718: “The
Synthesis consists in assuming the Causes discover’d, and establish’d as Principles, and by them explaining the Phnomena proceeding
from them.” Source: 
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
At one level, in using the concepts of simulation and synthesis, our community usually
makes a fundamental ontological distinction best described by referring to mechanistic and
phenomenologic models, respectively. In simulation, we usually adopt first principles for
image generation while in synthesis we start off with abundant data (with the notion of
abundance changing through the years). We also usually assume behind these concepts a
natural information processing direction: from data to models with synthesis; and from
models to data with simulation (Fig. 1). Simulation implies the existence of an abstraction of
the knowledge we possess, usually in the form of first principles, that is used to derive
instances of that knowledge in a scenario that is fully controlled by the selection of
simulation parameters. Synthesis, on the contrary, implies the ability to abstract or
summarise (synthesise) knowledge from a collection of exemplars that are representative of
a wider population, phenotype or phenomenon. This is usually accomplished through
statistical or phenomenologic models. If a mechanistic model is available, one can perform
data assimilation or parameter identification resulting in a customised or individualised
mechanistic model. Conversely, one can simulate new image (or shape) examples from an
image (or shape) synthesis method but we talk then of data-driven models and these are
usually phenomenologic in nature. At this point, we make explicit that the notion of
“medical image” we use here refers to any spatially (or spatio-temporally) resolved mapping
or function [item 5) in the Appendix] to any physical or physiological parameter space, even
if that space is non-measurable and hence derived from a computer-based synthesis or
simulation. In this case, we can refer to “virtual” or “in silico” medical imaging [item 6) in
the Appendix]. This has as a side-effect that while phenomenologic model can issue
forecasts (i.e. are regressive or extrapolative), only mechanistic models are truly predictive
(Latin: præ-, “before,” and dicere, “to say”).
Here, we offer these two definitions:
(Image) Synthesis [ours] n • The generation of visually realistic and quantitatively accurate
images through learning phenomenologic models with application to problems like
interpolation, super resolution, image normalisation, modality propagation, data
augmentation, etc.
(Image-based) Simulation [ours] n • The application of mechanistic first principles from
imaging physics, organ physiology, and/or their interaction, to produce virtual images that
are informed by individualised data; these result on both visually realistic and physically/
clinically plausible images, and are generated under controlled hypothetical imaging
conditions.
Synthetic images are generally useful in structuring information and capturing knowledge
from vast image data sets when little is known about the underlying mechanisms. They are
particularly useful as a modeling approach when data is abundant and we have few
hypothesis to make about the underlying mechanisms. They are hypothesis-free but datadriven: this means the extracted knowledge must be cautiously interpreted in light of the way
the data has been collected (e.g. what population is represented by this sample?, which
inclusion and exclusion criteria underlie the data?, etc.). Virtual images derived from imagebased simulations, in turn, produce images with strong mechanistic priors and are a great
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
approach when acquiring (large amounts of) images is impractical, ethically unjustifiable, or
simply impossible. Here, the data generated from simulations must also be cautiously
interpreted checking the epistemological validity of the underlying modeling assumptions
and mechanisms. In brief, both approaches have strengths and limitations. Synthetic images
play a key role in data-driven information processing and knowledge discovery while imagebased simulations are valuable in hypothesis-driven research in image-based diagnosis and
treatment.
III. MECHANISTIC OR PHENOMENOLOGIC?
It is beyond the scope of this editorial to review the considerable progress made over the past
decades in both physical models of image formation and in machine learning techniques for
image synthesis. This special issue is a modern and exciting excerpt of the most recent
developments. We would like, however, to put these two approaches underpinning these
special issue in the wider context of current trends in science and data science.
There are opportunities and limitations in approaching image generation from a mechanistic
or a phenomenologic standpoint, some of epistemological reach. Some would argue with
increasing availability of big data, computational resources, and breakthroughs in artificial
intelligence, data-driven phenomenologic models will eventually supersede the need of
mechanistic theories [item 7) in the Appendix], while others seriously contest this viewpoint
[item 8) in the Appendix]. The complexity of image generation process, the need to model
detailed and accurately the geometry and physics of imaging, and the variability and
uncertainty associated with anatomical and physiological factors, all seem to favour those
challenging the need or feasibility of generating truly accurate medical images from first
principles. In Chapter 12 of his book, Helbing [item 9) in the Appendix] presents an
interesting cautionary argument that contrasts with Anderson’s vision of Big Data (assuming
that we no longer will need theory and science). Fig. 2 shows Helbing’s model for digital
growth in computational resources doubling about every 18 months (Moore’s law), and data
resources doubling about every 12 months (soon every 12 hours!). While these two
resources follow an exponential growth, the complexity of the processes that these resources
help to elucidate or decide on (e.g. parametric complexity of the computational methods,
ontological complexity of health data) follow a factorial growth as they are based on
combinatorial combinations and system networks, respectively. The above implies the
problem of “dark data”, i.e. the share of data we cannot process is increasing with time. As a
consequence, we must know what data to process and how, which requires hypothesis-driven
science and understanding of the underlying mechanisms relating data and phenomena so
that algorithmic complexity is dealt with tractably.
IV. SPECIAL ISSUE STATISTICS
Twenty-four manuscripts were received for this special issue. Two were immediately
rejected while another ten were rejected after a revision round. Twelve papers were finally
accepted after peer-review covering both mechanistic (5) and phenomenologic (7) modeling
and data generation. This rich selection of papers covers applications in cardiology,
retinopathy, histopathology, neurosciences, and oncology. It also covers all mainstream
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
diagnostic medical imaging modalities. Two manuscripts were handled by Associate Editors
Mehrdad Gangeh and Hayit Greenspan to avoid potential conflicts of interest. Each paper
was reviewed, at least, by three expert reviewers.
V. SPECIAL ISSUE OVERVIEW
This special issue comprises 12 papers covering both image-based simulation and synthesis.
A. Image-Based Simulation
Simulation papers focus on either devising computational phantoms of anatomy or
physiology in health and disease, or aim at developing computational phantoms in image
formation.
In the first category of simulation papers, Segars et al. start off by reviewing what is
arguably one of the most widespread digital phantoms in computational human anatomy and
physiology of the human thorax. The authors overview the four dimensional (4D) eXtended
CArdiac-Torso (XCAT) series of phantoms, which cover a vast population of phantoms of
varying ages from newborn to adult, each including parametrised models for the cardiac and
respiratory motions. This paper illustrates how these phantoms found great use in radiation
dosimetry, radiation therapy, medical device design, and even the security and defence
industry. Abadi et al. extend upon the capabilities of the XCAT series of computational
phantoms, and propose a detailed lung architecture including airways and pulmonary
vasculature. Eleven XCAT phantoms of varying anatomy were used to characterize the lung
architecture. The XCAT phantoms were utilized to simulate CT images for validation
against true clinical data. As the number of organs described as numerical phantoms as
XCAT models increases, the potential use of such models as a tool to virtually evaluate the
current and emerging medical imaging technologies increases. Polycarpou et al. propose a
digital phantom to synthesise 3D+t PET data using a fast analytic method. The proposed
method derives models of cardiac respiration and motion based on real respiratory signals
derived from PET-CT images are combined with MRI-derived motion modeling and high
resolution MRI images. In addition, this study incorporates changes in lung attenuation at
different respiratory cycle positions. The proposed methodology and derived simulated
datasets can be useful in the development and benchmarking of motion-compensated PET
reconstruction algorithms by providing associated ground-truth of various controlled
imaging scenarios.
Others consider the role of models in disease processes. For example, in the paper by García
et al., the authors consider the challenging task of evaluating the correlation of parenchymal
patterns (i.e. local breast density) as provided by mammography with MRI volume
information. Differences in distributions (MRI versus x-ray) and radical deformation present
(due to how the breast is imaged during mammography and MR) render this problem also
relevant from a registration perspective. The authors in tackling this challenge, employ a
subject-specific biomechanical model of the breast to assist the MRI volumes to X-ray
mammograms. When converged, a direct projection of the MR-derived glandular tissue
permits the comparison to the corresponding mammogram. Along the same theme, Roque et
al. propose a reaction-diffusion model of tumour growth. Predicting tumour growth and particularly its response to therapy is a critical aspect of cancer care and a
challenge in cancer research. In this work, the authors derive an image-driven reactiondiffusion model of avascular tumour growth, which permits proliferation, death and spread
of tumour cells, and accounts for nutrient distribution and hypoxia. The model parameters
are learned (and evaluated) based on longitudinal time series of DCE-MRI images. Rodrigo
et al. study the influence of anatomical inaccuracy in the reconstruction of
Electrocardiographic Images (ECGI) in non-invasive diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmias. The
precise position of the heart inside the body is important for accurate reconstructions but
often not accurately known. They explored the curvature of L-curve from the Tikhonov
regularization approach, which is one methodology used to solved the inverse problem, and
discovered that optimization of the maximum curvature minimizes inaccuracies in the atrial
position an orientation. Such automatic method to remove inaccuracies in atrial position
improves the results of ECGI. Moreover, it allows to apply ECGI technology also where the
electric recording, usually done via Body Surface Potential Mapping (BSPM) and the
anatomical CT/MRI images are not recorded one after another, which could potentialy
expand ECGI use to a larger group of patients.
B. Image Synthesis
This issue also comprises several papers using phenomenologic or data-driven methods for
image synthesis or generating annotated reference datasets.
It is interesting to see that some methods are hybrid, i.e. they combine both data-driven with
mechanistic approaches. Zhou et al., for instance, undertake to generate realistic synthetic
cardiac images, of both ultrasound (US), and cine and tagged Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI), corresponding to the same virtual patient. This method develops a synthesis-byregistration approach where an initial dataset is segmented, transformed and warped (as
needed) to generate a motion and deformation-informed set of cMRI, tMRI, and US images.
Only the motion model in this method is derived from an actual physical model while the
image intensity is created through mapping reference values from literature. In a related
paper, Duchateau et al. also focus on the automatic generation of a large database of
annotated cardiac MRI image sequences. Their approach, like the one of Zhou et al.,
combines both mechanistic motion models of cardiac electro-mechanics with anatomical
augmentation via data-driven non-rigid deformations. The proposed method requires the
existence of a small database of cine CMR sequences that serve as seed to augment the
anatomical variability by creating simulations of cardiac electro-mechanics under diverse
conditions. Augmented data is created by warping image intensities in the original sequence
through the electromechanical simulation. This method ensures the material point
correspondence between frames complies with a mechanistic electromechanical model yet
image appearance is not altered compared to that of the original dataset used. The authors
apply this approach to generate a database of subjects myocardial infarction under controlled
conditions in infarct location and size. Finally, Mattausch and Goksel’s paper focuses on
how to reconstruct the distribution of ultrasound image scatterers of tissue samples noninvasively. The recovered scatterer map will inform a realistic ultrasound image simulation
under different viewing angles or transducer profiles. The robustness of this technique relies
on obtaining images from multiple view points to accurately assess scatterer distribution,
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
without which the forward problem is not accurately solved. Besides an inversion strategy,
the authors contribute a novel beam-steering technique to insonify the tissue rapidly and
conveniently acquiring multiple images of the same tissue. The authors also demonstrate that
the scatterer map offers a new tissue representation that can be edited to create controlled
variations.
Several papers focus on machine learning for image synthesis to tackle problems as diverse
as generating benchmark data, image normalisation, super resolution, or cross-modality
synthesis, to name just a few. One technique prominent among several submissions is
adversarial learning. For instance, Costa et al. propose a combination of adversarial
networks and adversarial auto-encoders to develop synthetic retinal colour images.
Adversarial auto-encoders are used to learn a latent representation of retinal vascular trees
and generate corresponding retinal vascular tree masks. Adversarial learning, in turn, is used
to map these vascular masks into colour retinographies. The authors present a learning
approach that jointly learns the parameters of the adversarial network and auto-encoder. The
authors extensively validated of the quality of their synthetic images. The data produced can
help in the generation of valuable labelled ground-truth data for testing or training retinal
image analysis methods. Ben Taieb and Hamarneh also use adversarial learning to address
the problem of histopathology normalisation. Recognizing the large variability between
staining processes in different histopathology laboratories, the authors propose a method that
aims to emulate stain characteristics from one laboratory to the other. Treated as a style
transfer problem (to adopt the term from computer vision literature) the authors proposed a
deep neural network that learns to map input images to output images that best match the
distribution characteristics of a reference set of data, thus achieving stain normalization. A
combination of generative, discriminative and task specific networks jointly optimized
achieve the desired objective of finding stain normalizations suitable for segmentation or
classification tasks.
Chartsias et al. propose an approach to MRI synthesis that is both multi-input and multioutput and uses fully convolutional neural networks. The model has two interesting
properties: it is robust to handle missing data, and, while it benefits from, does not require,
additional input modalities. The model was evaluated on the ISLES and BRATS datasets and
demonstrated statistically significant improvements over state-of-theart methods for single
input tasks. Using dictionary learning, Huang et al. present a method that can synthesize data
across modalities using paired and unpaired data. Relying on the power of cross modal
dictionaries they establish matching functions that can discover cross-modal sparse
embeddings even when unpaired and unregistered data are available. Considering that across
modalities different distributions may be present, a manifold geometry formulation term is
considered. They extensively evaluate their method on two publicly available brain MRI
C. Outlook and Conclusions
We hope with this special issue we have successfully consolidated current efforts in imagebased simulation and synthesis, and stimulate future research. Image-based simulation and
image synthesis will only gain relevance in the years to come: consider the tsunami of
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
healthcare data, [item 10) in the Appendix] emerging large-scale population imaging and its
analytics [item 10) in the Appendix], [item 10) in the Appendix] and the growing role of
machine learning [item 13) in the Appendix]–[item 15) in the Appendix] and computational
medicine [item 16) in the Appendix], [item17) in the Appendix], just to name a few trends.
As perhaps never before, intensive industrial innovation in this area fuels translation of these
technologies into clinical applications and commercial products. Tractica [item 16) in the
Appendix], for instance, forecasts global software revenue from 21 key healthcare AI use
cases will grow from $165 million in 2017 to $5.6 billion annually by 2025. Including the
hardware and services sales driven by these software implementations, the firm anticipates
the total revenue opportunity for the healthcare AI market will reach $19.3 billion by 2025.
By unambiguously defining these terms and putting them in context, we will be in a better
position to see the research gaps and synergies, address common challenges, and better track
the evolution of these methods. With data becoming pervasive and machine learning a
commodity, we expect image synthesis research to grow. As our discussion above shows,
mechanistic understanding and interpretation of the available data will have to develop on
par to data-driven approaches. Mechanism-driven priors will remain a foundation of
Bayesian inference or physics-based approaches to data interpretation and reconstruction.
Some methods presented do in fact combine both mechanistic and data-driven models, but
the gap still exists and more research is needed here.
Evaluation of machine learning and computational modeling remain crucial if these models
are to percolate to the clinical community with credibility. As machine learning, artificial
intelligence, computational medicine, etc. turn into buzzwords even among clinicians and
market analysts [item 19) in the Appendix], [item 20) in the Appendix], and the threshold to
access and (mis)use these technologies lowers, they become commodities [item 21) in the
Appendix] [item 22) in the Appendix] with the potential risk of confusing reality with
fiction. Well-designed community challenges5 for performance assessment and crossalgorithmic benchmarking should keep us grounded in reality and grow their importance.
For these challenges to be successful in this aim, larger and more diverse datasets must be
developed and made openly available, alongside with standards ensuring transparent
analysis and reporting protocols.
More benchmark data only part addresses the problem. Preprocessing, training, and testing
largely remain ad hoc processes with non-negligible impact on performance comparisons.
Standardised evaluation protocols are as key as standardised datasets. There are insufficient
reference implementations of key algorithms that everyone uses in open benchmarks. This
leads to considerable algorithmic re-implementation further obfuscating genuine
contributions and the origin of improved performance. Reference open-source
implementations of benchmark protocols are helpful but still remain the exception rather
than the norm (e.g. only a fraction of the papers in the special issue offer that). Of course,
this challenge holds both for simulation and synthesis approaches.
5 
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Computational sciences are increasingly pervasive in our lives. It is reassuring to see
growing awareness on the importance of model verification and validation across
engineering, [item 23) in the Appendix], [item 24) in the Appendix] medicine, [item 25) in
the Appendix] [item 26) in the Appendix] and biology [item 27) in the Appendix]. While
recent years have seen very positive initiatives in this arena, [item 28) in the Appendix]–
[item 30) in the Appendix] our community of medical imaging and medical image
computing will have to give even more consideration to these topics and develop and
promote best practices in the assessment and benchmarking of simulation and synthesis
One other area we believe is worth investigating is the definition of appropriate evaluation
criteria. Numerical fidelity in reconstruction is rather common (e.g. mean square error and
its variants) yet does not necessarily translate to best visual results. In computer vision
research, human observers are recruited via crowd sourcing and visually score the results of
image synthesis. In our domain (medical imaging), this would ideally require the
involvement of clinical experts, which is costly and time consuming. Perhaps more suitable
evaluations can be those that are application-driven, i.e. those that assess whether simulated/
synthesised data can be used in lieu of real data in an analysis task (or several tasks). Some
papers in this special issue did in fact use such application-driven evaluations, but these
approaches are not standardised across methods or applications, which adds another layer of
obfuscation to the assessment of performance.
In summary, simulation and synthesis are evolving areas in our field. Thankfully, specialised
workshops such as the MICCAI SASHIMI series can facilitate cross-disciplinary exchange,
visualise the progress made, and advance upon the challenges described earlier.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the Associate Editors Gangeh and Greenspan and the numerous reviewers for their contribution
to the selection process of the manuscripts in this special issue. They also thank Prof D. Helbing from ETH Zürich
for pointing us out to interesting literature and sharing his views with them.
APPENDIX RELATED WORK
1. ) Fisher RB et al., Dictionary of Computer Vision and Image Processing, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ,
USA: Wiley, 2013.
2. ) Hall RA and Greenberg DP, “A testbed for realistic image synthesis,” IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl,
vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 10–20, Nov. 1983.
3. ) Magnenat-Thalmann N and Thalmann D, “An indexed bibliography on image synthesis,” IEEE
Comput. Graph. Appl, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 27–38, Aug. 1987.
4. ) Glassner A, Principles of Digital Image Synthesis. San Mateo, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann,
5. ) Clapham C and Nicholson J, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Mathematics, 5th ed. Oxford,
U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2014.
6. ) Frangi AF, Taylor ZA, and Gooya A, “Precision imaging: More descriptive, predictive and
integrative imaging,” Med. Image Anal, vol. 33, pp. 27–32, Oct. 2016. [PubMed: 27373145]
7. ) Anderson C. The end of theory: The data deluge makes the scientific method
obsolete. Wired. [Online]. Available: 
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
8. ) Mazzocchi F, “Could big data be the end of theory in science? A few remarks on the epistemology
of data-driven science,” EMBO Rep, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1250–1255, Oct. 2015. [PubMed:
9. ) Helbing D, Thinking Ahead—Essays on Big Data, Digital Revolution, and Participatory Market
Society. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015.
10. ) Andreu-Perez J, Poon CCY, Merrifield RD, Wong STC, and Yang G-Z , “Big data for health,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1193–1208, Jul. 2015. [PubMed: 26173222]
11. ) Petersen SE et al., “Imaging in population science: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in
100,000 participants of UK Biobank—Rationale, challenges and approaches,” J. Cardiovascular
Magn. Reson, vol. 15,p. 46, 5 2013.
12. ) Alfaro-Almagro F et al., “Image processing and quality control for the first 10,000 brain imaging
datasets from UK Biobank,” NeuroImage, vol. 166, pp. 400–424, Feb. 2018. [PubMed: 29079522]
13. ) Suzuki K, “Overview of deep learning in medical imaging,” Radiol. Phys. Technol, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 257–273, Sep. 2017. [PubMed: 28689314]
14. ) Litjens G et al., “A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis,” Med. Image Anal, vol.
42, pp. 60–88, Dec. 2017. [PubMed: 28778026]
15. ) Ravi D et al., “Deep learning for health informatics,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform, vol. 21, no.
1, pp. 4–21, Jan. 2017. [PubMed: 28055930]
16. ) Winslow RL, Trayanova N, Geman D, and Miller MI, “Computational medicine: Translating
models to clinical care,” Sci. Transl. Med, vol. 4, no. 158, p. 158rv11, Oct. 2012.
17. ) Viceconti M and Hunter P, “The virtual physiological human: Ten years after,” Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng, vol. 18, pp. 103–123, Jul. 2016. [PubMed: 27420570]
18. ) Kirkpatrick K and Kaul A, Artificial Intelligence for Healthcare Applications, Market Analysis
and Forecast, Tractica, Boulder, CO, USA, Sep. 2017.
19. ) Mayo RC and Leung J, “Artificial intelligence and deep learning—Radiology’s next frontier?”
Clin. Imag, vol. 49, pp. 87–88, May-Jun 2017.
20. ) Dreyer KJ and Geis JR, “When machines think: Radiology’s next frontier,” Radiology, vol. 285,
no. 3, pp. 713–718, Dec. 2017. [PubMed: 29155639]
21. ) Kohli M, Prevedello LM, Filice RW, and Geis JR, “Implementing machine learning in radiology
practice and research,” Amer. J. Roentgenol, vol. 208, no. 4, pp. 754–760, Apr. 2017. [PubMed:
22. ) Deo RC, “Machine learning in medicine,” Circulation, vol. 132, no. 20, pp. 1920–1930, Nov.
2015. [PubMed: 26572668]
23. ) Roy CJ and Oberkampf WL, “A comprehensive framework for verification, validation, and
uncertainty quantification in scientific computing,” Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng, vol. 200,
no. 25, pp. 2131–2144, 2011.
24. ) Japkowicz N and Shah M, Evaluating Learning Algorithms: A Classification Perspective. New
York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011.
25. ) Pathmanathan P and Gray RA, “Verification of computational models of cardiac electrophysiology,” Int. J. Numer. Method Biomed. Eng, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 525–544, 5 2014. [PubMed:
26. ) Anderson AE, Ellis BJ, and Weiss JA, “Verification, validation and sensitivity studies in
computational biomechanics,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 171–
184, Jun. 2007.
27. ) Patterson EA and Whelan MP, “A framework to establish credibility of computational models in
biology,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol, vol. 129, pp. 13–19, Oct. 2017. [PubMed: 27702656]
28. ) Kauppi T et al., “Constructing benchmark databases and protocols for medical image analysis:
Diabetic retinopathy,” Comput. Math. Methods Med, vol. 2013, 5 2013, Art. no. 368514, doi:
10.1155/2013/368514.
29. ) Jannin P, Krupinski E, and Warfield SK, “Validation in medical image processing,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1405–1409, Nov. 2006.
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
30. ) Jannin P, Fitzpatrick JM, Hawkes DJ, Pennec X, Shahidi R, and Vannier MW, “Validation of
medical image processing in image-guided therapy,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag, vol. 21, no. 12, pp.
1445–1449, Dec. 2002.
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Data-Information-Knowledge-Wisdom (DIKW) pyramid and how phenomenologic and
mechanistic approaches relate to it. Adapted from [item 6) in the Appendix]
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Helbing’s model for digital growth where systemic complexity (e.g. algorithmic parametric
complexity and complexity of health data) grows at a factorial rate compared to the
exponential rate of data and computing resources. Courtesy of D Helbing. Reprinted with
permission.
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Top five healthcare artificial intelligence use cases revenue. World Markets: 2016–2025.
Medical image analysis has the lion’s share of revenues; other use cases are likely to also
involve image analytics of some sort. Courtesy of Tractica [item 18) in the Appendix].
Reprinted with permission.
Frangi et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript