Dilated Residual Networks
Princeton University
Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs
Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University
Convolutional networks for image classiﬁcation progressively reduce resolution until the image is represented by
tiny feature maps in which the spatial structure of the scene
is no longer discernible. Such loss of spatial acuity can limit
image classiﬁcation accuracy and complicate the transfer
of the model to downstream applications that require detailed scene understanding. These problems can be alleviated by dilation, which increases the resolution of output
feature maps without reducing the receptive ﬁeld of individual neurons.
We show that dilated residual networks
(DRNs) outperform their non-dilated counterparts in image classiﬁcation without increasing the model’s depth or
complexity. We then study gridding artifacts introduced by
dilation, develop an approach to removing these artifacts
(‘degridding’), and show that this further increases the performance of DRNs. In addition, we show that the accuracy
advantage of DRNs is further magniﬁed in downstream applications such as object localization and semantic segmentation.
1. Introduction
Convolutional networks were originally developed for
classifying hand-written digits . More recently, convolutional network architectures have evolved to classify much
more complex images . Yet a central aspect of
network architecture has remained largely in place. Convolutional networks for image classiﬁcation progressively reduce resolution until the image is represented by tiny feature
maps that retain little spatial information (7×7 is typical).
While convolutional networks have done well, the almost complete elimination of spatial acuity may be preventing these models from achieving even higher accuracy, for
example by preserving the contribution of small and thin
objects that may be important for correctly understanding
the image. Such preservation may not have been important
in the context of hand-written digit classiﬁcation, in which
a single object dominated the image, but may help in the
analysis of complex natural scenes where multiple objects
and their relative conﬁgurations must be taken into account.
Furthermore, image classiﬁcation is rarely a convolutional network’s raison d’ˆetre. Image classiﬁcation is most
often a proxy task that is used to pretrain a model before
it is transferred to other applications that involve more detailed scene understanding . In such tasks, severe loss
of spatial acuity is a signiﬁcant handicap. Existing techniques compensate for the lost resolution by introducing
up-convolutions , skip connections , and other
post-hoc measures.
Must convolutional networks crush the image in order to
classify it? In this paper, we show that this is not necessary, or even desirable. Starting with the residual network
architecture, the current state of the art for image classiﬁcation , we increase the resolution of the network’s output
by replacing a subset of interior subsampling layers by dilation . We show that dilated residual networks (DRNs)
yield improved image classiﬁcation performance. Speciﬁcally, DRNs yield higher accuracy in ImageNet classiﬁcation than their non-dilated counterparts, with no increase in
depth or model complexity.
The output resolution of a DRN on typical ImageNet input is 28×28, comparable to small thumbnails that convey
the structure of the image when examined by a human .
While it may not be clear a priori that average pooling can
properly handle such high-resolution output, we show that
it can, yielding a notable accuracy gain. We then study gridding artifacts introduced by dilation, propose a scheme for
removing these artifacts, and show that such ‘degridding’
further improves the accuracy of DRNs.
We also show that DRNs yield improved accuracy on
downstream applications such as weakly-supervised object
localization and semantic segmentation. With a remarkably
simple approach, involving no ﬁne-tuning at all, we obtain
state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy in weakly-supervised localization on ImageNet. We also study the performance of
DRNs on semantic segmentation and show, for example,
that a 42-layer DRN outperforms a ResNet-101 baseline on
the Cityscapes dataset by more than 4 percentage points,
despite lower depth by a factor of 2.4.
 
2. Dilated Residual Networks
Our key idea is to preserve spatial resolution in convolutional networks for image classiﬁcation. Although progressive downsampling has been very successful in classifying
digits or iconic views of objects, the loss of spatial information may be harmful for classifying natural images and
can signiﬁcantly hamper transfer to other tasks that involve
spatially detailed image understanding. Natural images often feature many objects whose identities and relative con-
ﬁgurations are important for understanding the scene. The
classiﬁcation task becomes difﬁcult when a key object is not
spatially dominant – for example, when the labeled object
is thin (e.g., a tripod) or when there is a big background
object such as a mountain. In these cases, the background
response may suppress the signal from the object of interest. What’s worse, if the object’s signal is lost due to downsampling, there is little hope to recover it during training.
However, if we retain high spatial resolution throughout the
model and provide output signals that densely cover the input ﬁeld, backpropagation can learn to preserve important
information about smaller and less salient objects.
The starting point of our construction is the set of network architectures presented by He et al. . Each of these
architectures consists of ﬁve groups of convolutional layers. The ﬁrst layer in each group performs downsampling
by striding: that is, the convolutional ﬁlter is only evaluated
at even rows and columns. Let each group of layers be denoted by Gℓ, for ℓ= 1, . . . , 5. Denote the ith layer in group
i . For simplicity of exposition, consider an idealized
model in which each layer consists of a single feature map:
the extension to multiple feature maps is straightforward.
i be the ﬁlter associated with layer Gℓ
i . In the original
model, the output of Gℓ
where the domain of p is the feature map in Gℓ
i . This is followed by a nonlinearity, which does not affect the presented
construction.
A naive approach to increasing resolution in higher layers of the network would be to simply remove subsampling
(striding) from some of the interior layers. This does increase downstream resolution, but has a detrimental side effect that negates the beneﬁts: removing subsampling correspondingly reduces the receptive ﬁeld in subsequent layers.
Thus removing striding such that the resolution of the output layer is increased by a factor of 4 also reduces the receptive ﬁeld of each output unit by a factor of 4. This severely
reduces the amount of context that can inform the prediction
produced by each unit. Since contextual information is important in disambiguating local cues , such reduction in
receptive ﬁeld is an unacceptable price to pay for higher resolution. For this reason, we use dilated convolutions to
increase the receptive ﬁeld of the higher layers, compensating for the reduction in receptive ﬁeld induced by removing
subsampling. The effect is that units in the dilated layers
have the same receptive ﬁeld as corresponding units in the
original model.
We focus on the two ﬁnal groups of convolutional layers:
G4 and G5. In the original ResNet, the ﬁrst layer in each
1) is strided: the convolution is evaluated at
even rows and columns, which reduces the output resolution
of these layers by a factor of 2 in each dimension. The
ﬁrst step in the conversion to DRN is to remove the striding
in both G4
1. Note that the receptive ﬁeld of each
unit in G4
1 remains unaffected: we just doubled the output
resolution of G4
1 without affecting the receptive ﬁeld of its
units. However, subsequent layers are all affected: their
receptive ﬁelds have been reduced by a factor of 2 in each
dimension. We therefore replace the convolution operators
in those layers by 2-dilated convolutions :
for all i ≥2. The same transformation is applied to G5
Subsequent layers in G5 follow two striding layers that have
been eliminated. The elimination of striding has reduced
their receptive ﬁelds by a factor of 4 in each dimension.
Their convolutions need to be dilated by a factor of 4 to
compensate for the loss:
for all i ≥2. Finally, as in the original architecture, G5
is followed by global average pooling, which reduces the
output feature maps to a vector, and a 1×1 convolution that
maps this vector to a vector that comprises the prediction
scores for all classes. The transformation of a ResNet into
a DRN is illustrated in Figure 1.
The converted DRN has the same number of layers and
parameters as the original ResNet. The key difference is
that the original ResNet downsamples the input image by a
factor of 32 in each dimension (a thousand-fold reduction
in area), while the DRN downsamples the input by a factor
of 8. For example, when the input resolution is 224×224,
the output resolution of G5 in the original ResNet is 7×7,
which is not sufﬁcient for the spatial structure of the input to
be discernable. The output of G5 in a DRN is 28×28. Global
average pooling therefore takes in 24 times more values,
which can help the classiﬁer recognize objects that cover
a smaller number of pixels in the input image and take such
objects into account in its prediction.
(a) ResNet
Figure 1: Converting a ResNet into a DRN. The original
ResNet is shown in (a), the resulting DRN is shown in (b).
Striding in G4
1 is removed, bringing the resolution
of all layers in G4 and G5 to the resolution of G3. To compensate for the consequent shrinkage of the receptive ﬁeld,
1 are dilated by a factor of 2 and G5
i are dilated by
a factor of 4, for all i ≥2. c, 2c, and 4c denote the number of feature maps in a layer, w and h denote feature map
resolution, and d is the dilation factor.
The presented construction could also be applied to earlier groups of layers (G1, G2, or G3), in the limit retaining
the full resolution of the input. We chose not to do this because a downsampling factor of 8 is known to preserve most
of the information necessary to correctly parse the original
image at pixel level . Furthermore, a 28×28 thumbnail,
while small, is sufﬁciently resolved for humans to discern
the structure of the scene . Additional increase in resolution has costs and should not be pursued without commensurate gains: when feature map resolution is increased
by a factor of 2 in each dimension, the memory consumption of that feature map increases by a factor of 4. Operating
at full resolution throughout, with no downsampling at all,
is beyond the capabilities of current hardware.
3. Localization
Given a DRN trained for image classiﬁcation, we can directly produce dense pixel-level class activation maps without any additional training or parameter tuning. This allows
a DRN trained for image classiﬁcation to be immediately
used for object localization and segmentation.
To obtain high-resolution class activation maps, we remove the global average pooling operator. We then connect
the ﬁnal 1×1 convolution directly to G5. A softmax is applied to each column in the resulting volume to convert the
(a) Classiﬁcation output
(b) Localization output
Figure 2: Using a classiﬁcation network for localization.
The output stages of a DRN trained for image classiﬁcation are shown in (a). Here K is a 1×1 convolution that
maps c channels to n. To reconﬁgure the network for localization, we remove the pooling operator. The result is
shown in (b). The reconﬁgured network produces n activation maps of resolution w × h. No training or parameter
tuning is involved.
pixelwise prediction scores to proper probability distributions. This procedure is illustrated in Figure 2. The output
of the resulting network is a set of activation maps that have
the same spatial resolution as G5 (28×28). Each classiﬁcation category y has a corresponding activation map. For
each pixel in this map, the map contains the probability that
the object observed at this pixel is of category y.
The activation maps produced by our construction serve
the same purpose as the results of the procedure of Zhou et
al. . However, the procedures are fundamentally different. Zhou et al. worked with convolutional networks that
produce drastically downsampled output that is not sufﬁciently resolved for object localization.
For this reason,
Zhou et al. had to remove layers from the classiﬁcation network, introduce parameters that compensate for the ablated
layers, and then ﬁne-tune the modiﬁed models to train the
new parameters. Even then, the output resolution obtained
by Zhou et al. was quite small (14×14) and the classiﬁcation
performance of the modiﬁed networks was impaired.
In contrast, the DRN was designed to produce highresolution output maps and is trained in this conﬁguration
from the start. Thus the model trained for image classiﬁcation already produces high-resolution activation maps. As
our experiments will show, DRNs are more accurate than
the original ResNets in image classiﬁcation. Since DRNs
produce high-resolution output maps from the start, there is
no need to remove layers, add parameters, and retrain the
model for localization. The original accurate classiﬁcation
model can be used for localization directly.
(b) ResNet-18
(c) DRN-A-18
(d) DRN-B-26
(e) DRN-C-26
Figure 3: Activation maps of ResNet-18 and corresponding DRNs. A DRN constructed from ResNet-18 as described in
Section 2 is referred to as DRN-A-18. The corresponding DRN produced by the degridding scheme described in Section 4 is
referred to as DRN-C-26. The DRN-B-26 is an intermediate construction.
4. Degridding
The use of dilated convolutions can cause gridding artifacts. Such artifacts are shown in Figure 3(c) and have also
been observed in concurrent work on semantic segmentation . Gridding artifacts occur when a feature map has
higher-frequency content than the sampling rate of the dilated convolution. Figure 4 shows a didactic example. In
Figure 4(a), the input feature map has a single active pixel.
A 2-dilated convolution (Figure 4(b)) induces a corresponding grid pattern in the output (Figure 4(c)).
In this section, we develop a scheme for removing gridding artifacts from output activation maps produced by
DRNs. The scheme is illustrated in Figure 5. A DRN con-
(b) Dilation 2
(c) Output
Figure 4: A gridding artifact.
structed as described in Section 2 is referred to as DRN-A
and is illustrated in Figure 5(a). An intermediate stage of
the construction described in the present section is referred
(a) DRN-A-18
(c) DRN-C-26
(b) DRN-B-26
Figure 5: Changing the DRN architecture to remove gridding artifacts from the output activation maps. Each rectangle is
a Conv-BN-ReLU group and the numbers specify the ﬁlter size and the number of channels in that layer. The bold green
lines represent downsampling by stride 2. The networks are divided into levels, such that all layers within a given level
have the same dilation and spatial resolution. (a) DRN-A dilates the ResNet model directly, as described in Section 2. (b)
DRN-B replaces an early max pooling layer by residual blocks and adds residual blocks at the end of the network. (c) DRN-C
removes residual connections from some of the added blocks. The rationale for each step is described in the text.
to as DRN-B and is illustrated in Figure 5(b). The ﬁnal construction is referred to as DRN-C, illustrated in Figure 5(c).
Removing max pooling. As shown in Figure 5(a), DRN-A
inherits from the ResNet architecture a max pooling operation after the initial 7×7 convolution. We found that this max
pooling operation leads to high-amplitude high-frequency
activations, as shown in Figure 6(b). Such high-frequency
activations can be propagated to later layers and ultimately
exacerbate gridding artifacts. We thus replace max pooling
by convolutional ﬁlters, as shown in Figure 5(b). The effect
of this transformation is shown in Figure 6(c).
(b) DRN-A-18
(c) DRN-B-26
Figure 6: First stage of degridding, which modiﬁes the early
layers of the network. (b) and (c) show input feature maps
for the ﬁrst convolutional layer in level 3 of DRN-A-18 and
DRN-B-26. The feature map with the highest average activation is shown.
Adding layers. To remove gridding artifacts, we add convolutional layers at the end of the network, with progressively lower dilation. Speciﬁcally, after the last 4-dilated
layer in DRN-A (Figure 5(a)), we add a 2-dilated residual
block followed by a 1-dilated block. These become levels 7 and 8 in DRN-B, shown in Figure 5(b). This is akin
to removing aliasing artifacts using ﬁlters with appropriate
frequency .
Removing residual connections. Adding layers with decreasing dilation, as described in the preceding paragraph,
does not remove gridding artifacts entirely because of residual connections. The residual connections in levels 7 and
8 of DRN-B can propagate gridding artifacts from level
6. To remove gridding artifacts more effectively, we remove the residual connections in levels 7 and 8. This yields
the DRN-C, our proposed construction, illustrated in Figure 5(c). Note that the DRN-C has higher depth and capacity than the corresponding DRN-A or the ResNet that had
been used as the starting point. However, we will show that
the presented degridding scheme has a dramatic effect on
accuracy, such that the accuracy gain compensates for the
added depth and capacity. For example, experiments will
demonstrate that DRN-C-26 has similar image classiﬁcation accuracy to DRN-A-34 and higher object localization
and semantic segmentation accuracy than DRN-A-50.
The activations inside a DRN-C are illustrated in Figure 7. This ﬁgure shows a feature map from the output of
each level in the network. The feature map with the largest
average activation magnitude is shown.
5. Experiments
5.1. Image Classiﬁcation
Training is performed on the ImageNet 2012 training
set . The training procedure is similar to He et al. .
We use scale and aspect ratio augmentation as in Szegedy
et al. and color perturbation as in Krizhevsky et al. 
and Howard . Training is performed by SGD with mo-
Class activation
Figure 7: Activations inside a trained DRN-C-26. For each level, we show the feature map with the highest average activation
magnitude among feature maps in the level’s output. The levels are deﬁned in Figure 5.
mentum 0.9 and weight decay 10−4. The learning rate is
initially set to 10−1 and is reduced by a factor of 10 every
30 epochs. Training proceeds for 120 epochs total.
The performance of trained models is evaluated on the
ImageNet 2012 validation set. The images are resized so
that the shorter side has 256 pixels. We use two evaluation
protocols: 1-crop and 10-crop. In the 1-crop protocol, prediction accuracy is measured on the central 224×224 crop.
In the 10-crop protocol, prediction accuracy is measured on
10 crops from each image. Speciﬁcally, for each image we
take the center crop, four corner crops, and ﬂipped versions
of these crops. The reported 10-crop accuracy is averaged
over these 10 crops.
ResNet vs. DRN-A. Table 1 reports the accuracy of different models according to both evaluation protocols. Each
DRN-A outperforms the corresponding ResNet model, despite having the same depth and capacity.
For example, DRN-A-18 and DRN-A-34 outperform ResNet-18 and
ResNet-34 in 1-crop top-1 accuracy by 2.43 and 2.92 percentage points, respectively. (A 10.5% error reduction in
the case of ResNet-34 →DRN-A-34.)
DRN-A-50 outperforms ResNet-50 in 1-crop top-1 accuracy by more than a percentage point. For comparison,
the corresponding error reduction achieved by ResNet-152
over ResNet-101 is 0.3 percentage points. (From 22.44 to
22.16 on the center crop.) These results indicate that even
the direct transformation of a ResNet into a DRN-A, which
does not change the depth or capacity of the model at all,
signiﬁcantly improves classiﬁcation accuracy.
DRN-A vs. DRN-C. Table 1 also shows that the degridding
construction described in Section 4 is beneﬁcial. Specif-
ResNet-101
Table 1: Image classiﬁcation accuracy (error rates) on the
ImageNet 2012 validation set. Lower is better. P is the
number of parameters in each model.
ically, each DRN-C signiﬁcantly outperforms the corresponding DRN-A. Although the degridding procedure increases depth and capacity, the resultant increase in accuracy is so substantial that the transformed DRN matches
the accuracy of deeper models. Speciﬁcally, DRN-C-26,
which is derived from DRN-A-18, matches the accuracy of
the deeper DRN-A-34. In turn, DRN-C-42, which is derived from DRN-A-34, matches the accuracy of the deeper
DRN-A-50. Comparing the degridded DRN to the original ResNet models, we see that DRN-C-42 approaches the
accuracy of ResNet-101, although the latter is deeper by a
factor of 2.4.
5.2. Object Localization
We now evaluate the use of DRNs for weakly-supervised
object localization, as described in Section 3. As shown in
Figure 3, class activation maps provided by DRNs are much
better spatially resolved than activation maps extracted from
the corresponding ResNet.
We evaluate the utility of the high-resolution activation
maps provided by DRNs for weakly-supervised object localization using the ImageNet 2012 validation set. We ﬁrst
predict the image categories based on 10-crop testing. Since
the ground truth is in the form of bounding boxes, we need
to ﬁt bounding boxes to the activation maps. We predict
the object bounding boxes by analyzing the class responses
on all the response maps. The general idea is to ﬁnd tight
bounding boxes that cover pixels for which the dominant response indicates the correct object class. Speciﬁcally, given
C response maps of resolution W×H, let f(c, w, h) be the
response at location (w, h) on the cth response map. In the
ImageNet dataset, C is 1000. We identify the dominant
class at each location:
c | ∀1 ≤c′ ≤C. f(c, w, h) ≥f(c′, w, h)
For each class ci, deﬁne the set of valid bounding boxes as
((w1, h1), (w2, h2))|
∀g(w, h) = ci and f(w, h, ci) > t.
w1 ≤w ≤w2 and h1 ≤h ≤h2
where t is an activation threshold. The minimal bounding
box for class ci is deﬁned as
((w1,h1),(w2,h2))∈Bi
(w2 −w1)(h2 −h1).
To evaluate the accuracy of DRNs on weakly-supervised
object localization, we simply compute the minimal bounding box bi for the predicted class i on each image. In the
localization challenge, a predicted bounding box is considered accurate when its IoU with the ground-truth box
is greater than 0.5. Table 2 reports the results. Note that
the classiﬁcation networks are used for localization directly,
with no ﬁne-tuning.
As shown in Table 2, DRNs outperform the corresponding ResNet models. (Compare ResNet-18 to DRN-A-18,
ResNet-34 to DRN-A-34, and ResNet-50 to DRN-A-50.)
This again illustrates the beneﬁts of the basic DRN construction presented in Section 2. Furthermore, DRN-C-26
signiﬁcantly outperforms DRN-A-50, despite having much
lower depth. This indicates that that the degridding scheme
described in Section 4 has particularly signiﬁcant beneﬁts
for applications that require more detailed spatial image
analysis. DRN-C-26 also outperforms ResNet-101.
ResNet-101
Table 2: Weakly-supervised object localization error rates
on the ImageNet validation set. Lower is better. The degridded DRN-C-26 outperforms DRN-A-50, despite lower
depth and classiﬁcation accuracy. DRN-C-26 also outperforms ResNet-101.
5.3. Semantic Segmentation
We now transfer DRNs to semantic segmentation. Highresolution internal representations are known to be important for this task . Due to the severe downsampling in prior image classiﬁcation architectures, their transfer to semantic segmentation necessitated post-hoc adaptations such as up-convolutions, skip connections, and posthoc dilation . In contrast, the high resolution
of the output layer in a DRN means that we can transfer
a classiﬁcation-trained DRN to semantic segmentation by
simply removing the global pooling layer and operating the
network fully-convolutionally , without any additional
structural changes. The predictions synthesized by the output layer are upsampled to full resolution using bilinear interpolation, which does not involve any parameters.
capability
Cityscapes
dataset . We use the standard Cityscapes training and
validation sets. To understand the properties of the models
themselves, we only use image cropping and mirroring for
training. We do not use any other data augmentation and do
not append additional modules to the network. The results
are reported in Table 3.
All presented models outperform a comparable baseline
setup of ResNet-101, which was reported to achieve a mean
IoU of 66.6 . For example, DRN-C-26 outperforms the
ResNet-101 baseline by more than a percentage point, despite having 4 times lower depth. The DRN-C-42 model
outperforms the ResNet-101 baseline by more than 4 percentage points, despite 2.4 times lower depth.
Comparing different DRN models, we see that both
DRN-C-26 and DRN-C-42 outperform DRN-A-50, sug-
Vegetation
Motorcycle
96.9 77.4 90.3 35.8 42.8 59.0 66.8 74.5 91.6 57.0 93.4 78.7 55.3 92.1 43.2 59.5 36.2 52.0 75.2
97.4 80.7 90.4 36.1 47.0 56.9 63.8 73.0 91.2 57.9 93.4 77.3 53.8 92.7 45.0 70.5 48.4 44.2 72.8
97.7 82.2 91.2 40.5 52.6 59.2 66.7 74.6 91.7 57.7 94.1 79.1 56.0 93.6 56.0 74.3 54.7 50.9 74.1
Table 3: Performance of dilated residual networks on the Cityscapes validation set. Higher is better. DRN-C-26 outperforms
DRN-A-50, despite lower depth. DRN-C-42 achieves even higher accuracy. For reference, a comparable baseline setup of
ResNet-101 was reported to achieve a mean IoU of 66.6.
(b) DRN-A-50
(c) DRN-C-26
(d) Ground truth
Figure 8: Semantic segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset. The degridded DRN-C-26 produces cleaner results than the
deeper DRN-A-50.
gesting that the degridding construction presented in Section 4 is particularly beneﬁcial for dense prediction tasks. A
qualitative comparison between DRN-A-50 and DRN-C-26
is shown in Figure 8. As the images show, the predictions
of DRN-A-50 are marred by gridding artifacts even though
the model was trained with dense pixel-level supervision.
In contrast, the predictions of DRN-C-26 are not only more
accurate, but also visibly cleaner.
6. Conclusion
We have presented an approach to designing convolutional networks for image analysis. Rather than progressively reducing the resolution of internal representations until the spatial structure of the scene is no longer discernible,
we keep high spatial resolution all the way through the ﬁnal
output layers. We have shown that this simple transformation improves image classiﬁcation accuracy, outperforming
state-of-the-art models. We have then shown that accuracy
can be increased further by modifying the construction to
alleviate gridding artifacts introduced by dilation.
The presented image classiﬁcation networks produce informative output activations, which can be used directly
for weakly-supervised object localization, without any ﬁnetuning. The presented models can also be used for dense
prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation, where they
outperform deeper and higher-capacity baselines.
The results indicate that dilated residual networks can be
used as a starting point for image analysis tasks that involve
complex natural images, particularly when detailed understanding of the scene is important. We will release code
and pretrained models to support future research and applications.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Intel and the National
Foundation
(IIS-1251217
1539014/1539099).