Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 16 321–357
Submitted 09/01; published 06/02
SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique
Nitesh V. Chawla
 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ENB 118
University of South Florida
4202 E. Fowler Ave.
Tampa, FL 33620-5399, USA
Kevin W. Bowyer
 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
384 Fitzpatrick Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
Lawrence O. Hall
 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ENB 118
University of South Florida
4202 E. Fowler Ave.
Tampa, FL 33620-5399, USA
W. Philip Kegelmeyer
 
Sandia National Laboratories
Biosystems Research Department, P.O. Box 969, MS 9951
Livermore, CA, 94551-0969, USA
An approach to the construction of classiﬁers from imbalanced datasets is described.
A dataset is imbalanced if the classiﬁcation categories are not approximately equally represented. Often real-world data sets are predominately composed of “normal” examples
with only a small percentage of “abnormal” or “interesting” examples. It is also the case
that the cost of misclassifying an abnormal (interesting) example as a normal example is
often much higher than the cost of the reverse error. Under-sampling of the majority (normal) class has been proposed as a good means of increasing the sensitivity of a classiﬁer to
the minority class. This paper shows that a combination of our method of over-sampling
the minority (abnormal) class and under-sampling the majority (normal) class can achieve
better classiﬁer performance (in ROC space) than only under-sampling the majority class.
This paper also shows that a combination of our method of over-sampling the minority class
and under-sampling the majority class can achieve better classiﬁer performance (in ROC
space) than varying the loss ratios in Ripper or class priors in Naive Bayes. Our method
of over-sampling the minority class involves creating synthetic minority class examples.
Experiments are performed using C4.5, Ripper and a Naive Bayes classiﬁer. The method
is evaluated using the area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUC) and
the ROC convex hull strategy.
1. Introduction
A dataset is imbalanced if the classes are not approximately equally represented. Imbalance
on the order of 100 to 1 is prevalent in fraud detection and imbalance of up to 100,000 to
c⃝2002 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
1 has been reported in other applications .
There have been
attempts to deal with imbalanced datasets in domains such as fraudulent telephone calls
 , telecommunications management , text classiﬁcation and detection
of oil spills in satellite images .
The performance of machine learning algorithms is typically evaluated using predictive
accuracy. However, this is not appropriate when the data is imbalanced and/or the costs of
diﬀerent errors vary markedly. As an example, consider the classiﬁcation of pixels in mammogram images as possibly cancerous . A typical mammography dataset might contain 98% normal pixels and 2% abnormal
pixels. A simple default strategy of guessing the majority class would give a predictive accuracy of 98%. However, the nature of the application requires a fairly high rate of correct
detection in the minority class and allows for a small error rate in the majority class in
order to achieve this. Simple predictive accuracy is clearly not appropriate in such situations. The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a standard technique for
summarizing classiﬁer performance over a range of tradeoﬀs between true positive and false
positive error rates . The Area Under the Curve (AUC) is an accepted traditional performance metric for a ROC curve . The ROC convex hull can also be used as a robust method of identifying potentially
optimal classiﬁers . If a line passes through a point on the convex
hull, then there is no other line with the same slope passing through another point with a
larger true positive (TP) intercept. Thus, the classiﬁer at that point is optimal under any
distribution assumptions in tandem with that slope.
The machine learning community has addressed the issue of class imbalance in two ways.
One is to assign distinct costs to training examples . The other is to re-sample the original dataset, either by oversampling the minority class and/or under-sampling the majority class . Our approach blends under-sampling of the majority class with a
special form of over-sampling the minority class. Experiments with various datasets and
the C4.5 decision tree classiﬁer , Ripper , and a Naive Bayes
Classiﬁer show that our approach improves over other previous re-sampling, modifying loss
ratio, and class priors approaches, using either the AUC or ROC convex hull.
Section 2 gives an overview of performance measures.
Section 3 reviews the most
closely related work dealing with imbalanced datasets. Section 4 presents the details of
our approach. Section 5 presents experimental results comparing our approach to other
re-sampling approaches. Section 6 discusses the results and suggests directions for future
2. Performance Measures
The performance of machine learning algorithms is typically evaluated by a confusion matrix
as illustrated in Figure 1 (for a 2 class problem). The columns are the Predicted class and the
rows are the Actual class. In the confusion matrix, TN is the number of negative examples
Figure 1: Confusion Matrix
correctly classiﬁed (True Negatives), FP is the number of negative examples incorrectly
classiﬁed as positive (False Positives), FN is the number of positive examples incorrectly
classiﬁed as negative (False Negatives) and TP is the number of positive examples correctly
classiﬁed (True Positives).
Predictive accuracy is the performance measure generally associated with machine learning algorithms and is deﬁned as Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN). In the
context of balanced datasets and equal error costs, it is reasonable to use error rate as a
performance metric. Error rate is 1 −Accuracy. In the presence of imbalanced datasets
with unequal error costs, it is more appropriate to use the ROC curve or other similar
techniques .
ROC curves can be thought of as representing the family of best decision boundaries for
relative costs of TP and FP. On an ROC curve the X-axis represents %FP = FP/(TN+FP)
and the Y-axis represents %TP = TP/(TP +FN). The ideal point on the ROC curve would
be (0,100), that is all positive examples are classiﬁed correctly and no negative examples are
misclassiﬁed as positive. One way an ROC curve can be swept out is by manipulating the
balance of training samples for each class in the training set. Figure 2 shows an illustration.
The line y = x represents the scenario of randomly guessing the class. Area Under the ROC
Curve (AUC) is a useful metric for classiﬁer performance as it is independent of the decision
criterion selected and prior probabilities. The AUC comparison can establish a dominance
relationship between classiﬁers. If the ROC curves are intersecting, the total AUC is an
average comparison between models . However, for some speciﬁc cost and class
distributions, the classiﬁer having maximum AUC may in fact be suboptimal. Hence, we
also compute the ROC convex hulls, since the points lying on the ROC convex hull are
potentially optimal .
3. Previous Work: Imbalanced datasets
Kubat and Matwin selectively under-sampled the majority class while keeping the
original population of the minority class. They have used the geometric mean as a performance measure for the classiﬁer, which can be related to a single point on the ROC curve.
The minority examples were divided into four categories: some noise overlapping the positive class decision region, borderline samples, redundant samples and safe samples. The
borderline examples were detected using the Tomek links concept . Another
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Percent False Positive
original data set
increased undersampling
of the majority class moves
the operating point to the
upper right
(100, 100)
Ideal point
Figure 2: Illustration of sweeping out a ROC curve through under-sampling.
under-sampling of the majority (negative) class will move the performance from
the lower left point to the upper right.
related work proposed the SHRINK system that classiﬁes an overlapping region of minority (positive) and majority (negative) classes as positive; it searches for the “best positive
region” .
Japkowicz discussed the eﬀect of imbalance in a dataset. She evaluated three
strategies: under-sampling, resampling and a recognition-based induction scheme. We focus
on her sampling approaches.
She experimented on artiﬁcial 1D data in order to easily
measure and construct concept complexity.
Two resampling methods were considered.
Random resampling consisted of resampling the smaller class at random until it consisted
of as many samples as the majority class and “focused resampling” consisted of resampling
only those minority examples that occurred on the boundary between the minority and
majority classes. Random under-sampling was considered, which involved under-sampling
the majority class samples at random until their numbers matched the number of minority
class samples; focused under-sampling involved under-sampling the majority class samples
lying further away. She noted that both the sampling approaches were eﬀective, and she also
observed that using the sophisticated sampling techniques did not give any clear advantage
in the domain considered .
One approach that is particularly relevant to our work is that of Ling and Li .
They combined over-sampling of the minority class with under-sampling of the majority
class. They used lift analysis instead of accuracy to measure a classiﬁer’s performance. They
proposed that the test examples be ranked by a conﬁdence measure and then lift be used as
the evaluation criteria. A lift curve is similar to an ROC curve, but is more tailored for the
marketing analysis problem . In one experiment, they under-sampled the
majority class and noted that the best lift index is obtained when the classes are equally
represented .
In another experiment, they over-sampled the positive
(minority) examples with replacement to match the number of negative (majority) examples
to the number of positive examples. The over-sampling and under-sampling combination
did not provide signiﬁcant improvement in the lift index. However, our approach to oversampling diﬀers from theirs.
Solberg and Solberg considered the problem of imbalanced data sets in oil slick
classiﬁcation from SAR imagery. They used over-sampling and under-sampling techniques
to improve the classiﬁcation of oil slicks. Their training data had a distribution of 42 oil
slicks and 2,471 look-alikes, giving a prior probability of 0.98 for look-alikes. This imbalance
would lead the learner (without any appropriate loss functions or a methodology to modify
priors) to classify almost all look-alikes correctly at the expense of misclassifying many of
the oil slick samples . To overcome this imbalance problem, they
over-sampled (with replacement) 100 samples from the oil slick, and they randomly sampled
100 samples from the non oil slick class to create a new dataset with equal probabilities.
They learned a classiﬁer tree on this balanced data set and achieved a 14% error rate on the
oil slicks in a leave-one-out method for error estimation; on the look alikes they achieved
an error rate of 4% .
Another approach that is similar to our work is that of Domingos . He compares
the “metacost” approach to each of majority under-sampling and minority over-sampling.
He ﬁnds that metacost improves over either, and that under-sampling is preferable to minority over-sampling. Error-based classiﬁers are made cost-sensitive. The probability of
each class for each example is estimated, and the examples are relabeled optimally with
respect to the misclassiﬁcation costs. The relabeling of the examples expands the decision
space as it creates new samples from which the classiﬁer may learn .
A feed-forward neural network trained on an imbalanced dataset may not learn to discriminate enough between classes .
authors proposed that the learning rate of the neural network be adapted to the statistics
of class representation in the data. They calculated an attention factor from the proportion
of samples presented to the neural network for training. The learning rate of the network
elements was adjusted based on the attention factor. They experimented on an artiﬁcially
generated training set and on a real-world training set, both with multiple (more than two)
classes. They compared this to the approach of replicating the minority class samples to
balance the data set used for training. The classiﬁcation accuracy on the minority class was
Lewis and Catlett examined heterogeneous uncertainty sampling for supervised
learning. This method is useful for training samples with uncertain classes. The training
samples are labeled incrementally in two phases and the uncertain instances are passed on
to the next phase. They modiﬁed C4.5 to include a loss ratio for determining the class
values at the leaves. The class values were determined by comparison with a probability
threshold of LR/(LR + 1), where LR is the loss ratio .
The information retrieval (IR) domain also faces the problem of class imbalance
in the dataset. A document or web page is converted into a bag-of-words representation;
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
that is, a feature vector reﬂecting occurrences of words in the page is constructed. Usually,
there are very few instances of the interesting category in text categorization. This overrepresentation of the negative class in information retrieval problems can cause problems
in evaluating classiﬁers’ performances. Since error rate is not a good metric for skewed
datasets, the classiﬁcation performance of algorithms in information retrieval is usually
measured by precision and recall:
precision =
Mladeni´c and Grobelnik proposed a feature subset selection approach to deal
with imbalanced class distribution in the IR domain.
They experimented with various
feature selection methods, and found that the odds ratio when combined with a Naive Bayes classiﬁer performs best in their domain. Odds
ratio is a probabilistic measure used to rank documents according to their relevance to the
positive class (minority class). Information gain for a word, on the other hand, does not
pay attention to a particular target class; it is computed per word for each class. In an
imbalanced text dataset (assuming 98 to 99% is the negative class), most of the features will
be associated with the negative class. Odds ratio incorporates the target class information in
its metric giving better results when compared to information gain for text categorization.
Provost and Fawcett introduced the ROC convex hull method to estimate the
classiﬁer performance for imbalanced datasets. They note that the problems of unequal
class distribution and unequal error costs are related and that little work has been done to
address either problem . In the ROC convex hull method, the
ROC space is used to separate classiﬁcation performance from the class and cost distribution
information.
To summarize the literature, under-sampling the majority class enables better classiﬁers
to be built than over-sampling the minority class. A combination of the two as done in
previous work does not lead to classiﬁers that outperform those built utilizing only undersampling. However, the over-sampling of the minority class has been done by sampling with
replacement from the original data. Our approach uses a diﬀerent method of over-sampling.
4. SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling TEchnique
4.1 Minority over-sampling with replacement
Previous research has discussed over-sampling with
replacement and has noted that it doesn’t signiﬁcantly improve minority class recognition.
We interpret the underlying eﬀect in terms of decision regions in feature space. Essentially,
as the minority class is over-sampled by increasing amounts, the eﬀect is to identify similar
but more speciﬁc regions in the feature space as the decision region for the minority class.
This eﬀect for decision trees can be understood from the plots in Figure 3.
Attribute 1
Attribute 2
2−attributes, 10% data of the original Mammography dataset
2−attributes, 10% data of the original Mammography dataset
Attribute 1
Attribute 2
2−attributes, 10% data of the original Mammography dataset
Attribute 1
Attribute 2
Figure 3: a) Decision region in which the three minority class samples (shown by ’+’) reside
after building a decision tree. This decision region is indicated by the solid-line
rectangle. b) A zoomed-in view of the chosen minority class samples for the same
dataset. Small solid-line rectangles show the decision regions as a result of oversampling the minority class with replication. c) A zoomed-in view of the chosen
minority class samples for the same dataset. Dashed lines show the decision region
after over-sampling the minority class with synthetic generation.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
The data for the plot in Figure 3 was extracted from a Mammography dataset1 . The minority class samples are shown by + and the majority class samples
are shown by o in the plot. In Figure 3(a), the region indicated by the solid-line rectangle
is a majority class decision region. Nevertheless, it contains three minority class samples
shown by ’+’ as false negatives. If we replicate the minority class, the decision region for the
minority class becomes very speciﬁc and will cause new splits in the decision tree. This will
lead to more terminal nodes (leaves) as the learning algorithm tries to learn more and more
speciﬁc regions of the minority class; in essence, overﬁtting. Replication of the minority
class does not cause its decision boundary to spread into the majority class region. Thus,
in Figure 3(b), the three samples previously in the majority class decision region now have
very speciﬁc decision regions.
We propose an over-sampling approach in which the minority class is over-sampled by creating “synthetic” examples rather than by over-sampling with replacement. This approach
is inspired by a technique that proved successful in handwritten character recognition . They created extra training data by performing certain operations on
real data. In their case, operations like rotation and skew were natural ways to perturb
the training data. We generate synthetic examples in a less application-speciﬁc manner, by
operating in “feature space” rather than “data space”. The minority class is over-sampled
by taking each minority class sample and introducing synthetic examples along the line
segments joining any/all of the k minority class nearest neighbors. Depending upon the
amount of over-sampling required, neighbors from the k nearest neighbors are randomly
Our implementation currently uses ﬁve nearest neighbors.
For instance, if the
amount of over-sampling needed is 200%, only two neighbors from the ﬁve nearest neighbors are chosen and one sample is generated in the direction of each. Synthetic samples
are generated in the following way: Take the diﬀerence between the feature vector (sample)
under consideration and its nearest neighbor. Multiply this diﬀerence by a random number
between 0 and 1, and add it to the feature vector under consideration. This causes the
selection of a random point along the line segment between two speciﬁc features.
approach eﬀectively forces the decision region of the minority class to become more general.
Algorithm SMOTE, on the next page, is the pseudo-code for SMOTE. Table 4.2 shows
an example of calculation of random synthetic samples.
The amount of over-sampling
is a parameter of the system, and a series of ROC curves can be generated for diﬀerent
populations and ROC analysis performed.
The synthetic examples cause the classiﬁer to create larger and less speciﬁc decision
regions as shown by the dashed lines in Figure 3(c), rather than smaller and more speciﬁc
regions. More general regions are now learned for the minority class samples rather than
those being subsumed by the majority class samples around them. The eﬀect is that decision trees generalize better. Figures 4 and 5 compare the minority over-sampling with
replacement and SMOTE. The experiments were conducted on the mammography dataset.
There were 10923 examples in the majority class and 260 examples in the minority class
originally. We have approximately 9831 examples in the majority class and 233 examples
1. The data is available from the USF Intelligent Systems Lab, 
in the minority class for the training set used in 10-fold cross-validation. The minority class
was over-sampled at 100%, 200%, 300%, 400% and 500% of its original size. The graphs
show that the tree sizes for minority over-sampling with replacement at higher degrees of
replication are much greater than those for SMOTE, and the minority class recognition of
the minority over-sampling with replacement technique at higher degrees of replication isn’t
as good as SMOTE.
Algorithm SMOTE(T, N, k)
Input: Number of minority class samples T; Amount of SMOTE N%; Number of nearest
neighbors k
Output: (N/100) * T synthetic minority class samples
(∗If N is less than 100%, randomize the minority class samples as only a random
percent of them will be SMOTEd. ∗)
if N < 100
then Randomize the T minority class samples
T = (N/100) ∗T
N = (int)(N/100) (∗The amount of SMOTE is assumed to be in integral multiples of
k = Number of nearest neighbors
numattrs = Number of attributes
10. Sample[ ][ ]: array for original minority class samples
11. newindex: keeps a count of number of synthetic samples generated, initialized to 0
12. Synthetic[ ][ ]: array for synthetic samples
(∗Compute k nearest neighbors for each minority class sample only. ∗)
13. for i ←1 to T
Compute k nearest neighbors for i, and save the indices in the nnarray
Populate(N, i, nnarray)
16. endfor
Populate(N, i, nnarray) (∗Function to generate the synthetic samples. ∗)
17. while N ̸= 0
Choose a random number between 1 and k, call it nn. This step chooses one of
the k nearest neighbors of i.
for attr ←1 to numattrs
Compute: dif = Sample[nnarray[nn]][attr] −Sample[i][attr]
Compute: gap = random number between 0 and 1
Synthetic[newindex][attr] = Sample[i][attr] + gap ∗dif
newindex++
26. endwhile
27. return (∗End of Populate. ∗)
End of Pseudo-Code.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Consider a sample (6,4) and let (4,3) be its nearest neighbor.
(6,4) is the sample for which k-nearest neighbors are being identiﬁed.
(4,3) is one of its k-nearest neighbors.
f1 1 = 6 f2 1 = 4 f2 1 - f1 1 = -2
f1 2 = 4 f2 2 = 3 f2 2 - f1 2 = -1
The new samples will be generated as
(f1’,f2’) = (6,4) + rand(0-1) * (-2,-1)
rand(0-1) generates a random number between 0 and 1.
Table 1: Example of generation of synthetic examples (SMOTE).
Degree of minority over−sampling
Decisiion tree size (Number of nodes)
Pruned decision tree size vs the degree of minority over−sampling
Synthetic data
Replicated data
Figure 4: Comparison of decision tree sizes for replicated over-sampling and SMOTE for
the Mammography dataset
Degree of Minority Over−sampling
%Minority Correct
% Minority Correct vs the Degree of Minority Over−sampling
Synthetic data
Replicated data
Figure 5: Comparison of % Minority correct for replicated over-sampling and SMOTE for
the Mammography dataset
4.3 Under-sampling and SMOTE Combination
The majority class is under-sampled by randomly removing samples from the majority class
population until the minority class becomes some speciﬁed percentage of the majority class.
This forces the learner to experience varying degrees of under-sampling and at higher degrees
of under-sampling the minority class has a larger presence in the training set. In describing
our experiments, our terminology will be such that if we under-sample the majority class at
200%, it would mean that the modiﬁed dataset will contain twice as many elements from the
minority class as from the majority class; that is, if the minority class had 50 samples and
the majority class had 200 samples and we under-sample majority at 200%, the majority
class would end up having 25 samples. By applying a combination of under-sampling and
over-sampling, the initial bias of the learner towards the negative (majority) class is reversed
in the favor of the positive (minority) class. Classiﬁers are learned on the dataset perturbed
by “SMOTING” the minority class and under-sampling the majority class.
5. Experiments
We used three diﬀerent machine learning algorithms for our experiments. Figure 6 provides
an overview of our experiments.
1. C4.5: We compared various combinations of SMOTE and under-sampling with plain
under-sampling using C4.5 release 8 as the base classiﬁer.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Naive Bayes
and Undersampling.
Loss-Ratio
varied from 0.9 to 0.001.
Modify costs of majority and minority
classes by changing priors.
ROC’s generated for SMOTE, Undersampling
and Loss Ratio comparisons. Performance
evaluated with AUC and ROC convex hull.
ROC’s generated for comparison between
SMOTE and Under-sampling using C4.5, and
SMOTE using C4.5 and Naive bayes.
Performance evaluated with AUC and ROC convex hull.
Figure 6: Experiments Overview
2. Ripper: We compared various combinations of SMOTE and under-sampling with
plain under-sampling using Ripper as the base classiﬁer.
varied Ripper’s loss ratio from 0.9 to
0.001 (as a means of varying misclassiﬁcation cost) and compared the eﬀect of this
variation with the combination of SMOTE and under-sampling. By reducing the loss
ratio from 0.9 to 0.001 we were able to build a set of rules for the minority class.
3. Naive Bayes Classiﬁer: The Naive Bayes Classiﬁer2 can be made cost-sensitive
by varying the priors of the minority class.
We varied the priors of the minority
class from 1 to 50 times the majority class and compared with C4.5’s SMOTE and
under-sampling combination.
These diﬀerent learning algorithms allowed SMOTE to be compared to some methods
that can handle misclassiﬁcation costs directly. %FP and %TP were averaged over 10-fold
cross-validation runs for each of the data combinations. The minority class examples were
over-sampled by calculating the ﬁve nearest neighbors and generating synthetic examples.
The AUC was calculated using the trapezoidal rule. We extrapolated an extra point of TP
= 100% and FP = 100% for each ROC curve. We also computed the ROC convex hull
to identify the optimal classiﬁers, as the points lying on the hull are potentially optimal
classiﬁers .
2. The source code was downloaded from 
5.1 Datasets
We experimented on nine diﬀerent datasets. These datasets are summarized in Table 5.2.
These datasets vary extensively in their size and class proportions, thus oﬀering diﬀerent
domains for SMOTE. In order of increasing imbalance they are:
1. The Pima Indian Diabetes has 2 classes and 768 samples. The
data is used to identify the positive diabetes cases in a population near Phoenix,
The number of positive class samples is only 268.
Good sensitivity to
detection of diabetes cases will be a desirable attribute of the classiﬁer.
2. The Phoneme dataset is from the ELENA project3. The aim of the dataset is to
distinguish between nasal (class 0) and oral sounds (class 1). There are 5 features.
The class distribution is 3,818 samples in class 0 and 1,586 samples in class 1.
3. The Adult dataset has 48,842 samples with 11,687 samples
belonging to the minority class. This dataset has 6 continuous features and 8 nominal
features. SMOTE and SMOTE-NC (see Section 6.1) algorithms were evaluated on
this dataset. For SMOTE, we extracted the continuous features and generated a new
dataset with only continuous features.
4. The E-state data4 consists of electrotopological state
descriptors for a series of compounds from the National Cancer Institute’s Yeast Anti-
Cancer drug screen. E-state descriptors from the NCI Yeast AntiCancer Drug Screen
were generated by Tripos, Inc.
Brieﬂy, a series of about 60,000 compounds were
tested against a series of 6 yeast strains at a given concentration. The test was a
high-throughput screen at only one concentration so the results are subject to contamination, etc. The growth inhibition of the yeast strain when exposed to the given
compound (with respect to growth of the yeast in a neutral solvent) was measured.
The activity classes are either active — at least one single yeast strain was inhibited
more than 70%, or inactive — no yeast strain was inhibited more than 70%. The
dataset has 53,220 samples with 6,351 samples of active compounds.
5. The Satimage dataset has 6 classes originally. We chose the
smallest class as the minority class and collapsed the rest of the classes into one as
was done in . This gave us a skewed 2-class dataset, with 5809
majority class samples and 626 minority class samples.
6. The Forest Cover dataset is from the UCI repository . This
dataset has 7 classes and 581,012 samples. This dataset is for the prediction of forest
cover type based on cartographic variables. Since our system currently works for binary classes we extracted data for two classes from this dataset and ignored the rest.
Most other approaches only work for only two classes . The two classes we considered are Ponderosa Pine with 35,754 samples and Cottonwood/Willow with 2,747
3. ftp.dice.ucl.ac.be in the directory pub/neural-nets/ELENA/databases.
4. We would like to thank Steven Eschrich for providing the dataset and description to us.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Majority Class
Minority Class
Forest Cover
Mammography
Table 2: Dataset distribution
samples. Nevertheless, the SMOTE technique can be applied to a multiple class problem as well by specifying what class to SMOTE for. However, in this paper, we have
focused on 2-classes problems, to explicitly represent positive and negative classes.
7. The Oil dataset was provided by Robert Holte and is used in their paper . This dataset has 41 oil slick samples and 896 non-oil slick samples.
8. The Mammography dataset has 11,183 samples with 260 calci-
ﬁcations. If we look at predictive accuracy as a measure of goodness of the classiﬁer
for this case, the default accuracy would be 97.68% when every sample is labeled noncalciﬁcation. But, it is desirable for the classiﬁer to predict most of the calciﬁcations
correctly.
9. The Can dataset was generated from the Can ExodusII data using the AVATAR
 version of the Mustafa Visualization tool5. The portion of
the can being crushed was marked as “very interesting” and the rest of the can was
marked as “unknown.” A dataset of size 443,872 samples with 8,360 samples marked
as “very interesting” was generated.
5.2 ROC Creation
A ROC curve for SMOTE is produced by using C4.5 or Ripper to create a classiﬁer for
each one of a series of modiﬁed training datasets. A given ROC curve is produced by ﬁrst
over-sampling the minority class to a speciﬁed degree and then under-sampling the majority
class at increasing degrees to generate the successive points on the curve. The amount of
under-sampling is identical to plain under-sampling. So, each corresponding point on each
ROC curve for a dataset represents the same number of majority class samples. Diﬀerent
ROC curves are produced by starting with diﬀerent levels of minority over-sampling. ROC
curves were also generated by varying the loss ratio in Ripper from 0.9 to 0.001 and by
varying the priors of the minority class from the original distribution to up to 50 times the
majority class for a Naive Bayes Classiﬁer.
5. The Mustafa visualization tool was developed by Mike Glass of Sandia National Labs.
Phoneme ROC
Under−C4.5
200 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 7: Phoneme. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. SMOTE-
C4.5 dominates over Naive Bayes and Under-C4.5 in the ROC space. SMOTE-
C4.5 classiﬁers are potentially optimal classiﬁers.
Figures 9 through 23 show the experimental ROC curves obtained for the nine datasets
with the three classiﬁers. The ROC curve for plain under-sampling of the majority class
 is
compared with our approach of combining synthetic minority class over-sampling (SMOTE)
with majority class under-sampling. The plain under-sampling curve is labeled “Under”,
and the SMOTE and under-sampling combination ROC curve is labeled “SMOTE”. Depending on the size and relative imbalance of the dataset, one to ﬁve SMOTE and undersampling curves are created. We only show the best results from SMOTE combined with
under-sampling and the plain under-sampling curve in the graphs. The SMOTE ROC curve
from C4.5 is also compared with the ROC curve obtained from varying the priors of minority
class using a Naive Bayes classiﬁer — labeled as “Naive Bayes”. “SMOTE”, “Under”, and
“Loss Ratio” ROC curves, generated using Ripper are also compared. For a given family
of ROC curves, an ROC convex hull is generated. The ROC
convex hull is generated using the Graham’s algorithm . For reference, we
show the ROC curve that would be obtained using minority over-sampling by replication
in Figure 19.
Each point on the ROC curve is the result of either a classiﬁer (C4.5 or Ripper) learned
for a particular combination of under-sampling and SMOTE, a classiﬁer (C4.5 or Ripper)
learned with plain under-sampling, or a classiﬁer (Ripper) learned using some loss ratio or
a classiﬁer (Naive Bayes) learned for a diﬀerent prior for the minority class. Each point
represents the average (%TP and %FP) 10-fold cross-validation result. The lower leftmost
point for a given ROC curve is from the raw dataset, without any majority class under-
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Phoneme ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
200 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 8: Phoneme. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss
Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper dominates over Under-Ripper and Loss Ratio
in the ROC space. More SMOTE-Ripper classiﬁers lie on the ROC convex hull.
Under−C4.5
100 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 9: Pima Indians Diabetes. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive
Bayes. Naive Bayes dominates over SMOTE-C4.5 in the ROC space.
Pima ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
100 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 10: Pima Indians Diabetes.
Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and
modifying Loss Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper dominates over Under-Ripper
and Loss Ratio in the ROC space.
sampling or minority class over-sampling. The minority class was over-sampled at 50%,
100%, 200%, 300%, 400%, 500%.
The majority class was under-sampled at 10%, 15%,
25%, 50%, 75%, 100%, 125%, 150%, 175%, 200%, 300%, 400%, 500%, 600%, 700%, 800%,
1000%, and 2000%. The amount of majority class under-sampling and minority class oversampling depended on the dataset size and class proportions. For instance, consider the
ROC curves in Figure 17 for the mammography dataset. There are three curves — one for
plain majority class under-sampling in which the range of under-sampling is varied between
5% and 2000% at diﬀerent intervals, one for a combination of SMOTE and majority class
under-sampling, and one for Naive Bayes — and one ROC convex hull curve. The ROC
curve shown in Figure 17 is for the minority class over-sampled at 400%. Each point on
the SMOTE ROC curves represents a combination of (synthetic) over-sampling and undersampling, the amount of under-sampling follows the same range as for plain under-sampling.
For a better understanding of the ROC graphs, we have shown diﬀerent sets of ROC curves
for one of our datasets in Appendix A.
For the Can dataset, we had to SMOTE to a lesser degree than for the other datasets
due to the structural nature of the dataset.
For the Can dataset there is a structural
neighborhood already established in the mesh geometry, so SMOTE can lead to creating
neighbors which are under the surface (and hence not interesting), since we are looking at
the feature space of physics variables and not the structural information.
The ROC curves show a trend that as we increase the amount of under-sampling coupled
with over-sampling, our minority classiﬁcation accuracy increases, of course at the expense
of more majority class errors. For almost all the ROC curves, the SMOTE approach dom-
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Satimage ROC
Under−C4.5
200 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 11: Satimage. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. The
ROC curves of Naive Bayes and SMOTE-C4.5 show an overlap; however, at
higher TP’s more points from SMOTE-C4.5 lie on the ROC convex hull.
Satimage ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
300 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 12: Satimage. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss
Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper dominates the ROC space. The ROC convex
hull is mostly constructed with points from SMOTE-Ripper.
Covtype ROC
Under−C4.5
300 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 13: Forest Cover.
Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes.
SMOTE-C4.5 and Under-C4.5 ROC curves are very close to each other. However, more points from the SMOTE-C4.5 ROC curve lie on the ROC convex
hull, thus establishing a dominance.
inates. Adhering to the deﬁnition of ROC convex hull, most of the potentially optimal
classiﬁers are the ones generated with SMOTE.
5.3 AUC Calculation
The Area Under the ROC curve (AUC) is calculated using a form of the trapezoid rule. The
lower leftmost point for a given ROC curve is a classiﬁer’s performance on the raw data.
The upper rightmost point is always (100%, 100%). If the curve does not naturally end at
this point, the point is added. This is necessary in order for the AUC’s to be compared
over the same range of %FP.
The AUCs listed in Table 5.3 show that for all datasets the combined synthetic minority over-sampling and majority over-sampling is able to improve over plain majority
under-sampling with C4.5 as the base classiﬁer.
Thus, our SMOTE approach provides
an improvement in correct classiﬁcation of data in the underrepresented class. The same
conclusion holds from an examination of the ROC convex hulls. Some of the entries are
missing in the table, as SMOTE was not applied at the same amounts to all datasets. The
amount of SMOTE was less for less skewed datasets. Also, we have not included AUC’s
for Ripper/Naive Bayes. The ROC convex hull identiﬁes SMOTE classiﬁers to be potentially optimal as compared to plain under-sampling or other treatments of misclassiﬁcation
costs, generally. Exceptions are as follows: for the Pima dataset, Naive Bayes dominates
over SMOTE-C4.5; for the Oil dataset, Under-Ripper dominates over SMOTE-Ripper. For
the Can dataset, SMOTE-classiﬁer (classiﬁer = C4.5 or Ripper) and Under-classiﬁer ROC
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Covtype ROC with RIPPER
Under−Ripper
100 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 14: Forest Cover.
Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying
Loss Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper shows a domination in the ROC space.
More points from SMOTE-Ripper curve lie on the ROC convex hull.
Under−C4.5
500 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 15: Oil. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. Although,
SMOTE-C4.5 and Under-C4.5 ROC curves intersect at points, more points from
SMOTE-C4.5 curve lie on the ROC convex hull.
Oil ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
300 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 16: Oil. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss Ratio
in Ripper. Under-Ripper and SMOTE-Ripper curves intersect, and more points
from the Under-Ripper curve lie on the ROC convex hull.
Mammography ROC
Under−C4.5
400 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 17: Mammography. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes.
SMOTE-C4.5 and Under-C4.5 curves intersect in the ROC space; however, by
virtue of number of points on the ROC convex hull, SMOTE-C4.5 has more
potentially optimal classiﬁers.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Mammography ROC with RIPPER
Under−Ripper
400 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 18: Mammography. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying
Loss Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper dominates the ROC space for TP > 75%.
Mammography ROC with C4.5
400 Replicate
Figure 19: A comparison of over-sampling minority class examples by SMOTE and oversampling the minority class examples by replication for the Mammography
E−state ROC
Under−C4.5
500 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 20: E-state.
(a) Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes.
SMOTE-C4.5 and Under-C4.5 curves intersect in the ROC space; however,
SMOTE-C4.5 has more potentially optimal classiﬁers, based on the number
of points on the ROC convex hull.
E−state ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
100 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 21: E-state.
Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss
Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper has more potentially optimal classiﬁers, based
on the number of points on the ROC convex hull.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Under−C4.5
100 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 22: Can. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. SMOTE-
C4.5 and Under-C4.5 ROC curves overlap for most of the ROC space.
Can ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
50 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 23: Can. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss Ratio
in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper and Under-Ripper ROC curves overlap for most of
the ROC space.
Forest Cover
Mammography
Table 3: AUC’s [C4.5 as the base classiﬁer] with the best highlighted in bold.
curves overlap in the ROC space. For all the other datasets, SMOTE-classiﬁer has more
potentially optimal classiﬁers than any other approach.
5.4 Additional comparison to changing the decision thresholds
Provost suggested that simply changing the decision threshold should always be
considered as an alternative to more sophisticated approaches. In the case of C4.5, this
would mean changing the decision threshold at the leaves of the decision trees. For example,
a leaf could classify examples as the minority class even if more than 50% of the training
examples at the leaf represent the majority class. We experimented by setting the decision
thresholds at the leaves for the C4.5 decision tree learner at 0.5, 0.45, 0.42, 0.4, 0.35, 0.32,
0.3, 0.27, 0.25, 0.22, 0.2, 0.17, 0.15, 0.12, 0.1, 0.05, 0.0. We experimented on the Phoneme
dataset. Figure 24 shows the comparison of the SMOTE and under-sampling combination
against C4.5 learning by tuning the bias towards the minority class. The graph shows that
the SMOTE and under-sampling combination ROC curve is dominating over the entire
range of values.
5.5 Additional comparison to one-sided selection and SHRINK
For the oil dataset, we also followed a slightly diﬀerent line of experiments to obtain results
comparable to . To alleviate the problem of imbalanced datasets the
authors have proposed (a) one-sided selection for under-sampling the majority class and (b) the SHRINK system . Table 5.5 contains the
results from . Acc+ is the accuracy on positive (minority) examples and
Acc−is the accuracy on the negative (majority) examples. Figure 25 shows the trend for
Acc+ and Acc−for one combination of the SMOTE strategy and varying degrees of undersampling of the majority class. The Y-axis represents the accuracy and the X-axis represents
the percentage majority class under-sampled.
The graphs indicate that in the band of
under-sampling between 50% and 125% the results are comparable to those achieved by
SHRINK and better than SHRINK in some cases. Table 5.5 summarizes the results for the
SMOTE at 500% and under-sampling combination. We also tried combinations of SMOTE
at 100-400% and varying degrees of under-sampling and achieved comparable results. The
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Phoneme: ROC comparison between SMOTE and C4.5 variation of decision thresholds
Varying C4.5 decision thresholds
Figure 24: SMOTE and Under-sampling combination against C4.5 learning by tuning the
bias towards the minority class
SMOTE and Under−sampling
Percentage under−sampling of majority class
Accuracy on majority (negative class)
Accuracy on minority (positive class)
Figure 25: SMOTE (500 OU) and Under-sampling combination performance
SHRINK approach and our SMOTE approach are not directly comparable, though, as they
see diﬀerent data points. SMOTE oﬀers no clear improvement over one-sided selection.
One-sided selection
Table 4: Cross-validation results 
Under-sampling %
Table 5: Cross-validation results for SMOTE at 500% SMOTE on the Oil data set.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
6. Future Work
There are several topics to be considered further in this line of research. Automated adaptive
selection of the number of nearest neighbors would be valuable. Diﬀerent strategies for
creating the synthetic neighbors may be able to improve the performance. Also, selecting
nearest neighbors with a focus on examples that are incorrectly classiﬁed may improve
performance. A minority class sample could possibly have a majority class sample as its
nearest neighbor rather than a minority class sample. This crowding will likely contribute
to the redrawing of the decision surfaces in favor of the minority class.
In addition to
these topics, the following subsections discuss two possible extensions of SMOTE, and an
application of SMOTE to information retrieval.
6.1 SMOTE-NC
While our SMOTE approach currently does not handle data sets with all nominal features,
it was generalized to handle mixed datasets of continuous and nominal features. We call this
approach Synthetic Minority Over-sampling TEchnique-Nominal Continuous [SMOTE-NC].
We tested this approach on the Adult dataset from the UCI repository. The SMOTE-NC
algorithm is described below.
1. Median computation: Compute the median of standard deviations of all continuous
features for the minority class. If the nominal features diﬀer between a sample and
its potential nearest neighbors, then this median is included in the Euclidean distance
computation. We use median to penalize the diﬀerence of nominal features by an
amount that is related to the typical diﬀerence in continuous feature values.
2. Nearest neighbor computation: Compute the Euclidean distance between the feature
vector for which k-nearest neighbors are being identiﬁed (minority class sample) and
the other feature vectors (minority class samples) using the continuous feature space.
For every diﬀering nominal feature between the considered feature vector and its
potential nearest-neighbor, include the median of the standard deviations previously
computed, in the Euclidean distance computation. Table 2 demonstrates an example.
F1 = 1 2 3 A B C [Let this be the sample for which we are computing nearest
neighbors]
F2 = 4 6 5 A D E
F3 = 3 5 6 A B K
So, Euclidean Distance between F2 and F1 would be:
Eucl = sqrt[(4-1)2 + (6-2)2 + (5-3)2 + Med2 + Med2]
Med is the median of the standard deviations of continuous features of the minority class.
The median term is included twice for feature numbers 5: B→D and 6: C→E,
which diﬀer for the two feature vectors: F1 and F2.
Table 6: Example of nearest neighbor computation for SMOTE-NC.
3. Populate the synthetic sample: The continuous features of the new synthetic minority
class sample are created using the same approach of SMOTE as described earlier. The
nominal feature is given the value occuring in the majority of the k-nearest neighbors.
The SMOTE-NC experiments reported here are set up the same as those with SMOTE,
except for the fact that we examine one dataset only. SMOTE-NC with the Adult dataset
diﬀers from our typical result: it performs worse than plain under-sampling based on AUC,
as shown in Figures 26 and 27. We extracted only continuous features to separate the eﬀect
of SMOTE and SMOTE-NC on this dataset, and to determine whether this oddity was
due to our handling of nominal features. As shown in Figure 28, even SMOTE with only
continuous features applied to the Adult dataset, does not achieve any better performance
than plain under-sampling. Some of the minority class continuous features have a very high
variance, so, the synthetic generation of minority class samples could be overlapping with
the majority class space, thus leading to more false positives than plain under-sampling.
This hypothesis is also supported by the decreased AUC measure as we SMOTE at degrees
greater than 50%. The higher degrees of SMOTE lead to more minority class samples in
the dataset, and thus a greater overlap with the majority class decision space.
Adult SMOTE−NC
Under−C4.5
50 SMOTE−NC−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Figure 26: Adult. Comparison of SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. SMOTE-
C4.5 and Under-C4.5 ROC curves overlap for most of the ROC space.
6.2 SMOTE-N
Potentially, SMOTE can also be extended for nominal features — SMOTE-N — with the
nearest neighbors computed using the modiﬁed version of Value Diﬀerence Metric proposed by Cost and Salzberg . The Value Diﬀerence Metric (VDM)
looks at the overlap of feature values over all feature vectors. A matrix deﬁning the distance
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Adult ROC with Ripper
Under−Ripper
50 SMOTE−Ripper
Loss Ratio
Figure 27: Adult. Comparison of SMOTE-Ripper, Under-Ripper, and modifying Loss Ratio in Ripper. SMOTE-Ripper and Under-Ripper ROC curves overlap for most
of the ROC space.
Adult only continuous [C4.5]
Figure 28: Adult with only continuous features. The overlap of SMOTE-C4.5 and Under-
C4.5 is observed under this scenario as well.
between corresponding feature values for all feature vectors is created.
The distance δ
between two corresponding feature values is deﬁned as follows.
δ(V1, V2) =
In the above equation, V1 and V2 are the two corresponding feature values. C1 is the total
number of occurrences of feature value V1, and C1i is the number of occurrences of feature
value V1 for class i. A similar convention can also be applied to C2i and C2. k is a constant,
usually set to 1. This equation is used to compute the matrix of value diﬀerences for each
nominal feature in the given set of feature vectors. Equation 1 gives a geometric distance
on a ﬁxed, ﬁnite set of values . Cost and Salzberg’s modiﬁed VDM
omits the weight term wa
f included in the δ computation by Stanﬁll and Waltz, which has
an eﬀect of making δ symmetric. The distance ∆between two feature vectors is given by:
∆(X, Y ) = wxwy
δ(xi, yi)r
r = 1 yields the Manhattan distance, and r = 2 yields the Euclidean distance . wx and wy are the exemplar weights in the modiﬁed VDM. wy = 1 for a
new example (feature vector), and wx is the bias towards more reliable examples (feature
vectors) and is computed as the ratio of the number of uses of a feature vector to the number
of correct uses of the feature vector; thus, more accurate feature vectors will have wx ≈
1. For SMOTE-N we can ignore these weights in equation 2, as SMOTE-N is not used for
classiﬁcation purposes directly. However, we can redeﬁne these weights to give more weight
to the minority class feature vectors falling closer to the majority class feature vectors; thus,
making those minority class features appear further away from the feature vector under
consideration. Since, we are more interested in forming broader but accurate regions of the
minority class, the weights might be used to avoid populating along neighbors which fall
closer to the majority class. To generate new minority class feature vectors, we can create
new set feature values by taking the majority vote of the feature vector in consideration and
its k nearest neighbors. Table 6.2 shows an example of creating a synthetic feature vector.
Let F1 = A B C D E be the feature vector under consideration
and let its 2 nearest neighbors be
F2 = A F C G N
F3 = H B C D N
The application of SMOTE-N would create the following feature vector:
FS = A B C D N
Table 7: Example of SMOTE-N
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
6.3 Application of SMOTE to Information Retrieval
We are investigating the application of SMOTE to information retrieval (IR). The IR problems come with a plethora of features and potentially many categories. SMOTE would have
to be applied in conjunction with a feature selection algorithm, after transforming the given
document or web page in a bag-of-words format.
An interesting comparison to SMOTE would be the combination of Naive Bayes and
Odds ratio. Odds ratio focuses on a target class, and ranks documents according to their
relevance to the target or positive class. SMOTE also focuses on a target class by creating
more examples of that class.
7. Summary
The results show that the SMOTE approach can improve the accuracy of classiﬁers for
a minority class. SMOTE provides a new approach to over-sampling. The combination
of SMOTE and under-sampling performs better than plain under-sampling. SMOTE was
tested on a variety of datasets, with varying degrees of imbalance and varying amounts of
data in the training set, thus providing a diverse testbed. The combination of SMOTE and
under-sampling also performs better, based on domination in the ROC space, than varying
loss ratios in Ripper or by varying the class priors in Naive Bayes Classiﬁer: the methods
that could directly handle the skewed class distribution. SMOTE forces focused learning
and introduces a bias towards the minority class. Only for Pima — the least skewed dataset
— does the Naive Bayes Classiﬁer perform better than SMOTE-C4.5. Also, only for the Oil
dataset does the Under-Ripper perform better than SMOTE-Ripper. For the Can dataset,
SMOTE-classiﬁer and Under-classiﬁer ROC curves overlap in the ROC space. For all the
rest of the datasets SMOTE-classiﬁer performs better than Under-classiﬁer, Loss Ratio,
and Naive Bayes. Out of a total of 48 experiments performed, SMOTE-classiﬁer does not
perform the best only for 4 experiments.
The interpretation of why synthetic minority over-sampling improves performance where
as minority over-sampling with replacement does not is fairly straightforward. Consider
the eﬀect on the decision regions in feature space when minority over-sampling is done
by replication (sampling with replacement) versus the introduction of synthetic examples.
With replication, the decision region that results in a classiﬁcation decision for the minority
class can actually become smaller and more speciﬁc as the minority samples in the region are
replicated. This is the opposite of the desired eﬀect. Our method of synthetic over-sampling
works to cause the classiﬁer to build larger decision regions that contain nearby minority
class points. The same reasons may be applicable to why SMOTE performs better than
Ripper’s loss ratio and Naive Bayes; these methods, nonetheless, are still learning from
the information provided in the dataset, albeit with diﬀerent cost information. SMOTE
provides more related minority class samples to learn from, thus allowing a learner to carve
broader decision regions, leading to more coverage of the minority class.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the United States Department of Energy through
the Sandia National Laboratories ASCI VIEWS Data Discovery Program, contract number
DE-AC04-76DO00789. We thank Robert Holte for providing the oil spill dataset used in
their paper. We also thank Foster Provost for clarifying his method of using the Satimage
dataset. We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their various insightful
comments and suggestions.
Chawla, Bowyer, Hall & Kegelmeyer
Appendix A. ROC graphs for Oil Dataset
The following ﬁgures show diﬀerent sets of ROC curves for the oil dataset. Figure 29 (a)
shows the ROC curves for the Oil dataset, as included in the main text; Figure 29(b) shows
the ROC curves without the ROC convex hull; Figure 29(c) shows the two convex hulls,
obtained with and without SMOTE. The ROC convex hull shown by dashed lines and stars
in Figure 29(c), was computed by including Under-C4.5 and Naive Bayes in the family of
ROC curves. The ROC convex hull shown by solid line and small circles in Figure 29(c) was
computed by including 500 SMOTE-C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes in the family of
ROC curves. The ROC convex hull with SMOTE dominates the ROC convex hull without
SMOTE, hence SMOTE-C4.5 contributes more optimal classiﬁers.
Under−C4.5
500 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Under−C4.5
500 SMOTE−C4.5
Naive Bayes
Oil ROC Convex Hulls
Convex Hull with SMOTE
Convex Hull without SMOTE
Figure 29: ROC curves for the Oil Dataset.
(a) ROC curves for SMOTE-C4.5, Under-
C4.5, Naive Bayes, and their ROC convex hull. (b) ROC curves for SMOTE-
C4.5, Under-C4.5, and Naive Bayes. (c) ROC convex hulls with and without