Latent Spaces for Dynamic Movement Primitives
Sebastian Bitzer and Sethu Vijayakumar
Abstract— Dynamic movement primitives (DMPs) have been
proposed as a powerful, robust and adaptive tool for planning
robot trajectories based on demonstrated example movements.
Adaptation of DMPs to new task requirements becomes difﬁcult
when demonstrated trajectories are only available in joint
space, because their parameters do not in general correspond
to variables meaningful for the task. This problem becomes
more severe with increasing number of degrees of freedom and
hence is particularly an issue for humanoid movements. It has
been shown that DMP parameters can directly relate to task
variables, when DMPs are learned in latent spaces resulting
from dimensionality reduction of demonstrated trajectories.
As we show here, however, standard dimensionality reduction
techniques do not in general provide adequate latent spaces
which need to be highly regular.
In this work we concentrate on learning discrete (point-topoint) movements and propose a modiﬁcation of a powerful
nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique (Gaussian Process
Latent Variable Model). Our modiﬁcation makes the GPLVM
more suitable for the use of DMPs by favouring latent spaces
with highly regular structure. Even though in this case the
user has to provide a structure hypothesis we show that its
precise choice is not important in order to achieve good results.
Additionally, we can overcome one of the main disadvantages
of the GPLVM with this modiﬁcation: its dependence on the
initialisation of the latent space. We motivate our approach on
data from a 7-DoF robotic arm and demonstrate its feasibility
on a high-dimensional human motion capture data set.
I. INTRODUCTION
Generating full-body humanoid motion still is an extremely difﬁcult task. The inherent instability of an upright,
2-legged body makes it very hard to generate dynamically
stable movements, but already designing efﬁcient and natural
movements for redundant bodies with many degrees of
freedom kinematically is a challenge for the control engineer.
Consequently it has been proposed to learn movements from
demonstrations . In this scenario we are given examples
of movements which successfully solve the given task and
the robot has to learn these movements and generalise them
to new situations.
The Dynamic Movement Primitive (DMP) framework 
provides representations particularly suited for robot programming by demonstration. DMPs are nonlinear dynamical
systems which are learned such that an example movement is
the attractor of the system. Hence, DMPs are control policies
which can robustly replicate demonstrations. Additionally
DMPs have parameters which allow to change the speed
of the learned dynamics and shift and stretch it in its state
space. These parameters can potentially be used to adapt a
learned movement to new situations. However, when DMPs
are learned in joint space, as originally proposed, it is not
(www.sensopac.org).
( )
Vijayakumar
( )
Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Informatics Forum, 10 Crichton
Street, EH8 9AB, UK
Example application of nonlinear DR: GPLVM learned from 12
demonstrated poses of KHR-1HV humanoid with 19 degrees of freedom on
a lifting task. (a) shows the resulting latent space. (b-e) show the robot in
poses generated from the depicted points in latent space. In (b), the robot
drops the object, because task constraints (hands keep distance) are not
fulﬁlled away from the data.
in general the case that a change in DMP parameters has
an effect meaningful for the given task, or maintains other
desirable properties of the demonstrated movements such
as resolution of null space in a naturally looking way (see
Fig. 2(a)). For low-DoF (degree of freedom) robots, for
which inverse kinematics is easily solvable, a solution is
to learn DMPs in task space where DMP parameters
directly relate to task variables. For full-body humanoid
movements, however, learning how to resolve redundant
degrees of freedom in a natural way is an important aspect
of learning from demonstration.
In earlier work we suggested to use dimensionality
reduction (DR) to infer spaces from movement trajectories
demonstrated in joint space in which DMP parameters can
be related to task variables. This allows us to generate new
motion which fulﬁls different task goals while maintaining the overall style of the demonstrated movements by a
simple change of DMP parameters. While we showed that
application of standard dimensionality reduction methods
can lead to acceptable results (for example see Fig. 1),
experiments also revealed that in many cases resulting latent
spaces are not sufﬁciently regular to be used in combination
with DMPs. This is, in particular, an issue with noisy,
high-dimensional data from human motion capture, but it
can already be observed for motion of a redundant 7-DoF
robotic arm. In we used such a system (the DLR light-
In Proc. 9th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids '09), Dec. 7-10, Paris .
weight robot arm) to extensively evaluate the capability of a
range of dimensionality reduction methods to produce latent
spaces which simplify point-by-point interpolation of robot
poses - a problem less demanding than the one we consider
here. These experiments showed that the usefulness of the
latent space strongly depends on the data set, the method
used and its parameters. Here we extend this analysis to
the case in which we aim to interpolate whole trajectories
by only changing parameters of a learned DMP and show
that no standard DR method gives acceptable results. In
section III, after introducing our formulation of DMPs, we
consequently suggest a modiﬁcation of the Gaussian Process
Latent Variable Model which favours the use of DMPs in
latent space by requiring it to be more regular. We present
results on the DLR data set in section IV-A and ﬁnally
evaluate our approach on human motion capture data in
section IV-B.
II. RELATED WORK
The dynamic movement primitive framework is based on
work presented by Ijspeert , . A similar formulation
with dynamical systems has been used to let a humanoid
perform a drumming task as a combination of discrete
and periodic DMPs. However, there was no robot learning
involved in this study and parameters for the DMPs had to
be found by hand. DMPs have also been used as compact
representations of movements for reinforcement learning
 , . These approaches also aim to adapt a demonstrated
movement to a new situation, but in order to do so they
change the representation of the dynamical systems directly
which leaves their parameters non-interpretable. This means
that for each new situation the representation has to be
tediously learned anew. Recently a reformulation of DMPs
has been proposed which is suited for applying DMPs
in task space and allows for automatic obstacle avoidance.
Potentially this formulation can equally be applied to latent
spaces, but for this study we have chosen to use the formulation presented in section III-A instead.
So far there is only little published work on generating
full-body humanoid movements based on demonstrations.
One reason for this is that it is not clear where the demonstrations are supposed to come from. An apparent possibility
is human motion capture. Even though there are suggestions for ﬁltering human motion to become dynamically
stable humanoid motion , , their assumptions or
computational constraints make general applicability questionable. In Grimes et al. propose to optimise an initial
humanoid trajectory, which roughly corresponds to a human
demonstration, based on predicted sensor feedback. Similarly
the reinforcement learning approaches from above , 
could be used to plan robot movements based on human
demonstrations ofﬂine. In a recent paper Grimes et al.
 use their single trajectory planner presented in to
generate movements for different task parameters. They then
learn a control policy via nonparametric regression which
generalises to a range of task parameters. The idea of this
approach is very similar to ours except that we employ DMPs
as control policies which are in our opinion better suited
for robot control tasks because of their dynamical systems
properties.
Schematic of experimental setup: Given are demonstrations in
joint space (blue). They have corresponding trajectories in task space, but
we do not in general know them. We infer a latent space through DR in
which DMPs are learned. Parameters of DMPs are changed to generate new
trajectories (red) which are translated to joint space through the generative
DR mapping.
Grimes et al. reduce the dimensionality of the humanoid
state representation with PCA. This is a common step which
has computational advantages. In our experience, however,
PCA as a linear method is not able to faithfully represent
joint angle motion in low dimensions. Many nonlinear DR
methods have been proposed (e.g. , ), but in our
application we need to generate motion from the lowdimensional (latent) space which can be done with latent
variable models , , . As basis for our study we
chose the Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model , because of its powerful Gaussian Process mapping and the ease
with which it can be modiﬁed. See section III-B for details
on the GPLVM and its variants. We additionally compare
results for the Gaussian Topographic Mapping (GTM) 
and Unsupervised Kernel Regression (UKR) .
III. METHODS
Fig. 3 shows a schematic of the different spaces involved.
The task space positions (x) are only known in control
experiments. In general we observe joint angles (y) and infer
latent points (z) with dimensionality reduction. We learn
DMPs in latent space (blue, solid line) and change their
parameters to generate new motion (red, dashed line) which
should have a correspondent in task space. We present our
formulation of DMPs below followed by our dimensionality
reduction framework.
A. Dynamic Movement Primitives
We use discrete Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) to
represent goal-directed movements as attractors of nonlinear
dynamical systems. We make minor adaptations of the formulation in to explicitly incorporate modiﬁable start and
end positions. Note that a DMP contains one independent
dynamical system per dimension of the space in which it is
learned - another argument for dimensionality reduction. The
following is a description of a single dynamical system. It
equally applies to all dimensions.
Discrete movements (e.g., reaching) are characterised by a
starting state, z0, some state trajectory and a goal state, g. The
formalisation of such a system is shown in Table I. Ignoring
the details of the modulating function f, this is a linear,
two-dimensional dynamical system with a single, attracting
stable point at [g, 0]. f is used to shape the trajectory of the
dynamical system between z0 and g. It can be represented
as a weighted sum of RBF basis functions which depend
on the state, ξ, of a canonical system that converges to
0. The number of basis functions, n and their width and
(a) DMP in joint space
(b) DMP in latent space
Inverse kinematics for 7 DLR arm joints (function from task space x and y positions to joint angles). 2(a) The blue trajectory is generated from
a DMP learned on demonstrated joint data. Red trajectories are generated from the same DMP, but with changed parameters: they do not lie on the task
manifold and have a different shape. 2(b) Same as 2(a) except that DMP is learned and modulated in latent space resulting from the suggested DR method:
trajectories lie on task manifold and have desired shape.
centres, hi, ci, are chosen a priori (wide range of choices
gives good results). Given a complete movement [z, ˙z, ¨z], the
weights, wi, of the nonlinear component are learned. Once
the movement is learned (or encoded as a DMP with start
0 and goal g∗), we can change the start state and goal
to produce a qualitatively equivalent dynamics of motion in
different parts of the state space of z.
DEFINITION OF DISCRETE MOVEMENT PRIMITIVES. THE DYNAMIC
VARIABLE GOVERNING THE NONLINEARITY, ξ, CONVERGES TO 0.
αv, βv, αξ HAVE TO BE CHOSEN A PRIORI.
τ ˙v = αv(βv(g −z) −v) + g −z0
i=1 Ψi(ξ)wi
Ψi(ξ) = exp
−hi(ξ −ci)2
The parameters resulting from this formulation are τ, z0
and g.1 τ can be used to speed up or slow down the
dynamical system. z0 sets a desired start state and g a desired
goal. By adapting z0 and g new trajectories with the same dynamics can easily be generated without need for relearning or
expensive computations. In experiments we learn a DMP on
one trajectory, modulate it to ﬁt the other trajectories in the
data set by changing z0 and g to the corresponding, known
values and interpolate new trajectories by interpolating z0
and g of learned and modulated trajectories.
1αv, βv, αξ are parameters governing the dynamics of the DMP which
we keep ﬁxed
B. Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models
The GPLVM learns one Gaussian Process (GP) 
mapping from latent to data space per dimension of the data
space, but with a common kernel based on the latent points.
The positions of the latent points, Z, are found by minimising
the negative GP data (Y) marginal log-likelihood
Z = arg min
−log P(Y|Z)
which serves as the objective function for the dimensionality
reduction. Modiﬁcations of the GPLVM are mostly based
on the adaptation of this function. For example, Lawrence
and Moore deﬁne hierarchical priors on Z with suitable
adaptation of the likelihood to explicitly model hierarchical
dependencies in the data dimensions. Wang et al. 
introduce a dynamics prior on Z deﬁned by an autoregressive
GP-inspired mapping between consecutive latent points to
achieve smooth transitions between points in a sequence
(they call their models Gaussian Process Dynamical Models
- GPDM). Unfortunately our experiments show that this
kind of model is still not sufﬁcient for generalisation of
DMPs in latent space. Similarly, Lawrence and Quinonero-
Candela try to strengthen neighbourhood relations between points by constraining the mapping from data to latent
space to be smooth as well. Consequently, the modiﬁcation
we present below is aimed at further constraining the latent
positions in a useful way and thereby, regularising the
GPLVM problem. A similar approach has been chosen in
 where the focus is on periodic latent spaces, though.
1) Simple Sequence Prior: The basic idea of the simple
sequence prior is to increase the structural constraints on
the latent space by requiring that all observed sequences are
translated versions of a template. This directly relates to how
we use the DMPs: the dynamics of a DMP and therefore the
shape of the trajectory it produces is learned on one example.
Changes in z0 and g move the DMP in its space, but its
dynamics stays ﬁxed. Consequently we amend (1) with
Z = arg min
−log P(Y|Z)P(¯Z)
where ¯Z contains the latent positions of the template sequence, P(¯Z) is an autoregressive mapping as in and
P(Zs|¯Z) is a GP mapping from template sequence to latent
positions of observed sequence s. This mapping is constrained to be a translation with additive noise, i.e. GPs
with mean function mi(¯z) = ¯zi and covariance function
ki(¯z,¯z′) = 1 + δ(¯z,¯z′)σ2 where i is an index to latent
dimensions, because we have one GP per dimension, and
δ(x, x′) = 1 if and only if x = x′. This can be derived
from the weight-space view of GP regression starting with
z = A¯z+b = Wˆz, ˆz = [¯z, 1]⊤and setting A to the identity
In this framework variables for the template, ¯Z, and noise,
σ, need to be added to the optimisation, but also the latent
positions are more constrained. ¯Z can be initialised with the
mean of the initialisations of the observed sequences. This
formulation allows for learning of the template sequence
during the optimisation process. Unfortunately we found in
early experiments that this procedure does not usually lead
to success, because the learned templates do not exhibit the
desired temporal structure. Alternatively we suggest to ﬁx
the template to a predeﬁned sequence. Similarly allowing
σ to be adapted during optimisation does not give desired
results, because the model tends to explain the data with a
large amount of noise. See section IV-B.2 for a discussion
on choices for ¯Z and σ. With these variables ﬁxed the above
formulation simpliﬁes to a Gaussian prior over the latent
positions. P(¯Z) then is constant during optimisation and
P(zsi|¯zi) ∼exp
2(zsi −¯zi)⊤K−1(zsi −¯zi)
where zsi is a vector containing the positions of sequence
s in latent dimension i and K is the covariance matrix
described above with ones everywhere except in the diagonal
where we have 1+σ. For small σ this prior strongly favours
latent representations of demonstrated sequences which have
equal shape to the template sequence and are close to it, but
their exact position and ordering among each other is not
constrained.
The deﬁnition of the prior assumes that all sequences
contain the same number of points as the template. This
criterion could easily be relaxed by having different length
templates for the different sequences (but still equal shape at
the same position). In this paper we have alternatively chosen
to subsample demonstrated human sequences such that all
have the same number of data points. Because movements
are usually sufﬁciently dense sampled, interpolating within
a trajectory does not lead to signiﬁcant errors.
In the following we shall call a GPLVM with simple
sequence prior a SS-GPLVM.
7-DoF DLR robot arm with Schunk Hand.
2) Probabilistic error feedback: Initially we also tried
another modiﬁcation which is based on the error between
original trajectories in joint space and their correspondents
generated by DMPs in latent space and then mapped to
joint space. We implemented this by adding a probabilistic
term based on the error to eq. (1). The idea is that the
resulting gradient with respect to the latent points automatically contains a component which moves the latent
points into positions compatible with the DMPs without
making further assumptions. Unfortunately we found that
this modiﬁcation scales badly with the number of data points,
but even more problematic is that instead of helping the
GPLVM to overcome local optima issues through additional
regularisation it makes the problem more severe and the
optimisation converges prematurely.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
The robotic data in the following section allows us to
evaluate the generalisation capabilities of our method which
motivates its application to high-dimensional movement systems such as the human motion capture data in section IV-B.
A. DLR LWR-III
These experiments are an extension of the experiments
presented in , please see there for details of the setup. In
short, we deﬁne a 2-dimensional task space for the DLR
LWR-III (see Fig. 4) which consists of straight upwards
movements of its end-effector along a line (see Fig. 5
for a visualisation). The DLR LWR-III is a robotic arm
with 7DoFs, i.e. it has 1 redundant DoF. The redundancy
is resolved in a consistent way in the inverse kinematics
of the robot. We evaluate generated movements according
to whether they follow the expected trajectory in the task
space and whether they resolve redundancy in the deﬁned
way. If they do within a strict error margin, we say that
they are successfully generated. In particular, we evaluate
whether we can interpolate movements from demonstrations.
In contrast to interpolations are not done pose-for-pose,
but by interpolating z0 and g of a learned DMP2 between
the demonstrated trajectories. In total this data set contains
36 upward movements. To investigate how close movements
need to be for interpolation to work we test our method by
gradually increasing the distance between 2 demonstrated
movements. This is implemented by skipping an increasing
number of movements during selection of the data set. We
2the DMP is always learned on the 1st demonstrated trajectory in these
experiments
DLR arm data set. Blue points: data trajectories, red points:
trajectories which need to be interpolated. Data set corresponds to column
5 in Fig. 6.
call the number of skipped movements the interpolation
width. Fig. 5 depicts an interpolation width of 5.
Fig. 6 summarises the accumulated results of our experiments. We tested learning and interpolation of DMPs in joint
space (1st row) and in latent spaces resulting from different
dimensionality reduction techniques (subsequent rows). Except for PCA and the GTM all tested techniques depend on
the initialisation of latent points before optimisation. We used
6 initialisations (in that order): parallel lines3, random, PCA,
Isomap, LLE and Laplacian Eigenmaps. Our results show
that no previously proposed DR technique produces latent
spaces in which interpolation of DMP parameters generates
trajectories which correspond to the desired trajectories in the
underlying task space. Our SS-GPLVM4, on the other hand,
reaches a high percentage of successfull interpolations up to
an interpolation width of 5 and partially beyond. We stress
that this is a measure for how well the found latent spaces
generalise to new movements of the same kind which we can
only evaluate in this controlled robotic setup. Furthermore
we note that while the GPLVM is known for being highly
dependent on the initialisation of the latent points we achieve
these results even with a random initialisation for the SS-
Fig. 2 illustrates the problems involved in this data set.
Depicted is the inverse kinematics function for the 7 DLR
joints that would need to be learned, if the task space coordinates were known. Fig. 2(a) shows the result of learning a
DMP and varying its parameters in joint space. Due to the
nonlinearities involved newly generated movements do not
follow the task constraints and exhibit different dynamics.
If the DMP is learned and modulated in a SS-GPLVM
latent space as in Fig. 2(b) (interpolation width=5), however,
generated movements ﬁt very well to the desired.
3an ad-hoc initialisation motivated by the fact that we are handling
discrete movements
4 ¯Z ﬁxed to a line, σ2 = 0.001
interpolation width
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 p
Ratio of successfully interpolated trajectories using DMPs. 1
means all trajectories successfully interpolated. First line: DMPs operated
in joint space, no dimensionality reduction. For GPLVM variants and UKR
6 different initialisations of latent points are tested (shown in this order):
ad-hoc parallel lines, random, PCA, Isomap, LLE, LE. Last column: p-value
for hypothesis that ’The mean ratio of successful interpolations is smaller
or equal to the corresponding mean of the joint space interpolation’.
B. Human motion capture data
Encouraged by the results on the DLR data we apply
our method to a data set of 3 punches executed by the
same individual. We selected the punches from a motion
capture database containing several martial arts movements
requiring that they look similar while exhibiting variation in
a prominent feature. In particular, the punches differ in the
height of the trajectory of the punch hand. The movements
have not been recorded with this application in mind and
exhibit considerable more variation apart from the punch
heights. Our aim is to generate similarly looking punches
with intermediate punch heights.
The punches are represented as sequences of 57 dimensional poses consisting of 19 3D joint rotations represented
with Euler angles in radians. The root node of the skeleton is
ﬁxed at the origin. We do not use constraints about physically
plausible joint rotations during optimisation. Because the
simple sequence prior requires sequences with equal length,
we subsample 2 of the sequences with cubic spline interpolation from 27 and 37 poses, respectively, to 33 poses. This has
no impact on the visual quality of the motions. The resulting
3 sequences all contain 33 poses which corresponds to 74.1,
53.5 and 60 poses per second, respectively. Consequently
we do dimensionality reduction on a data set with 99 57dimensional data points.
Again we want to interpolate between demonstrated movements. In contrast to the DLR data, however, we do not
have ground truth in this case. We still can evaluate: a)
The accuracy of the DR generative mapping, that is the
error between a data point in joint space and its reconstruction from the corresponding latent point by means of the
generative mapping (red arrow in Fig. 3). We call this the
reconstruction error er. b) The discrepancy between a data
sequence and the corresponding sequence generated from a
modulated DMP, that is the DMP is learned on a different
sequence, but its parameters z0 and g are set to the values
of the target sequence. An error occurs, when the dynamics
(shape) of the learned sequence differs from the dynamics of
the target sequence. We call the error the modulation error
and it can be evaluated in latent space (eLS
m ) or joint space
m ) after making use of the DR generative mapping. eJS
a combined measure of er and eLS
m . Both, the reconsruction
and modulation errors, only measure the ﬁt of the model
to the training data, but they give us a lower bound on the
interpolation performance that we expect. In other words,
if the modulation error is high, interpolation will not give
desired results either. All errors are given as normalised mean
square errors and reported as nMSE±standard deviation.
1) Existing dimensionality reduction techniques: First we
evaluate the use of DMPs in joint space. The modulation
error is eJS
= 0.75 ± 1.11. This is unacceptably high
and, for example, means that some joints rotate for several
periods. The resulting movement is completely unnatural.
Because of its ease of use, PCA is a popular tool for preprocessing of motion capture data, but its representational
power on this kind of sparse data sets is actually weak. The
data reconstruction error for a 2D latent space is huge at
er = 11.05 ± 16.78. By increasing the number of latent
dimensions the PCA representation becomes more accurate
and er decreases. For a 10D latent space er drops to an
acceptable 0.04 ± 0.05 while explaining 99% of the data
variance. The modulation error, however, stays high for all
latent dimensions (for 10D eJS
m = 1.01 ± 1.18) meaning that
PCA is no suitable DR method for our application.
PCA is the standard method for initialisation of the
GPLVM. Additionally we use the same initialisations as
with the DLR data set above. For Isomap (k=8), LLE (k=8)
and LE (k=6, σw = 0.19) we have chosen parameters by
searching for parameters leading to the smallest modulation error in latent space while requiring that the latent
dimensions and sequences have comparable scale. In the
random initialisation all points are distributed as N(0,1). The
resulting conﬁgurations of latent points for all initialisations
are depicted in Fig. 7.
The GPLVM latent spaces are highly dependent on the
chosen initialisation. We believe that the reason for this
is that the capacity of the GPLVM method exceeds the
complexity of the data. Even though based on probabilistic,
nonparametric methods, the core procedure of the GPLVM
is a maximum likelihood optimisation on, in our case, 202
highly nonlinearly related variables which is prone to run into
local minima. This can be seen in Table II where we compare
modulation errors eJS
m for the different initialisations and
methods. In our experiments, we learn the kernel parameters
of the GPLVM, but do not learn output scales, because we
ﬁnd that this leads to bad results with some initialisations.
For the same reason we do not learn the dynamics parameters
in the GPDM. We deﬁne the GPDM dynamics on the differences of the latent points and use a rbf kernel with inverse
width 1, variance 0.01 and white noise 1e-6. We also test
a back constrained GPLVM for which we use kernel based
regression (kbr) back constraints with rbf kernels with width
5. The implementations of all the GPLVM-based methods
are either identical to or based on code generously provided
by Neil Lawrence. We do not use sparse approximations and
(b) random
(d) Isomap
Different initialisations that we use on the mocap data. Green: high
punch, blue: low punch, red: very low punch.
(a) GPLVM, Isomap init
(b) simple prior, random init
Selected latent spaces. Dots: Latent positions of data, colour coded
as in Fig. 7. Solid lines: trajectories produced from DMPs, yellow: learned
DMPs, dark grey: modulated DMPs. The shading corresponds to the log of
the GP posterior output conﬁdences at this point.
set the maximum number of gradient descent steps to 500
which is usually reached.
Although the data reconstruction error for GPLVM based
approaches is usually very small (in the order of 10−6),
Table II shows that neither a standard GPLVM, a GPLVM
with back constraints, or a GPDM can produce latent spaces
sufﬁciently regular to allow for the representation of all
punches with a single DMP. As an example, we have plotted
the best latent space (GPLVM with Isomap initialisation)
together with the learned and modulated DMPs in Fig. 8(a).
2) Simple Sequence Prior: Table II also shows results for
the SS-GPLVM. It clearly outperforms all other methods
in terms of joint space modulation error. Good results are
largely independent of initialisation used as was already the
case for the DLR data set. The movements generated from
the modulated DMPs are very similar to the original movements. For these results we ﬁxed template positions ¯Z to the
mean of the lines initialisation and set σ2 = 0.001. The data
reconstruction error is very low at 0.003·10−3±0.005·10−3.
Not learning the parameters of the prior leaves the user
with making a choice. How difﬁcult is it to make that choice?
latent dim 1
latent dim 2
simple sequence prior (random init)
noise variance, σ2
modulation error (nMSE)
(a) Parameter selection
(b) Interpolation
SS-GPLVM results. (a) Inﬂuence of parameter setting on performance. Left: different choices of templates for the prior. Right: Dependence of
modulation error on choice of noise variance in prior for templates shown on left. (b) Trajectories of punch hand for interpolated DMP trajectories in latent
space of Fig. 8(b). Shown are: original data of high and very low punches (black dots), original data of low punch (grey dots), DMP trajectory learned on
high punch (blue crosses), DMP trajectory modulated to ﬁt very low punch (red crosses) and interpolated DMP trajectories (dashed lines).
SUMMARY OF RESULTS (MODULATION ERROR IN JOINT SPACE: eJS
m =NMSE±σ OF TRAJECTORIES GENERATED FROM DMPS MODULATED IN LATENT
SPACE). FOR COMPARISON, WITHOUT DR: 0.75 ± 1.11, WITH PCA: 5.38 ± 7.02
GPLVM+back
0.233 ± 0.372
0.521 ± 0.885
0.241 ± 0.429
0.022 ± 0.038
2.080 ± 2.742
0.324 ± 0.577
12.461 ± 13.813
0.037 ± 0.061
0.649 ± 1.030
0.422 ± 0.743
0.541 ± 0.831
0.058 ± 0.106
0.221 ± 0.329
0.748 ± 1.349
0.411 ± 0.672
0.040 ± 0.080
1.304 ± 1.836
0.459 ± 0.796
1.043 ± 1.483
0.019 ± 0.033
0.708 ± 0.963
0.894 ± 1.315
0.419 ± 0.645
0.023 ± 0.043
For the given template sequence we investigate the inﬂuence
of the noise variance, σ2. Fig. 9(a) shows the evolution of the
modulation error for different settings of σ2 and the random
initialisation. We see that we get low errors as long as we
choose σ2 low enough. The exact choice is not important.
The different graphs in the ﬁgure correspond to different
choices for the template (¯Z in eq. (2)) as shown in Fig.
9(a). Even though results with one choice of template are
not acceptable, the data suggests that the exact choice of
template is not important either.
A low modulation error eJS
m only guarantees that we
can use modulation of a DMP to accurately reconstruct all
demonstrated movements, but it does not guarantee that a
DMP with interpolated parameters also produces a movement that we would regard as interpolated with respect to the
desired task. In particular, in our punch example, a movement
interpolated between a high and low punch should result in a
punch with intermediate height. Fig. 9(b) illustrates the result
of such an interpolation experiment. We linearly interpolate
z0 and g between the high and very low punches and generate
new trajectories in the latent space shown in Fig. 8(b). The
ﬁgure depicts the punch hand trajectories of 9 interpolated
punches together with the original data points and the learned
and modulated DMP trajectories. The DMP is learned on the
high punch.
There are a few points to note. 1) The trajectories result
from equidistantly interpolated start and end points, but they
are denser towards the very low punch. This means that the
resulting latent space is still not linear with respect to the
punch height, but it is nevertheless possible to very easily
generate a continuum of punches between two examples. 2)
The order of the punch sequences in latent space does not
correspond to the punch heights. In particular, the very low
punch is closer to the high punch than the low punch. Also
none of the interpolations directly ﬁts to the low punch. We
believe that this is a consequence of the data resulting from
differences in style of execution of the punches.
V. DISCUSSION
In this paper we point out that the parameters of discrete
DMPs which are learned in joint space, as originally suggested, do not have a correspondence with underlying task
variables. Indeed we show that a change of these parameters
produces movements which neither follow the constraints
set by the task, nor the consistent resolution of redundant
degrees of freedom. Following previous work we suggest to
use dimensionality reduction to provide a representation of
demonstrated movements which overcomes these problems
by making parameters of DMPs interpretable with respect
to task variables while at the same time capturing regular
structure in the data. Experiments, however, show that application of standard dimensionality reduction methods is not
sufﬁcient to generate meaningful new movements by only an
adaptation of DMP parameters. Hence we suggest to modify
the GPLVM by incorporating a simple sequence prior which
strongly favours latent spaces reﬂecting the temporal and
spatial structure of point-to-point movements (SS-GPLVM).
In a control experiment on data from a 7-DoF robot arm
we demonstrate that only DMPs modulated in a SS-GPLVM
latent space generate movements which accurately follow
the expected trajectories as deﬁned by task and null space
constraints. As the results are obtained for interpolated DMP
parameters, we can conclude that the proposed method also
generalises to unseen movements which were not present in
the data. The experiment also indicates that demonstrated
movements can not be arbitrarily far away from each other.
This is a well-known problem for dimensionality reduction
methods. Note, however, that the SS-GPLVM still compares
favourably to the other tested methods.
For human motion capture data we observe very similar
results: we can show that a change of DMP parameters
leads to unrealistic movements when the DMP is learned
directly in joint space or a latent space resulting from
standard dimensionality reduction methods. If the DMP is
applied in a SS-GPLVM latent space, however, the original
movements can be reconstructed just by changing DMP
parameters. As we are missing ground truth in this data set,
it is not possible to quantitatively evaluate movements generated through interpolation of DMP parameters. Instead we
present interpolated trajectories which at least qualitatively
correspond to our expectations.
We point out that good results can only be achieved with
the simple sequence prior, if its parameters are ﬁxed a priori.
We also demonstrate, however, that making this choice is
easy and that a wide range of parameter settings works well.
Especially, the high tolerance to changes in the prior template
is surprising, because it is the main factor determining the
shape of the latent space. This suggests that the GP mapping
from latent to joint space is so powerful that almost any latent
space can serve as a reliable representation for the data. This
hypothesis is backed up by the low data reconstruction errors
for all GPLVM methods and initialisations. To control the
tradeoff between highly regular structure and generalisation
capabilities in latent space we suggest to set the noise
parameter in the SS-GPLVM to the maximum value that
gives acceptable modulation error.
In conclusion we present evidence that the SS-GPLVM
provides latent spaces that allow fast, online generation of a
continuum of new movements by a simple change of DMP
parameters based on a small number of similar demonstrations. It is therefore a useful tool for robot programming by
demonstration.