Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
ADVERSARIAL MANIPULATION OF
DEEP REPRESENTATIONS
Sara Sabour ∗1, Yanshuai Cao∗1,2, Fartash Faghri1,2 & David J. Fleet1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada
2 Architech Labs, Toronto, Canada
{saaraa,caoy,faghri,fleet}@cs.toronto.edu
We show that the image representations in a deep neural network (DNN) can be
manipulated to mimic those of other natural images, with only minor, imperceptible perturbations to the original image. Previous methods for generating adversarial images focused on image perturbations designed to produce erroneous class
labels. Here we instead concentrate on the internal layers of DNN representations,
to produce a new class of adversarial images that differs qualitatively from others.
While the adversary is perceptually similar to one image, its internal representation appears remarkably similar to a different image, from a different class and
bearing little if any apparent similarity to the input. Further, they appear generic
and consistent with the space of natural images. This phenomenon demonstrates
the possibility to trick a DNN to confound almost any image with any other chosen
image, and raises questions about DNN representations, as well as the properties
of natural images themselves.
INTRODUCTION
Recent papers have shown that deep neural networks (DNNs) for image classiﬁcation can be fooled,
often using relatively simple methods to generate so-called adversarial images . The existence of adversarial images is important, not just because they reveal
weaknesses in learned representations and classiﬁers, but because 1) they provide opportunities
to explore fundamental questions about the nature of DNNs, e.g., whether they are inherent in the
network structure per se or in the learned models, and 2) such adversarial images might be harnessed
to improve learning algorithms that yield better generalization and robustness .
Research on adversarial images to date has focused mainly on disrupting classiﬁcation, i.e., on
algorithms that produce images classiﬁed with labels that are patently inconsistent with human perception. Given the large, potentially unbounded regions of feature space associated with a given
class label, it may not be surprising that it is easy to disrupt classiﬁcation. In this paper, in constrast
to such label adversaries, we consider a new, somewhat more incidious class of adversarial images,
called feature adversaries, which are confused with other images not just in the class label, but in
their internal representations as well.
Given a source image, a target (guide) image, and a trained DNN, we ﬁnd small perturbations to the
source image that produce an internal representation that is remarkably similar to that of the guide
image, and hence far from that of the source. With this new class of adversarial phenomena we
demonstrate that it is possible to fool a DNN to confound almost any image with any other chosen
image. We further show that the deep representations of such adversarial images are not outliers
per se. Rather, they appear generic, indistinguishable from representations of natural images at
multiple layers of a DNN. This phenomena raises questions about DNN representations, as well as
the properties of natural images themselves.
∗The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
RELATED WORK
Several methods for generating adversarial images have appeared in recent years. Nguyen et al.
 describe an evolutionary algorithm to generate images comprising 2D patterns that are classiﬁed by DNNs as common objects with high conﬁdence (often 99%). While interesting, such
adversarial images are quite different from the natural images used as training data. Because natural images only occupy a small volume of the space of all possible images, it is not surprising that
discriminative DNNs trained on natural images have trouble coping with such out-of-sample data.
Szegedy et al. focused on adversarial images that appear natural. They used gradient-based
optimization on the classiﬁcation loss, with respect to the image perturbation, ϵ. The magnitude
of the perturbation is penalized ensure that the perturbation is not perceptually salient. Given an
image I, a DNN classiﬁer f, and an erroneous label ℓ, they ﬁnd the perturbation ϵ that minimizes
loss(f(I + ϵ), ℓ) + c∥ϵ∥2. Here, c is chosen by line-search to ﬁnd the smallest ϵ that achieves
f(I + ϵ) = ℓ. The authors argue that the resulting adversarial images occupy low probability
“pockets” in the manifold, acting like “blind spots” to the DNN. The adversarial construction in our
paper extends the approach of Szegedy et al. . In Sec. 3, we use gradient-based optimization
to ﬁnd small image perturbations. But instead of inducing misclassiﬁcation, we induce dramatic
changes in the internal DNN representation.
Later work by Goodfellow et al. showed that adversarial images are more common, and can
be found by taking steps in the direction of the gradient of loss(f(I + ϵ), ℓ). Goodfellow et al.
 also show that adversarial examples exist for other models, including linear classiﬁers. They
argue that the problem arises when models are “too linear”. Fawzi et al. later propose a more
general framework to explain adversarial images, formalizing the intuition that the problem occurs
when DNNs and other models are not sufﬁciently “ﬂexible” for the given classiﬁcation task.
In Sec. 4, we show that our new category of adversarial images exhibits qualitatively different properties from those above. In particular, the DNN representations of our adversarial images are very
similar to those of natural images. They do not appear unnatural in any obvious way, except for the
fact that they remain inconsistent with human perception.
ADVERSARIAL IMAGE GENERATION
Let Is and Ig denote the source and guide images. Let φk be the mapping from an image to its
internal DNN representation at layer k. Our goal is to ﬁnd a new image, Iα, such that the Euclidian
distance between φk(Iα) and φk(Ig) is as small as possible, while Iα remains close to the source Is.
More precisely, Iα is deﬁned to be the solution to a constrained optimization problem:
Iα = arg min
∥φk(I) −φk(Ig) ∥2
subject to ∥I −Is∥∞< δ
The constraint on the distance between Iα and Is is formulated in terms of the L∞norm to limit the
maximum deviation of any single pixel color to δ. The goal is to constrain the degree to which the
perturbation is perceptible. While the L∞norm is not the best available measure of human visual
discriminability ), it is superior to the L2 norm often
used by others.
Rather than optimizing δ for each image, we ﬁnd that a ﬁxed value of δ = 10 (out of 255) produces compelling adversarial images with negligible perceptual distortion. Further, it works well
with different intermediate layers, different networks and most images. We only set δ larger when
optimizing lower layers, close to the input (e.g., see Fig. 5). As δ increases distortion becomes perceptible, but there is little or no perceptible trace of the guide image in the distortion. For numerical
optimization, we use l-BFGS-b, with the inequality (2) expressed as a box constraint around Is.
Figure 1 shows nine adversarial images generated in this way, all using the well-known BVLC Caffe
Reference model (Caffenet) . Each row in Fig. 1 shows a source, a guide, and three
adversarial images along with their differences from the corresponding source. The adversarial
examples were optimized with different perturbation bounds (δ), and using different layers, namely
FC7 (fully connected level 7), P5 (pooling layer 5), and C3 (convolution layer 3). Inspecting the
adversarial images, one can see that larger values of δ allow more noticeable perturbations. That
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Figure 1: Each row shows examples of adversarial images, optimized using different layers of Caffenet (FC7, P5, and C3), and different values of δ = (5, 10, 15). Beside each adversarial image is
the difference between its corresponding source image.
said, we have found no natural images in which the guide image is perceptible in the adversarial
image. Nor is there a signiﬁcant amount of salient structure readily visible in the difference images.
While the class label was not an explicit factor in the optimization, we ﬁnd that class labels assigned
to adversarial images by the DNN are almost always that of the guide. For example, we took
100 random source-guide pairs of images from Imagenet ILSVRC data , and
applied optimization using layer FC7 of Caffenet, with δ = 10. We found that class labels assigned
to adversarial images were never equal to those of source images. Instead, in 95% of cases they
matched the guide class. This remains true for source images from training, validation, and test
ILSVRC data.
We found a similar pattern of behavior with other networks and datasets, including AlexNet
 , GoogleNet , and VGG CNN-S , all trained on the Imagenet ILSVRC dataset. We also used AlexNet trained on the Places205
dataset, and on a hybrid dataset comprising 205 scene classes and 977 classes from ImageNet . In all cases, using 100 random source-guide pairs the class labels assigned to the adversarial images do not match the source. Rather, in 97% to 100% of all cases the predicted class
label is that of the guide.
Like other approaches to generating adversarial images ), we ﬁnd that
those generated on one network are usually misclassiﬁed by other networks Using the same 100
source-guide pairs with each of the models above, we ﬁnd that, on average, 54% of adversarial
images obtained from one network are misclassiﬁed by other networks. That said, they are usually
not consistently classiﬁed with the same label as the guide on different netowrks.
We next turn to consider internal representations – do they resemble those of the source, the guide, or
some combination of the two? One way to probe the internal representations, following Mahendran
& Vedaldi , is to invert the mapping, thereby reconstructing images from internal representations at speciﬁc layers. The top panel in Fig. 2 shows reconstructed images for a source-guide pair.
The Input row displays a source (left), a guide (right) and adervarisal images optimized to match
representations at layers FC7, P5 and C3 of Caffenet (middle). Subsequent rows show reconstructions from the internal representations of these ﬁve images, again from layers C3, P5 and FC7. Note
how lower layers bear more similarity to the source, while higher layers resemble the guide. When
optimized using C3, the reconstructions from C3 shows a mixture of source and guide. In almost
all cases we ﬁnd that internal representations begin to mimic the guide at the layer targeted by the
optimization. These reconstructions suggest that human perception and the DNN representations of
these adversarial images are clearly at odds with one another.
The bottom panel of Fig. 2 depicts FC7 and P5 activation patterns for the source and guide images
in Fig. 2, along with those for their corresponding adversarial images. We note that the adversarial
activations are sparse and much more closely resemble the guide encoding than the source encoding.
The supplementary material includes several more examples of adversarial images, their activation
patterns, and reconstructions from intermediate layers.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
FC7 Advers.
P5 Advers.
Figure 2: (Top Panel) The top row shows a source (left), a guide (right), and three adversarial images
(middle), optimized using layers FC7, P5, and C3 of Caffenet. The next three rows show images
obtained by inverting the DNN mapping, from layers C3, P5, and FC7 respectively . (Lower Panel) Activation patterns are shown at layer FC7 for the source, guide and
FC7 adversarial above, and at layer P5 for the source, guide and P5 adversarial image above.
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We investigate further properties of adversarial images by asking two questions. To what extent
do internal representations of adversarial images resemble those of the respective guides, and are
the representations unnatural in any obvious way? To answer these questions we focus mainly on
Caffenet, with random pairs of source-guide images drawn from the ImageNet ILSVRC datasets.
SIMILARITY TO THE GUIDE REPRESENTATION
We ﬁrst report quantitative measures of proximity between the source, guide, and adversarial image encodings at intermediate layers. Surprisingly, despite the constraint that forces adversarial and
source images to remain perceptually indistinguishable, the intermediate representations of the adversarial images are much closer to guides than source images. More interestingly, the adversarial
representations are often nearest neighbors of their respective guides. We ﬁnd this is true for a
remarkably wide range of natural images.
For optimizations at layer FC7, we test on a dataset comprising over 20,000 source-guide pairs,
sampled from training, test and validation sets of ILSVRC, plus some images from Wikipedia to
increase diversity. For layers with higher dimensionality (e.g., P5), for computational expedience,
we use a smaller set of 2,000 pairs. Additional details about how images are sampled can be found in
the supplementary material. To simplify the exposition in what follows, we use s, g and α to denote
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
(a) d(α,g)/d(s,g)
(b) d(α,g)
(c) d(α,s)
Figure 3: Histogram of the Euclidean distances between FC7 adversarial encodings (α) and corresponding source (s) and guide (g), for optimizations targetting FC7. Here, d(x, y) is the distance
between x and y, d(s) denotes the average pairwise distances between points from images of the
same class as the source, and d1(g) is the average distance to the nearest neighbor encoding among
images with the same class as the guide. Histograms aggregate over all source-guide pairs.
DNN representations of source, guide and adversarial images, whenever there is no confusion about
the layer of the representations.
Euclidean Distance:
As a means of quantifying the qualitative results in Fig. 2, for a large ensemble of source-guide pairs, all optimized at layer FC7, Fig. 3(a) shows a histogram of the ratio of
Euclidean distance between adversarial α and guide g in FC7, to the distance between source s and
guide g in FC7. Ratios less than 0.5 indicate that the adversarial FC7 encoding is closer to g than s.
While one might think that the L∞norm constraint on the perturbation will limit the extent to which
adversarial encodings can deviate from the source, we ﬁnd that the optimization fails to reduce the
FC7 distance ratio to less than 0.8 in only 0.1% of pairs when δ = 5. Figure 5 below shows that if
we relax the L∞bound on the deviation from the source image, then α is even closer to g, and that
adversarial encodings become closer to g as one goes from low to higher layers of a DNN.
Figure 3(b) compares the FC7 distances between α and g to the average FC7 distance between
representations of all ILSVRC training images from the same class as the guide and their FC7
nearest neighbors (NN). Not only is α often the 1-NN of g, but the distance between α and g is
much smaller than the distance between other points and their NN in the same class. Fig. 3(c) shows
that the FC7 distance between α and s is relatively large compared to typical pairwise distances
between FC7 encodings of images of the source class. Only 8% of adversarial images (at δ = 10)
are closer to their source than the average pairwise FC7 distance within the source class.
Intersection and Average Distance to Nearest Neighbors:
Looking at one’s nearest neighbors
provides another measure of similarity. It is useful when densities of points changes signiﬁcantly
through feature space, in which case Euclidean distance may be less meaningful. To this end we
quantify similarity through rank statistics on near neighbors. We take the average distance to a
point’s K NNs as a scalar score for the point. We then rank that point along with all other points of
the same label class within the training set. As such, the rank is a non-parametric transformation of
average distance, but independant of the unit of distance. We denote the rank of a point x as rK(x);
we use K = 3 below. Since α is close to g by construction, we exclude g when ﬁnding NNs for
adversarial points α.
Table 1 shows 3NN intersection as well as the difference in rank between adversarial and guide
encodings, ∆r3(α, g) = r3(α) −r3(g). When α is close enough to g, we expect the intersection
to be high, and rank differences to be small in magnitude. As shown in Table 1, in most cases they
share exactly the same 3NN; and in at least 50% of cases their rank is more similar than 90% of data
points in that class. These results are for sources and guides taken from the ILSVRC training set.
The same statistics are observed for data from test or validation sets.
SIMILARITY TO NATURAL REPRESENTATIONS
Having established that internal representations of adversarial images (α) are close to those of guides
(g), we then ask, to what extent are they typical of natural images? That is, in the vicinity of g, is α
an inlier, with the same characteristics as other points in the neighborhood? We answer this question
by examining two neighborhood properties: 1) a probabilistic parametric measure giving the log
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
∆r3 median, [min, max] (%)
CaffeNet 
−5.98, [−64.69, 0.00]
AlexNet 
−5.64, [−38.39, 0.00]
GoogleNet 
pool5/7 × 7 s1
−1.94, [−12.87, 0.10]
VGG CNN S 
−3.34, [−26.34, 0.00]
Places205 AlexNet 
−1.24, [−18.20, 8.04]
Places205 Hybrid 
−1.25, [−8.96, 8.29]
Table 1: Results for comparison of nearest neighbors of the adversarial and guide. We randomly
select 100 pairs of guide and source images such that the guide is classiﬁed correctly and the source
is classiﬁed to a different class. The optimization is done for a maximum of 500 iterations, with
δ = 10. The statistics are in percentiles.
likelihood of a point relative to the local manifold at g; 2) a geometric non-parametric measure
inspired by high dimensional outlier detection methods.
For the analysis that follows, let NK(x) denote the set of K NNs of point x. Also, let Nref be
a set of reference points comprising 15 random points from N20(g), and let Nc be the remaining
“close” NNs of the guide, Nc = N20(g) \ Nref. Finally, let Nf = N50(g) \ N40(g) be the set
of “far” NNs of the guide. The reference set Nref is used for measurement construction, while α,
Nc and Nf are scored relative to g by the two measures mentioned above. Because we use up to
50 NNs, for which Euclidean distance might not be meaningful similarity measure for points in a
high-dimensional space like P5, we use cosine distance for deﬁning NNs. (The source images used
below are the same 20 used in Sec. 4.1. For expedience, the guide set is a smaller version of that
used in Sec. 4.1, comprising three images from each of only 30 random classes.)
Manifold Tangent Space:
We build a probabilistic subspace model with probabilistic PCA
(PPCA) around g and compare the likelihood of α to other points. More precisely, PPCA is applied
to Nref, whose principal space is a secant plane that has approximately the same normal direction
as the tangent plane, but generally does not pass through g because of the curvature of the manifold.
We correct this small offset by shifting the plane to pass through g; with PPCA this is achieved by
moving the mean of the high-dimensional Gaussian to g. We then evaluate the log likelihood of
points under the model, relative to the log likelihood of g, denoted ∆L(·, g) = L(·) −L(g). We
repeat this measurement for a large number of guide and source pairs, and compare the distribution
of ∆L for α with points in Nc and Nf.
For guide images sampled from ILSVRC training and validation sets, results for FC7 and P5 are
shown in the ﬁrst two columns of Fig. 4. Since the Gaussian is centred at g, ∆L is bounded above
by zero. The plots show that α is well explained locally by the manifold tangent plane. Comparing
α obtained when g is sampled from training or validation sets (Fig. 4(a) vs 4(b), 4(d) vs 4(e)), we
observe patterns very similar to those in plots of the log likelihood under the local subspace models.
This suggests that the phenomenon of adversarial perturbation in Eqn. (1) is an intrinsic property of
the representation itself, rather than the generalization of the model.
Angular Consistency Measure:
If the NNs of g are sparse in the high-dimensional feature space,
or the manifold has high curvature, a linear Gaussian model will be a poor ﬁt. So we consider a
way to test whether α is an inlier in the vicinity of g that does not rely on a manifold assumption.
We take a set of reference points near a g, Nref, and measure directions from g to each point. We
then compare the directions from g with those from α and other nearby points, e.g., in Nc or Nf,
to see whether α is similar to other points around g in terms of angular consistency. Compared to
points within the local manifold, a point far from the manifold will tend to exhibit a narrower range
of directions to others points in the manifold. Speciﬁcally, given reference set Nref, with cardinality
k, and with z being α or a point from Nc or Nf, our angular consistency measure is deﬁned as
Ω(z, g) = 1
⟨xi −z, xi −g⟩
∥xi −z∥∥xi −g∥
Fig. 4(c) and 4(f) show histograms of Ω(α, g) compared to Ω(nc, g) where nc ∈Nc and Ω(nf, g)
where nf ∈Nf. Note that maximum angular consistency is 1, in which case the point behaves
like g. Other than differences in scaling and upper bound, the angular consistency plots 4(c) and
4(f) are strikingly similar to those for the likelihood comparisons in the ﬁrst two columns of Fig. 4,
supporting the conclusion that α is an inlier with respect to representations of natural images.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
(a) ∆L, FC7, g ∈training (b) ∆L, FC7, g ∈validation
(c) Ω, FC7, g ∈training
(d) ∆L, P5, g ∈training
(e) ∆L, P5, g ∈validation
(f) Ω, P5, g ∈training
Figure 4: Manifold inlier analysis: the ﬁrst two columns (4(a),4(b),4(d),4(e)) for results of manifold tangent space analysis, showing distribution of difference in log likelihood of a point and g,
∆L(·, g) = L(·) −L(g); the last column (4(c)),(4(f)) for angular consistency analysis, showing
distribution of angular consistency Ω(·, g), between a point and g. See Eqn. 3 for deﬁnitions.
(a): Rank of adversaries vs rank of n1(α): Average distance
of 3-NNs is used to rank all points in predicted class (excl.
guide). Adversaries with same horizontal coordinate share
the same guide.
(b): Manifold analysis for label-opt
adversaries, at layer FC7, with tangent plane through n1(α).
Figure 4: Label-opt and feature-opt PPCA and rank measure comparison plots.
COMPARISONS AND ANALYSIS
We now compare our feature adversaries to images created to optimize mis-classiﬁcation , in part to illustrate qualitative differences. We also investigate if the linearity hypothesis for mis-classiﬁcation adversaries of Goodfellow et al. is consistent with and explains
with our class of adversarial examples. We hereby refer to our results as feature adversaries via
optimization (feature-opt). The adversarial images designed to trigger mis-classiﬁcation via optimization , described brieﬂy in Sec. 2, are referred to as label adversaries via
optimization (label-opt).
Comparison to label-opt:
To demonstrate that label-opt differs qualitatively from feature-opt, we
report three empirical results. First, we rank α, g, and other points assigned the same class label as
g, according to their average distance to three nearest neighbours, as in Sec. 4.1. Fig. 4(a) shows
rank of α versus rank of its nearest neighbor-n1(α) for the two types of adversaries. Unlike featureopt, for label-opt, the rank of α does not correlate well with the rank of n1(α). In other words, for
feature-opt α is close to n1(α), while for label-opt it is not.
Second, we use the manifold PPCA approach in Sec. 4.2. Comparing to peaked histogram of standardized likelihood of feature-opt shown in Fig. 4, Fig. 4(b) shows that label-opt examples are not
represented well by the Gaussian around the ﬁrst NN of α.
Third, we analyze the sparsity patterns on different DNN layers for different adversarial construction
methods. It is well known that DNNs with ReLU activation units produce sparse activations ). Therefore, if the degree of sparsity increases after the adversarial perturbation, the
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
I/U with s
feature-opt label-opt feature-opt label-opt
Table 2: Sparsity analysis: Sparsity is quantiﬁed
as a percentage of the size of each layer.
Figure 5: Distance ratio d(α,g)/d(s,g) vs δ.
C2, C3, P5, F7 are for feature-opt adversaries;
ℓ-f7 denotes FC7 distances for feature-linear.
adversarial example is using additional paths to manipulate the resulting represenation. We also investigate how many activated units are shared between the source and the adversary, by computing
the intersection over union I/U of active units. If the I/U is high on all layers, then two represenations share most active paths. On the other hand, if I/U is low, while the degree of sparsity
remains the same, then the adversary must have closed some activation paths and opened new ones.
In Table 2, ∆S is the difference between the proportion of non-zero activations on selected layers
between the source image represenation for the two types of adversaries. One can see that for all
except FC7 of label-opt, the difference is signiﬁcant. The column “I/U with s” also shows that
feature-opt uses very different activation paths from s when compared to label-opt.
Testing The Linearity Hypothesis for feature-opt:
Goodfellow et al. suggests that the
existence of label adversaries is a consequence of networks being too linear. If this linearity hypothesis applies to our class of adversaries, it should be possible to linearize the DNN around the source
image, and then obtain similar adversaries via optimization. Formally, let Js = J(φ(Is)) be the Jacobian matrix of the internal layer encoding with respect to source image input. Then, the linearity
hypothesis implies φ(I) ≈φ(Is)+J⊤
s (I −Is). Hence, we optimize ∥φ(Is)+J⊤
s (I −Is)−φ(Ig)∥2
subject to the same inﬁnity norm constraint in Eqn. 2. We refer to these adversaries as feature-linear.
As shown in Fig. 5, such adversaries do not get particularly close to the guide. They get no closer
than 80%, while for feature-opt the distance is reduced to 50% or less for layers down to C2. Note
that unlike feature-opt, the objective of feature-linear does not guarantee a reduction in distance
when the constraint on δ is relaxed. These results suggest that the linearity hypothesis may not
explain the existence of feature-opt adversaries.
Networks with Random Weights:
We further explored whether the existence of feature-opt adversaries is due to the learning algorithm and the training set, or to the structure of deep networks per
se. For this purpose, we randomly initialized layers of Caffenet with orthonormal weights. We then
optimized for adversarial images as above, and looked at distance ratios (as in Fig. 3). Interestingly,
the distance ratios for FC7 and Norm2 are similar to Fig. 5 with at most 2% deviation. On C2, the
results are at most 10% greater than those on C2 for the trained Caffenet. We note that both Norm2
and C2 are overcomplete representations of the input. The table of distance ratios can be found
in the Supplementary Material. These results with random networks suggest that the existence of
feature-opt adversaries may be a property of the network architecture.
DISCUSSION
We introduce a new method for generating adversarial images that appear perceptually similar to a
given source image, but whose deep representations mimic the characteristics of natural guide images. Indeed, the adversarial images have representations at intermediate layers appear quite natural
and very much like the guide images used in their construction. We demonstrate empirically that
these imposters capture the generic nature of their guides at different levels of deep representations.
This includes their proximity to the guide, and their locations in high density regions of the feature
space. We show further that such properties are not shared by other categories of adversarial images.
We also ﬁnd that the linearity hypothesis does not provide an obvious
explanation for these new adversarial phenomena. It appears that the existence of these adversarial
images is not predicated on a network trained with natural images per se. For example, results
on random networks indicate that the structure of the network itself may be one signiﬁcant factor.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Nevertheless, further experiments and analysis are required to determine the true underlying reasons
for this discrepancy between human and DNN representations of images.
Another future direction concerns the exploration of failure cases we observed in optimizing feature
adversaries. As mentioned in supplementary material, such cases involve images of hand-written
digits, and networks that are ﬁne-tuned with images from a narrow domain (e.g., the Flicker Style
dataset). Such failures suggest that our adversarial phenomena may be due to factors such as network
depth, receptive ﬁeld size, or the class of natural images used. Since our aim here was to analyze
the representation of well-known networks, we leave the exploration of these factors to future work.
Another interesting question concerns whether existing discriminative models might be trained to
detect feature adversaries. Since training such models requires a diverse and relatively large dataset
of adversarial images we also leave this to future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support for this research was provided, in part, by MITACS, NSERC
Canada, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). We would like to thank Foteini Agraﬁoti
for her support. We would also like to thank Ian Goodfellow, Xavier Boix, as well as the anoynomous reviewers
for helpful feedback.