NBER Working Paper Series
DUMMY ENDOGENOUS VARIABLES IN A
SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION SYSTEM
James J. Heckman
Working Paper No.
CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305
First draft April 1973
Second draft July 1975
Preliminary; not for quotation.
NBER working papers are distributed informally and in liaited
number for comments only.
They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
This research was supported by NSF and ASPER Department of Labor grants to
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Takeshi Ainemiya, R. Bahadur,
Linda Edwards Zvi Griliches, Tom MaCurdy, Marc Nerlove, Randy Olsen, Donald
Sant, Peter Schmidt and Arnold Zellner all made valuable comments on drafts
of this paper. I assume all responsibility for any remaining errors. The
first draft of this paper appeared under the same title as an unpublished
NEER paper in April 1973. A second draft was circulated under a different
title and presented at the World Econometric SocietyMeetings at Toronto, 1975.
This paper considers the formulation and estimation of simultaneous
equation models with both discrete and continuous endogenous variables.
statistical model proposed here is sufficiently rich to encompass the álassjcai
simultaneous equation model for continuous endogenous variables and more
recent models for purely discrete endogenous variables as special cases of
a more general model.
Interest in discrete data has been ftsledby a rapid growth in the
availability of microeconomic data sets coupled with a growing awareness
of the importance of discrete choice models for the analysis of uiicroeconomic
problems . To date, the only available statistical
models for the analysis of discrete endogenous variables have been developed
for the purely discrete case. The log—linear or logistic model of Goodman
 as expanded by Raberman and Nerlove and Press is one
such model that has been widely used. The multivariate probit model of
Ashford and Sowden , Mnemiya and Zeliner and Lee is
another widely used model. This paper expands the multivariate probit
structure to accomodate continuous endogenous variables. Alternatively,
the model presented here expands the classical, simultaneous equation theory
to encompass multivariate probit models.
The models developed below rely critically on the notion that discrete
endogenous variables are generated by continuous latent variables crossing
thresholds. Such models have an honored place in the history of statistics
and were first advanced by Pearson . The theory of biserial and
tetrathoric correlation is based on this idea. It is argued in this
paper that this class of statistical models provides a natural framework
for generating simultaneous equation models with both discrete and continuous
random variables.
In contrast, the framework of Goodman, while convenient for formulating descriptive models for discrete data, offers a much less natural
apparatus for analyzing econometric structural equation models. This is so
primarily because the simultaneous equation model is inherently an unconditional representation of behavioral equations while the model of Goodman is
designed to facilitate the analysis of conditional representations, and
does not lend itself to the unconditional formulations required in simultaneous
equation theory.
The structure of this paper is in four parts. in part one general
models are discussed. Dummy endogenous variables are introduced in two
distinct roles: (1) as proxies for unobserved latent variables and (2) as
direct shifters of behavioral equations. Five models incorporating such
dummy variables
are discussed. Part two, also the longest section, presents
a complete analysis of the most novel and most general of the five models
presented in part one. This is a model with both continuous and discrete
endogenous variables. The issues of identification and estimation are
discussed together by proving the existence of consistent estimators.
Maximum likelihood estimators and alternative estimators are discussed. In
part three, a brief discussion of a multivariate probit model with structural
shift is presented. Part four presents a comparison between the models
developed in this paper and the models of Goodman and Nerlove and Press.
I. A General Model for the Two Equation Case
Since few new issues arise in the multiple equation case, for
expositiona]. simplicity the bulk of the analysis in this paper is conducted
for a two equation system. All of the models considered in this paper can
be subsumed as special. cases of the following pair of simultaneous equations
for continuous latent random variables
1i x1a1 + d181 +
x2a2 + diB +
where dummy variable di is defined by•
otherwise,1
a12, j=l,2, i=l,. ..,I.
.E(Ujitljtit) = 0,
1,2, i # i'.
and "X21' are, respectively, lxK1 and lxK2 row vectors of bounded
exogenous variables. The Joint density of continuous random variables
U1, U2 is g(U11, U2i) which is assumed to be a bivariate normal density
in the analysis of Sections II and III. In order to focus attention on the
essential features of the argument, the conventional assumptions of classical
tClearly, a second dt.immy variable could be defined as arising from
crossing a threshold.. Note, too, that the choice of the zero threshold
is an arbitrary normalization.
simultaneous equation theory are maintained. In particular, it is assumed
that equations (la) and (lb) are identified if 8i
— 0 and both
and. y1 are observed for each of the I observations.' In this special
case, which conforms to the classical simultaneous equation model, standard
methods are available to estimate all of the parameters of the structure.
The full model of equations (la)—(lc) is sufficiently novel to
require some discussion. First, note that the model is cast in terms of
latent variables y and
which may or may not be directly observed.
Even if y is never observed, the event y1 > 0 is observed and its
occurrence is recorded by setting a dury variable, di equal to one. If
the dummy variable assumes the value zero. Second, note that if
> 0, structural equations (la) and (lb) are shifted by an amount
and 82 respectively.
To fix ideas, several plausible economic models are discussed that
may be described by equation system (la)—(lc). FirSt, suppose that both
are observed outcomes of a market at time i, say quantity and
price. Equation (la) is the demand curve while equation (lb) is the supply
[f the price exceeds some threshold (zero inequAlity
(lc), but this can be readily amended to be
any positive constant), the
government takes certain actions, that shift both the supply curve and the
demand curve, say a subsidy to consumers and a per unit subsidy to producers.
These actions shift the demand curve and the supply curve by the amount
and 8z respectively.
As another example, consider a model of the effect of laws on the
status of blacks. Let
be the measured income of blacks in state i while
Tor reasons that become clearer in the analysis of Section II, identification is assumed to be secured through exclusion restrictions or through
restrictions on reduced forms for covariance parameters that are estimable.
is an unmeasured variable that reflects the state's population sentiment
toward blacks. If sentiment for blacks is sufficiently favorable, (y > 0),
the state may enact antidiscrimjnation legislation and the presence of such
legislation in state 1, a variable that can be measured, is denoted by a
dummy variable di — 1.
In the income equation (la), both the presence of
a law and the population sentiment towards blacks is assumed to affect the
measured income of blacks. The first effect is assumed to operate discretely
while the second effect is assumed to operate in a lore continuous fashion.
An important question for the analysis of policy is to determine whether or
not measured effects of legislation are due to genuine consequences of
legislation (8 ,' 0) or to the spurious effect that the presence of legislation favorable to blacks merely proxies the presence of pro—black sentiment
that would lead to higher status for blacks in any event
Section II, methods for consistently estimating the separate effects (n and
y1) are presented! This example is valuable because it illustratei two
conceptually distinct roles for dummy variables: (1) as indicators of
latent variables that cross thresholds and (2) as direct shifters •of behafloral
functions.
These two roles must be carefully distinguished in the ensuing
The model of equations (la)—(lc) subsumes a wide variety of
interesting econometric models. These special cases are briefly discussed
Case 1. The Classical Simultaneous Equation Model
This model arises when
are observed, and there is no
structural shift lathe equations (81
1Note that even if sentiment were measured (i.e.,
were known),
least squares estimators of equation (la) are inconsistent because of the
correlation of di and y1 with U1.
The Classical Simultaneous Equation Model with Structural Shift
This model is the same as that of Case 1 except that Etructural
shift is permitted in each equation. It will be shown below that certain
restrictions must be imposed on the model in order to generate a sensible
statistical structure for this case.
Case 3. The Multivariate Probit Model
This model arises when
and y, are not observed but the events
0 are observed (i.e., one knows whether or not the latent
variables have crossed a threshold). The notation of equations (la)—(lc) must
be altered to accommodate two dummy variables but that modification is obvious.
No structural shift is permitted
This is the model of Ashford
and Sowden , Amemiya and Zeliner and Lee .
Case 4. The Multivariate Probit Model with Structural Shift
This model is the same as that of Case 3 except that structural shift
is permitted l' 82 ' 0).
Case 5. The Hybrid Model
This model arises when y is observed and
is not, but the event
0 is observed. No structural shift is permitted.
Case 6. The Hybrid Model with Structural Shift
This model is the same as that of Case 5 except that structural
shifts in the equations are permitted.
The hybrid models of Cases 5 and 6 are the most novel and general.
Accordingly, these cases receive the greatest attention in the ensuing analysis.
Models 2 and 4 are also new but since the analysis of these models follow
directly from the analysis of the hybrid model they receive less attention
in this paper. Case 4 is briefly discussed in Section III while Case 2
is never explicitly developed.
It. The Hybrid Model with Structural Shift
In this section, a model with one observed continuous random variable,
and one latent random variable is analyzed for the general case of structural
shift in the equations. The argument proceeds in the following steps. First,
a condition for the existence of a meaningful statistical model is derived.
Second, consistent estimators of identified parameters are presented.
marfminn likelihood estimators are discussed. Finally, some alternative
estimators are presented and discussed.
To facilitate the discussion, equations (la) and (ib) may be written
in semi—reduced form as
= X11it11 + X2ir12 + d1yr13 +
= xliw2l+ x2i22 1 i'23 +
0 otherwise,
13 l—y1y2 '
l—y1y2 ' li
In the ensuing analysis it is assumed that exogenous variables included in
and X21 are allocated to either X11 or X2, but not, both. The
absence of an asterisk on y1 denotes that this variable is observed.
is not observed. Random variables
and U2 are assumed to be bivariate
normal random variables. Accordingly, the joint distribution
of V113 V2,
h(V11, V211,is a bivariate normal density fully characterized by the
following assumptions:
To obtain the true reduced form
equations, assume that the conditional.
probability that di is unity given X11 and X exists, and denote this
probability by P. Then the true reduced forms may be written
iili + X21tr12 + P1w13 +
1i21 + X2w22 + Pi2a + V21 + (di — Pi)7123
di=1 iff Yri>o
otherwise.
The error term in each equation consists of the sum of continuous and discrete
random variables that are correlated. The errors have zero conditional
mean but if
is a nontrivial, function of X11, X2,, heteroscedasticity is
present in the errors.
(i) Conditions for Existence of the Model1
The first order of business is to determine whether or not the
model of equations (la)—(lb) as represented in reduced form by equations
(3a)—(3b) makes sense. Without imposing a further restriction, it does
not. The restriction required is precisely the restriction implicitly
assumed in writing equations (3a) and (3b), i.e., the restriction that
permits one to define a unique probability statement for the events
d — 1 and di
O.so that P in fact exists. A necessary and sufficient
condition for this to be so is that it23 = 0, i.e., that the probability
of the event di
1 is not a determinant of the event.. Equivalently, this
assumption can be written as the requirement that 1281 + 82 = 0.
condition is critical to the analysis and thus deserves some discussion.
The argument supporting this assumption is summarized in the following
proposition.
Proposition. A necessary and sufficient condition for the model of equations
(la)—(lc) or (3a)—(3c) to be defined is that 1123 = 0 = 1281 + 82.
assumption is termed the Principle Assumption.
Proof. Sufficiency is obvious. Thus, only necessary conditions are discussed.
Denote the joint density of V2, d1 by t(V2i
di) which is assumed to be a proper
density in the sense that
I t(V21, di)dV2j = 1
From equations (3b) and (3c), the probability that
> 0 given di
am grateful to Peter Schmidt for correcting an important error
in the argument of this section in a previous draft.
must be unity, so that one may write,
where the symbols
are defined by
£ a_(7 I +(
Alternatively, one may write this probability as
t(V21, 1)dV21
and obviously
t(V2, 1)dV21
Using similar reasoning, one can conclude that
t(V2i. O)dV21 — 1
I t(v2, 0)dv2 — 0.
The sum, of •the left hand side terms of equations (4a)—(4d) equals the sum
of the right hand side terms .which should equal one if the probability of
the event di — 1 is meaningfully defined. If
= 0, this is the case.
But if 1123 'c 0, the sum of the left hand side terms falls short of one
while if 1123
> 0, this sum exceeds one. Q.E.D. Notice that this argument
does not rely on the assumption that V21 is normally distributed but does
rely on the assumption that
has positive density at almost all points
on the real line.
An intuitive motivation for this condition is possible. Suppose
that one rewrites equations (la)—(lc) to exclude dii i.e., write
di = 0 otherwise.
is an unobserved latent variable. The random variable
is observed and is defined by the following equation
Making the appropriate substitutions of
in the system given
above, one concludes that
+ diB1 + iil + lJii
+ 'li — d181)y2 + U2.
Invoking the Principle Assumption, one reaches equations (la)—(lc) including
di. Thus the dummy shift variable diB1 may be viewed as a veil that obscures
measurement of the latent variable
But, as will be shown, the veil can
be removed, i.e., l can be estimated.
It is important to note that the principle assumption does not rule
out structural shift in equations (la) and (ib). It simply restricts the
nature of the shift. However, the Principle AsSumption does exclude any
structural shift in the reduced form equation that determines the probability
of a shift (equation (3b)).
(ii) Identification of Parameters: Indirect
Least Squares Estimators
Given the principle assumption, equation system (3a)—(3c) may be
written as
+ V1 + (di — 2i'l3
(5b) 1 ii21 + 2i22
0 otherwise.
Estimation of equation (5b) is a problem in probit analysis. Subject to
the standard requirements for identification and existence of probit estimates
 , one may normalize by u4 and estimate
by using the reduced form probit fniction to estimate the conditional
probabilities of the events di = 1 and di = 0.
To determine how to estimate the parameters of the equation (5a),
it is useful to write the conditional expectatiàn of 7jj given di, i and
E(YjiIXii X2, di) =
+ X2ir12 + dun3 + E(ViuIdi X1, X2).
Utilizing a result familiar in the theory of biserial correlation ,
E(V1iId1 X, X21)
A — ________
with c = — (xiTr + X2ir2). where $ and • are the density and distribution
function of a standard normal random variable and
If one knew, or could estimate, E(Viildi, X11, X2), it could be
entered as a regressor in equation (7) and parameters
i.v it13 and
could be estimated by standard least squares methods. Since
the normalized parameters of equation <5b) are estimable, so is ci and hence
A. A1 and E(V111d1, X11, X21). Elsewhere it s shown that
use of estimated values of A1 and Ai instead of actual values as regressors
in equation (7) leads, under general conditions, to consistent parameter
estimates of all the regression coefficients in that equation.
Given this result, all of the parameters of equation (7) are estimable.
Note in particular that the correlation between
estimable even though there are no direct observations on22 y. This
result is a familiar one in the theory of biserial correlation.1
To see how to estimate the reduced form variance, w11, note that
the general model, of which equation (7) is the conditional expectation, may
be written as
hiote that the use of the estimated value of E(V1iJdj X11, X1) as a
regressor to estimate the parameters of the disturbance covariance structure
closely parallels Telser' s procedure of utilizing least squares
residuals from other equations in a system of equations to estimate the
parameters of the inter—equation covariance structure.
E(yiilXii, X2, di) + Ilj
E(nilXii, X2, d) 0
E(r)IXii X2, d) w11[(1 — 2) + 2(d1 + (1 — d)s1]
1 — Xc — A1.
 .
can be consistently estimated, süd since
a consistent estimate of ca is possible using the estimatedresiduals from
leaat.squares estimates of equation (8).
Denote the estimated residual for
observation 1 by rj1. Then estimate
from the foflowing formula:
d1q1 + (1 —
where estimated values of q and
are used in place of actual values. This
estimate is consistent)
Given consistent estimators of reduced form coefficients, estimators
of the structural parameters are easily obtained. Since the coefficient of
equation (5b) can only be estimated up to an unknown constant of proportionality,
1Further, it is guaranteed to be positive. One can prove that the
second term on the right hand side must be positive.
it is not possible to estimate all of the coefficients of equations
(la) and (lb). Some of these coefficients can only be estimated up to an
unknown constant of proportionality.
From equation.(2), it is clear that if some exogenous variables
appear in equation (la) that do not appear in (ib) it is possible to
estimate y
Take the th variable in X11, denoted X1 , and its
associated estimable reduced form coefficients
Assume that
this variable is not included in X2.
Taking the ratio of the estimate of
the second coefficient to the estimate of the first yields a consistent
estimator of
IfAIt denotes an estimate and where
is the number of variables in
not contained in X, adopting the harmless convention that the first
variables in
are such variables. Similarly, one may consisteutly
if some variables included in
do not appear
Utilizing notation previously introduced,
is the number of variables in
not contained in
variables in
are assumed not to be included in
In general, the model will be overidentif led if it is identified
at all. The procedure for resolving the overidentification problem is
entirely conventional and will be discussed below. Assume, for the moment,
that this problem can be resolved. Given unique estimates of
one can exploit the information in equations (2) and (6) to estimate
Cl, a2(w22Y"2 a a, B2(0122)U2 a
The only parameters that remain to be identified are the disturbance
covariance terms of the structurai. equations. Without further information,
it is not possible to estimate all of the parameters of the structural
equation covariance. matrix, just the normalized parameters c, t2
To see this, note that
ll + 2y1a12 + ya22
+ (1 + y1y2)a12 + y1a22
+ (1 + 44°f2 + t 12
+ 2y2a2 + 22
22 — E( wi?
+ 2(1)0t2 + !2 j/
are estimable parameters, and since consistent estimators
of the left hand side terms of equations (9) and (10) are available, these
'This final restriction was suggested to we by Professor L. Lee.
equations, supplemented by equation (11) provide three linear equations in
the three unknowns
In general, these equations can be solved
for unique estimators.
(iii) Maximum Likelihood Estimators
The preceding analysis not only yields criteria for the identification
of structural coefficients but also produces consistent estimators for
identified coefficients. These estimators are useful for providing estimates
enroute to deriving maximum likelihood estimators, but they are not, in
general, efficient. The mnvlmum likelihood estimator that is discussed
nextis asymptotically efficient.
The density function for the disturbances V1, V2 is bivariate
For notational simplicity normalize V2 by l/2 and define
v2w"2. The joint density of V1, V1 is h(Vii .12*i)
> 0 and di
0 otherwise, the density of y1, di is given by
f(y, di) =
— din13. vp
x2ilflz — du3, 9)
where c has previously been defined as
Using equatioa (2), the density may be rewritten in terms of identified
structural parameters.
1For a discussion of this rather unusual density see Appendix A.
Assuming random sampling, the likelihood function for the hybrid
model with structural shift is
— It f(1 d)
where I is sample size.
Under conditions specified below, this function
possesses an optimum, and the maximum likelihood estimators have desirable
large sample properties. The identification procedure previously discussed
provides an algorithm for generating initial consistent estimators so that
one Newton step produces asymptotically efficient estimators. These initial
estimators are particularly valuable because likelihood function (13) is not
a globally concave function of the structural parameters.
Note that if
— 0, so that the reduced form disturbances V1 and
are independent, density h(V1i
factors into a product of marginal
densities h1(V1i)h2(Vi) and i(1 d) bdcomeS
f(y11, di) — h1(71i
so that regression estimators of equation (5a) and probit estimators of
equation (5b) are maximum likelihood estimators. In most practical problems
the assumption that
= 0 is untenable.
In addition to the ordinary identification conditions previously
discussed, another condition is required in order for likelihood function
(13) to possess a well defined maximum with respect to its parameters. In
order to understand this condition, it is helpful to use conditional
normal theory to write density f(y1 di) as
f&1. d1) — h1(y11 —
— din3) (t(ri)ldi(sc_ri)11_thi
where 4' is the cumulative distribution of the univariate normal, and
(1 — p2)1t2
— X11T1l — X2fr12 — din13
This representation of the density is both coinputationally and theoretically
convenient.
In a sample of size I, classify the observations into two groups
depending on whether or not the dummy variable di is one. Among the
observations with di
1, denote the smallest r by riin., and the largest
by 4Niax. Among the to(= I — 1i observations with di a 0, denote the
largest ri by r{°lax, and the smallest by r°2iin. Then, likelihood
function (13) possesses no interior optimum in a compact parameter set if
4°iax C r'iin
r°un > riiax
so that there is no overlap among the values of the ri classified by the
occurrence of the event.'
This condition arises in étandard probit analysis . To understand it, consider estimates of an ordinary probit
model. If any variable perfectly classifies the outcomes of a discrete
experiment, the coefficient of that variable becomes unbounded and is not
similar condition arises in the conditional logit model. See
McFadden .
identified.
This phenomenon may arise in the current problem even if no
exogenous variable (or/combination of exogenous variables) perfectly
classifies outcomes because of the presence of random variable
There is a positive probability that condition (14) will be met and
maximum likelihood estimators will fail to exist. However, using standard
results in the theory of order statistics, it is trivial to establish that
the probability that condition (14) is met tends to zero if sample size
expands by "fixed in repeated samples" sampling) Given their existence,
maximum likelihood estimators are consistent, asymptotically normal and
efficient.2
1Briefly consider the condition 4°iax < r{4in. If one data
configuration (i.e., a choice of XL X2i) is considered and the number of
observations on that configuration becomes large, the condition becomes
i51/2 li il
random variable
conditional on di
random variable V11 conditional on di a o
One may write
Vj.'k1+fl11andV1, _ko+llzit. il•• i 1,...,
where 1i and fl1, are continuous independent random variables. The probability
— n2> k0 — k is less than one for any pair of observations from the
disjoint sets. Hence, in large.samples, condition 40)max c rniin occurs
with probability zero.
21t is a straightforward exercise to verify that LeCain's 
generalization of the classical Cramer conditions applies to the model in the
text for suitably chosen values of the parameters. These conditions are local
in nature and imply the existence of some root of the likelihood equations
that is consistent and asymptotically normally distributed. Olsen 
verifies the Lecam conditions for a model based on the one in the text. Olsen's
structural model is the reduced form of the current model with the exception
that 1113 is set at zero in his work. His proofs carry over to the more general
One point is not obvious, and is not covered in Olsents work. Since
a model with
# 0 superficially resembles the model advanced by Memiya 
(iv) Sane Alternative Estimators
Since maximum likelihood estimation is computationally cumbersome,
it is useful to consider alternative estimators for the hybrid model. In
addition, the problem of the multiplicity of consistent estimators that
arises in an overidentified model remains to be resolved. It.will be shown
that the fact that
is never observed has important consequences that
cause the analysis in this paper to differ dramatically from conventional
simultaneous equation theory.
Consider equations (la)—(lc), rewritten below to facilitate the
exposition. Because it is assumed that
is observed, it is replaced
With this change, the equations become
to demonstrate the inconsistency of maximum likelihood estimators for the
parameters of a discontinuous density, it is worth verifying that the
expectation of the first partial of the log of the density of f(y11, di)
with respect to
vanishes when the expectation is taken with respect to
the density evaluafed at the true parameter values.
as the expectation taken with respect to the density of
and di when the true parameters are used in the density. Let V11 =
h(V1, li)d91
V h(Vii. V)d9dV1
V h(V1i V)dVdv1
 , it follows that
as desired.
+ d131 + 1i + U1
y1 X2ia2 + d182 + y1r2 + U2
where dummy variable di is defined by
d1 —1 1ff Yi> 0
otherwise,
and the Principle Assumption is invoked so that y2G1 +
Using the results of the previous analysis, it is possible to
estimate equations (la) and (ib) directly using the reduced form coefficient
estimates to generate instruments. To see this, note that it is possible
to use equation (5b) to estimate the expectation of y*/42 conditional on
5.i and X2.
From the probit estimates of (5b) it is possible to estimate the
probability of the event di = 1 conditional on values of
and di by their estimated expectations, equation (la) becomes
'li = X11a1 +
+ (YiwY2h't
+ U1 + (d -
+ y*(y*wh/2 - 2i°2
Least squares applied to equation (la') yields unique consistent estimators
of c1, l and y.
The proof is trivial and hence is omitted. Estimation of
this equation resolves the problem of the multiplicity of estimators that
arise from the application of indirect least squares discussed in Section (ii).
Precisely the same procedure may be used to estimate, the parameters
of equation (lb). There is one new point. The choice of a normalization
rule in a simultaneous equation system is usually arbitrary. Here the
choice is important because Yj is never observed, although its expectation
can be estimated. In equations (la) and (lb), y1 is selected as the dependent variable. Substituting estimated conditional means for endogenous
variables, equation (lb) may be written as
+ Pi8 — (y*l"2)) —
1 (U2w"2 + (di —
It is straightforward to prove that least sqmres estimators of equation (lb')
are consistent.
There is one further problemJ Although the Principle Assumption
requires 1281 + 82
= 0, this constraint is not imposed in the preceding
One way to impose the constraint is to estimate equation (la')
and use the fitted value of 82*112* (
—8) as a parameter in equation (lb').
A more satisfactory approach that is computationally more burdensome is
to impose the constraint directly in formulating joint least squares
estimators for equations (lat) and (1W).
-It is tempting to use the residuals computed from the fitted equations
(la') and (lbt) to directly estimate the structural covariance terms a11, at2
A direct application of structural two stage least squares formulae
will not work precisely because y is never observed. If estimated values
are used in place of actual values, the residuals from (lc) and (lb)
will not permit identification of the structural covariances.
One method for circumventing this difficulty is to use the estimated
structural parameters to solve for the reduced form parameters
li owe this point to Tom Macurdy.
l2 and it13.
These estimates may be treated as known parameters in
estimating equation (7). Hence it is possible to estimate
and by use of equations (9), (10) and (11) to obtain unique consistent
estimates of a11, a12 and 022•
While these estimators are simply computed, consistent, and free of
the nonuniqueness problem that plagues indirect least squares estimators in
the overidentified case, they are not asymptotically efficient nor are their
asymptotic distributions simple. The standard formulae used for the computation
of large sample parameter variances is inappropriate. This is so because
is never directly observed and only an estimated value of this
variable is available.
To understand these difficulties, it is useful to discuss two
special cases that are of interest in practical empirical work. First
consider estimation of equation (la) when
0 so that no direct structural
shift is present in that equation. Then consider a case in which
so that no unobserved latent variable is present in equation (la). In both
cases consistent parameter estimates are available, as has been shown.
Consider the disturbance from equation (la') under the assumption
Denote the composite disturbance by U1
U =U +/*(v*cu
The crucial feature of these residuals is that they are not independent
across observations nor are they identically distributed. Accordingly,
standard central limit theorems do not apply to regression coefficient
estimates of equation (la'). In particular, it is not the case that the
standard estimator of the regression parameter variance—covariance matrix,
is the appropriate asymptotic variance—covariance matrix for the regression
coefficients.
The source of the problem comes in the final term in U11. Utilizing
the reduced form for Yiw'2 this term becomes
is an iid random variable. But the first two terms are not iid. Since
are maximum likelihood estimators, they possess asymptotic
normal limiting distribution, and in large samples the first two terms
converge in probability to zero. But their rate of convergence is not
fast enough.
In fact, regression estimates of equation (la') with
the following relationship.
z X1(y1w2)
(xj1(u1 + V1i)
z (y1w2)(U11 + Vii)
E (xi(x1[ir1 —
+ x2i[W2 — 7T]
E(y1w (X11[w1 -
+ x21[ir2 - 1T221
Both terms on the right hand side converge to proper normal random variables.1
Accordingly1 the standard formula for the asymptotic variance—covariance matrix
is inapplicable. Although the correct asymptotic variance—covariance matrix
can be estimated, the computational burden of doing so is greater than direct.
optimization of the likelihood function.
Now turn to the second case. Consider the estimation of equation Cia')
for a case in which
0 so that no latent variable is present in equation (la).
The analysis of this case is thoroughly conventional.
The estimated reduced form probability P may be used as an instrumental variable for di. Standard instrumental variable formulas may be
used to estimate the appropriate asymptotic variance—covariance matrix of
the coefficients.
The procedure to be used is as. follows.
may be employed as an
instrument for di in equation (la'), and consistent estimators of a1 and 81
may be produced. Using actual values for di and the estimated coefficients,
one may estimate the residuals for each observation which when squared,
summed and divided by I yield an estimator of a11. The appropriate asymptotic
variance covariance matrix for the regression coefficients a1, B may be
consistently estimated by the standard instrumental variable formula
E XiXh I X1d
Note that since the residuals from the prediction of
di (di — F) are not
guaranteed to be orthogonal to the X1 regressors, the instrumental variable
formula is not equivalent to the standard two stage least squares formula, and
1The proof is straightforward. See Heckman .
the instrumental variable estimator is not equivalent to the standard two
stage least squares estimator.1
Note further that if the sole purpose of the analysis is to estimate
equation (la), it is not necessary to estimate probit functions at all. It
is possible to generate an instrumental variable for di by estimating a
simple linear probability model with di as a dependent variable that contains
and some other xogenous variable
at least all of the variables in X11/as regressors.
If these estimators are
utilized, the standard two stage least squares procedure applies and
predicted values of di may be utilized as regressors since in this case
the regression residuals from the prediction of di are constructed to be
orthogonal to the
regressors. This result simply restates the well
known point that it is unnecessary to obtain consistent estimates of the
parameters of reduced form equations in order to consistently estimate
structural equations.
Since the linear probability procedure is the simplest one to use,
it is recommended. However, it is likely that the use of the probit
instrument results in more efficient estimates although no proof of this
assertion is offered.
The discussion of these two cases is illuminating. For both cases
simply computed consistent parameter estimates are available. In the first
case, with an unobserved random variable present, the estimators converge
to a normal distribution but the theoretically appropriate asymptotic
covariance matrix is cumbersome to compute. In this case it is suggested
that analysts utilize the consistent estimators discussed in this section
as starting values for at least one Newton step towards the likelihood
optimum to produce estimators with desirable large sample properties.3 The
1See Sant .
follows directly from the analysis of Kelejian .
copy of a computer program to produce both one step Newton iterates
and full information maximum likelihood estimates is available, on request,
from the author for the cost of duplication, postage and handling charges.
second case requires only a simple application of conventional instrumental
variable estimator theory. For both cases and in the general case that
contains both special cases, full system maximum likelihood estimation will
produce asymptotically efficient estimates and is certainly recommended for
all but the special second case.
The hybrid model can be generalized in several ways. Two extensions
are particularly important. First, several dummy indicator variables can
be introduced into the model. Two types of multiple dummy shj.ft variables
can be introduced. The first type of dummy variable represents a poly—
tomization of a single latent variable and is appropriate for the case of
ordered dichotomous variables. The second type is for intrinsically
unordered case.1 These models, and obvious multivariate extensions, are
briefly discussed in Appendix B. Second, the random variable
truncated variable. This case, which nests robin's model into a
simultaneous equation system, follows as a trivial extension of the previous
analysis and hence is not discussed here.
III. Multivariate Probit Models with Structural Shift
In this section maltivariate probit models are discussed. In these
models there are no observed latent variables so that the only information
available is that y 0 and
0. These models are superficially
different from those considered in the analysis of the hybrid model. Appearances are deceiving. Both models are generated from underlying continuous
latent variables and the analysis of one model readily applies to the analysis
of the other.
Equations (la)—(lc) apply to this case as well. As before, di is
defined as the dichotomization of
l important reference for such models is Amemiya .
dial iff y>O
and define dummy variable a as the dichotomization of
(15) a1 1ff
otherwise.
The argument of Section II may be applied to this case.
As in the case of the hybrid model, the Principle Assumption
= 0) is a requirement for a meaningful statistical modelto exist.
Accordingly, the argument of Section II (1) of this paper applies to the multivariate
probit model. The models of Ashford and Sowden , Ameiniya , and
Zellner and Lee satisfy this assumption since none of these papers
considers structural shift in the equations (i.e., they assume that
= 82 = 0).
The identification procedure in Section II (ii) must be modified
since no observations are available on y1.. The analysis of identification
and 22 is as before. But the analysis of equation (5a) must be
modified. Two distinct cases are worth considering. First suppose that
0 so that there is no structural shift in the equations.
In this case, normalized parameters of equation (5a) may be estimated.
That is, one may use probit analysis to estimate
The correlation between V1. and V2 may also be estimated, even though both
are latent variables. This result is well known in the theory
of tetrachoric correlation . To establish
this result is is useful to recall that c is defined as
c1 = - (X1i11 +
and that b1 can be defined as
bi = — (X11it1 +
The probability of the events a and di can be written as
Prob(a 1 A di
P01(i) — Prob(ai
1) — F(b1,
— c1, — p)
P10(i) — Prob(a1
1 A di = 0) —
F(—b1, c, — p)
where F(,) is a standarized bivariate normal cumulative distribution.1
Substituting consistent estimators of b and ci in place of the true values,
these probabilities are solely a function of p. the correlation coefficient.
The sample likelihood function may be maximized with respect to p to achieve
a consistent estimator of that parameter. The appropriate likelihood function
1p01(i)]di(l-al) [r10(i)](l_di)ai (00(1)JUaiX1_dp
There are alternative minimum chi square estimators and modified minimum
chi square estimators for this parameter discussed elsewhere ;
Eeckman ). All of these estimators are consistent but not efficient
since the information matrix for the reduced form coefficients is not block
diagonal in p.
Next suppose that
# 0 so that there is structural shift in
reduced form equation (5a). For this case, initial consistent estimators
are also available. The conditional distribution of ai given di may be written as
Thus, F(b1, c. p) — / f i
h(V. Vpd9dvt
where Vf =
[li(i)1aidj xo1 (ai) (1—d1) [1'O1(JYJ (la)d VOO1 (la) (1—di)
ro (aj di)
where P0(i)
F(o, c) and 21(i)
1 — P0(i), and where bi is replaced
everywhere by b defined by
c b1 — wt3di.
Since consistent estimators of c are available, these may be inserted as
parameters in the appropriate conditional (on di) likelihood function, If
that function is maximized with respect to p, lTb, t2 and 1T!l consistent
estinators result. These estimators are not efficient since the full
system information matrix is not block diagonal with respect to these parameters.
This analysis establishes that it is possible to estimate all of the
normalized reduced form parameters: p, irk, w2, tr3, ,r1
andw2. Under
the identification hypothesis postulated in Section I, one can utilize
equation (2) to solve for normalized structural parameters
, y** = y*iwiliZ
Moreover, the argument presented in Section EI(ii) on the estimation of
structural covariances may be readily extended to show that it is possible
to estimate
This completes the analysis of parameter identification.
The analysis of the full information maximum likelihood estimators
is straightforward and need not be belabored. The likelihood function is
1P01(i)Iii [P10u)]di _a1) [P11(i)]aid
The function nay be maximized with respect to the parameters listed in
equations (17) and (18). As in the hybrid model, in a finite sample there
is some probability that maximum likelihood estimators fail to exist but this
probability becomes arbitrarily small as sample size becomes arbitrarily
The maximum likelihood estimators are consistent, asymptotically
normal and efficient.1
IV. The formulation of Simultaneous Equation Models
with Discrete Endogenous Variables2
In this section, the models developed in this paper are contrasted
with previous work on discrete models with jointly endogenous variables by
Goodman and Nerlove and Press . These models deal with purely
discrete random variables. Accordingly, the appropriate comparison is one
between that work and the models of Section III although an important topic
to be considered is the issue of generalizing purely discrete models to
accommodate both discrete and continuous endogenous variables.
It is argued here that the log linear model of Goodman and Rerlove
and Press is an inadequate scheme for formulating the sbnu.ltaneous equation
model required in econometrics. This is so for two reasons. First, the log
linear model is designed to simplify the estimation of conditional probabilities
1The same sort of existence conditions are required as those presented
in Section II. With probability one, maximum likelihood estimators exist in
large sample samples.
have greatly benefited from discussions with Marc Nerlove on the
material in this section.
whereas the simultaneous equation mode], is intrinsically on unconditional
representation of random variables. Estimators of conditional probabilities
in the log linear model have the same interpretation as direct least squares
estimators in classical simultaneous equation theory which are also conditional probability statements. Both estimators confound true structural
parameters with eleme.nts of the equation error covariance structure. Second,
the log linear model does not readily generalize to accommodate continuous
endogenous variables while the multivariate normal structure can easily
be modified to do so, as has been shown.
To fix ideas, consider a log linear model for a two equation system
comparable to the model of Section III. Nerlove and Press 
explicitly consider a log linear model for this case. Altering their
notation to conform with the notation of Section III and suppressing
subscript i, the log linear analogue of equations (16a)—(l6d) is
Zn Prob (a = 0 A d
Zn P00 = a0 + a1 + + p
Zn Prob (a
1) = Zn P01
Lu Prob (a
— 0) = Zn P10 - + a1— B + i
Zn Prob (a — 1 A d
1) = Zn P11
—Zn [exp(a0 ÷ a1 + $) + exp(a0 — a1
— ) + exp(—a0 + a1 — 8) +
exp(—a0 — a1 ÷ $)] and a0, a1 and
may be paraineterized as functions of
exogenous variables.
The marginal probability of the event a 0 in the log linear model is
exp(a0 + a1 + 8) + exp(a0 — a1
This expression is to be compared with the corresponding probability given
in Section III for the normal model with structural shift
[F(b — irt3d,
[F(b — 1T3d, c)]1d
Recall that F is a function of correlation parameter p.
0, the log linear probability model collapses to a simple
logit model
0, the normal model becomes a probit model with structural
E [(b — ,rt3d)ID(_c)]d (,(b)G(c)]l_d
where •(t) is the standard univariate cumulative density ( F(°o, .t)).
Finally, note that if there is no structural shift (itt3 = 0), as well as
no covariance (p0)
Prob (a = 0)
so that a simple probit model arises.
Further note that in the log linear model, the conditional probability
that a — 0 given d may be written as
— 23(l—d))
The simplicity of this representation is the basis for the popularity of the
log linear model. The comparable expression for the normal model is
F(b — ir* ci, — cfld
— ir3d, c)ll_d
Note that a0 and b, a1 and c play similar roles in the model in which they
appear. The important point to note, however, is that B and p and ir play
similar roles. In the normal model the probability that a
depeüds on d for two conceptually distinct reasons: one related to the
true structure of the model Or!3
0) and the other due to covariance in
latent errors (p # 0).
In the log linear model, these effects are
indistinguishable. Thus the log linear parameter of association, B,
corresponds to two distinct parameters in the normal model p and iT!3.
As long as one only seeks to estimate empirical relationships among
endogenous variables, this issue may be ignored. Suppose, however, that
one seeks to utilize fitted econometric relationships to answer policy
questions. Then, as liaavelnio has stressed, it is important to
identify structural parameters. A simple example will fix ideas.
1 if a family has a child and let a = 0 if it does not.
Let d = 1 if the family uses birth control and d = 0 otherwise. It may
happen that because of unmeasured taste and knowledge factors, families
more likely to contracept are more likely not to have a child. This effect
would be captured in a normal model by setting values of the parameter
p c 0. There is,. however, a second effect. For obvious structural reasons
families on birth control will have fewer children (iT!3 < 0 in the normal
model). For either reason
< 0 in the log linear model.
Suppose that the government forces all families to contracept, say
through a sterilization program.
The normal model would permit identification
of the effect of this policy shift through use of irs. Thus the predicted
change in the probability of a couple having no children as a result of the
policy would be derived from equation (20) as
[F(b — dirt3,
[F(b — dnt3, c)]l_d
Notice that if
= 0, there would be no effect predicted for the policy,
whether or not p
The estimate of the policy effect from the log linear model would
be given by subtracting the conditional probability that a = 0 given d = 1
(given in equation (21)) from the marginal probability (given in equation
(a = Old = 1) — Prob 
suggestion and use the log linear model to approximate a multivariate
normal model, misleading predictions of policy effects might occur. Indeed,
0, but p < 0 in the normal model, the log linear model would predict
an effect of the program (B < 0) even when none in fact would occur. Conversely,
if 't3 > 0 and p < 0, estimated independence of events in the log linear
0) would lead to incorrect forecasts of policy effects. Mote,
however, that if dummy variables are defined S indicators of latent variables
that cross thresholds, and not as structural shift parameters (7r!3 = 0),
Amemiya's suggestion is appropriate, and the log linear model may be used to
approximate a multivariate normal, model. The parameters B and p then play
'The difference between the first term and the second term is that d
is set to one inside the brackets signifying that everyone in the population
is forced to use birth control.
the same role in their respective models.
A second, more minor point, concerns the computational intractability
of the multivariate logistic model when both continuous and discrete
endogenous variables are present. The reader is invited to differentiate
the cumulative distribution/of the multivariate distribution to confirm
this point.1 Further, as Amemiya has noted the multivariate logistic
distribution arbitrarily fixes the correlation structure among the random
variables, a highly unattractive feature.2 For both reasons, the log linear
structure does not generalize to accommodate continuous and discrete
endogenous variables in a simultaneous equation system.
1That distribution is
1 + E exP(Yi)
2Note, however, that it is misleading to think that the cumulative
logistic distribution introduced in the previous footnote plays the same
role in the log linear model as the multivariate normal plays in the models
of Sections II and III of this paper. In the multivariate case, the log
linear probabilities are not dichotomizations of underlying continuous latent
logistic random variables. Thus, the transition from the log linear model
to the multivariate normal model involves more than a convenient choice of
a joint distribution for the latent variables introduced in Section I of this
paper. Moreover, if one were to alter the log linear model to incorporate
a structural shift term in a that would play the same role as parameter
ITt3 in the normal model, tha term would not be identified. This result is
simply a restatement of the argument in the text.
This paper develops a class of econometric models for simultaneous
equation systenswith dummy endogenous variables. These models are based on
the pioneering work of Pearson on dichotomized variables. The general
model presented here includes simultaneous probit and ordinary simultaneous
equation models as special cases. Dummy endogenous variables are introduced
in two conceptually distinct roles: (1) as proxy variables for unmeasured
latent variables crossing thresholds, as in the classical quantal response
model and (2) as direct shifters of structural behavioral
equations formulated in terms of latent variables. This distinction is
shown to be quite important in the formulation and interpretation of the
econometric models developed here. Maximum likelihood and alternative
estinators are discussed.
Conditions for the existence of a meaningful
statistical model are derived.
The models presented here have already been put to practical use
 and Heckman ). They are computationally
tractable and in the applications cited have led to new interpretations
of old evidence.
The models formulated here are compared with alternative models by
Goodman and Nerlove and Press . It is shown that the log linear
model does not provide a natural framework for formulating the simultaneous
equation model of econometrics whereas the models presented in this paper do.
APPENDIX A
DERIVATION OF THE DENSITY
In this appendix, there is a brief discussion of the derivation of
density f(1 di) that is used in the text. This discussion is useful
because random variables that are the sum of underlying continuous and
discrete random variables are unfamiliar in econometrics. The joint
density of V1, V1 (=
is given by h(Vii V1), a bivariate
normal density. The joint density of
[7 h(Vii Vj)dVjJ
i [ h(V1, Vi)dVi]i
where c = —(X11 w1 + X2i ,r22L
Define a random variable 2. = V1 + l3 di. The joint density of
di is simply
e(Zi — i3di di) [ f h(Z
— ¶l3di Vi)dVi]i
Substitute 7li — X1ilr1i
— X2f12 for Z (noting that the Jacobian is
unity) to reach the density f(y1 di) used in the text.
The measured density for
— it13, 91)dV1 +
h(21, li)d9i
Using conditional normal theory one can write
h(Zi — r13, V) = +(Zi
and also, clearly
where $(j) is a conditional normal density. Then obviously e1(Z) is a proper
density since
J ei(Z)dz1 =
[ (ZiJVi)u(v*)dzdv*
+ J j +(z —
I $(zjl9i)dzj
APPENDIX B
HULTIVARIATE EXTENSIONS
Nultivariate extensions of the models of Sections II and III in
the text are presented in this appendix. Let
be a row vector of G
jointly endogenous latent random variables, some of which may be observed.
Let r be a C xG nonsingular matrix with unit diagonal elements. X is a
lxK row vector of bounded exogenous variables. A is a ICxG coefficient
matrix for the exogenous variables. Td1U is a 1 xc vector of dummy
variables (C c C). Only C1(c C) of these dummy variables act as shifters
of the structural equations. Associated with the C1 shift dummy variables
is a C1xG coefficient matrix B. U1 is a lxG vector of disturbances for
observation i, I = 1,
The structural equation system may be written as
EOJIUJ) = 0
U is assumed to be a multivariate normal random vector. Z is positive
definite. For notational convenience, suppose that the first C latent
variables activate theC dummy variables
1ff Y. > 0
otherwise,j=1, -
and that the first C continuous variables in
are unobserved while the
remaining C—C variables are observed.1 Finally, note that C
assume that the first C1 latent variables generate the C1 shift dummies.
The semi—reduced form for the system is
it = —Ar',
= —Br1 and
It is convenient to work with reduced form variance normalized versions
of these coefficients. Define fl as
= (r)' Er1.
Diagonal matrix D is defined by
D displays the population standard deviation for each element of V. Partition 0, and define D* as
1Note that case 2 in Part I of the text is excluded by the assumption that C1 c C and that only unobserved latent variables generate structural shift. The model can readily be generalized to include this case.
where Dc is a C XC submatrix of the first C diagonal elements of D, and
is a (G—C) x (G—C) identity matrix.
Postmultiply equation (B—2) by
E((V)' v) Q* = (D*) 2(D*).
This operation normalizes the first C semi—reduced form equations to have
a unit variance disturbance, on obvious generalization of the procedure
utilized in Section II in the text. Note that
= ,r(It), i =
In the notation of this appendix, the Principle kssumption in the
text requires that the first C1 rows of the first C1 columns of 0 should
Thus the Principle Assumption in this model becomes
Assuming that the reduced form model is of full rank, the coefficients in the first C1 columns of ir may be estimated by applying
probit analysis to each equation. If C > C1, the coefficients in the next
C—C1 columns of wS and ii may be estimated by applying the methods of
Section III to each equation. Assuming C > C, the coefficients of the
final G—C columns of ir and ff* may be consistently estimated by applying
the methods of Section II to each equation. Precisely the same type of
argument offered in Section II establishes that all elements of
estimable.
Now consider the estimation of structural coefficients. Assume
that through exclusion restrictions all nonzero coefficients in equation
(3—1) could be identified if
were observable.1 Clearly, in the transition
to equation system (B—i) with some continuous variables unobserved,
the same regression coefficients that can be identified in the previous
case can be identified in the current model if they are suitably re—
normalized. To obtain the required normalization, rewrite equation (3—1)
in terms of normalized latent variables
Y(D*y- D*r + X1A + diE = U.
For the normalization implicit in the choice of r, it is natural to post—
multiply this equation by
(Y(D*))(D*r(D*)) + X A(D') + di B(D*)' = Ui(D.*)_l.
Clearly, then, one can identify the following parameters:
o*r(D*)JA* = A(D*) 13* = B(D*)l.
Finally, it is clear that one can identify the following
parameters of
the structural covariance terms
= (D*)l E (D*)'.
This completes the analysis of parameter identification.
The likelihood function for the model may be generated from the
density for random variables di and 4 where
is the 1 X (C-C) subvector
of Y cortespondthg to the observed continuous variables. That density is
defined next. Let
be defined as
1The restriction to exclusion restrictions is overly stringent.
Identification through use of covariance restrictions is also permitted
so long as such restrictions can be imposed on
X1y' + dilr*.
density for di 4, g(d 4) is given by
= F2OPic *[2di_ O
* [2 —U[2ç —U')
where * denotes a Hademard product, ' is a lxc vector of "l's," and 2 is the
number "2". F2 is the derivative of the cumulative distribution for the
multivariate normal with respect to the final C—C elements of
U = U(DsYl, i.e.,
I IzI exp _l/2(Ut (Z*) Ut')dUtc
where U = (Uc, U_c).
The sample likelihood function is
which is to be maximized with respect to the terms in equations (B—4) and
(B—5). As in the text, the identification analysis produces initial consistent estimators to use as starting values.
- In large samples, maximum
likelihood estimators exist, and are consistent and asymptotically
efficient.
One final multivariate extension is worth noting. The models
developed thus far are for unordered dichotomous variables. In some cases,
dummy endogenous variables may be naturally ordered. For example, in an
analysis of the effects of legislation on the income of blacks, one might
distinguish existing laws by their "strength" and a natural ordering would
One simple way to generate such ordered dichotomies is to polytomize
a single latent continuous random variable. Thus, each element of d. say
d1 might be replaced by a vector of dummy variables, with a typical
defined as
0 otherwise, j = 1,
where the categories are mutually exclusive, and the $, j
a set of estimable constants (fixing $ =
Each of the C dummy variables may be polytomized in this fashion)
1This procedure for generating ordered dichotomous variables is
discussed in iire specialized cases by Johnson and Amemiya .