Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI
Brent Mittelstadti
AI Ethics is now a global topic of discussion in academic and policy circles. At least 84 public-private initiatives
have produced statements describing high-level principles, values, and other tenets to guide the ethical
development, deployment, and governance of AI. According to recent meta-analyses, AI Ethics has seemingly
converged on a set of principles that closely resemble the four classic principles of medical ethics. Despite the
initial credibility granted to a principled approach to AI Ethics by the connection to principles in medical ethics,
there are reasons to be concerned about its future impact on AI development and governance. Significant
differences exist between medicine and AI development that suggest a principled approach in the latter may not
enjoy success comparable to the former. Compared to medicine, AI development lacks (1) common aims and
fiduciary duties, (2) professional history and norms, (3) proven methods to translate principles into practice, and
(4) robust legal and professional accountability mechanisms. These differences suggest we should not yet
celebrate consensus around high-level principles that hide deep political and normative disagreement.
Introduction
Over the past several years a plethora of public-private initiatives have arisen globally to define
values, principles, and frameworks for the ethical development and deployment of AI.1 These
initiatives can help focus public debate on a common set of issues and principles, and raise
awareness among the public, developers and institutions of the ethical challenges that
accompany AI.2
To date, at least 84 such ‘AI Ethics’ initiatives have published reports describing high-level
ethical principles, tenets, values, or other abstract requirements for AI development and
deployment.3 Many envision these high-level contributions being ‘translated’ into mid- or lowlevel design requirements and technical fixes, governance frameworks, and professional
Existing initiatives to codify AI Ethics are not without their critics. Many initiatives,
particularly those sponsored by industry, have been characterised as mere virtue signalling
intended to delay regulation and pre-emptively focus debate on abstract problems and technical
solutions.1,4 This view is difficult to dismiss: AI Ethics initiatives have thus far largely
produced vague, high-level principles and value statements which promise to be actionguiding, but in practice provide few specific recommendations5 and fail to address fundamental
normative and political tensions embedded in key concepts (e.g. fairness, privacy).
Declarations by AI companies and developers committing themselves to high-level ethical
principles and self-regulatory codes nonetheless provide policy-makers with a reason not to
pursue new regulation.5,6
Comparisons have recently been drawn between AI Ethics initiatives and medical ethics.7 A
recent review found that many AI Ethics initiatives have converged on a set of principles that
closely resemble the four classic principles of medical ethics.8 This finding has been
i Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St. Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, UK; the Alan Turing Institute,
British Library, 96 Euston Road, London, NW1 2DB, UK. Correspondence via .
subsequently endorsed by the OECD9 and the European Commission’s High Level Expert
Group on Artificial Intelligence (HLEG), which proposed four principles to guide the
development of ‘trustworthy’ AI: respect for human autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness,
and explicability.10
This convergence of AI Ethics around principles of medical ethics is opportune, as it is
historically the most prominent and well-studied approach to applied ethics. ‘Principlism’
emerged from medicine as a theoretical moral framework joining traditional ethical standards
with the requirements of practitioners, research ethics committees, and medical institutions for
practical ethical decision-making.11 Principlism proposes four core principles that require
specification and balancing in different decision-making contexts.12 Whereas principlism in
medical ethics provides a common language to identify and conceptualise ethical
challenges,13,14 and provides guidance for setting health policy and clinical decision-making, a
principled approach in AI Ethics seems intended to embed normative considerations in
technology design and governance. Both approaches address how to embed principles in
professional practice. Principlism thus provides a helpful backdrop to assess the potential for
AI Ethics to enact real change in the development and deployment of AI.
Despite the initial credibility lent by the comparison with medical ethics, there are reasons to
be concerned about the future impact of AI Ethics. Important differences exist between
medicine (and other traditional professions11) and AI development that suggest a principled
approach in the latter may not enjoy success comparable to the former.
This paper critically assesses the strategies and recommendations proposed by current AI
Ethics initiatives. Outputs of existing AI Ethics initiatives were reviewed to determine their
proposed strategy for embedding ethics into the development and governance of AI.3 Prior
work on the implementation and impact of principlism in medicine is used to critically assess
the potential impact of a principled approach to AI ethics.
The challenges of a principled approach to AI Ethics
Four characteristics of AI development suggest a principled approach may have limited
impact on design and governance. Compared to medicine, AI development lacks (1) common
aims and fiduciary duties, (2) professional history and norms, (3) proven methods to translate
principles into practice, and (4) robust legal and professional accountability mechanisms.
Common aims and fiduciary duties
Medicine is broadly guided by a common aim: to promote the health and well-being of the
patient.15 It is a defining quality of a profession for its practitioners to be part of a ‘moral
community’ with common aims, values, and training.16–18 The pursuit of a common goal
facilitates a principled approach to ethical decision-making.11 While there is much
disagreement over the meaning of ‘health’, and how best to promote it in practice, the interests
of patients and medical practitioners remain aligned at some fundamental level which
encourages solidarity and trust.19 By some accounts, practitioners have a moral obligation to
advocate for their patient’s interests against institutional interests.18–20
Comparable solidarity cannot be taken for granted in AI development. AI is largely developed
by the private sector for deployment in public (e.g. criminal sentencing) and private (e.g.
insurance) contexts. The fundamental aims of developers, users, and affected parties do not
necessarily align. Developers often “work in an environment which constantly pressures them
to cut costs, increase profit and deliver higher quality” systems, and face pressure from
management to make decisions that prioritise company interests.21,22 While health
professionals undoubtedly face similar organisational pressures, they are not equivalent in
degree. Unlike medicine, AI development does not serve the equivalent of a ‘patient’ whose
interests are granted initial primacy in ethical decision-making. This lack of a common goal
transforms ethical decision-making from a cooperative to a competitive process, which makes
finding a balance between public and private interests more difficult in practice.
The implicit solidarity of medicine is formally recognised in professional codes of practice and
regulatory frameworks that establish fiduciary duties towards patients.20 Formal professions
are distinguished from other vocations by fiduciary duties derived from the client-practitioner
relationship,23 which are mediated by common goals and values within the profession, and
enforced through sanctions and self-governance (see: Table 1).16,24,25 These characteristics
facilitate a principled approach to ethical decision-making by requiring practitioners to promote
their clients’ best interests.
AI development is not a formal profession. Equivalent fiduciary relationships and
complementary governance mechanisms do not exist for private sector AI developers.5 AI
developers do not commit to ‘public service’, which in other professions requires practitioners
to uphold public interests in the face of competing business or managerial interests.24 For AI
or software deployed in the public sector, such a commitment may be implicit in institutional
or political structures. The same cannot be said for the private sector. Companies and their
employees have principal fiduciary duties towards their shareholders. Public interests are not
granted primacy over commercial interests.
It could be argued that many medical practitioners and institutions face similar pressures.
Hospitals, for example, must ensure their model of healthcare delivery is sustainable and
balances the interests of individual patients against public health goals. Likewise, many new
therapies are developed in the private sector.
These apparent similarities are, however, superficial. Public and private medical institutions
are required to operate within strict regulatory frameworks that ensure the health and wellbeing of patients and research participants are not subsumed in pursuit of sustainability or
profit.13 AI institutions are of course also subject to regulation in certain sectors; data protection
and privacy law, for example, constrain processing of the personal data necessary to train
models. However, the impact of such frameworks is variable and limited in scope.26,27 A unified
regulatory framework does not yet exist for AI which establishes clear fiduciary duties towards
data subjects and users. Should such a framework emerge from AI Ethics, a principled
approach could be deemed successful. But in the absence of strong regulation that establishes
fiduciary duties or primacy for the vital interests of data subjects and users,28 a comparable
degree of value alignment cannot be said to exist for AI.
The absence of a fiduciary relationship in AI means that users cannot trust that developers will
act in their best interests when implementing ethical principles in practice. Reputational risks
may push companies to engage with ethics, but these risks carry weight only as long as they
remain in the public consciousness. Personal moral conviction may also push AI developers
towards ‘good’ behaviour;29 recent examples of internal protests at Google provide some cause
for hope.30,31 However, incentive structures that discourage ‘whistleblowing’ or placing public
interests before the company suggest that virtuous actions will often come at a high personal
cost.32 It is unacceptable that users and affected parties must rely on the personal convictions
of developers, fear of reputational damage, or public outcry for their vital interests in privacy,
autonomy, identity, and other areas to be taken seriously.33
Professional history and norms
The second weakness of a principled approach to AI Ethics is a relative lack of professional
history and well-defined norms of ‘good’ behaviour. Medicine benefits from a long history and
shared professional culture with variation across cultures and specialties. Accounts of the moral
obligations and virtues of health professions have developed over centuries.14 In Western
biomedicine, longstanding standards set in the Hippocratic Oath, the Declaration of Geneva,
the Declaration of Helsinki, and other accounts of the ‘good’ health professional have served
as a basis for clinical decision-making and research ethics,34 and inspired the development of
ethics and codes in other professions.11
These standards and accounts of being a ‘good’ doctor have not entirely prevented ethical
negligence in clinical practice and medical research. Nonetheless, they provide a historically
sensitive account of the obligations of the profession against which negligent conduct and
practices can be identified.19 As such failures have occurred across the profession’s history,
and as new technologies, treatments, and changing social values have disrupted established
norms of good behaviour, ethical standards have been revised.
Evidence of these historical lessons can be seen in modern codes of conduct and ethics; the
American Medical Association’s Code of Medical Ethics, for example, is a highly detailed
document detailing opinions, behavioural norms, and standards across a plethora of medical
practices and technologies.35 The first version (1847) of the code focused solely on professional
conduct and emphasised a paternalistic duty to maximize benefits and minimize harms to
patients. Over time the profession’s standards have shifted away from this myopic focus on
beneficence and professional conduct, and towards other duties owed to patients, most notably
a growing respect for autonomy.14,34 Particularly egregious failures have often provided the
catalyst for change; atrocities in human experimentation, involuntary sterilization, and
euthanasia committed in Nazi Germany during World War II, for example, led to the
formalisation of a set of research ethics principled in the 1947 Nuremberg Code. Similarly, in
the United States the National Research Act and Belmont Report were drafted
in response to abuses observed in the Tuskegee Syphilis Study and other human studies.13,14,34
Principlism12 subsequently arose to correct the “minimal and unsatisfactory professional
morality” the Hippocratic tradition was perceived to have created.14 To move beyond this
tradition, “explicit recognition of basic ethical principles that could help identify various
clinical practices and human experiments as morally questionable or unacceptable” was
required.14 By addressing concerns with conduct as well as practice, principlism has established
a common moral language to identify and address problematic behaviours and practices. This
framework has subsequently taken hold in curricula and training for medical students,
practitioners, and policy-makers, and continues to influence ethical codes and decision-making
in medicine.13,14,36 Principlism thus has a strong, historically informed regulating influence on
the behaviour and ethics of medical practitioners and institutions.
AI development does not have a comparable history, homogenous professional culture and
identity, or similarly developed professional ethics frameworks. The profession has not gone
through comparable transformative moments in which its ethical obligations are clearly
recognised and translated into specific, practical moral duties and best practices. Whereas AI
can in principle be deployed in any context involving human expertise, medicine in comparison
has narrower aims which facilitates development of standard practices and norms. Reflecting
this, AI developers come from varied disciplines and professional backgrounds which have
incongruous histories, cultures, incentive structures, and moral obligations.11,24,25 Reducing the
field to a single vocation or type of expertise would be an oversimplification.11
Software engineering, which is arguably the closest analogue, has historically not been legally
recognised as a profession with fiduciary duties to the public11,37 due to the absence of licensure
schemes and a well-defined professional ‘standard of care’.38 Reflecting this, a comparably
rich account of what it means to be a ‘good’ AI developer or software engineer does not exist;
while the IEEE and ACM, two of the field’s largest professional associations, have published
and revised codes of ethics, these documents remain comparatively short, theoretical, and
lacking in grounded advice and specific behavioural norms.11
Stronger professional standards (and supporting organisations) for AI development could, of
course, be drafted in the future. Unfortunately, this will not be a simple task. Systems are often
created by large, multi-disciplinary and multi-national teams. Whereas the effects of clinical
decision-making are often (but not always) immediate and observable, the impact of decisions
taken in designing, training, and configuring AI systems for different uses may never become
apparent to developers.39 This is worrying, as distance from potential victims has been shown
to have a positive effect on unethical professional behaviour.40 The risks addressed by medical
ethics largely arise from interventions performed (or not) on the physical body. In comparison,
ethical risks in AI are continuous and not similarly bound, and may not be directly experienced
by data subjects.41 Systems are also often ‘opaque’ in the sense that no single person will have
a full understanding of the system’s design or functionality,42 or be able to predict its behaviour.
Even where problems are recognised, they can rarely be traced back to a single team member
or action;43 responsibility must be assigned across a network of actors that influenced the
system’s design, training, and configuration. This inability to reliably predict the effects of
development choices undermines the creation of standards to be a ‘good’ AI developer or
requirements for ‘good’ AI.
AI Ethics initiatives address this gap by defining broadly acceptable principles to guide the
people and processes responsible for the development, deployment, and governance of AI
across radically different contexts of use. At this level of abstraction meaningful guidance may
be impossible.44,45 The great diversity of stakeholders and interests involved necessarily pushes
the search for common values and norms towards a high level of abstraction.24 The results are
statements of principles or values based on abstract and vague concepts, for example
commitments to ensure AI is ‘fair’ or respects ‘human dignity’, which are not specific enough
to be action-guiding.7
Statements reliant on vague normative concepts hide points of political and ethical conflict.
‘Fairness’, ‘dignity’, and other such abstract concepts are examples of “essentially contested
concepts” which have many possible conflicting meanings requiring contextual interpretation
through one’s background political and philosophical beliefs.46 These different interpretations,
which can be rationally and genuinely held, lead to substantively different requirements in
practice47 which will only be revealed once principles or concepts are translated and tested in
practice.48 At best, this conceptual ambiguity allows for context-sensitive specification of
ethical requirements for AI. At worst, it masks fundamental, principled disagreement and
drives AI Ethics towards moral relativism. At a minimum, any compromise reached thus far
around core principles for AI Ethics does not reflect meaningful consensus on a common
practical direction for ‘good’ AI development and governance. We must not confuse high-level
compromise with a priori consensus.
The truly difficult part of ethics—actually translating normative theories, concepts and values
into ‘good’ practices AI practitioners can adopt—is kicked down the road like the proverbial
can. Developers are left to translate principles and specify essentially contested concepts as
they see fit, without a clear roadmap for unified implementation. This process will likely
encounter incommensurable moral norms and frameworks which present true moral dilemmas
that principlism cannot resolve.49–51 An established profession that can draw on a rich history,
ethical culture, and norms of ‘good’ practice will be best placed to conceptualise and debate (if
not resolve) these challenges.11,52 Unfortunately, AI development is left wanting in this regard.
Methods to translate principles in practice
The third weakness of a principled approach to AI Ethics is the absence of proven methods to
translate principles into practice. The prevalence of essentially contested concepts in AI Ethics
begs a question: How can normative disagreements over the ‘correct’ specification of such
concepts be resolved?
Principles do not automatically translate into practice.21 Throughout its history, medicine has
developed effective ways of translating high-level commitments and principles into practical
requirements and norms of ‘good’ practice.14,18 Professional societies and boards, ethics review
committees, accreditation and licensing schemes, peer self-governance, codes of conduct and
other mechanisms supported by strong institutions help determine the ethical acceptability of
day-to-day practice by assessing difficult cases, identifying negligent behaviour, and
sanctioning bad actors.53,54 The formal codes and informal norms that govern medical practice
have been extensively tested, studied, and revised over time, with their recommendations and
norms (and underlying principles) evolving to remain relevant. High-level principles rarely
feature explicitly in clinical decision-making which is instead bounded by institutional policies
that include principled concerns.13 On the ground, case-relevant precedents or specifications
which use the moral language provided by principlism are more common.36,55 Taken together,
institutional and clinical decision-making are effectively a ‘coherence’ approach accounting
for both high-level and grounded considerations.12
AI development does not have comparable empirically proven methods to translate principles
into practice in real-world development contexts. This is a multi-faceted methodological
challenge. Translation involves the specification of high-level principles into mid-level norms
and low-level requirements. Norms and requirements cannot be deduced directly from midlevel principles without accounting for specific elements of the technology, application, context
of use, or relevant local norms.51,55,56 Normative decisions must be made at each stage of
translation, and coherence must be sought between principles, specified norms or rules, and the
facts of the case.12,56 It follows that the justification arising from widespread consensus on a
set of common principles does not transfer to the mid-level norms and low-level requirements
derived from them. Each stage of translation and specification must be independently justified.
A universally accepted hierarchy of principles to prioritise competing norms does not exist.49,57
This observation reveals the scope of work that remains for AI Ethics. High-level consensus is
encouraging, but it has little bearing on the justification of norms and practical requirements
proposed within specific contexts of use. Due to the necessity of local specification and
justification, the prominence of essentially contested concepts in AI Ethics, and the field’s
relative lack of a binding professional history (see: Section 2.2), conflicting practical
requirements will almost certainly emerge across the diverse sectors and contexts in which a
principled approach to AI Ethics is used.
One other methodological challenge remains. Normative practical requirements must somehow
be embedded in development processes, and functionally implanted in design requirements.
Prior work points to the difficulty of embedding ethical values and principles in technology
design and the development cycle.1,56,58,59 Many such methods exist,60 including participatory
design, reflective design, Values@Play, and Value-Sensitive Design,1 but thus far they have
largely been implemented and studied in academic contexts which are more receptive to
normative concerns than commercial settings.22,60,61 Value-conscious methods are also largely
procedural, not functional. Generally speaking, they introduce values, normative issues, and
relevant stakeholders into the development process.56 They do not, however, allow for
particular values to be ‘injected’ into system design, and struggle to capture the degree to which
the resulting artefact reflects particular values or specifications.58
Value-conscious design frameworks face additional challenges in commercial development
processes. Ethics has a cost. AI is often developed behind ‘closed doors’ without public
representation. Gathering the views of relevant stakeholders, embedding an ethicist with the
development team, and resolving conflicts between different specifications of essentially
contested concepts create additional work and costs. Unsurprisingly, ethical considerations
may be discarded when they conflict with commercial incentives.22 It cannot be assumed that
value-conscious frameworks will be meaningfully implemented in commercial processes that
value efficiency, speed, and profit.
Legal and professional accountability
The fourth weakness of a principled approach to AI Ethics is the relative lack of legal and
professional accountability mechanisms. Medicine is governed by legal and professional
frameworks which uphold professional standards and provide patients with redress for
negligent behaviour, including malpractice law, licensing and certification schemes, ethics
committees, and professional medical boards.53,54 Medical institutions subject to regulation
help ensure these standards are upheld.13 Legally supported accountability mechanisms provide
an external impetus for health professionals to fulfil their fiduciary duties, amplifies
complementary forms of self-governance by establishing a clear link between ‘bad’ behaviour
and professional sanctions (e.g. losing one’s license to practice),11 mandates a professional
standard of care, and allows patients to make claims against negligent members of the
profession.
Excluding certain types of risks (e.g. privacy violations governed by data protection law), AI
development does not have comparable professionally or legally endorsed accountability
mechanisms.62 This is a problem. Serious, long-term commitment to self-regulatory
frameworks cannot be taken for granted.4,5
Prior research on the impact of codes of ethics on professional behaviour has revealed mixed
results. Codes are often followed in letter rather than spirit, or as a ‘checklist’ rather than as
part of a critical reflexive practice.24,50,63,64 A recent study of the ACM Code of Ethics revealed
that it has little effect on the day-to-day decision-making of software engineering professionals
and students.65 Other studies of corporate and professional codes of ethics outside computing
have reported similar results.66–68 A recent meta-analysis of evidence on the impact of codes
on professional behaviour found that the mere existence of a code has no discernible effect on
unethical behaviour; rather, an effect is only found when codes (and their underlying
principles) are embedded in organisational culture and actively enforced.29,69,70 Norms must be
clearly defined and highly visible if they are to influence practitioners11 and inspire peer selfgovernance. Current governance structures in AI companies are insufficient in this regard.2
External sanctions for breaching a code are also key for adherence and effective selfgovernance.11 Compared with medicine, information professions lack sanctions that can impact
the professional’s livelihood.24 While software engineering degrees can now be accredited, a
license is not required to practice,71 with some national exceptions.72–74 Professional bodies
such as the IEEE and ACM lack formal sanction powers beyond expulsion from the
organisation which, absent licensing, does not impact the ability to practice.
While stronger legal and professional accountability mechanisms could be adopted, this seems
unlikely in the near term. AI development is not a unified profession with a long-standing
history and harmonised aims. AI developers do not formally provide a public service, meaning
public interests need not be given primacy.75 AI does not operate in a single sector, meaning
any new legal or professional mechanisms must account for myriad potential benefits and
harms, and integrate with existing sector-specific law. Finally, proposals to introduce
professional sanctions and licensing schemes for computing professionals are also not new, but
have thus far seen limited uptake.72,74,76,77
These weaknesses in existing legal and professional accountability mechanisms for AI raises a
difficult question: is it enough to define ‘good intentions’ and hope for the best? Without
complementary punitive mechanisms and governance bodies to ‘step in’ when self-governance
fails, a principled approach runs the risk of merely providing false assurances of ethical or
trustworthy AI.78
Where should AI Ethics go from here?
While principlism has undoubtedly significantly influenced medical ethics owing to the four
characteristics analysed above, it has not been an unqualified success. The comparative
shortcomings of AI development along these lines thus gives cause for concern. First, AI
development is not a formal profession with aims that align with public interests. Second,
developers are not governed by a historically validated account of what it means to be a ‘good’
AI developer. Third, outside of academic contexts AI development lacks proven methods to
translate principles into practice. And finally, when a developer falls afoul of these vaguely
defined requirements, there remain few sanction mechanisms and channels for redress to set
things right. Signing up to self-regulatory codes lacking clearly defined and enforceable
obligations costs developers nothing, but can have immediate benefits in terms of
trustworthiness and reputation. Together, these shortcomings point towards significant
challenges facing the implementation of AI Ethics.
We must therefore hesitate to celebrate consensus around high-level principles that hide deep
political and normative disagreement. Shared principles are not enough to guarantee
trustworthy or ethical AI in the future. Without a fundamental shift in regulation, translating
principles into practice will remain a competitive, not cooperative, process. This is a problem,
as principles remain vacuous until tested, at which point the true costs and value of a principled
approach to AI Ethics will be revealed. Conflicting prescriptions of essentially contested
concepts are to be expected. Resolving these conflicts is where the real work starts for AI
Ethics. A key question remains: how can this essential work be supported by government,
industry, and civil society?
1. Clearly define sustainable pathways to impact
A principled approach requires cooperative oversight to ensure translated norms and
requirements remain fit for purpose and impactful over time. Going forward, the long-term
aims and pathways to impact of principled initiatives must be more clearly defined (see: Table
2 for key questions). Binding and highly visible accountability structures as well as clear
implementation and review processes are needed at a sectoral and organisational level.25
Professional and institutional norms can be established by defining clear requirements for
inclusive design, transparent ethical review,16 documentation of models and datasets, and
independent ethical auditing.
2. Support ‘bottom-up’ AI Ethics in the private sector
A ‘top-down’ approach to AI Ethics is uniquely difficult due to the diversity of technologies
described as ‘AI’. In such a diverse field, generalist top-down approaches must be
complemented by bottom-up case studies of production AI systems. Local practices can be
collaboratively assessed to specify principles and define precedents to move professional
standards forward.11,52 Novel cases reveal new challenges for AI Ethics, which are desperately
needed to move the field beyond well-worn cases79,80 and develop sector- and case-specific
guidelines, technical solutions, and an empirical knowledge base detailing the impact and
harms of production AI technologies. Much current ‘bottom-up’ work pursues technological
solutions and metrics for ethical concepts amenable to quantification (e.g. fairness),5,81 and
occurs primarily in an academic environment. Increased support and access to development
settings should be made available to support multi-disciplinary bottom-up research and
development in AI Ethics, particularly in commercial development contexts currently closed
to external scrutiny.
3. License developers of high-risk AI
To encourage long-term recognition of ethical commitments, it may be necessary to formally
establish AI development as a profession with equivalent standing to other high-risk
professions. It is a regulatory oddity that we license professions providing a public service, but
not the profession responsible for developing technical systems to augment or replace human
expertise and decision-making within them. The risks of licensed professions have not
dissipated, but rather been displaced to AI. To unpack the significant challenges facing
licensing such a diverse set of practitioners,11 initiatives could initially target developers of
systems with elevated risk or built for the public sector, such as facial recognition systems
designed for policing.
4. Shift from professional ethics to organisational ethics
The outputs of many AI Ethics initiatives resemble professional codes of ethics that address
design requirements and the behaviours and values of individual professions.1 The legitimacy
of particular applications and their underlying business and organisational interests remain
largely unquestioned.1,82 This approach conveniently steers debate towards the transgressions
of unethical individuals, and away from the collective failure of unethical organisations and
business models.27 Developers will always be constrained by the institutions that employ them.
To be truly effective, the ethical challenges of AI cannot conceptualised as individual failures.
Going forward, AI Ethics must become an ethics of AI businesses and organisations as well.
5. Pursue ethics as a process, not technological solutionism
Many initiatives suggest ethical challenges can best be addressed through “technical and design
expertise,” and address concepts for which technical fixes seem feasible (e.g. privacy,
fairness),1 but rarely propose technical definitions or explanations.5 Exceptions such as the
IEEE’s ‘Ethically-Aligned Design’ initiative do exist, although the impact and uptake of this
work in commercial environments remains to be seen.83 Nonetheless, the rationale seems to be
as follows: insufficient consideration of ethics leads to poor design decisions which create
systems that harm users.
This attitude is misguided. The promise of AI largely owes to its apparent capacity to replace
or augment human expertise. This malleability means AI inevitably becomes entangled in the
ethical and political dimensions of vocations and practices in which it is embedded. AI Ethics
is effectively a microcosm of the political and ethical challenges faced in society. Framing
ethical challenges in terms of design flaws ensures they remain “fundamentally technical,
shielded from democratic intervention.”1 It is foolish to assume that very old and complex
normative questions can be solved with technical fixes or ‘good’ design alone. The risk is that
complex, difficult ethical debates will be oversimplified to make the concepts at hand
computable and implementable in a straightforward but conceptually shallow manner.80
Ethics is not meant to be easy or formulaic. Intractable principled disagreements should be
expected and welcomed, as they reflect both serious ethical consideration and diversity of
thought. They do not represent failure, and do not need to be ‘solved’. Ethics is a process, not
a destination. The real work of AI Ethics begins now: to translate and implement our lofty
principles, and in doing so to begin to understand the real ethical challenges of AI.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Prof. Sandra Wachter, Prof. Barbara Prainsack, and Prof.
Bernd Stahl for their insightful feedback that has immensely improved the quality of this
work. Financial support for this work was provided by the Alan Turing Institute (EPSRC)
and the British Academy.
Competing Interests
The author has previously received reimbursement for conference-related travel from funding
provided by DeepMind Technologies Limited.