Statistics and Its Interface Volume 2 457–468
Conceptual issues concerning mediation,
interventions and composition
Tyler J. VanderWeele∗and Stijn Vansteelandt
Concepts concerning mediation in the causal inference literature are reviewed. Notions of direct and indirect eﬀects
from a counterfactual approach to mediation are compared
with those arising from the standard regression approach to
mediation of Baron and Kenny , commonly utilized in
the social science literature. It is shown that concepts of direct and indirect eﬀect from causal inference generalize those
described by Baron and Kenny and that under appropriate
identiﬁcation assumptions these more general direct and indirect eﬀects from causal inference can be estimated using
regression even when there are interactions between the primary exposure of interest and the mediator. A number of
conceptual issues are discussed concerning the interpretation of identiﬁcation conditions for mediation, the notion of
counterfactuals based on hypothetical interventions and the
so called consistency and composition assumptions.
Keywords and phrases: Causal inference, Counterfactuals, Direct and indirect eﬀects, Intervention, Mediation.
The notion of mediation concerns the extent to which the
eﬀect of one variable on another is mediated by some possible intermediate variable. As such, notions of mediation
concern causality. The use of mediation analysis has become
quite common in the social sciences. An approach based on
regression analysis advocated by Baron and Kenny 
is now utilized routinely, especially within the literature on
psychology. More recently, an approach to mediation arising
from the causal inference literature and based on the notion
of counterfactuals has been proposed . The current paper is structured in
two parts. In the ﬁrst part we will review notions of direct
and indirect eﬀects from the causal inference literature on
mediation and will relate these notions to the approach advocated by Baron and Kenny . We will show how the
notions from causal inference generalize those arising from
the Baron and Kenny approach. In particular, under certain
identiﬁcation conditions, the approach based on causal inference allows for the deﬁnition of direct and indirect eﬀects
and for eﬀect decomposition of a total eﬀect into a direct
and indirect eﬀect even in settings with interaction and nonlinearities. Under appropriate identiﬁcation conditions, the
∗Corresponding author.
direct and indirect eﬀects deﬁned in the causal inference
literature can also be estimated in a regression framework.
In the second part of the paper we will consider in some
detail a number of conceptual issues raised by the causal
inference or counterfactual approach to mediation. We will
discuss the constraints imposed by identiﬁcation conditions
for mediation; we will discuss the extent to which an approach to mediation based on interventions is possible and
we will ﬁnally consider the interpretation of a conceptual
assumption, sometimes referred to as “composition”, which
is made in the causal inference work on mediation when
decomposing total eﬀects into direct and indirect eﬀects.
DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS IN
CAUSAL INFERENCE
To formalize the meaning of a direct eﬀect, we conceptualize for each subject the existence of a so-called counterfactual outcome Y (a), which denotes the outcome that we
would — possibly contrary to fact — have observed for that
subject had the exposure A been set to the value a through
some intervention or manipulation . Variables such as Y (a) are referred to as “potential
outcomes” or “counterfactual outcomes”. If the exposure A
is dichotomous (e.g., taking values 0 for no exposure and
1 otherwise), then we can think of each subject having 2
such counterfactual outcomes, Y (0) and Y (1). The (average) causal eﬀect of the exposure on the outcome can then
be deﬁned as the expected diﬀerence E[Y (1)−Y (0)] between
both counterfactual outcomes for the same study population. This is to be contrasted with the more usual expected
diﬀerence E[Y |A = 1] −E[Y |A = 0], where Y denotes the
observed outcome, which may not carry the interpretation
of a causal eﬀect when the subgroups of exposed and unexposed subjects are not inherently comparable. More generally, we deﬁne the conditional causal eﬀect of exposure level
a versus 0 (where we let 0 denote an arbitrary reference
level) on the outcome, given pre-exposure covariates C, as
the expected contrast E[Y (a) −Y (0)|C].
To be able to identify total causal eﬀects, the following
2 assumptions must be made. The so-called consistency assumption states that amongst subjects with observed exposure level A = a, the observed outcome Y is equal to the
potential outcome Y (a) (i.e., Y (a) = Y when A = a). Under this assumption, we can observe one of the potential
outcomes for each subject, namely the one corresponding to
the observed exposure level (i.e., Y = Y (A)). We return to
this assumption below. We need one further assumption for
the identiﬁcation of total causal eﬀects; we also need some
additional notation. For random variables A, B and C, let
A ⊥⊥B|C denote that A is conditionally independent of B,
For the identiﬁcation of total causal eﬀects, we
will assume that subjects with diﬀerent observed exposure
levels A, but the same pre-exposure characteristics C, are
comparable in the sense that
Y (a) ⊥⊥A|C
for all exposure levels a. This assumption states that a subject’s choice of exposure level A, while possibly related to
pre-exposure characteristics C, has no residual dependence
on how that subject would fare under an arbitrary, ﬁxed
exposure level. It is usually referred to as the no unmeasured confounders assumption as it eﬀectively states that
the variables in C are the only confounders of the association between exposure and outcome. Both these assumptions cannot be tested on the basis of the observed data, but,
in combination, are suﬃcient for identifying the conditional
causal eﬀect as
E[Y (a) −Y (0)|C]
= E[Y (a)|C] −E[Y (0)|C]
= E[Y (a)|A = a, C] −E[Y (0)|A = 0, C]
= E[Y |A = a, C] −E[Y |A = 0, C].
We could take averages over the distribution of C to obtain
average causal eﬀects, E[Y (1) −Y (0)].
By extending the previous concepts to a joint exposure
(A, M) where M is the potential mediator, deﬁnitions of
direct and indirect eﬀects can be constructed. For each subject, let us deﬁne Y (a, m) to be the outcome that we would
— possibly contrary to fact — have observed for that subject
had the exposure A been set to the value a and, likewise,
M to the value m, through some intervention or manipulation. Similarly, we can consider counterfactual variables
M(a) which denote the value of the mediator if — possibly contrary to fact — the exposure A were set to a. For
a dichotomous exposure, the controlled direct eﬀect of the
exposure on the outcome, controlling for M, can then be de-
ﬁned as the expected contrast E[Y (1, m)−Y (0, m)] . It expresses the exposure
eﬀect that would be realized if the mediator were controlled
at level m uniformly in the population. For instance, in accordance with Figure 1, let A be the father’s occupation, let
Y be the respondent’s income, let M be the respondent’s
occupation, let C1 be the father’s education, and let C2 be
the respondent’s education. Then E[Y (a, m) −Y (0, m)] expresses the average change in income that would be realized
in a subgroup of respondents if their father changed occupation (from 0 to a), but their own occupation were kept
Figure 1. Example of the eﬀect of A on Y mediated by M
with both exposure-outcome confounders and
mediator-outcome confounders.
uniformly at level m.
More generally, we will deﬁne the
conditional controlled direct eﬀect of exposure level a versus
0 on the outcome (controlling for M), given covariates C,
as the expected contrast E[Y (a, m) −Y (0, m)|C].
The consistency assumption for joint exposure (A, M) is
then that amongst the subgroup with observed exposure
A = a and observed mediator M = m, the observed outcome
Y is equal to Y (a, m). The consistency assumption for the
eﬀect of the exposure on the mediator is that amongst the
subgroup with observed exposure A = a the observed mediator M is equal to M(a). The assumption of no-unmeasuredconfounders for the exposure-outcome relationship can then
be expressed as
Y (a, m) ⊥⊥A|C
for all levels of a and m. However, controlled direct eﬀects in
general require stronger conditions for identiﬁcation than do
total causal eﬀects. This is because the deﬁnition of a controlled direct eﬀect requires evaluating the impact of holding
the mediator M ﬁxed. For this purpose, one must know all
confounders of the association between mediator and outcome, which we formally express as
Y (a, m) ⊥⊥M|A, C
for all levels of a and m. To identify controlled direct eﬀects,
the set C must contain all of the confounders of both the
exposure-outcome relationship and the mediator-outcome
relationship i.e. in Figure 1 control must be made for both
C1 and C2 to identify controlled direct eﬀects. If control is
not made for the variables that confound the relationship
between the mediator and the outcome (the variables C2 in
Figure 1) then estimates of direct eﬀects will generally be
biased . In the early mediation literature, this point about controlling for the mediator-outcome
confounders was made by Judd and Kenny but was
not pointed out by Baron and Kenny and was also
subsequently ignored by much of the social science literature on mediation.
The importance of controlling for the
confounders of the mediator-outcome relationship has been
458 T. J. VanderWeele and S. Vansteelandt
Figure 2. Example of an eﬀect of the exposure confounding
the mediator-outcome relationship.
emphasized in the causal inference literature on mediation
 . If assumptions (1) and (2) hold, then controlled direct eﬀects are identiﬁed by
E[Y (a, m) −Y (0, m)|C]
= E[Y |A = a, M = m, C] −E[Y |A = 0, M = m, C].
We could take averages over the distribution of C to obtain
average controlled direct eﬀects, E[Y (a, m)−Y (0, m)]. Note
that, because the mediator M arises later in time than the
exposure A, it is possible that the exposure itself may affect one or more of the confounders of the mediator-outcome
relationship. Such an example is given in Figure 2 with L
being both an eﬀect of exposure A and a confounder of the
mediator-outcome relationship. Note that in Figure 2, L
could also be considered to be a mediator of the eﬀect of
A on Y ; which variable is taken to be the mediator of interest will depend on the context. In this paper we will use
M to denote the mediator of interest and L to denote any
confounders of the mediator-outcome relationship that are
aﬀected by the exposure A. When there are confounders of
the mediator-outcome relationship that are aﬀected by the
exposure, condition (2) can be modiﬁed to
Y (a, m) ⊥⊥M|A, C, L
for all levels of a and m and then controlled direct eﬀects
can still be identiﬁed . For most of this paper, however, we will restrict our attention to settings in which the
confounders of the mediator-outcome relationship are not
aﬀected by exposure. We will consider the scope of such
settings further below.
There are a number of limitations to the concept of a
controlled direct eﬀect. First, as in the previous example, it
is often not realistic to imagine scenarios where one would
consider forcing the mediator to be the same for all subjects
in the population (e.g. forcing all subjects to have the same
occupation). Second, indirect eﬀects cannot be deﬁned in
a similar manner as controlled direct eﬀects because it is
impossible to hold a set of variables ﬁxed, in such a way
that the eﬀect of exposure on outcome would circumvent
the direct pathway. In particular, the total causal eﬀect,
say E[Y (a) −Y (0)], minus the controlled direct eﬀect, say
E[Y (a, m) −Y (0, m)], may not carry the interpretation of
an indirect eﬀect. Because of potential exposure-mediator
interactions, the diﬀerence may be non-zero even if the expsoure has no eﬀect on the mediator so that none of the eﬀect
of the exposure is mediated by M . Both limitations can be overcome
by considering so-called natural direct eﬀects which may be deﬁned as the expected contrast
E[Y (a, M(0))−Y (0, M(0))]. Robins and Greenland 
refer to this quantity as the pure direct eﬀect to distinguish
it from the total direct eﬀect, E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (0, M(a))];
both are instances of what Pearl calls natural direct
eﬀects and we will thus use the terms pure natural direct effect and total natural direct eﬀect. The pure natural direct
eﬀect, E[Y (a, M(0))−Y (0, M(0))], expresses the eﬀect that
would be realized if the exposure were administered, but its
eﬀect on the mediator were somehow blocked, or equivalently, if the mediator were kept at the level it would have
taken in the absence of the exposure. More generally, we will
deﬁne the conditional pure natural direct eﬀect of exposure
level a versus 0 on the outcome (other than through modifying M), given pre-exposure covariates C, as the expected
contrast E[Y (a, M(0))−Y (0, M(0))|C]. In the context of the
example, this expresses the average change in income that
would be realized in a subgroup of respondents (all of whose
fathers had the same education) if their father changed occupation (from 0 to a), but they kept their own occupation.
While controlled direct eﬀects are often of greater interest in
policy evaluation , natural direct
and indirect eﬀects may be of greater interest in evaluating
the action of various mechanisms = Y (a, M(a)) i.e. that the potential
outcome Y (a) intervening to set A to a is equal to the potential outcome Y (a, M(a)) intervening to set A to a and
to set M to the value it would have been if A had been a.
Under this composition assumption the pure natural direct
eﬀect E[Y (1, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0))|C] can also be expressed
as E[Y (1, M(0))−Y (0)|C]. We return to the interpretation
of the composition assumption below.
The use of natural direct eﬀects overcomes the previously
listed limitations of controlled direct eﬀects. First, this is so
because the level M(0) at which the mediator is controlled
allows for natural variation between subjects. Second, this
is so because the diﬀerence between the total causal eﬀect
and a pure natural direct eﬀect
E[Y (a) −Y (0)|C] −E[Y (a, M(0)) −Y (0)|C]
= E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a, M(0))|C]
Conceptual issues concerning mediation, interventions and composition 459
expresses how much the outcome would change on average
if the exposure were controlled at level a, but the mediator
were changed from level M(0) to M(a). It thus carries the
interpretation of an indirect eﬀect and will be termed the
total natural indirect eﬀect . Importantly, the above eﬀect decomposition
does not assume that the functional form relating A, M,
and Y is linear nor that there is no interaction between
the eﬀects of A and M on Y . Likewise, the diﬀerence between the total eﬀect and the total natural direct eﬀect,
E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (0, M(a))|C] = E[Y (a) −Y (0, M(a))|C],
E[Y (a) −Y (0)|C] −E[Y (a) −Y (0, M(a))|C]
= E[Y (0, M(a)) −Y (0, M(0))|C],
which expresses how much the outcome would change on
average if the exposure were controlled at level 0, but the
mediator were changed from its natural level M(0) to the
level M(a) which it would have taken at exposure level a.
This is termed the pure natural indirect eﬀect . In the context of the example, this expresses the average change in income that would
be realized in a subgroup of respondents (all of whose fathers had the same education) if their father’s occupation
were uniformly controlled at the reference level 0, but they
changed their occupation to what they would have had if
their father had a diﬀerent occupation a.
Controlled and natural direct and indirect eﬀects can all
be deﬁned so as to compare levels of exposure a and a∗
rather than a and 0. Thus, the controlled direct eﬀect under
this comparison is E[Y (a, m)−Y (a∗, m)|C]; the pure natural
direct eﬀect is E[Y (a, M(a∗)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C]; the total
natural indirect eﬀect is E[Y (a, M(a))−Y (a, M(a∗))|C]; the
total natural direct eﬀect is E[Y (a, M(a))−Y (a∗, M(a))|C];
and the pure natural indirect eﬀect is E[Y (a∗, M(a)) −
Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C].
Identiﬁcation of natural direct eﬀects, like controlled direct eﬀects, requires assumptions (1) and (2) but relies on
additional assumptions as well. First, to be able to assess
what values the mediator would take if the exposure were
controlled, one must have measured all confounders of the
association between exposure and mediator, which we formally express as
M(a) ⊥⊥A|C
for all levels of a. In addition to assumptions (1)–(3) the
identiﬁcation of natural direct and indirect eﬀects is generally made by imposing an additional assumption.
 , for example, eﬀectively identiﬁes natural direct and
indirect eﬀects by also assuming
Y (a, m) ⊥⊥M(a∗)|C
for all levels of a, a∗and m. For example, for the natural
direct eﬀect Y (a, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0)) we would need (4)
to hold for a∗= 0. Condition (4) is somewhat diﬃcult to
interpret but will generally hold if condition (2) holds and if
there are no variables L that are eﬀects of exposure and that
confound the mediator-outcome relationship .
Under assumptions (1)–(4), the natural direct eﬀect can be
identiﬁed by
E[Y (a, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0))|C]
{E[Y |A = a, M = m, C]
−E[Y |A = 0, M = m, C]}
× f(M = m|A = 0, C)dm.
Natural indirect eﬀects can be obtained by subtracting a
natural direct eﬀect from a total eﬀect as explained above.
Note that even in settings in which the identiﬁcation conditions for controlled and natural direct and indirect eﬀects
are not satisﬁed, data can sometimes still be used to obtain
bounds on these eﬀects .
Alternatively, instead of assumption (4), one can identify natural direct and indirect eﬀects by making the nointeraction assumption that Y (a, m) −Y (0, m) is a random
variable that does not depend on m. This assumption states
that the eﬀect of changing the exposure from 0 to a while
holding the mediator ﬁxed, is the same no matter what value
m to which one intervenes to ﬁx the mediator. Under assumptions (1) and (2) and the no-interaction assumption,
natural direct eﬀects can be identiﬁed . Petersen et al. consider an assumption that essentially
allows for identiﬁcation of natural direct and indirect effects under assumptions (1)–(3) along with a disjunction of
assumption (4) and the no-interaction assumption. In the
next section, we will show how the approach of Baron and
Kenny of using regression to assess mediation can be
extended to settings including interactions. Instead of the
no-interaction assumption, we will thus assume that conditions (1)–(4) hold. That is, we will restrict our consideration to settings in which there are no variables L that are
eﬀects of exposure and that confound the mediator-outcome
relationship and we will assume the set C contains all confounders of the exposure-outcome, mediator-outcome and
exposure-mediator relationships.
DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS USING
REGRESSION
In assessing mediation, Baron and Kenny proposed using regression models such as
E[M|A = a, C = c] = β0 + β1a + β′
E[Y |A = a, M = m, C = c] = θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ′
460 T. J. VanderWeele and S. Vansteelandt
in order to assess mediation. They proposed that the direct
eﬀect be assessed by estimating θ1 and that the indirect effect be assessed by estimating β1θ2; subsequent literature
has discussed a variety of estimation procedures . Importantly, the regression models Baron and
Kenny proposed do not include an interaction term θ3am in
the regression model for Y . In this section we show how the
notions of direct and indirect eﬀects from causal inference
introduced in the previous section can extend the Baron and
Kenny approach in settings in which there is an interaction
term θ3am in the regression model for Y i.e. in settings in
which the exposure and the mediator interact in their effects on the outcome. We assume that the mediator M and
outcome Y are continuous; the results will apply to arbitrary exposures A. When the mediator M is dichotomous
rather than continuous a somewhat similar approach to the
one described here could potentially be used; however, if the
model for M is logistic, rather than linear, then the analytic
formulas for the natural direct and indirect eﬀects no longer
take quite as simple a form.
Suppose then that, instead of using regression models (6)
and (7), one were to use regression model (6) and the following regression model
E[Y |A = a, M = m, C = c]
= θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ3am + θ′
i.e. one were to use the regression models of Baron and
Kenny but to include a product term θ3am in the
regression model for Y . In the appendix we show that under assumptions (1)–(4) and under correct speciﬁcation of
the regression models, the controlled direct eﬀect and the
natural direct and indirect eﬀects are given by:
E[Y (a, m) −Y (a∗, m)|C] = (θ1 + θ3m)(a −a∗)
E[Y (a, M(a∗)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C]
= (θ1 + θ3β0 + θ3β1a∗+ θ3β′
2C)(a −a∗)
E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a, M(a∗))|C]
= (θ2β1 + θ3β1a)(a −a∗).
Note that the expression for the controlled direct eﬀect only
requires assumptions (1) and (2) and that the regression
model (8) is correctly speciﬁed; the expressions for natural
direct and indirect eﬀects requires assumptions (1)–(4) and
correct speciﬁcation of models (6) and (8).
Several points merit attention. First, if there were indeed
no product term θ3am in the regression model, i.e. if θ3 = 0,
then the expressions in (9) reduce to
E[Y (a, m) −Y (a∗, m)|C] = θ1(a −a∗)
E[Y (a, M(a∗)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C] = θ1(a −a∗)
E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a, M(a∗))|C] = θ2β1(a −a∗)
and thus the controlled and the natural direct eﬀects coincide and are equal to θ1 for a one unit change in a, which is
the direct eﬀect given by the Baron and Kenny approach; the
natural indirect eﬀect is equal to θ2β1 for a one unit change
in a, which thus coincides with the indirect eﬀect given by
the Baron and Kenny approach.
Thus when θ3 = 0, the
notions of direct and indirect eﬀects from causal inference
reduce to the eﬀects given in Baron and Kenny’s proposal.
Second, when there is interaction so that θ3 ̸= 0, one
can still deﬁne direct and indirect eﬀects as described above
and one can still decompose a total eﬀect into a natural direct eﬀect and a natural indirect eﬀect; one can moreover,
still use regression models to estimate natural direct and
indirect eﬀects and doing so gives the expressions given in
(9) provided assumptions (1)–(4) hold.
The deﬁnitions of
natural direct and indirect eﬀects given in the causal inference literature thus usefully extend concepts of direct and
indirect eﬀects from the social science literature to include
settings with interactions. The deﬁnitions from causal inference given above furthermore apply also to settings with
non-linear models .
Third, the expressions given in (9) are for the pure natural direct eﬀect, E[Y (a, M(a∗)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C], and the
total natural indirect eﬀect, E[Y (a, M(a))−Y (a, M(a∗))|C].
One can similarly obtain expressions for the total natural
direct eﬀect, E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a∗, M(a))|C], and the pure
natural indirect eﬀect, E[Y (a∗, M(a)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C].
Using calculations similar to those in the appendix one obtains
E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a∗, M(a))|C]
= (θ1 + θ3β0 + θ3β1a + θ3β′
2C)(a −a∗)
E[Y (a∗, M(a)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C]
= (θ2β1 + θ3β1a∗)(a −a∗).
The expression for the total natural direct eﬀect diﬀers from
pure natural direct eﬀect given in (9) in that it has the
term θ3β1a, rather than θ3β1a∗.
The expression for the
pure natural indirect eﬀect diﬀers from total natural indirect
eﬀect given in (9) in that it has the term θ3β1a∗rather than
Finally, if the formulas in (9) are used to estimate direct
and indirect eﬀects by using estimates from linear regressions (6) and (8) then standard errors for the estimates of
these direct and indirect eﬀects could be obtained either
through bootstrapping or by the delta method as described in the
In this section we have restricted attention to the setting in which there are no eﬀects of exposure that confound
the mediator-outcome relationship. Some progress can be
made even in settings in which there are such exposureinduced mediator-outcome confounders but estimation in
such cases requires techniques beyond simple regression
analysis . In the next section we will consider in greater detail
this assumption that there are no eﬀects of exposure that
confound the mediator-outcome relationship.
CONCEPTUAL ISSUES CONCERNING THE
IDENTIFICATION OF NATURAL DIRECT
AND INDIRECT EFFECTS
In the previous section, to derive the expressions for
direct and indirect eﬀects given in (9) we have assumed
that condition (4) would hold. Condition (4) allowed for
the identiﬁcation of natural direct and indirect eﬀects but
condition (4) is a strong assumption. Pearl gives a
graphical interpretation of condition (4) essentially showing that it requires that there be no consequence of exposure that confounds the relationship between the mediator
and the outcome. Condition (4) will be violated if there are
such exposure-induced confounders, irrespective of whether
or not data is available on them. Condition (4) contrasts
with conditions (1)–(3). Conditions (1)–(3) could potentially
be satisﬁed, at least approximately, by collecting data on
more and more confounding variables C; conditions (1)–(3)
are no-unmeasured-confounding assumptions. Condition (4)
however requires that there be no eﬀect of exposure that
confounds the relationship between the mediator and the
outcome; if there are such variables condition (4) will be violated irrespective of whether data is available for all such
variables.
In many contexts, condition (4) will not be reasonable.
Thus in the example concerning the eﬀects of a father’s occupational choice, A, on a respondent’s income, Y , as mediated by respondent’s occupation, M, if the father’s occupational choice aﬀects the respondent’s education level, which
we might denote by L in Figure 2, then condition (4) will be
violated. If the father’s occupational choice does not aﬀect
the respondent’s education level, as in Figure 1 where we
would denote respondent’s education level by C2, then condition (4) may be satisﬁed. In general one can imagine many
variables on the pathway between the exposure of interest
and the mediator. Condition (4), that there are no eﬀects of
exposure that confound the mediator-outcome relationship,
essentially then requires that of all the variables that are
on the pathway from the exposure to the mediator, none of
these also aﬀects the outcome. As noted above, this assumption will often be violated and in such cases, natural direct
and indirect eﬀects will not in general be identiﬁed. There
are exceptions; for example, natural direct and indirect effects can be identiﬁed as in (5) without assumption (4) if
the no-interaction assumption holds ; see Petersen et al. , Hafeman and VanderWeele and
Imai et al. for other exceptions. However, it has been
shown that whenever there is a consequence of the exposure that also aﬀects both the mediator and the outcome
then natural direct and indirect eﬀects are not in general
identiﬁed .
Perhaps one notable exception in which assumption (4) is
more reasonable are settings in which the mediator is measured immediately after, or very shortly after, the exposure
takes place. For example, Nelson et al. examine the
extent to which the framing of political issues in news media aﬀected subjects’ tolerance of a Ku Klux Klan rally as
mediated by aﬀecting subjects’ general political attitudes.
Subjects in the study were randomized to watch one of two
news clips, one of which presented the rally as a free speech
issue and the other of which as a public order issue. Following the clip, survey questions were used to assess general political attitudes towards the right to free speech and
the maintenance of public order and two further questions
were used to assess subjects’ tolerance for Klan speeches
and rallies. The analysis is presented in Nelson et al. 
and is reanalyzed using contemporary ideas from causal inference by Imai et al. . The point here, however, is
that since political attitudes are assessed immediately after the exposure (the watching of the video clip) it is less
likely that there is anything that is an eﬀect of exposure
that confounds the mediator-outcome relationship. Thus assumption (4) might be reasonable in this case; the exposure (video clip) was randomized so assumptions (1) and
(3) would hold. Thus provided that control is adequately
made for variables that confound the mediator-outcome relationship so that assumption (2) holds, one could proceed with the estimation of natural direct and indirect effects.
We will consider another similar example. In a study by
Smeesters et al. , the investigators used a one-trial
prisoner’s dilemma game with a ﬁctitious partner to study
the extent to which the eﬀect of “morality” or “might”
primes on cooperative versus competitive behavior was mediated by expectations about a partner. Expectations about
the partner’s behavior was assessed after exposure to either
the “morality” or the “might” prime. As with the Nelson
et al. study, the mediator, in this case expectations
about the behavior of the partner, could be assessed immediately after the exposure and it thus may be plausible that
there are no variables that are eﬀects of exposure but confound the mediator-outcome relationship. Assumption (4)
might thus be reasonable, assumptions (1) and (3) hold by
randomization of the exposure and thus, provided adequate
control is made for mediator-outcome confounders (assumption (2)), natural direct and indirect eﬀects could be identiﬁed. These two examples exhibit a similar structure with
the mediator being measured immediately after the exposure occurs thereby potentially rendering condition (4) more
plausible. One can potentially conceive of a whole class of
psychological experiments that follow a similar structure to
these two examples for which assumption (4) may be more
reasonable than in many other settings.
In summary, if there is an exposure-induced confounder
of the mediator-outcome relationship, natural direct and indirect eﬀects are not in general identiﬁed. Controlled direct
462 T. J. VanderWeele and S. Vansteelandt
eﬀects are identiﬁed in such settings but require special techniques for
estimation . Unfortunately, however, controlled direct eﬀects are
of limited use in assessing mediation because the diﬀerence
between a total eﬀect and a controlled direct eﬀect cannot in general be interpreted as an indirect eﬀect except in cases in which
there is no interaction between the eﬀects of the exposure
and the mediator on the outcome . Natural
direct and indirect eﬀects are desirable in that they allow
for eﬀect decomposition even in settings with interaction
and non-linearities but as we have seen above, the identi-
ﬁcation conditions required for these eﬀects are in general
quite stringent. The possibility of designing an experiment
so that the mediator is measured or occurs immediately after the exposure, so that assumption (4) may be plausible,
suggests a range of settings in which the assumptions required to identify natural direct and indirect eﬀects may be
reasonable.
CONCEPTUAL ISSUES CONCERNING
INTERVENTIONS
Thus far, we have not discussed the kind of intervention or manipulation that would enable setting M to some
given value m. As implied by the consistency assumption,
the kind of interventions or manipulations that we consider
are noninvasive in the sense that their only eﬀect is to set
the mediator at some pre-determined value m such that the
intervention has no eﬀect amongst those for whom mediator level m was naturally observed. Any conclusion that
we draw in terms of controlled direct eﬀects holds for interventions satisfying this assumption. In practice, however,
it is often diﬃcult to conceive of such noninvasive interventions, either because the mediator is not manipulable, or
because any conceivable manipulation would aﬀect the outcome in ways other through setting the mediator at some
pre-determined value. Thus in the Nelson et al. study
described above, the mediator was general political attitudes towards the right to free speech and the maintenance
of public order. Clearly one cannot intervene on these political attitudes directly. One might conceive of some type
of intervention to change these political attitudes such as
the watching of another video clip; however, such interventions might well also aﬀect the outcome in ways other than
through the mediator. Diﬀerent conceivable interventions to
aﬀect M so that it is set to level m might then result in different counterfactual outcomes Y (a, m); the counterfactual
outcome Y (a, m) would then not be well deﬁned. Clearly in
many psychological experiments, similar problems will arise;
when the mediator is a psychological construct, such as a
particular attitude, intervening directly will not in general
be possible.
In some cases, however, hypothetical interventions on the
mediator may be conceivable. For example, in the study of
Smeesters et al. described above, the mediator was
the subjects’ expectations about the behavior of the ﬁctitious partner. One could imagine a study in which one could
intervene on the subjects’ expectations by having the study
investigators telling the subject the behavioral decision of
the ﬁctitious partner before the subject decides on his or her
own action (or alternatively telling the subject a distribution of possible actions for the ﬁctitious partner). Once the
subject is told the behavior of the partner, the expectations
are eﬀectively ﬁxed. One thus has a potential intervention
on the mediator. One still may have to be concerned with
violations of the consistency assumption as to whether an
individual will select the same action under a particular set
of expectations as the subject would select if the subject
were told the partner’s behavior was that which he or she
was expecting.
Further discussion of the consistency assumption and of
potential violations is given in the appendix. Extending
the corresponding discussion of total eﬀects in VanderWeele
 , we discuss in the appendix the consistency assumptions for mediation. We clarify that essentially two things
are being assumed about the interventions under consideration: ﬁrst, that diﬀerent conceivable interventions to ﬁx the
mediator M to some level m all give rise to the same counterfactual outcomes and, second, that interventions to set the
mediator to its naturally ocurring level will give the same
outcome as not intervening. The ﬁrst assumption may be referred to as an assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance
(or no-multiple-versions-of-treatment) which is needed for
counterfactuals of the form Y (a, m) to be well-deﬁned and
the second as an assumption of consistency. Both types of
assumptions are subsumed by Rubin’s stable unit treatment
value assumption, abbreviated SUTVA . See
also VanderWeele for discussion of potential violations of the “no-interference” component of SUTVA within
a mediation context.
Even in cases in which it is not possible to conceive of a
noninvasive intervention to change the mediator, the deﬁnition of a controlled direct eﬀect can be meaningful because it
eﬀectively communicates what the exposure eﬀect would be
if nothing happened over and above ﬁxing the mediator at
some level uniformly in the population. For instance, while
there are no conceivable interventions that would ﬁx the occupation of a given subject at some pre-determined choice,
and do nothing on top of that, the question of whether the
father’s occupation aﬀects the respondent’s income through
pathways other than by inﬂuencing the respondent’s occupation, is arguably a meaningful one. The fact that any conceivable intervention on the respondent’s occupation would
do more than just determine the occupation implies that
there are no realistic interventions that would bring about
exactly the controlled direct exposure eﬀect. Nonetheless, estimates of the controlled direct exposure eﬀect can be meaningful in this setting because they give a more pure reﬂection
Conceptual issues concerning mediation, interventions and composition 463
of the direct exposure eﬀect than could be attained through
realistic interventions on the mediator.
The interpretability of natural direct and indirect eﬀects
arguably hinges to a lesser extent on the ability to control
or manipulate the mediator. First, the deﬁnitions of natural direct and indirect eﬀects only require manipulations
to set the mediator to levels which are naturally occurring
e.g. M(0) or M(a) rather than to some arbitrary level m
which, for certain individuals, might never occur for any
exposure a. Second, rather than conceiving of a natural direct eﬀect such as E[Y (1, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0))] as the eﬀect
of exposure intervening to ﬁx the mediator at level M(0),
one might alternatively think about natural direct eﬀects
as requiring interventions that would block the exposure’s
eﬀect on the mediator . Such interventions are sometimes more easily conceivable (as well
as more natural by not necessarily requiring that the mediator be uniformly ﬁxed at the same level). Consider for
instance a study on the eﬀect of gender, A, on graduate admissions, Y , for graduate school applicants. Suppose that
the goal of the study was to assess whether gender diﬀerences in admissions to a particular department are entirely
explained by the admission committee’s perception of gender, M, and thus potential discrimination based on gender. In principle, blinding of gender at the time of application (e.g. having all applicants in the study list either
“male” as gender, or having all applicants in the study list
“female” as gender) would bring about the natural direct
eﬀect of gender on admission because letting say A = 1 denote female and A = 0 denote male, we would have that
E[Y (1, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0))] = E[Y (1, 0) −Y (0, 0)]. In this
case the natural direct eﬀect and the controlled direct eﬀect
in fact coincide. Robins notes that generally natural
direct eﬀects can be only interpreted as the eﬀect of exposure on the outcome intervening to block the eﬀect of the
exposure on the mediator if the intervention were to block
the ﬁrst conceivable link on the pathway from exposure to
The issue of the applicability of hypothetical interventions arise in causal inference outside the mediation context, when one is only examining total eﬀects . In the occupation example, it
is clearly as inconceivable to ﬁx the occupation of a respondent’s father (the exposure A) at some pre-determined
choice, and do nothing on top of that, as it is to do so for
that of the respondent (the mediator M). Many exposures or
causes of interest are not obviously manipulable; examples
of such exposures might include gender, race or psychological disposition. Without clear interventions to change these
variables, counterfactual contrasts are not necessarily welldeﬁned or are ill-deﬁned to the extent to which the intervention is not speciﬁed . However, in general we still are interested in examining the eﬀects of these variables. The counterfactual or
potential outcomes framework is perhaps not ideally suited,
at least in its present form, to conceptualize the eﬀects of
such non-manipulable exposures. Nevertheless, as discussed
above, the consistency assumption suggests that the inferred
eﬀects can perhaps be interpreted as what would be realized
under non-invasive interventions. Some further progress can
perhaps be made by relaxing or reﬁning the consistency assumption and allowing for multiple versions of treatment
 . However, an alternative approach, which perhaps more closely ties causation to physical laws governing
systems, may be desirable . Work has been done in causal inference on direct
and indirect eﬀects outside of the counterfactual framework
 but this work also
conceptualizes direct and indirect eﬀects through various
potential interventions. The point here, however, is that the
issue of the manipulability of variables is not unique to the
context of mediation but arises even in the context of examining total eﬀects.
We conclude this section by noting that in cases in which
interventions on the exposure of interest are conceivable
but interventions on the mediator are not, an alternative
approach to assessing mediation is possible using concepts
of principal stratiﬁcation . Principal strata are strata deﬁned by the joint counterfactual
outcomes M(a) for all possible values of a. One might assess direct eﬀects, for example, by examining the eﬀect of
exposure on the outcome for individuals for whom the exposure does not aﬀect the value of the mediator e.g. for whom
M(0) = M(a). Such an approach is, in a certain sense, advantageous in that it only requires counterfactuals M(a) and
Y (a), rather than also counterfactuals of the form Y (a, m)
i.e. it does not require hypothetical interventions on the mediator. Unfortunately, however, the utility of the approach
based on principal stratiﬁcation is limited because of the inability to identify which individuals fall into which principal
strata, because the probability of falling within the principal stratum M(a) = M(0) will be zero in many realistic
applications , and because the notions
of mediation based on principal direct eﬀects do not correspond in any clear way to mechanisms of scientiﬁc interest
 .
CONCEPTUAL ISSUES CONCERNING
COMPOSITION
In this section we would like to discuss brieﬂy the assumption that is sometimes referred to as composition that Y (a) = Y (a, M(a)) i.e. that the potential outcome Y (a) intervening to set A to a is equal to the potential
outcome Y (a, M(a)) intervening to set A to a and to set
M to the value it would have been if A had been a. This
assumption allows one to express the natural direct eﬀect,
E[Y (1, M(0)) −Y (0, M(0))|C], as E[Y (1, M(0)) −Y (0)|C]
464 T. J. VanderWeele and S. Vansteelandt
and allows one to decompose a total eﬀect into a natural
direct and indirect eﬀect:
E[Y (a)−Y (0)|C]=E[Y (a, M(a))−Y (a, M(0))|C]
+ E[Y (a, M(0))−Y (0, M(0))|C].
The composition assumption contrasts with the consistency
assumption for Y (a, m) which states that when A = a and
M = m then Y (a, m) = Y i.e. that amongst the subgroup
with observed exposure A = a and observed mediator M =
m, the observed outcome Y is equal to the value of Y that
would have been obtained intervening to set A to a and M
Because the composition assumption is used for eﬀect decomposition, it is an important assumption in the context
of mediation. The assumption is, however, often not explicitly stated but merely implicitly assumed. Perhaps this is
in part because the composition assumption arguably does
not involve substantial conceptual issues above and beyond
those entailed by the consistency and treatment-variation
irrelevance assumptions. The consistency and treatmentvariation irrelevance assumptions eﬀectively presuppose hypothetical interventions on the exposure and the mediator; the composition assumption also presupposes hypothetical interventions on the exposure and the mediator but
only imposes restrictions concerning hypothetical interventions on the mediator for levels which naturally occur under various interventions on the exposure. The consistency
assumption requires that when A = a and M = m then
Y (a, m) = Y and thus that the value of Y under two interventions to set A and M to their natural levels simply equals
the observed outcome; the composition assumption requires
that Y (a) = Y (a, M(a)) and thus that, under interventions
on a, interventions on M to set it to its naturally occurring level M(a) have no further eﬀect on the outcome obtained. The consistency and treatment-variation irrelevance
assumptions thus essentially presuppose that interventions
on both A and M are in some sense noninvasive, as discussed
above and also in the appendix, while the composition assumption essentially just presupposes that interventions on
M are noninvasive. The conceptual issues involved in the
composition assumption thus do not seem to entail considerably more than that which was required with the consistency assumption. The consistency assumption does not
mathematically entail the composition assumption but we
ﬁnd it diﬃcult to imagine cases in which a researcher would
be willing to make the consistency assumption but unwilling
to make the composition assumption.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper we have related concepts of direct and indirect eﬀects from causal inference to concepts arising from
the approach of Baron and Kenny , popular in the
social sciences. We have also considered a number of important conceptual issues concerning mediation. We have seen
that in certain psychological experiments the assumptions
required to identify natural direct and indirect eﬀects may
be rendered more plausible. This is important because it
is notions of natural direct and indirect eﬀects which allow
for eﬀect decomposition even in settings involving interactions and non-linearities. We have also considered at length
the issues of the relation of hypothetical interventions on the
mediator and the exposure to the counterfactual framework.
We have seen that often it is diﬃcult to conceive of interventions that non-invasively ﬁx the mediator and have discussed
potential violations of the so-called consistency assumption.
We have furthermore seen that in some cases interventions
on the mediator are conceivable and that, moreover, for natural direct and indirect eﬀects, one only need conceive of interventions on the mediator to set the mediator to naturally
occurring levels. In addition, natural direct and indirect effects can in some cases be conceived of as eﬀects that would
result by blocking the eﬀect of an exposure on the mediator.
Nevertheless, the counterfactual framework is, at least at
present, tied quite closely to the notion of a hypothetical intervention and in some cases this can be problematic, even
when total eﬀects are in view. The formalization of the counterfactual approach is still arguably of use even in settings
in which conceiving of interventions is diﬃcult. Questions
of total eﬀects and of mediation are likely to be of interest
in practice even when interventions on the considered exposures and mediators are not possible; the counterfactual
approach clariﬁes at least the assumptions and identiﬁcation
conditions required for assessing direct and indirect eﬀects
and makes clear when violations of these assumptions will
lead to bias. The counterfactual framework is a simpliﬁcation of a complex reality but it arguably moves us one step
closer to the quantities of interest when we think about mediation.
Finally, we have extended our discussion of interventions
in the mediation context to the composition assumption, an
assumption that is not always explicitly stated but is often utilized when natural direct and indirect eﬀects are in
view. We have seen that when the various consistency and
treatment-variation irrelevance assumptions hold, the composition assumption does not impose considerable conceptual challenges above and beyond those already implicit in
the consistency assumptions. The notions of mediation using the counterfactual approach are sometimes subtle, but
we hope that the contributions in this paper will help clarify
the conceptual issues involved in utilizing the counterfactual
framework to address these questions of mediation in the social sciences and beyond.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the participants at a session on
“Mediation and Causal Inference” at the 2009 ENAR International Biometric Society meetings for the interesting
discussion at that session that prompted the writing of this
paper. We also thank Haiqun Lin for the invitation to write
Conceptual issues concerning mediation, interventions and composition 465
the paper and we thank an anonymous referee for helpful
Controlled and natural direct and indirect eﬀects using regression
If the regression models (6) and (8) are correctly speciﬁed
and assumptions (1) and (2) hold then we could compute
the controlled direct eﬀect as follows:
E[Y (a, m) −(a∗, m)|C = c]
= E[Y |C = c, A = a, M = m]
−E[Y |C = c, A = a∗, M = m]
= (θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ3am + θ′
−(θ0 + θ1a∗+ θ2m + θ3a∗m + θ′
= (θ1a + θ3am −θ1a∗−θ3a∗m)
= θ1(a −a∗) + θ3m(a −a∗)
If the regression models (6) and (8) are correctly speciﬁed
and assumptions (1)–(4) hold, we could compute natural
direct eﬀects by
E[Y (a, M(a∗)) −Y (a∗, M(a∗))|C = c]
m{E[Y |C = c, A = a, M = m]
−E[Y |C = c, A = a∗, M = m]}
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a∗)
m{(θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ3am + θ′
−(θ0 + θ1a∗+ θ2m + θ3a∗m + θ′
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a∗)
m{(θ1a + θ2m + θ3am)
−(θ1a∗+ θ2m + θ3a∗m)}
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a∗)
= {θ1a + θ2E[M|A = a∗, C = c]
+ θ3aE[M|A = a∗, C = c])
−(θ1a∗+ θ2E[M|A = a∗, C = c]
+ θ3a∗E[M|A = a∗, C = c])}
= {θ1a + θ2(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
+ θ3a(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
−(θ1a∗+ θ2(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
+ θ3a∗(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
= {θ1a + θ3a(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
−(θ1a∗+ θ3a∗(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
= (θ1 + θ3β0 + θ3β1a∗+ θ3β′
2c)(a −a∗)
If the regression models (6) and (8) are correctly speciﬁed
and assumptions (1)–(4) hold, we could compute natural
indirect eﬀects by
E[Y (a, M(a)) −Y (a, M(a∗))|C = c]
mE[Y |C = c, A = a, M = m]
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a)
mE[Y |C = c, A = a, M = m]
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a∗)
m(θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ3am + θ′
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a)
m(θ0 + θ1a + θ2m + θ3am + θ′
× P(M = m|C = c, A = a∗)
= (θ0 + θ1a + θ2E[M|A = a, C = c]
+ θ3aE[M|A = a, C = c] + θ′
c(θ0 + θ1a + θ2E[M|A = a∗, C = c]
+ θ3aE[M|A = a∗, C = c] + θ′
= (θ0 + θ1a + θ2(β0 + β1a + β′
+ θ3a(β0 + β1a + β′
−(θ0 + θ1a + θ2(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
+ θ3a(β0 + β1a∗+ β′
= θ2β1(a −a∗) + θ3β1a(a −a∗).
Standard errors of controlled and natural direct and indirect
eﬀects using regression
Suppose that models (6) and (8) have been ﬁt using standard linear regression software and that the resulting estimates ˆβ of β ≡(β0, β1, β′
2)′ and ˆθ of θ ≡(θ0, θ1, θ2, θ3, θ′
have covariance matrices Σβ and Σθ, which can be obtained
from most oﬀ-the-shelf statistical software packages. Then
the covariance matrix of (ˆβ′, ˆθ′)′ is
which can be seen upon noting that
Cov(ˆβ, ˆθ) = E
Cov(ˆβ, ˆθ|M, A, C)
E(ˆβ|M, A, C), E(ˆθ|M, A, C)
where we use the fact that ˆβ is a function of M, A and C
only. Standard errors of the controlled and natural direct
and indirect eﬀects in (9) can then be obtained (using the
Delta method) as
ΓΣΓ′|a −a∗|
with Γ ≡(0, 0, 0′, 0, 1, 0, m, 0′) for the controlled direct eﬀect
in (9), Γ ≡(θ3, θ3a∗, θ3C′, 0, 1, 0, β0 +β1a∗+β′
2C, 0′) for the
pure natural direct eﬀect in (9) (the same expression holds
for the total natural direct eﬀect upon substituting a and a∗)
466 T. J. VanderWeele and S. Vansteelandt
and Γ ≡(0, θ2 + θ3a, 0′, 0, 0, β1, β1a, 0′) for the total natural
indirect eﬀect in (9) (the same expression holds for the pure
natural indirect eﬀect upon substituting a and a∗). In these
expressions, 0′ denotes a row vector of the dimension of C,
containing zeroes only.
Treatment-variation irrelevance assumptions and consistency assumptions for mediation
In this appendix, we extend the discussion of the consistency and treatment-variation irrelevance assumptions for
total eﬀects in VanderWeele to the case of mediation and potential interventions on a mediator. For each
possible exposure level a, let Ka denote some set of interventions to ﬁx exposure to level a. For ka ∈Ka, let Mj(a, ka)
and Yj(a, ka) be the values of the mediator and the outcome
respectively that would be observed for individual j under
an intervention to ﬁx exposure to level a by means ka. As in
VanderWeele , we consider two distinct assumptions.
First, if for each a we have,
Yj(a, ka) = Yj(a, k′
a) for all ka, k′
then we say that the assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance holds for Y with respect to A and the potential
outcome Yj(a) can be deﬁned as Yj(a) := Yj(a, ka) for any
ka ∈Ka. Second, if assumption (C1) holds then we say
that the consistency assumption for Y (a) is satisﬁed if for
for some ka ∈Ka, Yj = Yj(a, ka) when a = Aj.
Assumption (C1) requires for each a that the potential outcomes Yj(a, ka) take the same value irrespective of what
means ka is used to set A to a so long as ka ∈Ka. Assumption (C2) then requires that for some ka the potential outcome Yj(a, ka) is equal to the observed outcome
Yj when a = Aj. Assumption (C1) captures the notion
that the set of interventions under consideration, Ka, do
not aﬀect Y
except through setting A to level a. Assumption (C2) captures the notion that the interventions
under consideration are non-invasive in that the outcome
that would be observed under an intervention to set exposure to the level it actually was is equal to the outcome
that was in fact observed (i.e. the naturally occurring outcome).
We can formulate similar assumptions for M(a). If for
Mj(a, ka) = Mj(a, k′
a) for all ka, k′
then we say that the assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance holds for M with respect to A and then the potential outcome Mj(a) can be deﬁned as Mj(a) := Mj(a, ka)
for any ka ∈Ka. If assumption (C3) holds then we say that
the consistency assumption for M(a) is satisﬁed if for each j,
for some ka ∈Ka, Mj = Mj(a, ka) when a = Aj.
We can furthermore consider similar assumptions for
Y (a, m). For each possible mediator level m, let Km denote some set of interventions to ﬁx the mediator to level
m. For ka ∈Ka and km ∈Km, let Yj(a, m, ka, km) be the
value of the outcome for individual j that would be observed
under interventions to ﬁx exposure to level a by means ka
and to ﬁx the mediator to level m by means km. If for each
Yj(a, m, ka, km) = Yj(a, m, k′
for all ka, k′
a ∈Ka, km, k′
then we say that the assumption of treatment-variation
irrelevance holds for Y
with respect to (A, M)
Yj(a, m, ka, km) for any ka
km ∈Km. If assumption (C5) holds then we say that
the consistency assumption for Y (a, m) is satisﬁed if for
for some ka ∈Ka
and some km ∈Km, Yj = Yj(a, m, ka, km)
when a = Aj and m = Mj.
VanderWeele noted that treatment-variation irrelevance assumptions, such as (C1), (C3) and (C5), are
necessary not only in order to articulate the consistency assumptions but also in order to articulate no-unmeasuredconfounding assumptions and even for the potential outcomes of the form Yj(a), Mj(a) and Yj(a, m) to be welldeﬁned. Similarly, these treatment-variation irrelevance assumptions are necessary in order to articulate the composition assumption as Y (a) = Y (a, M(a)).
The treatment-variation irrelevance and consistency assumptions given above can, however, potentially be made
more plausible by employing stochastic counterfactuals
 and allowing the counterfactuals, Mj(a, ka), Yj(a, ka), Yj(a, m, ka, km), and the actual
outcomes, Mj, Yj, to follow a distribution for each j, rather
than simply being single values. See VanderWeele 
for further discussion.
Received 4 June 2009