Emotional Presence, Learning, and the
Online Learning Environment
In spite of evidence that more and more students are engaging in online learning experi­
ences, details about the transition for teachers and students to a new learning environment
are still unconfirmed. While new technologies are often expected to make work easier, they
also involve the development of new competencies. This change may, in itself, elicit an
emotional response, and, more importantly, emotion may impact the experience of online
learning. Knowledge about the impact of emotion on learning broadly is available, but not
about emotion and online learning. This study presents evidence of emotions present in
online environments, and empirical data which suggests emotional presence may exist as a
fundamental element in an online community of inquiry.
Keywords: Online learning; community of inquiry; emotional presence; higher educa­
tion; distance education; pedagogy
Introduction
General wisdom has it that emotion is antithetical to thinking; the coolest head prevails
 . This may be the reason that, until recently, emotion and learning have
received little attention in the development of education and instructional models. We may
have Bloom and colleagues to thank for introducing us to the notion of affect as a learning
domain . Previous studies suggest that
teaching and learning with technology has a small, positive, nonsignificant (p > .05) effect
on students’ affective outcomes when compared to traditional instruction. . However, the notion of affect, defined as the extent to which one can
be influenced and affected , is much different from the
issue of emotion and its impact on learning—impact that may exist in all activities and do­
Martha Cleveland-Innes and Prisca Campbell (not shown)
Athabasca University, Canada
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
mains of learning . To engage in education innovation
with no reference to emotion, and continue to assume learners are little more than dispas­
sionate thinkers, would be to miss a fundamental influence on education.
Bowlby provides the definition of emotion most amenable to understanding in reference to
learning. He says, “Emotions are phases of an individual’s intuitive appraisals either of his
own organismic states and urges to act or of the succession of environmental situations in
which he finds himself” . For some, emotions exist comprehensively in the hu­
man experience; to ignore emotion in the human response to internal and external events
is to ignore a central element of the human experience . Emotion, therefore, cannot be considered
separate from the learning environment .
New research regarding the impact of emotion and cognition provides compelling evidence
that the relationship between emotion and learning should be examined further .
Given this new information about cognition and emotion, we developed a working hypoth­
esis that emotion plays a role in learning and, therefore, will be present in online learning
environments. In addition, Dirkx made a case for the integration of feeling into
adult education. That impassioned argument was the impetus for this examination of the
role of emotion in online learning.
Our research unfolded in two phases. The first question we set out to answer is which, if
any, emotions exist in the online learning environment. Phase II of our research is a re­
consideration of the role of emotion in the conceptual model of online learning proposed
by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer . The online community of inquiry framework
served as a tool to analyze and categorize the existence of emotion across elements of the
online learning experience.
Background Information
Given that emotions exist in the broader, comprehensive human experience , they cannot be considered separate from the experience of the learning environ­
ment . Recently, there has been an increasing focus on
emotion and learning, which has been generally neglected in educational research .
Moreover, Brookfield and Dirkx suggest that emotion is often mistaken as
a deterrent that impedes effective teaching and learning. It is likely that emotion plays a
far more dynamic role in learning than merely inhibiting rational thought and reason. An
understanding of the nature of emotions in the learning context may assist the learning
process as all human actions and reasoning “require appropriate facilitating emotions if
successful actions or reason at all are to be achieved [emphasis added]” began researching emotion in the 1970s, he chose to study fear “be­
cause it is the emotion about which we know the most” (p. 212). He assumed that what
he learned would likely “be similar across emotion categories” (p. 212). At the same time
LeDoux was studying emotion in rats, Damasio noticed the importance of emo­
tion in the human experience. A neuroscientist, Damasio made his life’s work the study of
emotion and the human brain, using as his subjects people whose brains were damaged
through accident, surgery, or birth. His observations of a patient referred to as Elliot, who
had lost his ability to draw conclusions, led him to reconsider the role of emotion in rational
thought. Elliot was a brilliant lawyer, well known for his complex reasoning abilities and his
ability to defend clients with intricate argument. Elliot had an accident that damaged his
ability to experience emotion. Damasio became intrigued with the possibility that reduced
emotion and feeling played a role in Elliot’s decision-making failures (p. 145).
This work did not go unnoticed in education. “In recent years, there has been a growing
interest in the role of emotions in academic settings, especially in how emotions shape
student engagement and learning” . Educational
psychology has long considered motivation, particularly achievement motivation in rela­
tion to education performance, to be related to emotion . Callahan called for educators who espouse critical theory
to “manage the emotions in their classrooms actively” (p. 82). He pointed out that “the very
praxis of critical theory relies on emotion as its catalyst” (p. 75). Dirkx questioned the appropriateness of “management” of emotion in learning
environments. However, the impact on particular emotional states in relation to the learn­
ing environment is still to be understood.
Merriam and Heuer recognized that feelings of threat and fear are intrinsic in learn­
ing. Goleman , writing of face-to-face learning, described the connection be­
tween emotion and cognition as a “battle,” with the brain at the epicentre. One consequence
of this battle is paradoxical. “Sometimes stress helps in formation of explicit memories
but it can also devastate explicit memory” . Emotions, then, are a
double-edged sword that may help or hinder learning.
Dirkx called for the recognition of the positive emotions engendered by learning.
Furthermore, he suggested that critical theory failed to “adequately account for the emo­
tional and spiritual dimensions (para. 1)” of learning. At about the same time, Gardner
 , Goleman , and LeDoux rethought the significance of emotion.
Concurrently, Damasio conducted experiments that indicate that emotion and
cognition are innately intertwined. Although other researchers are beginning to build on
the work of Damasio and his team, “inquiry has been slow to advance our understanding
of emotions in education” . Learning processes are the
currency of exchange in education, and emotional experiences are a “neglected dynamic”
 in complex social environments where learning takes place. This
is particularly so in online learning. According to O’Regan , the transition to online
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
teaching and learning provides the opportunity to test the assumptions about emotion em­
bedded in our practice, building on the strands of research developed regarding emotion
and the human experience, emotion and cognition, and, more recently, emotion and learn­
Emotion and Online Learning
Lipman provides one exception to what has been a neglectful approach to emotion.
He explicitly writes about emotion while describing learning through a community of in­
quiry. For Lipman, the community of inquiry model is “thoroughly social and communal; a
method for integrating emotive experience, mental acts, thinking skills, and informal falla­
cies into a concerted approach to the improvement of reasoning and judgment [emphasis
added]” (p. 18). Another exception to the neglect is the application of this same model in
online learning by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer , who identify emotional expres­
sion as part of being socially present online.
This model explicating teaching practice and student learning online is the community of
inquiry (CoI) framework developed by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer . This model
has received significant attention and has been well researched . It provides a process-oriented, conceptual model that informs the prac­
tice of online instruction.
The model views community as something that emerges in support of online learning
 in the relationship between
three elements: social presence, teaching presence, and cognitive presence. Social pres­
ence is defined as the degree to which learners feel socially and emotionally connected with
others in an online environment; cognitive presence describes the extent to which learners
are able to construct and confirm meaning through sustained reflection and discourse. The
central organizing element is teaching presence: the design, facilitation, and, most impor­
tantly, the direction of cognitive and social processes for the realization of personally mean­
ingful and educationally worthwhile learning outcomes. The possibility of an expanded role
for emotional presence, beyond the influence found in social presence, is central to this
The creative innovation that follows the development of online learning provides a unique
place for the study of emotional presence and learning. As indicated by Anderson ,
seven of fifteen indicators of social expression are expressions of emotion. Emotion is iden­
tified as important to student adjustment to the role of online learner , the development of online community ,
the choice of instructional format , and perception, expression, and selfmanagement . Conrad , in her study of emotion, vividly
recounted the tumult of feelings, including anxiety, that accompany the online learning
experience.
Those engaged in online learning deal with the effects of emotion on a daily basis, whether
in designing instruction, teaching, or learning online. The work of Damasio and LeDoux
independently suggests that emotion is neither an objective nor outcome of learning yet is
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
central to cognition. The study of O’Regan showed that students express their emo­
tions in relation to the various aspects of an online course such as design and organizational
issues (i.e., a lack of clear instructions), cognitive issues (i.e., learning materials, success),
social issues (during communicating), time management, or technology. Similarly, Cleve­
land-Innes, Garrison, and Kinsel also found out that students disclosed emotions in
relation to the social, teaching, and cognitive presence in an online course.
Zembylas applied qualitative methodology to investigate emotional presence, using
learners’ monthly emotion journals and interview strategy. The analysis resulted in two
broad themes: positive and negative emotions related to learning. Positive emotions in­
cluded joy, enthusiasm, and excitement for the flexibility of online learning, which were
higher in intensity and frequency in earlier months; pride and contentment for fulfilling the
course requirements; and surprise and excitement for the emotional nature of online com­
munication. Negative emotions included fear and anxiety for the unknown mode of online
learning and its demands (technology, time management, structure); alienation and the
need for connectedness, which emerged during the first weeks of the course and when the
students struggled to find satisfying ways of communicating with their classmates and their
instructor; and stress and guilt for the inability to balance multiple roles and responsibili­
ties, which is the most serious obstacle that the students faced. They struggled to combine
their professional, family, and social life, which made it hard to cope with the numerous
demands of the program.
Research results from multiple studies indicate that emotions are an integral part of the
learning environment and influence students’ learning experiences . According to Baumeister, DeWall, and Zhang , emotions influence
outcomes. That is, positive emotions lead to positive outcomes and negative emotions to
negative outcomes. The research also indicates the impeding effect of negative emotions
such as stress and anger. Evidence suggests that negative emotions, such as anger and em­
barrassment, can influence decision making and lead people to take inappropriate risks
 .
In addition, excessive emotion can harm our rational thinking, and a lack of emotion can
make for similarly flawed thinking . All these aspects come together and
create a new challenge for educators in determining how to best integrate and control emo­
tions in a learning environment. This is especially so in reference to the adjustment process
that occurs as students move online. Experiencing negative emotions during adjustment
to the role of online learner may interfere with the learning experience. Thoughtful con­
sideration of emotions and possible facilitation strategies in response to negative emotions
during the online adjustment process are both timely and important.
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
Methodology
Sample of Courses and Respondents
Students participating in this study were enrolled in two graduate programs at a singlemode distance education university. A total of 217 students from 19 courses agreed to par­
ticipate. Courses were drawn from education, humanities, science, social science, and sci­
ence, and all were delivered online. Of the 217 students consenting to participate, 33% were
male and 58% were female (9% did not indicate gender). Respondents indicated their age
as follows: 20–29 years, 10%, 30–39 years, 24%, 40–49 years, 43%, 50+ years, 23%. Fortysix percent of the participants reported this as their first experience in an online learning
environment (n = 73).
Additional data were collected from students in the same graduate programs using a modi­
fied CoI instrument . The modified instrument includes previously
validated item indicators for cognitive, social, and teaching presence, with the addition of
new measures for emotional presence.
To qualify for sampling, courses had to be delivered using a combination of print and elec­
tronic media and online conferencing. The online conferencing component had to provide
the opportunity for regular student engagement and group interaction.
Data Collection
In the first phase of data collection, students were asked to 1) provide access to confer­
ence discussion transcripts, and 2) complete a survey of questions regarding his/her on­
line experience. Conference discussion transcripts were collected at the end of each course.
Written, detailed responses were gathered from open-ended questions related to online
activities, becoming part of the online learning community and the design and facilitation
of online learning. Secondary data analysis of open-ended questions and conference tran­
scripts, originally assessed for alignment with the expectations of online learners, were
evaluated for emotional content. Text analysis was completed with four individual raters
using open, axial, and confirmatory analysis . Inter-rater reliability ranged
from 66% to 80%.
Once we confirmed evidence of emotional content in text about online learning and text
found in conference discussions in online learning, we set out to measure whether emotion
was present in one or more elements of an online community of inquiry, as proposed by
Garrison, Anderson, and Archer . The academic and social domains are represented
in the online CoI model and measurement tool by three elements called presences: social,
cognitive, and teaching presence. A similar convenience sample of seven courses was cho­
sen from the same two graduate programs at the same university. A response rate of 38%
yielded 79 completed questionnaires. The online CoI measurement instrument was employed, with six additional items written to measure the possibility of
emotional presence. The instrument was available online through Zoomerang online sur­
vey software and self-administered by students. The possibility of response-set bias was
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
deterred by randomizing items measuring different types of presence.
Exploratory factor analysis (principal components extraction method) with an oblimin ro­
tation was used. An oblimin rotation was chosen due to the theoretical interdependence of
the presences. The cutoff point for significant loadings on each factor was 0.350.
The unit of analysis for the present study is the student, in Phase I via the text-based re­
sponse and in Phase II via indications of presence. Qualitative data, drawn from openended questions about the online experience, were evaluated by four different coders using
a grounded theory analysis process of open, axial, and confirmatory coding. After the first
read-through of all documentation, coders discussed the range of emotions noted in the
textual data and discussed the use of terms to label expressions deemed to be ‘emotional.’ A
preliminary list of terms was created. Data were reassessed using new terminology. Table 1
presents the list of identifiable emotional responses found in questionnaire responses and
conference postings.
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
Emotional Responses Identified in Text Data
Constructs
Written responses to questions
Asynchronous conference tran­
Appreciation
Disappointment
Excitement
Frustration
Irony/sarcasm
Preference
Thankfulness
Unhappiness
These constructs were attached to student responses deemed to represent emotive descrip­
tion. Each label emerged after multiple passes through the text, and much discussion. Con­
firmation was achieved in two ways. Coders reached agreement regarding the labels pre­
sented here. In addition, the pattern of emotions was measured against the taxonomy of
human emotions, as defined by Plutchick .
Phase II of the data collection used a questionnaire administered as an online survey. Stu­
dents in the same courses were invited to respond to item indicators, on a Likert scale of
Strongly Agree, Agree, Undecided, Disagree, or Strongly Disagree. These items are drawn
from the original online CoI measurement instrument measuring social presence, cognitive
presence, and teaching presence .
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
The revised instrument included an additional six items designed to measure emotional
presence. The items listed below were written to assess emotional response in relation to
the instructor, the other students, the technology, and the course:
Emotion was expressed when connecting with other students.
I felt comfortable expressing emotion through the online medium.
Expressing emotion in relation to expressing ideas was acceptable in this course.
I found myself responding emotionally about ideas or learning activities in this course.
The instructor acknowledged emotion expressed by students.
The instructor demonstrated emotion in online presentations and/or discussions.
Factor analysis rests on the logic that it is possible to assess patterns in relative variances
of measured items such that underlying, hypothesized theoretical constructs will emerge.
This analysis was completed to determine if the items measuring emotional presence would
cluster together in a unique component. The extraction method was a principal components
analysis with an oblimin rotation. This yielded a nine-factor solution in which four of the
six items measuring emotional presence clustered into a single factor. The remaining items
measuring the other three presences clustered as expected based on the theoretical model.
However, the addition of emotional presence items did affect the clustering of factors, as
indicated in Table 2. Items in this table are identified by the presence and sub-element they
are designed to measure.1
Factor Analysis – Nine Components
V24 – TP Design and Organization
The instructor provided clear instructions on how to
participate in course learning activities.
V7 – TP Design and Organization
The instructor clearly communicated important course
Recent research demonstrates that the general rules of thumb regarding minimum sam­
ple size are not valid or useful .
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
V15 – TP Design and Organization
The instructor clearly communicated important course
V5 – TP Design and Organization
The instructor clearly communicated important due
dates/time frames for learning activities.
V33 – SP Group Cohesion
Online discussions help me to develop a sense of col­
laboration.
V20 – TP Facilitation
The instructor helped keep the course participants on
task in a way that helped me to learn.
V10 – TP Facilitation
The instructor was helpful in identifying areas of
agreement and disagreement on course topics that
helped me to learn.
V29 – TP Direct Instruction
The instructor helped to focus discussion on relevant
issues in a way that helped me to learn.
V2 – TP Facilitation
Instructor actions reinforced the development of a
sense of community among course participants.
V40 – Emotion
I found myself responding emotionally about ideas or
learning activities in this course.
V9 – TP Direct instruction
The instructor provided feedback that helped me un­
derstand my strengths and weaknesses relative to the
course’s goals and objectives.
V31 – SP Open Communication
I felt comfortable participating in the course discus­
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
V23 – SP Open Communication
I felt comfortable interacting with other course partici­
V11 – SP Group Cohesion
I felt comfortable disagreeing with other course par­
ticipants while still maintaining a sense of trust.
V38 – Emotion
I felt comfortable expressing emotion through the on­
line medium.
V27 – SP Affective Expression
Online or web-based communication is an excellent
medium for social interaction.
V6 – SP Affective Expressions
I was able to form distinct impressions of some course
participants.
V35 Emotion
Emotion was expressed when connecting with other
V36 – Emotion
The instructor acknowledged emotion expressed by
V37 – Emotion
Expressing emotion in relation to expressing ideas was
acceptable in this course.
V39 – Emotion
The instructor demonstrated emotion in online pre­
sentations and/or discussions.
V3 – CP Triggering Event
I felt motivated to explore content-related questions.
V4 – CP Triggering Event
Course activities piqued my curiosity.
V28 – CP Triggering Event
Problems posed increased my interest in course issues.
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
V18 – CP Integration
Learning activities helped me construct explanations/
solutions.
V16 – CP Integration
Combining new information helped me answer ques­
tions raised in course activities.
V17 – CP Exploration
Brainstorming and finding relevant information
helped me resolve content-related questions.
V34 – TP Facilitation
The instructor was helpful in guiding the class towards
understanding course topics in a way that helped me
clarify my thinking.
V12 – CP Integration
Reflection on course content and discussions helped
me understand fundamental concepts in this class.
V13 – CP Exploration
Online discussions were valuable in helping me appre­
ciate different perspectives.
V30 – CP Resolution
I can apply the knowledge created in this course to my
work or other non-class-related activities.
V32 – CP Resolution
I have developed solutions to course problems that can
be applied in practice.
V1 – CP Resolution
I can describe ways to test and apply the knowledge
created in this course.
V8 – TP Direct Instruction
The instructor provided feedback in a timely fashion.
V21 – CP Exploration
I utilized a variety of information sources to explore
problems posed in this course.
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
V19 – SP Group Cohesion
I felt that my point of view was acknowledged by other
course participants.
V25 – SP Affective Expression
Getting to know other course participants gave me a
sense of belonging in the course.
V14 – TP Facilitation
The instructor encouraged course participants to ex­
plore new concepts in this course.
V22 – TP Facilitation
The instructor helped to keep course participants en­
gaged and participating in productive dialogue.
In the case of double-loadings, consideration was given to either the theoretical alignment
that made the most sense or the level of the eigenvalue. One item did not load to an eigen­
value of the minimum value of .350. The last four factors were made up of five items in total
and may represent interpretations of the items or the nature of the learning experience,
unique to this sample. The other five factors, representing 34 of 40 items, did cluster in
ways that are interpretable.
According to the CoI model, social presence is indicated by three subcategories: affective
expression, open communication, and group cohesion. Teaching presence is indicated by
three subcategories: design and organization, facilitation of discourse, and direct instruc­
tion. Cognitive presence is identified by four subcategories: triggering events, exploration,
integration, and resolution. In the validated measurement of this instrument, the factor
analysis yields three factors representing the umbrella categories of social (nine items),
teaching (13 items), and cognitive (12 items) presence.
With the addition of six new measurement items related to the experience of emotion in on­
line environments, a nine-factor solution emerged. Five of these nine factors corresponded
to the theoretical model in appropriate but incomplete ways. Factor one included nine of 13
items measuring teaching presence: design and organization (4), facilitation (3), and direct
instruction (2). In addition, one measure of social presence, group cohesion, and one mea­
sure of emotion loaded with this factor. The second factor yielded four of nine measures of
social presence: group cohesion (1), open communication (2), and affective expression (1).
One item measuring emotion loaded with this factor.
Four measures of emotional presence and one of social presence, affective expression, clus­
ter together in factor three. These four items refer to emotion as expressed by students and
the instructor, in relation to ideas and in discussion and presentation.
Eleven of the 12 items designed to measure cognitive presence loaded together, but in two
factors. The fourth factor in the nine-factor solution emerged from cognitive presence, trig­
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
gering event (3), cognitive presence, exploration (2), and cognitive presence, integration
(3). One teaching presence item, facilitation, loaded with this factor. This item referred to
guidance on understanding that “helped clarify thinking.” Factor five was made of the three
cognitive presence, resolution, items.
Six items loaded either singly, in pairs, or without a valid eigenvalue. These items were not
seen as indications of individual concepts but rather idiosyncratic representations of this
Discussion
Our research involved two phases. In the first phase, we considered the possibility that the
online experience elicited, and is steeped in, emotion. We confirmed that emotion is pres­
ent for students 1) when they discuss the online experience, and 2) in the experience of
engaging in online learning. In addition, we began to see the type of emotion that exists in
one, the other, or both. This begins to add the ‘what’ and ‘when’ of the emotional experience
to earlier work that suggests emotion is present in the online experience .
The challenge of identifying, labeling, and discussing the subjective, emotional experience
in text-based evidence makes it difficult for us to precisely define each emotive response
and label from this data. We noted several regular patterns, giving us confidence we were
getting closer to the real picture of the emotional experience of working online. First, text
from the more complex interaction found in conference postings, compared to single-per­
son response to questions in a survey instrument, demonstrated more numerous, complex,
and interrelated emotional tone. Second, in spite of this difference in complexity, emotional
range was very similar. Nine emotional responses were common to the experience of dis­
cussing the online experience and the experience itself as indicated in Table 1. Finally, this
range of emotion was somewhat bounded; Plutchick’s taxonomy of human emotion covers
a far greater range than what was identified here. It is possible that certain emotions are
notable in relation to learning and others less common.
In the second phase of this research, emotional presence indicators were added to the mea­
surement of the three current theoretical elements that make up a community of inquiry.
Given the range of emotional language expressed in the text of discussion forums and in the
text describing the experience of being an online student, we submit that emotion is experi­
enced by online students in areas beyond the expression of social presence.
Garrison, Anderson, and Archer define social, cognitive, and teaching presence in
the following ways.
Social presence: The ability of participants in a community of inquiry to project themselves
socially and emotionally, as ‘real’ people (i.e., their full personality), through the medium
of communication being used.
Cognitive presence: The extent to which learners are able to construct and confirm meaning
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
through sustained reflection and discourse in a critical community of inquiry.
Teaching presence: The design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social processes
for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile learning
Emotion is noticeably absent from the discussion of teaching and cognitive presence. Emo­
tion and affective response is part of social presence, and any connection with cognitive
and teaching presence is deemed to occur through an overlap with social presence. Lip­
man , the original creator of the community of inquiry notion for higher education,
doesn’t make the same distinction. For Lipman, emotive experience integrates with think­
ing to improve reason and judgment.
In emotional presence as measured here, the emotive experience does exist in combina­
tion with social presence, but it also clusters together as a unique presence. While Garrison
 suggests that “the face-to-face environment can more easily provide socio-emotion­
al support”(p. 64), such support is essential online, beyond socio-emotional support to ne­
gotiating emotion that exists in and of itself, in relation to teaching and cognition. Based on
our data, emotional presence is not just the affective response that presents itself through
social presence; rather, it underpins the broader online experience. We define emotional
presence as the following:
Emotional presence is the outward expression of emotion,
affect, and feeling by individuals and among individuals
in a community of inquiry, as they relate to and interact
with the learning technology, course content, students,
and the instructor.
This emotion will emerge as part of the transition to online learning and in the learning
experience itself. In spite of evidence that more and more students are engaging in online
learning , clarity about the transition to a new learning environ­
ment is still unconfirmed . While new tech­
nologies are often expected to make work easier, they also involve the development of new
competencies . For Birch, the dimensions of these new competencies are not
yet clear; implementation of new technology for learners has sped well ahead of our under­
standing of necessary competencies. This creates two problems. One is that learners are
left to create their own understanding and develop the skills to succeed in this technologi­
cally mediated environment. Second is that the emotion created by dealing with this new
learning environment is still to be addressed. Knowledge about the impact of emotion on
learning broadly is starting to emerge, but we are at early
stages of discerning appropriate actions by students and teachers online, let alone being
able to explain how emotion impacts online learning.
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
It is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss the pattern of factors somewhat different
from the original factor analysis that tested this instrument. The cluster of items was sup­
portive enough of the original model that we feel confident suggesting that emotional pres­
ence may exist in combination with other presences theorized and measured as part of an
online community of inquiry.
Expanding the Online Community of Inquiry
An online community of inquiry is a distinct personal and public search for community,
meaning, and understanding. New roles are necessitated by the nature of the communica­
tion, which compels students to assume greater responsibility for, and control over, their
learning. Under this enhanced communication, “each form of transport not only carries,
but translates and transforms the sender, the receiver and the message” . In addition to onlinedness , a collaborative learning community neces­
sitates the adoption of personal responsibility and shared control. This goes to the heart of
an online learning community—a significant shift from the transmission of information in
the lecture hall and the passive role of students.
Thus, online learning communities demand role adjustments. In the context of a new social
role, the pathway to competence will occur over time as the role becomes prevalent and
normalized. In this early stage, online communities will contribute to the socialization pro­
cess for those engaging in this new role. The result is a new role and a new identity for learn­
ers. While the adoption and enactment of social roles is a standard, commonplace element
of everyday experience, becoming an online learner has a unique characteristic. For many
learners, role models for learning the required and expected activities are not present until
one is already engaged in an online course . Emotion
presents itself at two junctures: one in relation to the adjustment to a new role as online
learner and the second in combination with cognitive, social, and teaching presence. This
supports the detailed work of Zembylas , an example of the emotional adjustment
process and the positive and negative emotions that influence students’ online learning
experiences.
In this regard, we propose that ongoing analysis of emotions through the lens of the CoI
framework will allow us to organize and develop appropriate interventions and thus new
learning environments in which students can adjust to the new role and develop their social,
emotional, teaching, and cognitive presences more effectively. Employing the CoI frame­
work enables a comprehensive view of the dynamic and complex nature of online learning,
including emotion. The three elements of the framework (i.e., social, teaching, and cogni­
tive presence) present the main aspects of an online learning experience that cause and/or
affect emotional arousal.
The implications of the emotional presence confirmed in this study are explained by Lehm­
an ; emotions create presence as “presence is the result of the dynamic interplay
between emotion, behaviour, cognition and the environment” (p. 13). Lehman further ex­
plains that individuals are perceptual by nature and dynamically interacting within the per­
ceptual field to create representation of the world; throughout this dynamic, enactive pro­
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
cess emotions affect behavior and cognition and impact our experience of presence. They
are key to the interaction process in the perceptual world in that they focus our perceptions
on particular aspects of a situation and enable us to concentrate on specific situations, con­
nect the affective to the cognitive, and arrive at thoughtful and appropriate decisions.
Conclusions
Emotion may constrain learning as a distracter but, if managed, may serve as an enabler in
support of thinking, decision making, stimulation, and directing. Online learning is replete,
not fraught, with emotion. We conclude, with others, that emotion is present in online
learning communities .
Research on emotional presence within an online community of inquiry demonstrates the
salience of emotion in online learning. Given this reality, emotion must be considered, if
not a central factor, at least as a ubiquitous, influential part of learning—online and other­
wise . Therefore, emotions
expressed in the online experience, as explained by the CoI model , indicate that emotional presence exists in social, cognitive, and teaching
Our exploratory study must now be replicated with deductive emotional coding structures
and larger samples to validate our exploratory statistical analysis. Future research requires
that we determine first which emotions are present in common human exchanges and in
any learning environment then identify if emotions in online environments are the same
or different. Key to online environments is to acknowledge and discuss emotional tenor
as much communicative information is lost without tone of voice and facial expressions—
emoticons excepted. The exploration of emotional states that are not present— hidden yet
influential—needs attention.
With evidence that emotions exist in all aspects of an online community of inquiry, consid­
eration of the appropriate response is next. How does this impact design and organization,
facilitation, and direct instruction? Which emotions, if any, are found uniquely in the trig­
gering events, exploration, integration, and resolution found in cognitive presence? And
what of the overlaps in all three presences and the possible emotion that may exist there?
In addition, emotion and online learning may be explored in pedagogical models other than
At the end of our deliberations, we define emotional presence as an experience that is sa­
lient in the online environment. It is a topic worthy of further study. In common practice,
emotions are unexamined, seemingly visceral and unconscious. This is not appropriate in
reflective pedagogy designed to bring cognition to consciousness. Learners need to under­
stand the role of emotion in life and in learning to realize their benefits. This moves learners
beyond the role of unaware victim of the human emotion response to conscious manager
of emotion. Instructors can model emotional response and its place in
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012
the instructor’s own learning and teach how to bring emotion
to consciousness and make use of the emotional state in a learning situation . “As an instructor, it’s crucial that you set up the learning situation
in a manner that arouses learners’ feelings of security, well-being, and self-confidence. It’s
equally important to challenge them without threats, intimidation, or pressure” .
Emotional Presence, Learning, and the Online Learning Environment
Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
Vol 13 | No 4
Research Articles
October 2012