macroeconomic factors and
oil futures prices:
a data-rich model
Paolo Zagaglia∗
This version: February 10, 2009
I study the dynamics of oil futures prices in the NYMEX using a large panel dataset
that includes global macroeconomic indicators, ﬁnancial market indices, quantities and
prices of energy products. I extract common factors from these series and estimate
a Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregression for the maturity structure of oil futures
prices. I ﬁnd that latent factors generate information that, once combined with that
of the yields, improves the forecasting performance for oil prices. Furthermore, I show
that a factor correlated to purely ﬁnancial developments contributes to the model
performance, in addition to factors related to energy quantities and prices.
Keywords: Crude oil, futures markets, factor models.
JEL Classification: C53, D51, E52.
∗Department of Economics, Stockholm University, . This work started when I was a
visiting scholar in the Research Unit of the Bank of Finland, and was completed during a consultancy
assignment for the Research Department of Sveriges Riksbank. I acknowledge the warm hospitality of
both institutions. I am deeply grateful to Vincent Brousseau and Tarja Yrjölä for help in constructing
the dataset. Efrem Castelnuovo, Juha Kilponen, Massimiliano Marzo and Alistair Milne contributed with
relevant suggestions and constructive criticism. The usual disclaimer applies.
Introduction
During the past year, oil prices have made the headlines of the ﬁnancial press almost every
day. Since the beginning 2008, the spot price of crude oil traded in the New York Mercantile
Exchange (NYMEX) has almost doubled at peak. This has raised serious concerns among
market participants and policymakers worldwide. Comments released to the press have
often denoted a deep disagreement on the causes of the price spikes and, in general, on the
mechanics of oil market.
Bernanke has represented the central bankers’ view in a timely manner, stating
“. . . the price of oil has risen signiﬁcantly in terms of all major currencies,
suggesting that factors other than the dollar, notably shifts in the underlying
global demand for and supply of oil, have been the principal drivers of the
increase in prices. (. . . ) Another concern that has been raised is that ﬁnancial
speculation has added markedly to upward pressures on oil prices. (. . . ) However, if ﬁnancial speculation were pushing oil prices above the levels consistent
with the fundamentals of supply and demand, we would expect inventories of
crude oil and petroleum products to increase as supply rose and demand fell.
But in fact, available data on oil inventories show notable declines over the past
Trichet clariﬁes the role that factors unrelated to energy demand and supply can
play in oil markets:1
“I am not sure that speculation is the major culprit for what we are observing. The major issues are associated with supply and demand.. . . It is not the
futures market itself that is the problem. The problem is that this is acrossthe-board reallocation of portfolios that gives more weight to commodities in
Since oil commodities are traded through futures and derivatives contracts, market views
shape the pricing of oil commodities. In this sense, the ﬁnancial press has pushed the
hypothesis that purely ﬁnancial factors, or ‘speculation’, have been behind the recent
spikes .
The academic literature on the macroeconomics of oil prices presents the same dichotomy. For instance, Kilian suggests that a proper measurement of the business
cycle eﬀects of energy prices requires disentangling the role of demand supply shocks in
energy markets. Kilian decomposes the real price of crude oil into supply shocks,
1Also quoted in Barber .
shocks to the global demand for industrial commodities, and demand shocks that are idiosyncratic to the oil market. The role of energy quantity factors is stressed also in Alquist
and Kilian , who show that spread between oil futures prices of diﬀerent maturities
are related to uncertainty about supply shortfalls.
The literature on the ﬁnancial determinants of oil prices has produced a number of
results on the role of uncertainty for oil pricing. Askari and Krichene model the
jump intensity of daily crude oil prices between 2002 and 2006. They ﬁnd that measures
of market expectations extracted from call and put option prices have incorporated no
change in underlying fundamentals in the short term. Chong and Miﬀre document
the presence of a signiﬁcant pattern of risk premia earned by investors on a number of
commodities futures since 1979, including crude oil. Gorton, Hayashi and Rouwenhorst
 show that, although commercial positions on oil futures are correlate with inventory
signals, they do not determine risk premia. Finally, Marzo, Spargoli and Zagaglia 
examine the predictive content for futures prices of a speciﬁc type of oil derivative contract,
namely oil spreads. Their results indicate that oil spread prices have stable predictive power
for futures prices, thus supporting the hypothesis that speculative motives matter.
A number of key questions related to price formation in oil markets is not dealt with in
the literature. The issue of causality between spot and futures prices across the maturity
structure is largely unsettled. Suppose that oil futures contain information about spot
prices. Omitting futures prices would bias the results in favour of a strong role for demandsupply factors to drive the spot price. It is not clear what the channels are for oil prices to
have macroeconomic impact. Moreover, the role of macroeconomic factors for the dynamics
of oil prices has been studied in isolation from the conditions prevailing in ﬁnancial markets.
This is at odds with what is suggested by Trichet with reference to recent episodes.
In this paper, I exploit the information from a large panel of energy prices and quantities, macroeconomic and ﬁnancial data to study the dynamics of the term structure of
futures prices for crude oil. I assume that the available time series are noisy measures of
broad concepts, such as demand and supply. Hence, I treat these variables as unobservable. Like Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz , I extract common factors. I model the joint
dynamics of the factors and the oil prices in a ‘Factor-Augmented’ vector autoregression
This modelling strategy has already been applied by Mönch to construct a noaﬃne model for the yield curve of government bonds. There are multiple advantages from
following this approach. The ﬁrst one is that this can capture the underlying dynamics in
oil prices generated by latent factors of diﬀerent nature. The FAVAR allows to model the
relevant maturity spectrum of oil futures prices in a ﬂexible way.
The panel dataset from which I extract common components include over 200 data
series with detailed information on energy demand and supply, energy prices, macroeco-
nomic and ﬁnancial variables. I show that a latent factor correlated with the open interest
on oil futures prices contributes signiﬁcantly to the joint model of the yields. This appears
to corroborate the conjecture of Trichet on the ﬁnancial determinants of oil prices.
The other factors are strongly correlated with data on energy quantity and prices, as typically suggested by the macroeconomics literature. I ﬁnd that augmenting the information
from the term structure of oil futures prices with latent factors improves the forecasting
performance of the model.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I outline the structure of the FAVAR
model. Section 3 presents the dataset. Section 4 describes the results. Final remarks are
presented in section 5.
The Factor Augmented VAR Model
The model presented here is based on the assumption that the futures price for one maturity is driven both by the prices of the other maturities, and by macroeconomic shocks.
The macroeconomic determinants are proxied by unobservable factors that summarize the
common information in a large number of time series. The joint dynamics of the observable
an unobservable variables in modelled in the FAVAR model of Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz
The general form of the FAVAR can be written as
= µ + Φ(L)
where Φ(L) is a (k + m) × (k + m) matrix of lag polynomials, νt is a (k + m) × 1 vector of
standardized normal shocks. Yt = [y′
t−1 . . .] is a vector m×1 of observed variables. The
unobservable factors are collected in the k × 1 vector Ft = [f′
t−1 . . .]. Equation 1 states
that the dynamics of the factors is aﬀected by its own lags, by the vector of observables,
and by the shocks.
Equation 1 cannot be estimated without knowledge of Ft. For that purpose, a large
number p of series can be used to extract common factors. The ‘information series’ are
collected in the vector Xt with dimension p × 1. The dynamic factor model of Stock and
Watson can then be used to obtain Ft
Xt = Λf(L)ft + Λy(L)yt + ϵt.
If p > k, and k is small, the dynamic model 2 can be rewritten as a static factor model
with ﬁxed loadings
Xt = ΛfFt + ΛyYt + ϵt.
Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz propose two methods for estimating the model 1-3.
The ﬁrst one is the ‘diﬀusion index’ approach of Stock and Watson , which consists
itself of two steps.
In the ﬁrst step, equation 3 is used to estimate the unobservable
factors Ft through principal components analysis.
The estimated ˆFt is then ﬁt to the
FAVAR model 1. The second method for the estimation of the model follows a single-step
Bayesian likelihood approach. Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz discuss a Gibbs sampler
that approximates the marginal posterior densities of both the factors and the parameters.
Since it is not clear a priori which estimation method delivers the results that are most
desirable, Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz estimate the model using both approaches,
and ﬁnd that they yield similar outcomes. In this paper, I apply the two-step procedure.
The asymptotic principal component method of Stock and Watson estimates
the factors by recovering the space of Xt spanned by both Ft and Yt. Denote by V the
eigenvectors corresponding to the k largest eigenvalues of the variance-covariance matrix
XX′/k. The estimates of the factors are obtained from
and the loadings are
The dataset
I use monthly data from January 1992 until March 2008 for a total of 193 observations for
each series. The vector Yt consists of returns on the spot price for WTI crude oil traded in
the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), and on futures prices with maturities of 1,
6 and 12 months.2 The panel dataset used for the extraction of the factors comprises 239
series that are meant to capture the macroeconomic, ﬁnancial and geographic forces that
move oil prices. The complete list of the series, the sources and the choice of ﬁltering are
reported in Appendix A.
Oil prices in the NYMEX respond to global supply and demand factors. Hence, the
dataset includes series that are publicly available on petroleum stocks and consumption in
the major OECD countries. Since this information is not available for the major emerging
economies (Russia, India and China), the industrial production index is used as a proxy for
consumption pressures. Instead, crude oil production data account for the entire range of
oil producers worldwide. Almost half the series on energy quantities described in Appendix
A refer to the U.S. In particular, there is detailed information on the use of all the available
energy sources across sectors of the economy, including the energy products derived from
2Returns are computed as the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the log.
petroleum and natural gas. There are indicators on rigging and drilling activities in the
U.S., as well as on alternative sources of energy such as ethanol. I use around 50 price
indices that are related with U.S. imports and reﬁning. I control for the role of shipment
prices to the Mediterranean sea and from the Gulf to Northern Europe.
The macroeconomic part of the dataset consists of on measures of monetary aggregates,
prices indices, indicators of conﬁdence and bilateral exchange rates for the U.S. economy.
Since the stability of the Dollar exchange rate is often pointed to as a key factor for oil
prices, I use the global hazard indicator of Brousseau and Scacciavillani . This is a
measure of risk in foreign exchange markets calculated from implied volatilities of currency
options. Following the lead from the previous quotation of Bernanke , the dataset
includes information on the open interest and the volumes of traded futures contracts, as
well as prices of crude oil spreads. In particular, crude oil spreads are over-the-counter
derivatives. As Marzo, Spargoli and Zagaglia show, these contracts have predictive
content for oil futures prices, and can provide information on the speculative motive for
trading oil. Finally, the dataset comprises the prices of stocks of major oil companies, and
a number of bond and stock indices.
Model speciﬁcation
In the ﬁrst part of the estimation, I extract common factors from the panel dataset using
static principal components along the lines of Stock and Watson . The ﬁrst 8 factors
account for 80% of the variance in the dataset. Table 1 reports the fraction of variance
explained by the ﬁrst four factors.
These factors account for a sizeable proportion of
the total variation, namely around 50% . They exhibit a low degree of persistence. The
estimated autocorrelation coeﬃcients are however quite diﬀerent across factors.
I include the ﬁrst four factors in the FAVAR model for two reasons. Testing for the
optimal number of factors using the statistical framework of Bai and Ng points
in favour of the use of these factors. On more general grounds, the VAR model presents
a tradeoﬀbetween parsimony and ﬁt. Various experiments suggest that the results are
qualitatively unaltered by the inclusion of additional factors.3 A similar issue arises for
the choice of the lag length. Information criteria suggest that 2 lags provide a reasonable
speciﬁcation of the model.
Factor estimates
The factors extracted from the panel have no structural interpretation unless identifying
assumptions are imposed. In order to provide some understanding on the information they
3These results are available from the author upon request.
convey, I regress the factors on the variables of the panel. Table 2 reports the variance
explained by the ﬁve series that are most correlated with the factors. The ﬁrst factor is
strongly correlated with a price index of crude oil imports. This can be interpreted as a
cost indicator of the price pressure on oil futures. The second and third factors are related
to stock volumes of oil-related products. This has to do with the intermediate demand for
crude oil. Finally, the fourth factors is correlated with a purely ﬁnancial variables that is
disconnected from real developments in oil markets. This provides support to the claim
that ﬁnancial factors contribute to the determination of oil prices.
Figure 1 plots the estimated factors together with the most correlated series of the panel
dataset. The factor loadings are plotted in ﬁgure 2. I break down the contribution to the
loadings of each factor by three groups of series, divided into energy prices, energy quantities and macro and ﬁnancial data. The contributions to the factors diﬀer largely across
series. Energy prices provide the largest contribution to the ﬁrst factor. Energy quantities
instead account for the largest weights in the second and third factors. Finally, macro and
ﬁnancial series determine the largest fraction of the fourth factor. These considerations
support the economic interpretation of the factors discussed earlier.
Preliminary evidence on the role of factors
In order to understand the relation between the factors and the the return on oil futures
prices at diﬀerent maturities, I report the correlation between the yields and the lagged
factors in Table 3. The correlations diﬀer in terms of size and sign across factors. The ﬁrst
factor has a large and positive contemporaneous correlation with all the returns. This is
consistent with the interpretation of measure of cost pressure on futures prices. The other
three facts are less correlated with the yields. The sign of the contemporaneous correlation
on the second and third factors is negative, in agreement with the idea that available
stocks provide a buﬀer to prices.
The third factor is however weakly correlated, with
the magnitude of correlation increasing at longer lags. Overall, this preliminary evidence
suggests that not all the factors have predictive power for the yields at various lags.
To explore further this issue, I estimate unrestricted regressions of the yields on the
factors, which takes the form
Yt = µ + ΛFt + ϵt.
Table 4 reports the parameters estimates and the fraction of explained variation. Two
observations arise. The ﬁrst one concerns the fact that only the ﬁrst and the fourth factors
have statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for regressions of all the yields. The estimated
coeﬃcients are the signs one would expect from the correlation analysis.
The second
consideration is that the regressions explain large fractions of the variation in the yields of
up to 6 months of maturity. Moreover, the longer the maturity, the more limited the scope
of the factors for explaining the dynamics of the yields. For 1-year oil futures, the joint
predictive power of the factors becomes low, as the R2 declines to approximately 12%.
Parameter estimates
Before estimating the factor-augmented VAR, I evaluate the persistence of all the variables.
In order to investigate the null of a unit root, I run the tests proposed by Dickey and Fuller
 and Phillips and Perron . Instead of relying on the standard formulation of
these tests, I apply the state-of-the-art modiﬁcations proposed by Perron and Ng .4 Table 5 reports the test statistics. The results indicate that the null of a unit root
is rejected for all the variables. Hence, all the series to be included in the FAVAR can be
modelled as stationary variables.
The estimates of the FAVAR model are detailed in Table 6. The upper part of the
diagonal of the coeﬃcient matrix Γ1 suggests that only the ﬁrst fact displays a certain
degree of persistence. Additional evidence on the relation between the factors and the
returns can be obtained through pairwise Granger-causality tests in the VAR. These are
F tests for zero restrictions on the lagged coeﬃcients of a variable onto another. Table 7
reports the test statistics and the p-values for the null of Granger causality of the factors
for the yields, and vice versa. The ﬁrst panel shows that not all the factors have predictive
power for the yields. In this sense, the most important factor is the ﬁrst one. The second
factor, instead, does not Granger cause any of the yields. Since these are bivariate tests,
they provide no information on the indirect relation between variables. For instance, the
second factor might Granger cause another factor, which can in turn have predictive power
on the yields.
Interestingly, the second panel shows that the yields Granger cause of
the factors. This highlights one of the advantages of the modelling strategy pursued in
this paper, namely capturing the interaction between the observable and non-observable
variables.
Figure 3 plots the ﬁtted series in-sample. The ﬁtted series do not succeed in capturing
the large variation that characterizes the historical data.
However, they ﬁt the peaks
relatively well. In the case of the returns on 1-year futures, the model replicates the large
swing of the sample that takes place in 1996-1998.
Out-of-sample forecasts
In this section, I compare the performance for out-of-sample forecasts from the FAVAR
with that of alternative models. In particular, the competitor models are
4These are based on the use of Generalized Least Squares detrended data for the estimation of the
spectral density matrix at zero frequency, and on the computation of a class of improved selection criteria
for the choice of the order of the underlying autoregression. Perron and Ng shows that both aspects
improve the small-sample properties of the tests.
• a VAR on yields only
ˆYt+h|t = ˆµ + ˆΛYt,
• a factor-only VAR
ˆYt+h|t = ˆµ + ˆΛFt,
• a random walk
ˆYt+h|t = Yt.
The forecasting exercise is run as follows. I initialize the parameter estimates on data until
December 2002. The forecasts are then computed for various horizons, and the model
estimates are updated recursively by estimating with one additional data-point at the
Table 8 reports the root mean squared errors (RMSE). Table 9 lists the squared errors
relative to those of a random walk. The FAVAR generates the best forecasts for 1- and
3-month and 1-year yields at short horizons. The VAR with yields only is instead the
best predictor for yields 6 months ahead. For forecast horizons longer than 3 months, the
FAVAR generates the same squared errors of either the VAR with yields only or the factoronly model. However, the squared errors generated by the models are rather close. This
means that no major reduction in RMSE are obtained from choosing the best performing
model. To summarize, the joint information from factors and yields improves to a limited
extent the predictive power for the yields at short horizons.
Conclusion
This paper models the dynamics of the term structure of oil futures prices by using information from a panel dataset including over 230 series with global macroeconomic indicators,
ﬁnancial market indices, quantities and prices of energy products. I estimate a Factor-
Augmented Vector Autoregression with latent factors extracted from the panel. I show
that latent factors generate information which, once combined with that of the yields,
improves the forecasting performance for oil prices. Furthermore, I ﬁnd that a factor correlated to purely ﬁnancial developments contributes to the model performance, in addition
to factors related to energy quantities and prices.
The results presented here can be extended in a number of directions. I am planning
to use Bayesian model averaging to study the performance of the best-performing subset
of factors for forecasting the term structure of oil prices. Moreover, the factors could be
used to identity the impact of oil demand and supply shocks.
In this sense, it would
be important to understand what role purely ﬁnancial market variables can play for the
persistence and magnitude of the estimated shocks.