Munich Personal RePEc Archive
Latent Factor Models for Credit Scoring
in P2P Systems
Ahelegbey, Daniel Felix and Giudici, Paolo and
Hadji-Misheva, Branka
Boston University - Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Pavia - Faculty of Economics, University of Pavia -
Department of Economics and Management
4 July 2018
Online at 
MPRA Paper No. 92636, posted 23 Mar 2019 03:56 UTC
Latent Factor Models For Credit Scoring In P2P Systems
Daniel Felix Ahelegbeya, Paolo Giudicib, Branka Hadji-Mishevab,∗
aDepartment of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston University, USA
bDepartment of Economics and Management Sciences, University of Pavia, Italy
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) FinTech platforms allow cost reduction and service improvement in credit
lending. However, these improvements may come at the price of a worse credit risk measurement, and this can hamper lenders and endanger the stability of a ﬁnancial system.
approach the problem of credit risk for Peer-to-Peer (P2P) systems by presenting a latent
factor-based classiﬁcation technique to divide the population into major network communities
in order to estimate a more eﬃcient logistic model. Given a number of attributes that capture
ﬁrm performances in a ﬁnancial system, we adopt a latent position model which allow us to
distinguish between communities of connected and not-connected ﬁrms based on the spatial
position of the latent factors. We show through empirical illustration that incorporating the
latent factor-based classiﬁcation of ﬁrms is particularly suitable as it improves the predictive
performance of P2P scoring models.
Credit Risk, Factor models, Financial Technology, Peer-to-Peer, Scoring
models, Spatial Clustering
1. Introduction
In the past ten years, the emergence of ﬁnancial technology ventures (‘FinTechs’) in both
the consumer and commercial credit space has introduced many opportunities for both lenders
and investors, which has in turn redeﬁned the role of traditional intermediaries. Since 2005,
the growth of FinTech investments has been exponential, with their total funding jumping
from around $5.5B in 2005 to more than $100.2B in 2017. A key development within the
context of alternative ﬁnancial service operators, is the emergence and fast growth of peerto-peer lending platforms. The concept “peer-to-peer” captures the interaction between units
while eliminating the need for a central intermediary. The origins of the term can be found in
the ﬁeld of computer networking where it describes a network where any one computer can
act as a client or a server to other computers connected within the network without the need
of connecting to a centralized server .
In the context of ﬁnance, P2P platforms oﬀer disintermediation by allowing borrowers
and lenders to communicate directly. With the rapid growth of P2P lending activities, a
key point of interest becomes assessing their risks, to protect investors and maintain ﬁnancial
stability. From a general viewpoint, despite the fact that P2P platforms oﬀer many advantages
∗Corresponding author at: Via San Felice 7, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
Email addresses: (Daniel Felix Ahelegbey), (Paolo Giudici),
 (Branka Hadji-Misheva)
to borrowers and lenders, causes for concerns do exist.
Namely, P2P platforms are less
able to deal with asymmetric information, compared to traditional banks.
This can lead
to adverse selection, in which investors cannot distinguish between borrowers belonging to
diﬀerent levels of credit risk. This problem is made worse by the diﬀerence in risk ownership
that exists between P2P and traditional banking models. Although both banks and P2P
platforms rely on scoring models for the purpose of estimating the probability of default of
a loan, the incentive for model accuracy may diﬀer signiﬁcantly, as in the context of P2P
lending platforms, in most cases, the credit risk is not born by the platform but, rather, by
the investors. Because of P2P platform’s inability to solve for asymmetric information as
eﬃciently as traditional banks, and because of the diﬀerences in risk ownership, the scoring
system of P2P lenders may not adequately reﬂect the “correct” probability of default of a
A further issue associated with the nature of P2P platforms, not considered extensively
within the literature, is that they are by construction globally-interconnected networks. This
in turn suggests that the application of traditional scoring models may lead to bias and
inaccurate classiﬁcation of borrowers into diﬀerent levels of credit risk. Speciﬁcally, classical
banks have, over the years, segmented their reference markets into speciﬁc territorial areas,
or into speciﬁc business activities, increasing the accuracy of their ratings but, on the other
hand, increasing concentration risks. Diﬀerently, P2P platforms are based on a “universal”
banking model, fully inclusive, without space and business type limitations, that beneﬁts from
diversiﬁcation but which suﬀers from a diﬃcult scoring mechanism.
We claim that the inclusion of network information can improve loan default predictions,
as it captures information that reﬂects underlying common features, that cannot be otherwise observed. For related works see Wilson and Sharda and Letizia and Lillo .
Besides improving predictive accuracy, a network representation can also provide valuable
“descriptive” insights on the interconnectedness between companies participating in the P2P
platform, identifying participants which are central to the network and, therefore, most important from a systemic risk perspective. In line with this, our main contributions are two: i)
to analyze the predictive performance of scoring models employed by P2P platforms, specifically in SME lending; ii) to investigate whether network-based scoring model can improve
loan default predictions, and, therefore, better protect investors, and better preserve ﬁnancial
stability.
Network modeling has become increasingly recognized as a powerful methodology for
investigating and capturing interactions between economic agents and among ﬁnancial institutions . In particular, correlation network models, that rely on correlations matrices
between the units of analysis (borrowers, in our context) for the purpose of deriving an adjacency matrix between them, have been proposed by Giudici and Spelta , Giudici and
Parisi , Giudici et al. and Giudici and Parisi . The use of correlation networks in ﬁnancial studies has grown in popularity, because they provide a simple and useful
tool for representing and visualizing the structure of pairwise cross correlations among a set
of units, over a particular time period. This allows to obtain deeper insights into the mutual
interconnections that exist between diﬀerent statistical units, exactly as classical correlation
analysis allows to understand the mutual relationships between diﬀerent statistical variables.
For related works on the application of correlation networks and centrality measures for risk
quantiﬁcation see Aste et al. ; Barfuss et al. ; Mantegna ; Massara
et al. ; Musmeci et al. ; Pozzi et al. ; Tumminello et al. .
In the context of peer to peer lending, we propose a network-based scoring models based
on an alternative method of inferring links between P2P participants, based on uncovering
community structures within them.
Most ﬁnancial systems are characterized by the existence of structural modules that play
signiﬁcant roles and deﬁne the functional role of the system . Communities in a network are the dense group of nodes which are tightly coupled to each other
within the group and loosely coupled to the rest of the nodes in the network . Community detection within the context of P2P platforms will allow us to better
understand the properties and functionalities of the network and also it will also help the
process of developing and estimating a more eﬃcient scoring model for these platforms which
in turn will ensure higher-level protection for investors and overall ﬁnancial stability.
By representing SMEs which have applied for a loan to a P2P lending platform as vectors
in real space, expressed as linear combinations of orthogonal bases described by singular value
decomposition (SVD), orthogonality becomes a metric for classifying the respective SMEs into
communities. Speciﬁcally, the information contained in the eigenvectors and eigenvalues are
at the center of all spectral graph partitioning approaches. In the context of this study, nodes
are partitioned in two groups such that companies connected to each other belong to the
same community. Once the adjacency matrix based on the SVD approach is inferred, we
estimate and compare the predictive utility of traditional scoring models for connected and
not-connected nodes independently. Note that, in applying this approach, we attempt to
replicate the segmentation practices which are an imperative factor of bank’s service oﬀering
and main determinant of the accuracy of their scoring models.
To summarize, this paper contributes to the literature on credit scoring for P2P lending
by: a) propose a new network-based scoring model, that leverages the structure of network
communities, obtained using all available information; and b) demonstrate that such a model
improves predictive accuracy and, therefore, reliability, of credit risk estimations provided by
P2P platforms. By increasing the ability of P2P lenders to successfully discriminate between
diﬀerent risk classes, the proposed methodology indirectly helps stabilize the overall ﬁnancial
system. Namely, although regulators are greatly interested in managing credit risk exposure,
they cannot apply such models as they are based on commercial data made available only to
the P2P lending platform.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains the proposed methodology, Section
3 discuss application to a credit scoring database provided by a European rating agency that
supplies credit risk information to P2P platforms and, Section 4 presents concluding remarks.
2. Methodology
2.1. Scoring Models
Generally, the main linear statistical tool used for developing credit scoring model is the
logistic regression. In the context of P2P lending, logistic regression has been used in the
studies of Andreeva et al. ; Barrios et al. ; Emekter et al. ; Serrano-Cinca
and Gutiérrez-Nieto . This approach aims to classify the dependent variable in two
groups, characterized by a diﬀerent loan status [1=default; 0=no default] in which borrowers
are classiﬁed by logistic regression, speciﬁed by the following model:
where pi is the probability of default, for borrower i, xi = (xi1, . . . , xim) is an m dimensional
vector of borrower-speciﬁc explanatory variables, and the intercept parameter α, as well as
the regression coeﬃcients βj, for j = 1, . . . , m, are to be estimated from the available data.
It follows that the probability of default can be obtained as:
 1 + exp . One approach for incorporating network information into the econometric
speciﬁcation is by extending the work of Chinazzi et al. by adding network summary
measures to the logistic regression context. This leads to the proposal of a network-based
scoring, which may take the following form:
βjxij + γgi
where pi is the probability of default, for borrower i, xi = (xi1, . . . , xij, . . . , xiJ) is a vector
of borrower-speciﬁc explanatory variables, gi is the network centrality measure for borrower
i and the intercept parameter α and the regression coeﬃcients γ and βj, for j = 1, . . . , J,
are to be estimated from the available data. Speciﬁcally, what is suggested by Giudici and
Hadji-Misheva is using correlation network models for deriving an adjacency matrix
between the participants in the P2P platform. Once an adjacency matrix is derived, estimated
centrality measures are incorporated into the predictive model.
However, the above speciﬁcation suﬀer for one important limitation: it requires the preliminary choice of an explanatory variable, on which to derive the correlation matrix between
the observed company times series. This may be ﬁne when one variable is suﬃcient to discriminate credit behavior; when more variables, instead, are required, an alternative approach is
necessary. To build correlation network models that simultaneously consider more variables,
we propose a network-based scoring model that uncovers community structures within them.
Communities in a network are the dense group of nodes which are tightly coupled to each
other within the group and loosely coupled to the rest of the nodes in the network .
Our approach can be described by three consecutive steps. We ﬁrst obtain the latent
factors (positions) for each credit applicant (i); we then infer communities between connected
and not-connected nodes (ii); last, we estimate and compare the predictive performance of
logistic regression models, separately for connected and not-connected nodes (iii).
next two subsections we describe steps (i) and (ii), while (iii) is the logistic regression model
described in this section, applied separately to each of the found communities.
2.2. Latent Factor Model
Let Z be an arbitrary n × m matrix. The singular value decomposition (SVD) of any
n × m non-symmetric matrix Z can be expressed as
where D = Λ1/2 is a diagonal matrix, with Λ interpreted as the diagonal matrix of nonzero
eigenvalues of Z′Z and ZZ′, U and V are matrices whose columns are the orthonormal
eigenvectors of ZZ′ and Z′Z respectively. More speciﬁcally, U is referred to as the matrix of
the left singular vectors that span the column space of Z and the columns of V span its row
space and are referred to as the right singular vectors.
Let X = (x1, . . . , xn)′ be a stacked collection of the institutional features. Following Hoﬀ
 , we relate the observations in X to the following model
X = Z + E = UDV ′ + E
where Z is the expectation of X and E is the errors assumed to be normally distributed with
mean zero and covariance matrix Σ.
We assume the observed institutional attributes are driven by some unobserved underlying
factors that signal the ﬁnancial conditions of the institution. We consider a lower dimensional
number of factors (i.e, k < m). Thus, following (5), we express each xi as:
xi = uiDV ′ + εi = fiV ′ + εi
where ui = (ui,1, . . . , ui,k)′ is a k dimensional vector representing the i-th row of U, D is a
k × k diagonal matrix, V is the m × k matrix of factor loadings and fi = uiD is the vector of
factor scores.
2.3. Network inference
Following the literature on latent space models, we consider a class of network models
commonly referred to as inner-product models .
In this framework, we project the latent factors onto a “social space” and nodes that are
“close” to each other are more likely to be connected. Let A be an n × n binary adjacency
matrix where Aij = Aji = 1 indicates a link between nodes i and j, and zero otherwise. We
parameterize the ij-th entry of A via a probit mapping function given by
P(Aij = 1|fi, fj, θ) = πij = Φ( θ + f′
where πij is the probability of a link between nodes i and j, Φ is the cumulative density
function of the standard normal distribution, and θ is a constant. In estimating a network
for a large number of nodes, a common approach is to approximate the network by a sparse
structure. Following the literature on sparse graphical models, we set θ = Φ−1(
n−1). From
(7), we deﬁne a link between nodes i and j by
Aij = (πij > π0)
Thus, node i is connected to node j if and only if the probability of a link between the two
nodes exceeds π0. The choice of the threshold π0 may be put in correspondence with the
proportions of the event of interest within the total sample.
3. Application
To implement our proposed models, we consider data supplied by a European External
Credit Assessment Institution (ECAI), that supplies credit scoring to P2P platforms focused
Figure 1: Histogram of missing data
on SME commercial lending. Speciﬁcally, the analysis relies on a dataset composed of oﬃcial
ﬁnancial information (44 balance sheets and income statement variables) on 813 SMEs, mostly
based in Southern Europe, for the year 2015. To make data consistent between diﬀerent
European countries, ﬁnancial data has been reclassiﬁed to minimize the diﬀerences based
on diﬀerent ﬁscal legislations. The majority of the companies included in the sample are
Italian based enterprises with less than 20 employees and strong focus on manufacturing.
The proportion of observed defaults in the sample is equal to 13.8%, a large proportion, in
line with the observed impact of the recent ﬁnancial and debt crisis in Europe and, speciﬁcally,
in Southern European countries.
3.1.1. Data Pre-Processing
As it is the case with most studies, when collecting balance sheet data on companies, the
required count or value for some variables are not available. Although this is a problem that
arise in most empirical research relying on ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial data about economic
agents, very rarely do authors stray from the complete cases analysis. This approach can
be problematic as it considered ineﬃcient and possibly leading to bias conclusions . In line with this, in this paper we adapt the imputation method for generating
replacements values for missing data which in turn allows for the use of the full number of
observations.
In the context of the dataset used in this paper, missing variables are present for four main
variables indicating the leverage and proﬁtability condition of the SMEs. Figure 1 provides
the histogram of missing data. Looking at the histogram in Figure 1 we observe that the
four variables for which most NAs are present are: (i) the leverage ratio, (ii) the return on
investment ratio, (iii) the return on equity ratio and (iv) the return on sales ratio. These
represent some of the most crucial ﬁnancial ratios determining the companies’ overall ﬁnancial
health which in turn impacts the probability of loan default.
The most used imputation methods take a set of complete predictors and returns a single
imputation for each variable. In this paper we follow a multiple approach, in which imputations are created by repeated calls to the elementary imputation function. Considering that
all four variables which contain NAs are continuous variables, the imputation method we
employ is predictive mean matching Burton et al. .
In the literature there has been an extensive discussion on when it is appropriate to use
an imputation function rather than following the complete case approach. In most cases, the
choice depends on two main elements: (i) whether the missing data mechanism is ignorable
and (ii) whether the imputations contain information coming from outside the model used
for predictions. In the context of this study, some negative implications from the use of the
imputation function could arise. Speciﬁcally, the variance of the variables subjected to the
imputation function may be reduced once the missing values are included which in turn could
lead to bias estimates. However, we justify our choice by two main arguments. First, it is the
view of the authors that the missing data mechanism is not ignorable as the variables with
the highest NA count are crucial determinants of the probability of default hence the use of
the complete case approach, could lead to bias estimates. Second, the imputations are based
on information from outside the model which are relevant to the outcome and at the same
time are not predicted by the other covariates. Table 1 present a description and summary
statistics of the variables in our sample.
3.2. Descriptive Modeling
The purpose of this subsection is to elaborate on the community formation identiﬁed in
the context of SME-focused P2P lending platforms and investigate the systemic importance
of SMEs and their potential inﬂuence on other companies within the network.
Following , we estimate the number of factors, k, using the information
criterion (IC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). Speciﬁcally
IC(k) = ln(V (k, ˆfk)) + k
BIC(k) = V (k, ˆfk) + kˆσ2
where V (k, ˆfk) = 1
Given that our sample consists of 813 SME’s each with 44 variables, we set n = 813 and
m = 44. Table 2 shows the IC and BIC for the diﬀerent values of k ∈{1, 2, . . . , 44}. For
convenience, only the results of a selected few is shown in the Table. Figure 2 presents the plot
of the IC and the BIC, which clearly indicates that the both criteria favors higher dimensions
of k. Thus, k = 44 is selected based on the IC and BIC.
Figure 2: Plot of information criterion (IC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) for the selection of
the number of factors, k.
Fixed assets
Intangible ﬁxed assets
Tangible ﬁxed assets
Other ﬁxed assets
Current assets
Other current assets
Total assets
Shareholder funds
Other shareholder funds
Non current liabilities
Long term debt
Other non current liab
Provisions
Current liabilities
Other current liab
Total shareholder funds & liab
Proﬁt loss
Financial revenues
Financial expenses
Financial proﬁt loss
Proﬁt loss before tax
Proﬁt loss after tax
Other revenues
Other expenses
Leverage ratio
Total asset total liab
Current ratio
Quick ratio
Asset turnover
Debt conversion ratio
Debt ratio
Table 1: List and Summary Statistics of the variables in our sample.
Table 2: Comparing the information criterion (IC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) for the
selection of the number of factors, k. Boldface values indicate the best choice for each metric.
Using the SVD approach, we depict the network structure and the interconnections that
emerge between companies participating in the P2P lending platform. In Figure 3, nodes
are colored based on their status, with red indicating defaulted companies, and green active
companies. The Figure contains two graphs: in Figure 3b nodes are equal sized whereas in
Figure 3c nodes are proportional to companies’ degree centrality. The choice of π0 is set
at 0.1 in correspondence with the proportions of defaulted companies in the overall sample.
Although 0.1 is at a variance from 0.138 which is the precise proportion of defaulted companies
in the sample, we use a round threshold as we found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
number of links resulting from applying the two thresholds. Furthermore, we acknowledge
that the proportion of defaulted companies within the sample is relatively high hence a more
lenient approach to the process of link-inference could result in a more precise inference of
the true network between the companies.
From the above graph the high interconnection that exists between active and defaulted
SMEs is evident. The emergence of such linkages between companies provides evidence of the
existence of joint unobservable forces linking P2P participants. From a credit risk viewpoint, if
an active company is linked with a defaulted one, its credit scoring should decrease (contagion
eﬀect). Overall, network contagion seems to positively aﬀect default, as the proportion of
defaulted companies in Figure 3 is much larger than the observed proportion of defaults in the
sample. Speciﬁcally, using the latent factor approach, in the community of connected nodes,
25% are companies which have defaulted which is signiﬁcantly higher than the proportion of
defaulted companies in the full sample which is 13.8%.
We remark that the identiﬁcation of a network structure within the P2P lending systems
could lead to the estimating on a more eﬃcient scoring model. Namely, unlike traditional
ﬁnancial institutions which over the years have segmented their reference markets and in turn
increased the accuracy of their scoring models, P2P platforms are based on a global and
universal banking model hence developing a scoring model based on full inclusiveness of the
data might lead to misleading results as it will capture the behavior and patterns of greatly
varying units. In line with this, identifying underlining network structures and dividing the
population into connected and not-connected nodes (based on the inferred latent variables),
there is the potential of building a more eﬃcient scoring model.
(a) Network Structure of All Institutions
(b) Network of Connected Component (Equal node sized)
(c) Network of Connected Component (Degree sized nodes)
Figure 3: Latent factor graph of participants in a P2P lending platform. (3a) shows both connected and
non-connected participants in a P2P system, (3b) shows the connected component with equal sized nodes, and
(3c) shows connected component where the size of nodes is proportional to their degrees. Nodes in green are
active whiles defaulted participants are represented in red.
3.3. Predictive modeling
We now present the application of the latent factor approach for the purpose of improving
the predictive performance of the credit scoring employed by P2P lending platforms. The
available data include information on the status of the companies, classiﬁed as [1 = Defaulted]
and [0 = Active] as well as information on the most important ﬁnancial characteristics of the
borrowers. This information can be used to specify and estimate a logistic regression model,
aimed at predicting the default status, based on the observed values of the balance sheet
variables. From the many available variables, we select a small number of them, based on
the research literature as well as by means of a preliminary statistical signiﬁcance analysis.
Speciﬁcally, we rely on step-wise regression informed via the Akaike information criterion
(AIC), to decide on the variables included in the ﬁnal model. The variables included in the
analysis are presented in Table 3.
How they are constructed / Description
Leverage ratio
Total current liabilities over shareholders funds
Debt to assets ratio
Total liabilities over total assets
Current ratio
Current liabilities over current assets
Quick ratio
Cash and cash equivalents over total assets
Return on investment
Proﬁt/loss for period over total assets
Return on equity
Net income over shareholders’ equity
Asset turnover
Operating revenue/total assets
Return on assets
Net income over total assets
Return on sales
EBIT/operating revenues
Return on capital employed
EBIT/sum of shareholders’ equity & debt liab.
Debt coverage
Net income over total loans
Debt ratio
Total current liabilities over total assets
Table 3: Explanatory variables included in the scoring models and how they are constructed.
Using the variables in Table 3, we can specify and estimate the benchmark model employed
in the credit scoring literature: the logistic regression model. Speciﬁcally, we estimate and
compare three logit models: (i) full-sample scoring, (ii) scoring for connected nodes and (iii)
scoring for not-connected nodes. We argue that because of P2P platforms’ universal and global
banking model, higher predictive utility can be achieved by applying a latent factor-based
classiﬁcation technique which divides the population into major communities (connected vs.
not-connected companies).
Table 4 presents the results from the full-sample model which does not control for the
network structures that emerge on the bases of the latent variables. We remark that the
model in Table 4 has been derived after a thorough activity of model selection, aimed at
obtaining the best ﬁt statistical model.
Signiﬁcance
Leverage ratio
Current ratio
Quick ratio
Debt conversion ratio
Debt ratio
Table 4: Full-sample scoring – Sample size: 813 companies
From Table 4 we note that all variables are statistically signiﬁcant (at 10%) expect the
return on sales variable. Although identifying causality is not the prime focus of the paper, we
note that most of the coeﬃcients have the expected sign except for the two ratios capturing
liquidity and proﬁtability performance of companies. Namely, the quick ratio and the ROE
indicator report a positive and a negative sign, respectively which is contrary to our expectations. In the context of the quick ratio, the reported positive sign appears counter intuitive
as it indicates that higher liquidity (measured via the quick ratio) increases the probability of
default. Potential explanation for the positive sign can be in the fact that worst-performing
companies tend to have higher liquidity due to their inability to invest in proﬁtable prospects.
Moreover, in the context of ROE, the results suggest that increasing ability of companies to
use equity for generating proﬁts increase the probability of default. This may be due to the
fact that the companies investigated within this analysis are small businesses which do not
rely extensively on equity ﬁnancing.
As the main purpose of the analysis is to investigate the predictive utility of scoring models,
we ﬁt the models on a training set to make predications on a data that was not trained, and
we consider the classiﬁcation errors resulting from the models, the corresponding ROC curve
and, ﬁnally, the Area Under the ROC curve (AUROC), the most widely-used measure of
predictive performance for credit scoring models. The AUROC, which theoretically ranges
between 0 and 1, is equal to 0.856, for the considered full sample model. Although the value
of AUROC equal to 0.856 can be considered suﬃcient, a need to increase the accuracy of the
model is always encouraged. Even small increases in accuracy can lead to signiﬁcant savings
due to a superior predictive performance, as argued by West .
As previously commented, to improve the credit scoring accuracy, we introduce a networkbased scoring. Speciﬁcally, we use the logistic estimator for connected and not-connected
communities separately. Table 5 summarizes the results obtained from the scoring model for
connected nodes.
Signiﬁcance
Leverage ratio
Current ratio
Quick ratio
Debt ratio
Table 5: Scoring for connected nodes – Sample size: 176 companies
Looking at the results for the connected nodes, similarly as it is the case with the full
sample scoring, most of the variables are statistically signiﬁcant and report the expected
sign. ROCE remains insigniﬁcant potentially conﬁrming the low-equity dependency of small
businesses. Both the quick ratio and ROE keep the counterintuitive signs. We also note that
in the context of connected companies, the liquidity ratios are among the main drivers which
could be an indication of their exposure to contagion and systemic risk that in turn motivates
them to keep higher liquidity.
In terms of predictive utility, the model, estimated only for the connected nodes, leads to
an AUROC of 0.949 which is a signiﬁcant improvement in scoring accuracy with respect to
the model previously ﬁt on all nodes. We remark that the diﬀerence between the two models
are only in the node selection. Speciﬁcally, in the latter case, the model is estimated using
the same methodology but only considering those companies which are connected (have at
least one link with another company in the sample). Hence variable selection is consistent
throughout the individual models. As mentioned previously, we employ stepwise regression
including all the key ﬁnancial ratios available in the dataset and consequently select the
models that best ﬁt the data according to the AIC criteria.
Signiﬁcance
Leverage ratio
Quick ratio
Asset turnover
Debt conversion ratio
Debt ratio
Table 6: Scoring for not-connected nodes – Sample size: 637 companies
Finally, we investigate the scoring model for not-connected companies. Table 6 summarizes
the results. Looking at the results for the non-connected nodes, we see that most variables
are found statistically signiﬁcant except for the quick ratio and the debt conversion ratio.
The AUROC reported is 0.945 which is like the predictive utility of the scoring model for the
connected nodes. In the attempt to validate the results, robustness checking has been carrying
out by changing the π0 threshold. We have conﬁrmed that the community detection approach
results in higher predictive utility relative to the full-sample scoring if the π0 threshold is
changed to 0.138, 0.2 and 0.3. Furthermore, another robustness check performed is that of
random sub-sampling. Speciﬁcally, to conﬁrm the validity of the results, we ran the same
analysis considering many diﬀerent random subsets. Speciﬁcally, we divided the sample of
813 companies on two random subsets (keeping the same proportion between connected and
not-connected companies) and re-ran the analysis with several diﬀerent seeds.
The average AUC for the random subsets with sample sizes equal to the connected and
not connected communities are: 0.8618256 and 0.8555784, respectively. These predictive utilities are signiﬁcantly lower compared to those obtained by splitting the sample based on the
SVD approach. We believe that these results are a clear indicator that a latent factor-based
classiﬁcation technique that divides the population into major communities based on the
SVD approach does lead to the estimation of a more eﬃcient logistic model, which in turn
is crucial to improving credit risk measurement. The approach of identifying communities
of connected and not-connected nodes, in a way, mimics the segmentation strategies employed by traditional ﬁnancial institutions which in turn allows P2P platforms to obtain high
predictive accuracy of the scoring model without necessarily possessing all the ﬁnancial and
non-ﬁnancial information about individual participants in the platform. Furthermore, the
proposed methodology can also help traditional ﬁnancial providers to improve their scoring
by further "segmenting the segments".
Finally, our results can be put in context of a similar research carried out by Giudici and
Hadji-Misheva which aim is to investigate whether the inclusion of network parameters
(obtained from correlation networks) into a traditional credit scoring approach can improve
the model’s overall predictive utility. The study conﬁrms this premise as the inclusion of
the network-derived parameters improves the predictive accuracy of the scoring by several
percentage points. However, the approach presented in this paper enables a more precise
diﬀerentiation of risk classes as the network is inferred based on all known ﬁnancial parameters
which in turn lead to a much higher predictive utility.
4. Conclusions
This paper contributes to the recent development on P2P lending credit risk modeling
in that it shows how scoring models can be improved, using the information that is automatically collected by P2P lenders, which typically connect borrowers, in a well-connected
network of relationships and transactions. Such network structure extends beyond the classical geographical and economic sectors. Information that can be embedded into ﬁnancial
network models, can capture non-linearities and endogenous factors that explain the spread
of credit risk through the network.
The application of our proposed network-based scoring model demonstrates that the model
is appealing, not only theoretically but also, from an operational point of view, as it increases
predictive accuracy of the default, thereby better protecting lenders and improving ﬁnancial
stability. We believe that the main beneﬁciaries of our results may be regulators and supervisors, aimed at preserving ﬁnancial stability, as well as investors of P2P platforms, whom
should be protected against the negative sides of FinTech innovations (related with information asymmetries) while keeping their positive sides (related with the improvement of of data
availability and processing).
Acknowledgments
Authors’ research is supported by funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 825215 ; and the US Air Force Oﬃce for Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR), whose grant
number is FA9550-12-1-0102.