Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 111–116
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
GLTR: Statistical Detection and Visualization of Generated Text
Sebastian Gehrmann
Harvard SEAS
 
Hendrik Strobelt
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI lab
 
Alexander M. Rush
Harvard SEAS
 
The rapid improvement of language models
has raised the specter of abuse of text generation systems. This progress motivates the
development of simple methods for detecting
generated text that can be used by and explained to non-experts. We develop GLTR, a
tool to support humans in detecting whether a
text was generated by a model. GLTR applies
a suite of baseline statistical methods that can
detect generation artifacts across common
sampling schemes. In a human-subjects study,
we show that the annotation scheme provided
by GLTR improves the human detection-rate
of fake text from 54% to 72% without any
prior training.
GLTR is open-source and
publicly deployed,
and has already been
widely used to detect generated outputs.
Introduction
The success of pretrained language models for natural language understanding has led to a
race to train unprecedentedly large language models . These large language
models have the potential to generate textual output that is indistinguishable from human-written
text to a non-expert reader. That means that the advances in the development of large language models also lower the barrier for abuse.
Instances of malicious autonomously generated
text at scale are rare but often high-proﬁle, for instance when a simple generation system was used
to create fake comments in opposition to net neutrality . Other scenarios include
the possibility of generating false articles or misleading reviews . Forensic techniques will be necessary
to detect this automatically generated text. These
techniques should be accurate, but also easy to
convey to non-experts and require little setup cost.
Figure 1: The top-k overlay within GLTR. It is easy
to distinguish sampled from written text. The real text
is from the Wikipedia page of The Great British Bake
Off, the fake from GPT-2 large with temperature 0.7.
In this work, we argue that simple statistical detection methods for generated/fake text can be applied within a visual tool to assist in detection. The
underlying assumption is that systems over generate from a limited subset of the true distribution of
natural language, for which they have high conﬁdence. In a white-box setting where we have access to the system distribution, this property can be
detected by computing the model density of generated output and comparing it to human-generated
text. We further hypothesize that these methods
generalize to black-box scenarios, as long as the
fake text follows a similar sampling assumption
and is generated by a large language model.
We develop a visual tool, GLTR, that highlights
text passages based on these metrics, as shown
in Figure 11. We conduct experiments to empirically test these metrics on a set of widely-used
language models and show that real text uses a
wider subset of the distribution under a model.
This is noticeable especially when the model
distribution is low-entropy and concentrates most
1Our tool is available at 
 
HendrikStrobelt/detecting-fake-text
(a) statistics
(c) tokens
(d) details about ‘chuck’
Figure 2: User interface for GLTR. On the top, we show three graphs with global information (a). Below the
graphs, users can switch between two different annotations and customize the top-k thresholds (b). On the bottom,
each token is shown with the associated annotation as heatmap (c). The tooltip (d) highlights information about
the current prediction when hovering over the word “chuck”.
probability in a few words. We demonstrate in
a human-subjects study that without the tool,
subjects can differentiate between human- and
model-generated text only 54% of the time. With
our tool, subjects were able to detect fake text
with an accuracy of over 72% without any prior
training. By presenting this information visually,
we also hope the tool teaches users to notice the
artefacts of text generation systems.
Consider the generation detection task as deciding whether a sequence of words ˆX1:N have been
written by a human or generated from a model. We
do not have supervision for this task, and instead,
want to use distributional properties of the underlying language. In the white-box case, we are also
given full access to the language model distribution, p(Xi |X1:i−1), that was used in generation.
In the general case, we assume access to a different
learned model of the same form. This approach
can be contextualized in the evaluation framework
proposed by Hashimoto et al. who ﬁnd that
human-written and generated text can be discriminated based on the model likelihood if the human
acceptability is high.
The underlying assumption of our methods
is that to generate natural looking text, most
systems sample from the head of the distribution, e.g., through max sampling , k-max sampling , beam
search , temperature-modulated sampling , or even implicitly with
rule-based templated approaches.
These techniques are biased, but seem to be necessary for
ﬂuent output and are widely used.
We therefore propose three simple tests, using a detection model, to assess whether text is generated in
this way: (Test 1) the probability of the word,
e.g. pdet(Xi = ˆXi|X1:i−1), (Test 2) the absolute
rank of a word, e.g. rank in pdet(Xi|X1:i−1), and
(Test 3) the entropy of the predicted distribution,
w pdet(Xi = w|X1:i−1) log pdet(Xi =
w|X1:i−1). The ﬁrst two test whether a generated
word is sampled from the top of the distribution
and the last tests whether the previously generated
context is well-known to the detection system such
that it is (overly) sure of its next prediction.
GLTR: Visualizing Outliers
We apply these tests within our tool GLTR (pronounced Glitter) – a Giant Language model Test
Room. GLTR aims to both teach users what to be
aware of when assessing whether a text is real, and
to assist them in performing forensic analyses. It
works on a per-instance basis for any textual input.
The backend supports multiple detection models.
both BERT and GPT-2
117M . Since GPT-2 117M
is a standard left-to-right language model, we
compute pdet(Xi | X1...i−1) at each position i in
a text X. BERT is trained to predict a masked
Figure 3: On the left, we analyze a generated sample (a-c) with GLTR that is generated from a non-public GPT-2
model. The ﬁrst sentence (a) is the prompt given to the model. We can observe that the generated text (b) is mostly
highlighted in green and yellow, which strongly hints at a generated text. The histograms (c) show additional hints
at the automatic generation. On the right, we show samples from a real NYT article (d) and a scientiﬁc abstract
(e). Compared to the ”unicorn” example, the fraction of red and purple words is much higher.
token, given a bidirectional context. Thus, we iteratively mask out each correct token ˆXi and use
a context of 30 words to each side as input to estimate pdet(Xi|Xi−30...i−1, Xi+1...Xi+30)2.
The central feature of the tool is the overlay
function, shown in Figure 2c, which can render arbitrarily chosen top-k buckets (Test-2) as an annotation over the text. By default, a word that ranks
within the top 10 is highlighted in green, top 100
in yellow, top 1,000 in red, and the rest in purple. GLTR also supports an overlay for Test-1 that
highlights the probability of the chosen word in
relation to the one that was assigned the highest
probability. Since the two overlays provide evidence from two separate sources, their combination helps to form an informed assessment.
The top of the interface (Figure 2a), shows one
graph for each of the three tests. The ﬁrst one
shows the distribution over the top-k buckets, the
second the distribution over the values from the
second overlay, and the third the distribution over
the entropy values. For a more detailed analysis,
hovering over a word (Figure 2d) shows a tooltip
with the top 5 predictions, their probabilities, and
the rank and probability of the following word.
The backend of GLTR is implemented in Py-
Torch and is designed to ensure extensibility. New
detection models can be added by registering
2While BERT can handle inputs of length 512, we observed only minor differences between using the full and
shortened contexts.
themselves with the API and providing a model
and a tokenizer. This setup will allow the frontend of the tool to continue to be used as improved
language models are released.
Case Study
We demonstrate the functionality
of GLTR by analyzing three samples from different sources, shown in Figure 3. The interface
shows the results of detection analysis with GPT-2
117M. The ﬁrst example is generated from GPT-2
1.5B. Here the example is conditioned on a seed
The analysis shows that not a single token in the generated text is highlighted in purple and very few in red. Most words are green
or yellow, indicating high rank. Additionally, the
second histogram shows a high fraction of highprobability choices. A ﬁnal indicator is the regularity in the third histogram with a high fraction of
low-entropy predictions and an almost linear increase in the frequency of high-entropy words.
In contrast, we show two human-written samples; one from a New York Times article and a
scientiﬁc abstract (Figure 3d+e). There is a significantly higher fraction of red and purple (e.g. nonobvious) predictions compared to the generated
example. The difference is also observable in the
histograms where the fraction of low-probability
words is higher and low-entropy contexts smaller.
3In a shocking ﬁnding, scientist discovered a herd of unicorns living in a remote, previously unexplored valley, in the
Andes Mountains. Even more surprising to the researchers
was the fact that the unicorns spoke perfect English
Bag of Words
0.63 ±0.11
(Test 1 - GPT-2) Average Probability
0.71 ±0.25
(Test 2 - GPT-2) Top-K Buckets
0.87 ±0.07
(Test 1 - BERT) Average Probability
0.70 ±0.27
(Test 2 - BERT) Top-K Buckets
0.85 ±0.09
Table 1: Cross-validated results of fake-text discriminators. Distributional information yield a higher informativeness than word-features in a logistic regression.
Empirical Validation
We validate the detection features by comparing
50 articles for each of 3 generated and 3 human
data sources. The ﬁrst two sources are documents
sampled from GPT-2 1.5B .
We use a random subset of their released examples that were generated (1) with a temperature
of 0.7 and (2) truncated to the top 40 predictions.
As alternative source of generated text, we take
articles that were generated by the autonomous
Washington Post Heliograf system, which covers
local sports results and gubernatorial races.
human-written sources, we choose random paragraphs from the bAbI task children book corpus
(CBT) , New York Times articles (NYT), and scientiﬁc abstracts from the journals nature and science (SA). To minimize overlap
with the training set, we constrained the samples
to publication dates past or close to the release of
the GPT-2 models.
Our ﬁrst model uses the average probability of
each word in a document as single feature (Test 1)
and the second one the distribution over four buckets (highlight colors in GLTR) of absolute ranks of
predictions (Test 2). As a baseline we consider a
logistic regression over a bag-of-words representation of each document. We cross-validate the results by training on each combination of four of
the sources (two real/fake) and testing on the remaining two.
As Table 1 illustrates, the GLTR features lead to better separation than word-features,
both with and without access to the true generating model. The classiﬁer that uses ranking information learns that real text samples from the tail
of the distribution more frequently. The odds ratio for a word outside the top 100 predictions is
Percentage
GPT-2 (temp=0.7)
GPT-2 (top 40)
Nature Abstracts
Figure 4: Distribution over the rankings of words in
the predicted distributions from GPT-2. The real text
in the bottom three examples has a consistently higher
fraction of words from the tail of the distribution.
GPT-2 (temp 0.7)
Figure 5: A kernel density estimate of the contextual
entropy (Test 3) versus the next-word rank (Test 2) for
NYT and GPT-2. Human-written text (NYT) is more
likely to have high-rank words, even in low-entropy
5.32, while the odds ratio for being the top 1 prediction is 0.09. Figure 4 presents the distribution
of rankings under GPT-2 and further corroborates
this ﬁnding. Real texts use words outside of the
top 100 predictions 2.41 times as frequently under GPT-2 (1.67 for BERT) as generated text, even
compared to sampling with a lower temperature.
To get a better sense of how low-rank words enter into natural text, we look at the probability of
each word compared to its relative rank. We hypothesize that human authors use low-rank words,
even when the entropy is low, a property that sampling methods for generated text avoid. We compare the relationship of the entropy and rank of
the next word by computing a Gaussian Kerneldensity estimate over their distributions. As shown
in Figure 5, human text uses high-rank words more
frequently, regardless of the estimated entropy.
Human-Subjects Study
To evaluate the efﬁcacy of the GLTR tool, we conducted a human-subjects study on 35 volunteer
students in a college-level NLP class. Our goal
was to both have students be able to tell generated
text from real, but also to see which parts raised
the suspicion of the students. In two rounds, students were ﬁrst shown ﬁve texts without overlay
and then ﬁve texts with overlay and were asked to
assess which texts were real within 90 seconds. In
between the rounds, we presented a brief tutorial
on the overlay and showed the example in Figure 1 but did not disclose any information about
the study. For each participant and round, we presented two texts generated from GPT-2 with 0.7
temperature, one from Heliograf, and two from
NYT.4 We alleviated bias from the text selection
by randomly assigning texts to either of the two
rounds between students.
The results demonstrate the ease of use
of the overlay.
Without the interface, the participants achieved an accuracy of 54.2%, barely
above random chance. While only 40% of texts
were real, they trusted 56.0% of texts, Heliograf
at a higher rate than GPT-2 (68.6% vs. 51.4%,
p < 0.01). The difﬁculty of the task without overlay was rated at 3.89 on a 5-point Likert scale,
further supporting the need for assistive systems.
With the interface, the performance improved to
72.3%. The average treatment effect shows an improvement of 18.1% with p < 0.001, even after controlling for whether a participant is a native speaker and how difﬁcult they rated the task.
42.1% of the participants stated that the interface
helped them be more accurate, and 37.1% found
that it helped them to identify fakes faster.
Qualitative Findings
The tool caused students
to think about the properties of the fake text.
While humans would vary expressions in real
texts, models rarely generate synonyms or referring expressions for entities, which does not follow the theory of centering in discourse analysis .
An example of this is
shown in the text in Figure 3b in which the model
keeps generating the name P´erez and never refers
to him as he. Another observation was that samples from Heliograf exhibit high parallelism in
sentence structure. Since previous work has found
that neural language models learn long linguistic
structures as well, we imagine that sentence structure analysis can further be used for forensic analysis. We hope that automatic analysis and visualization like GLTR will help students better under-
4We randomly sampled one paragraph of text and resampled NYT if it was covering recent, well-known events.
stand the generation artifacts in current systems.
Related Work
While statistical detection methods have been
applied in the past, the increase in language
model power upends past assumptions in this area.
Lavergne et al. introduce prediction entropy as an indicator of fake text. However, their
ﬁndings are the opposite of ours (low entropy
for generated text), a change which is indicative
of language model improvements. Similar work
ﬁnds that texts differ in perplexity under a language model , frequency of rare
bigrams , and n-gram frequencies . Similar methods
that detect machine translation . Hovy ﬁnds that a logistic regression model can detect generated product reviews
at a higher rate than human judges, indicating that
humans struggle with this task. Finally, we distinguish this task from detecting misinformation in
text . We aim to understand
the statistical signature and not the content of text.
Discussion and Conclusion
We show how detection models can be applied to
analyze whether a text is automatically generated
using only simple statistical properties. We apply
the insights from the analysis to build GLTR, a
tool that assists human readers and improves their
ability to detect fake texts.
GLTR aims to educate and raise awareness about generated text. To explain GLTR to
non-NLP experts, we included a blog post on the
web page with examples and an explanation of
GLTR. Within the ﬁrst month, GLTR had 30,000
page views for the demo and 21,000 for the blog.
Numerous news websites and policy researchers
reached out to discuss the ethical implications of
language generation. The feedback from these discussions and in-person presentations helped us to
reﬁne our publicly released examples and explore
the limits of our detection methods.
Future Work
A core assumption of GLTR is
that systems use biased sampling for generating
text. One can imagine adversarial schemes that
aim to fool our overlay; however, forcibly sampling from the tail decreases the coherence of a
text which may make it harder to fool human readers. Another potential limitation are samples con-
ditioned on a hidden seed text. A conditional distribution will look different, even if we have access
to the model. Our preliminary qualitative investigations with GLTR show a relatively short-range
memory on this seed, but it is crucial to conduct
more in-depth evaluations on the inﬂuence of conditions in future work. The ﬁndings further motivate future work on how to use our methods as
part of autonomous classiﬁers to assist moderators
on social media or review platforms.
Acknowledgments
AMR gratefully acknowledges the support of NSF
1845664 and a Google research award.