CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 585 — #1
Biology-Derived
Algorithms in
Engineering
Optimization
Xin-She Yang
Introduction.............................................. 32-585
Biology-Derived Algorithms ............................ 32-586
Genetic Algorithms • Photosynthetic Algorithms • Neural
Networks • Cellular Automata • Optimization
Engineering Optimization and Applications .......... 32-590
Function and Multilevel Optimizations • Shape Design and
Optimization • Finite Element Inverse Analysis • Inverse
IVBV Optimization
References ....................................................... 32-595
Introduction
Biology-derived algorithms are an important part of computational sciences, which are essential to many
scientiﬁc disciplines and engineering applications. Many computational methods are derived from or
based on the analogy to natural evolution and biological activities, and these biologically inspired computations include genetic algorithms, neural networks, cellular automata, and other algorithms. However, a
substantial amount of computations today are still using conventional methods such as ﬁnite difference,
ﬁnite element, and ﬁnite volume methods. New algorithms are often developed in the form of a hybrid
combination of biology-derived algorithms and conventional methods, and this is especially true in the
ﬁeld of engineering optimizations. Engineering problems with optimization objectives are often difﬁcult
and time consuming, and the application of nature or biology-inspired algorithms in combination with
the conventional optimization methods has been very successful in the last several decades.
There are ﬁve paradigms of nature-inspired evolutionary computations: genetic algorithms, evolutionary programming, evolutionary strategies, genetic programming, and classiﬁer systems . Genetic algorithm (GA), developed by John Holland and
his collaborators in the 1960s and 1970s, is a model or abstraction of biological evolution, which includes
the following operators: crossover, mutation, inversion, and selection. This is done by the representation
within a computer of a population of individuals corresponding to chromosomes in terms of a set of
character strings, and the individuals in the population then evolve through the crossover and mutation
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 586 — #2
Handbook of Bioinspired Algorithms and Applications
of the string from parents, and the selection or survival according to their ﬁtness. Evolutionary programming (EP), ﬁrst developed by Lawrence J. Fogel in 1960, is a stochastic optimization strategy similar
to GAs. But it differs from GAs in that there is no constraint on the representation of solutions in EP
and the representation often follows the problem. In addition, the EPs do not attempt to model genetic
operations closely in the sense that the crossover operation is not used in EPs. The mutation operation
simply changes aspects of the solution according to a statistical distribution, such as multivariate Gaussian
perturbations, instead of bit-ﬂopping, which is often done in GAs. As the global optimum is approached,
the rate of mutation is often reduced. Evolutionary strategies (ESs) were conceived by Ingo Rechenberg
and Hans-Paul Schwefel in 1963, later joined by Peter Bienert, to solve technical optimization problems.
Although they were developed independently of one another, both ESs and EPs have many similarities in
implementations. Typically, they both operate on real-values to solve real-valued function optimization
in contrast with the encoding in Gas. Multivariate Gaussian mutation with zero mean are used for each
parent population and appropriate selection criteria are used to determine which solution to keep or
remove. However, EPs often use stochastic selection via a tournament and the selection eliminates those
solutions with the least wins, while the ESs use deterministic selection criterion that removes the worst
solutions directly based on the evaluations of certain functions . In addition,
recombination is possible in an ES as it is an abstraction of evolution at the level of individual behavior
in contrast to the abstraction of evolution at the level of reproductive populations and no recombination
mechanisms in EPs.
AQ: Please check if
the insertion of
 here is ok.
Theaforementionedthreeareashavethemostimpactinthedevelopmentof evolutionarycomputations,
and, in fact, evolutionary computation has been chosen as the general term that encompasses all these
areas and some new areas. In recent years, two more paradigms in evolutionary computation have
attracted substantial attention: Genetic programming and classiﬁer systems. Genetic programming (GP)
was introduced in the early 1990s by John Koza , and it extends GAs using parse trees to represent
functions and programs. The programs in the population consist of elements from the function sets,
rather than ﬁxed-length character strings, selected appropriately to be the solutions to the problems.
The crossover operation is done through randomly selected subtrees in the individuals according to their
ﬁtness; the mutation operator is not used in GP. On the other hand, a classiﬁer system (CFS), another
invention by John Holland, is an adaptive system that combines many methods of adaptation with learning
and evolution. Such hybrid systems can adapt behaviors toward a changing environment by using GAs
with adding capacities such as memory, recursion, or iterations. In fact, we can essentially consider the
CFSs as general-purpose computing machines that are modiﬁed by both environmental feedback and the
AQ: Holland, 1996,
is not listed in the
References. Is it
1995 as in the list?
underlying GAs .
Biology-derived algorithms are applicable to a wide variety of optimization problems. For example,
optimization functions can have discrete, continuous, or even mixed parameters without any a priori
assumptions about their continuity and differentiability. Thus, evolutionary algorithms are particularly
suitable for parameter search and optimization problems. In addition,they are easy for parallel implementation. However, evolutionary algorithms are usually computationally intensive, and there is no absolute
guarantee for the quality of the global optimizations. Besides, the tuning of the parameters can be very
difﬁcult for any given algorithms. Furthermore, there are many evolutionary algorithms with different
suitabilities and the best choice of a particular algorithm depends on the type and characteristics of the
problems concerned. However, great progress has been made in the last several decades in the application
of evolutionary algorithms in engineering optimizations. In this chapter, we will focus on some of the
important areas of the application of GAs in engineering optimizations.
Biology-Derived Algorithms
There are many biology-derived algorithms that are popular in evolutionary computations. For engineering applications in particular, four types of algorithms are very useful and hence relevant. They are
GAs, photosynthetic algorithms (PAs), neural networks, and cellular automata. We will brieﬂy discuss
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 587 — #3
Biology-Derived Algorithms in Engineering Optimization
these algorithms in this section, and we will focus on the application of GAs and PAs in engineering
optimizations in Section 32.3.
32.2.1 Genetic Algorithms
The essence of GAs involves the encoding of an optimization function as arrays of bits or character
strings to represent the chromosomes, the manipulation operations of strings by genetic operators, and
the selection according to their ﬁtness to ﬁnd a solution to the problem concerned. This is often done
by the following procedure: (1) encoding of the objectives or optimization functions; (2) deﬁning a
ﬁtness function or selection criterion; (3) creating a population of individuals; (4) evolution cycle or
iterations by evaluating the ﬁtness of all the individuals in the population, creating a new population by
performing crossover, mutation, and inversion, ﬁtness-proportionate reproduction, etc., and replacing
the old population and iterating using the new population; (5) decoding the results to obtain the solution
to the problem.
One iteration of creating new populations is called a generation. Fixed-length character strings are used
in most GAs during each generation although there is substantial research on variable-length string and
coding structures. The coding of objective functions is usually in the form of binary arrays or real-valued
arrays in adaptive GAs. For simplicity, we use the binary string for coding for describing genetic operators.
Genetic operators include crossover, mutation, inversion, and selection. The crossover of two parent
strings is the main operator with highest probability pc (usually, 0.6 to 1.0) and is carried out by switching
one segment of one string with the corresponding segment on another string at a random position (see
Figure 32.1). The crossover carried out in this way is a single-point crossover. Crossover at multiple
points is also used in many GAs to increase the efﬁciency of the algorithms. The mutation operation is
achieved by the ﬂopping of randomly selected bits, and the mutation probability pm is usually small (say,
0.001 to 0.05), while the inversion of some part of a string is done by interchanging 0 and 1. The selection
of an individual in a population is carried out by the evaluation of its ﬁtness, and it can remain in the
new generation if a certain threshold of ﬁtness is reached or the reproduction of a population is ﬁtnessproportionate. One of the key parts is the formulation or choice of ﬁtness functions that determines the
selection criterion in a particular problem.
Further, just as crossover can be carried out at multiple points, mutations can also occur at multiple
sites. More complex and adaptive GAs are being actively researched and there is a vast literature on this
topic. In Section 32.3, we will give examples of GAs and their applications in engineering optimizations.
Crossover point
FIGURE 32.1
Diagram of crossover and mutation in a GA.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 588 — #4
Handbook of Bioinspired Algorithms and Applications
32.2.2 Photosynthetic Algorithms
The PA was ﬁrst introduced by Murase to optimize the parameter estimation in ﬁnite element
AQ: Murose is
changed to Murase
as per the Reference
list. Trust this is OK.
inverse analysis. The PA is a good example of biology-derived algorithms in the sense that its computational
procedure corresponds well to the real photosynthesis process in green plants. Photosynthesis uses water
and CO2 to produce glucose and oxygen when there is light and in the presence of chloroplasts. The
overall reaction
6CO2 + 12H2O light and green plants
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→C6H12O6 + 6O2 + 6H2O
is just a simple version of a complicated process. Other factors, such as temperature, concentration of CO2,
water content, etc., being equal, the reaction efﬁciency depends largely on light intensity. The important
part of photosynthetic reactions is the dark reactions that consist of a biological process including two
cycles: the Benson–Calvin cycle and photorespiration cycle. The balance between these two cycles can be
considered as a natural optimization procedure that maximizes the efﬁciency of sugar production under
the continuous variations of light energy input .
Murase’s PA uses the rules governing the conversion of carbon molecules in the Benson–Calvin cycle
(with a product or feedback from DHAP ) and photorespiration reactions. The product DHAP serves
AQ: Please provide
expansion for
as the knowledge strings of the algorithm and optimization is reached when the quality or the ﬁtness of
the products no longer improves. An interesting feature of such algorithms is that the stimulation is a
function of light intensity that is randomly changing and affects the rate of photorespiration. The ratio of
O2 to CO2 concentration determines the ratio of the Benson–Calvin and photorespiration cycles. A PA
consists of the following steps: (1) the coding of optimization functions in terms of ﬁxed-length DHAP
strings (16-bit in Murase’s PA) and a random generation of light intensity (L); (2) the CO2 ﬁxation rate r
is then evaluated by the following equation: r = Vmax/(1 + A/L), where Vmax is the maximum ﬁxation
rate of CO2 and A is its afﬁnity constant; (3) either the Benson–Calvin cycle or photorespiration cycle is
chosen for the next step, depending on the CO2 ﬁxation rate, and the 16-bit strings are shufﬂed in both
cycles according to the rule of carbon molecule combination in photosynthetic pathways; (4) after some
iterations, the ﬁtness of the intermediate strings is evaluated, and the best ﬁt remains as a DHAP, then the
results are decoded into the solution of the optimization problem (see Figure 32.2).
In the next section, we will present an example of parametric inversion and optimization using PA in
ﬁnite element inverse analysis.
Light (random)
O2/CO2 concentration
DHAP Strings and results
Benson–Calvin
evaluation
Photorespiration
iterations
FIGURE 32.2
Scheme of Murase’s PAs.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 589 — #5
Biology-Derived Algorithms in Engineering Optimization
Hidden layer
FIGURE 32.3
Diagram of a McCulloch–Pitts neuron (left) and neural networks (right).
32.2.3 Neural Networks
Neural networks, and the associated machine-learning algorithms, is one more type of biology-inspired
algorithms, which uses a network of interconnected neurons with the intention of imitating the neural
activities in human brains. These neurons have high interconnectivity and feedback, and their connectivity can be weakened or enhanced during the learning process. The simplest model for neurons is the
McCulloch–Pitts model (see Figure 32.3) for multiple inputs u1(t), . . . , un(t), and the output ui(t). The
activation in a neuron or a neuron’s state is determined by
ui(t + 1) = H
wijui(t) −i
where H(x) is the Heaviside unit step function that H(x) = 1 if x ≥0 and H(x) = 0 otherwise. The
weight coefﬁcient wij is considered as the synaptic strength of the connection from neuron j to neuron i.
For each neuron, it can be activated only if its threshold i is reached. One can consider a single neuron
as a simple computer that gives the output 1 or yes if the weighted sum of incoming signals is greater than
the threshold, otherwise it outputs 0 or no.
Real power comes from the combination of nonlinear activation functions with multiple neurons
 . Figure 32.3 also shows an example of feed-forward neural
networks. The key element of an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is the novel structure of such an
information processing system that consists of a large number of interconnected processing neurons.
These neurons work together to solve speciﬁc problems by adaptive learning through examples and selforganization. A trained neural network in a given category can solve and answer what-if type questions
to a particular problem when new situations of interest are given. Due to the real-time capability and
parallel architecture as well as adaptive learning, neural networks have been applied to solve many realworld problems such as industrial process control, data validation, pattern recognition, and other systems
of artiﬁcial intelligence such as drug design and diagnosis of cardiovascular conditions. Optimization is
just one possibility of such applications, and often the optimization functions can change with time as
is the case in industrial process control, target marketing, and business forecasting . On
the other hand, the training of a network may take considerable time and a good training database or
examples that are speciﬁc to a particular problem are required. However, neural networks will, gradually,
come to play an important role in engineering applications because of its ﬂexibility and adaptability in
32.2.4 Cellular Automata
Cellular automata (CA) were also inspired by biological evolution. On a regular grid of cells, each cell has
ﬁnite number of states. Their states are updated according to certain local rules that are functions of the
states of neighbor cells and the current state of the cell concerned. The states of the cells evolve with time
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 590 — #6
Handbook of Bioinspired Algorithms and Applications
in a discrete manner, and complex characteristics can be observed and studied. For more details on this
topic, readers can refer to Chapters 1 and 22 in this handbook.
There is some similarity between ﬁnite state CA and conventional numerical methods such as ﬁnite
difference methods. If one considers the ﬁnite different method as real-valued CA, and the real-values are
always converted to ﬁnite discrete values due to the round-off in the implementation on a computer, then
there is no substantial difference between a ﬁnite difference method and a ﬁnite state CA.
However, CA are easier to parallelize and more numerically stable. In addition, ﬁnite difference schemes
are based on differential equations and it is sometimes straightforward to formulate a CA from the
corresponding partial differential equations via appropriate ﬁnite differencing procedure; however, it is
usually very difﬁcult to conversely obtain a differential equation for a given CA (see Chapter 22 in this
handbook).
An optimization problem can be solved using CA if the objective functions can be coded to be associated
with the states of the CA and the parameters are properly associated with automaton rules. This is an
area under active research. One of the advantages of CA is that it can simulate many processes such as
reaction–diffusion, ﬂuid ﬂow, phase transition, percolation, waves, and biological evolution. Artiﬁcial
intelligence also uses CA intensively.
32.2.5 Optimization
Many problems in engineering and other disciplines involve optimizations that depend on a number of
parameters, and the choice of these parameters affects the performance or objectives of the system concerned. The optimization target is often measured in terms of objective or ﬁtness functions in qualitative
models. Engineering design and testing often require an iteration process with parameter adjustment.
Optimization functions are generally formulated as:
Optimize: f (x),
Subject to: gi(x) ≥0,
i = 1, 2, . . . , N;
hj(x) = 0,
j = 1, 2, . . . , M.
where x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn),
x ∈(parameter space).
Optimization can be expressed either as maximization or more often as minimization . As
parameter variations are usually very large, systematic adaptive searching or optimization procedures are
required. In the past several decades, researchers have developed many optimization algorithms. Examples
of conventional methods are hill climbing, gradient methods, random walk, simulated annealing, heuristic
methods, etc. Examples of evolutionary or biology-inspired algorithms are GAs, photosynthetic methods,
neural network, and many others.
The methods used to solve a particular problem depend largely on the type and characteristics of
the optimization problem itself. There is no universal method that works for all problems, and there is
generally no guarantee to ﬁnd the optimal solution in global optimizations. In general, we can emphasize
on the best estimate or suboptimal solutions under the given conditions. Knowledge about the particular
problem concerned is always helpful to make the appropriate choice of the best or most efﬁcient methods
for the optimization procedure. In this chapter, however, we focus mainly on biology-inspired algorithms
and their applications in engineering optimizations.
Engineering Optimization and Applications
Biology-derived algorithms such as GAs and PAs have many applications in engineering optimizations.
However, as we mentioned earlier, the choice of methods for optimization in a particular problem depends
on the nature of the problem and the quality of solutions concerned. We will now discuss optimization
problems and related issues in various engineering applications.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 591 — #7
Biology-Derived Algorithms in Engineering Optimization
32.3.1 Function and Multilevel Optimizations
For optimization of a function using GAs, one way is to use the simplest GA with a ﬁtness function:
F = A −y with A being the large constant and y = f (x), thus the objective is to maximize the ﬁtness
AQ: Please check
the change of
f (x) to f (x)
function and subsequently minimize the objective function f (x). However, there are many different ways
of deﬁning a ﬁtness function. For example, we can use the individual ﬁtness assignment relative to the
whole population
i=1 f (xi)
where xi is the phenotypic value of individual i, and N is the population size. For the generalized
De Jong’s test function
α = 1, 2, . . . , m,
where α is a positive integer and r is the half-length of the domain. This function has a minimum of
f (x) = 0 at x = 0. For the values of α = 3, r = 256, and n = 40, the results of optimization of this test
function are shown in Figure 32.4 using GAs.
The function we just discussed is relatively simple in the sense that it is single-peaked. In reality, many
functions are multi-peaked and the optimization is thus multileveled. Keane studied the following
bumby function in a multi-peaked and multileveled optimization problem
f (x, y) = sin2(x −y) sin2(x + y)
0 < x, y < 10.
The optimization problem is to ﬁnd (x, y) starting (5,5) to maximize the function f (x, y) subject to:
x + y ≤15 and xy ≥3/4. In this problem, optimization is difﬁcult because it is nearly symmetrical about
x = y, and while the peaks occur in pairs one is bigger than the other. In addition, the true maximum
is f (1.593, 0.471) = 0.365, which is deﬁned by a constraint boundary. Figure 32.5 shows the surface
variation of the multi-peaked bumpy function.
Although the properties of this bumpy function make it difﬁcult for most optimizers and algorithms,
GAs and other evolutionary algorithms perform well for this function and it has been widely used as a test
Generation (t)
Best estimate=0.046346
Generation (t)
Best estimate= 0.23486
FIGURE 32.4
Function optimization using GAs. Two runs will give slightly different results due to the stochastic
nature of GAs, but they produce better estimates: f (x) →0 as the generation increases.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 592 — #8
Handbook of Bioinspired Algorithms and Applications
FIGURE 32.5
Surface of the multi-peaked bumpy function.
FIGURE 32.6
Diagram of the pressure vessel.
function in GAs for comparative studies of various evolutionary algorithms or in multilevel optimization
environments .
32.3.2 Shape Design and Optimization
Most engineering design problems, especially in shape design, aim to reduce the cost, weight, and volume
and increase the performance and quality of the products. The optimization process starts with the
transformation of design speciﬁcation and descriptions into optimization functions and constraints. The
structure and parameters of a product depend on the functionality and manufacturability, and thus
considerable effort has been put into the modeling of the design process and search technique to ﬁnd
the optimal solution in the search space, which comprises the set of all designs with all allowable values
of design parameters . Genetic algorithms have been applied in many areas of
engineering design such as conceptual design, shape optimization, data ﬁtting, and robot path design.
A well-studied example is the design of a pressure vessel using
different algorithms such as augmented Lagrangian multiplier and GAs. Figure 32.6 shows the diagram
of the parameter notations of the pressure vessel. The vessel is cylindrical and capped at both ends by
hemispherical heads with four design variables: thickness of the shell Ts, thickness of the head Th, inner
radius R, and the length of the cylindrical part L. The objective of the design is to minimize the total
cost including that of the material, forming, as well as welding. Using the notation given by Kannan and
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 593 — #9
Biology-Derived Algorithms in Engineering Optimization
Kramer, the optimization problem can be expressed as:
Minimize: f (x) = 0.6224x1x2x3 + 1.7781x2x2
3 + 3.1611x2
1x4 + 19.84x2
x = (x1, x2, x3, x4)T = (Ts, Th, R, L)T,
Subject to: g1(x) = −x1 + 0.0193x3 ≤0,
g2(x) = −x2 + 0.00954x3 ≤0,
g3(x) = −πx2
3/3 + 1296000 ≤0,
g4(x) = x4 −240 ≤0.
The values for x1, x2 should be considered as integer multiples of 0.0625. Using the same constraints as
given in Coello , the variables are in the ranges: 1 ≤x1, x2 ≤99, 10.0000 ≤x3. x4 ≤100.0000
(with a four-decimal precision). By coding the GAs with a population of 44-bit strings for each individual (4-bits for x1 · x2; 18-bits for x3 · x4), similar to that by Wu and Chow , we can solve
the optimization problem for the pressure vessel. After several runs, the best solution obtained is
x∗= (1.125, 0.625, 58.2906, 43.6926) with f (x) = 7197.9912$, which is compared with the results
x∗= (1.125, 0.625, 28.291, 43.690) and f (x) = 7198.0428$ obtained by Kannan and Kramer .
32.3.3 Finite Element Inverse Analysis
The usage and efﬁciency of Murase’s PA described in Section 32.3.4 can be demonstrated in the application
of ﬁnite element inverse analysis. Finite element analysis (FEA) in structural engineering is forward
modeling as the aims are to calculate the displacements at various positions for given loading conditions
and material properties such as Young’s modulus (E) and Poisson’s ratio (ν). This forward FEA is widely
used in engineering design and applications. Sometimes, inverse problems need to be solved. For a given
structure with known loading conditions and measured displacement, the objective is to ﬁnd or invert the
material properties E and ν, which may be required for testing new materials and design optimizations. It
is well known that inverse problems are usually very difﬁcult, and this is especially true for ﬁnite element
inverse analysis.
To show how it works, we use a test example similar to that proposed by Murase . A simple beam
system of 5 unit length × 10 unit length (see Figure 32.7) consists of ﬁve nodes and four elements whose
Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio may be different. Nodes 1 and 2 are ﬁxed, and a unit vertical load is
applied at node 4 while the other nodes deform freely. Let us denote the displacement vector
U = (u1, v1, u2, v2, u3, v3, u4, v4, u5, v5)T,
where u1 = v1 = u2 = v2 = 0 (ﬁxed). Measurements are made for other displacements. By using the PA
with the values of the CO2 afﬁnity A = 10000, light intensity L = 104 to 5 × 104 lx, and maximum CO2
FIGURE 32.7
Beam system of ﬁnite element inverse analysis.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 594 — #10
Handbook of Bioinspired Algorithms and Applications
ﬁxation speed Vmax = 30, each of eight elastic modulus (Ei, νi)(i = 1, 2, 3, 4) is coded as a 16-bit DHAP
molecule string. For a target vector
Y = (E1, ν1, E2, ν2, E3, ν3, E4, ν4) = (600, 0.25, 400, 0.35, 450, 0.30, 350, 0.32),
and measured displacements U = (0, 0, 0, 0, −0.0066, −0.0246, 0.0828, −0.2606, 0.0002, −0.0110), the
best estimates after 500 iterations from the optimization by the PA are Y = (580, 0.24, 400, 0.31,
460, 0.29, 346, 0.26).
32.3.4 Inverse Initial-Value, Boundary-Value Problem Optimization
Inverse initial-value, boundary-value problem (IVBV) is an optimization paradigm in which GAs have
been used successfully . Some conventional algorithms for solving such search optimizations are the trial-and-error iteration methods that usually start with a guessed solution, and the
substitution into the partial differential equations and associated boundary conditions to calculate the
errors between predicted values and measured or known values at various locations, then the new guessed
or improved solutions are obtained by corrections according to the errors. The aim is to minimize the
difference or errors, and the procedure stops once the given precision or tolerance criterion is satisﬁed. In
this way, the inverse problem is actually transformed into an optimization problem.
We now use the heat equation and inverse procedure discussed by Karr et al. as an example to
illustrate the IVBV optimization. On a square plate of unit dimensions, the diffusivity κ(x, y) varies with
locations (x, y). The heat equation and its boundary conditions can be written as:
∂t = ∇· [κ(x, y)∇u],
0 < x, y < 1, t > 0,
u(x, y, 0) = 1,
u(x, 0, t) = u(x, 1, t) = u(0, y, t) = u(1, y, t) = 0.
The domain is discretized as an N × N grid, and the measurements of values at (xi, yj, tn), (i, j =
1, 2, . . . , N; n = 1, 2, 3). The data set consists of the measured value at N 2 points at three different times
t1, t2, t3. The objective is to inverse or estimate the N 2 diffusivity values at the N 2 distinct locations. The
Karr’s error metrics are deﬁned as
umeasured
−ucomputed
umeasured
κknown
−κpredicted
where A = 100 is just a constant.
The ﬂoating-point GA proposed by Karr et al. for the inverse IVBV optimization can be summarized
as the following procedure: (1) Generate randomly a population containing N solutions to the IVBV
problem; the potential solutions are represented in a vector due to the variation of diffusivity κ with
locations; (2) The error metric is computed for each of the potential solution vectors; (3) N new potential
solution vectors are generated by genetic operators such as crossover and mutations in GAs. Selection of
solutions depends on the required quality of the solutions with the aim to minimize the error metric and
thereby remove solutions with large errors; (4) the iteration continues until the best acceptable solution
On a grid of 16 × 16 points with a target matrix of diffusivity, after 40,000 random κ(i, j) matrices
were generated, the best value of the error metrics Eu = 4.6050 and Eκ = 1.50 × 10−2. Figure 32.8 shows
the error metric Eκ associated with the best solution determined by the GA. The small values in the error
metric imply that the inverse diffusivity matrix is very close to the true diffusivity matrix.
With some modiﬁcations, this type of GA can also be applied to the inverse analysis of other problems
such as the inverse parametric estimation of Poisson equation and wave equations. In addition, nonlinear
problems can also be studied using GAs.
CHAPMAN: “C4754_C032” — 2005/5/6 — 23:44 — page 595 — #11
Biology-Derived Algorithms in Engineering Optimization
node ( j )
FIGURE 32.8
Error metric Eκ associated with the best solution obtained by the GA algorithm.
The optimization methods using biology-derived algorithms and their engineering applications have
been summarized. We used four examples to show how GAs and PAs can be applied to solve optimization
problems in multilevel function optimization, shape design of pressure vessels, ﬁnite element inverse
analysis of material properties, and the inversion of diffusivity matrix as an IVBV problem. Biologyinspired algorithms have many advantages over traditional optimization methods such as hill-climbing
and calculus-based techniques due to parallelism and the ability to locate the best approximate solutions in very large search spaces. Furthermore, more powerful and ﬂexible new generation algorithms
can be formulated by combining existing and new evolutionary algorithms with classical optimization