Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray
Diana Davletshina1⋆, Valentyn Melnychuk1, Viet Tran1, Hitansh Singla1,
Max Berrendorf2, Evgeniy Faerman2, Michael Fromm2, Matthias Schubert2
1 Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany
{d.davletshina,v.melnychuk,viet.tran,hitansh.singla}@campus.lmu.de
2 Lehrstuhl für Datenbanksysteme und Data Mining, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Munich, Germany
{berrendorf,faerman,fromm,schubert}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de
Abstract. Obtaining labels for medical (image) data requires scarce
and expensive experts. Moreover, due to ambiguous symptoms, single
images rarely suﬃce to correctly diagnose a medical condition. Instead,
it often requires to take additional background information such as the
patient’s medical history or test results into account. Hence, instead of
focusing on uninterpretable black-box systems delivering an uncertain
ﬁnal diagnosis in an end-to-end-fashion, we investigate how unsupervised
methods trained on images without anomalies can be used to assist doctors
in evaluating X-ray images of hands. Our method increases the eﬃciency
of making a diagnosis and reduces the risk of missing important regions.
Therefore, we adopt state-of-the-art approaches for unsupervised learning
to detect anomalies and show how the outputs of these methods can be
explained. To reduce the eﬀect of noise, which often can be mistaken
for an anomaly, we introduce a powerful preprocessing pipeline. We
provide an extensive evaluation of diﬀerent approaches and demonstrate
empirically that even without labels it is possible to achieve satisfying
results on a real-world dataset of X-ray images of hands. We also evaluate
the importance of preprocessing and one of our main ﬁndings is that
without it, most of our approaches perform not better than random. To
foster reproducibility and accelerate research we make our code publicly
available on GitHub3.
Introduction
Deep Learning techniques are ubiquitous and achieving state-of-the-art performance in many areas. However, they require vast amounts of labeled data as
witnessed by the marvelous boost in image recognition after the publication
of the large scale ImageNet data set . In medical applications, labels are
expensive to acquire. While anyone can decide whether an image depicts a dog
or a cat, deciding whether a medical image shows abnormalities, is a highly
⋆The ﬁrst four authors have equal contribution.
3 
 
Davletshina et al.
diﬃcult task requiring specialists with years of training. Another specialty of
medical applications is that a simple classiﬁcation decision does often not suﬃce.
End-to-end deep learning solutions tend to be hard to interpret, preventing
their application in an area as sensitive as deciding for a treatment. Moreover,
additional patient information such as the patient’s medical history, and clinical
test results are often crucial to a correct diagnosis. Integrating this information
into an end-to-end pipeline is diﬃcult and makes results even less interpretable.
Thus, the motivation for our work is to let doctors decide about the ﬁnal diagnosis
and treatment and develop a system, which can provide hints for doctors where
to pay more attention to.
Hence, in this work, we investigate how we can support doctors to faster
assess X-ray images, and reduce the chance of overlooking suspicious regions. To
this end, we demonstrate how state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, such as
Autoencoders (AE) or Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), can be used for
anomaly detection on X-ray images. As this dataset is noisy, and this is a general
problem for a lot of real-world datasets, we present a sophisticated preprocessing
pipeline to obtain better training data. Afterwards, we train several unsupervised
models, and explain for each, how to obtain several image-level anomaly scores.
For some of them, it is even natural to obtain pixel-wise annotations, highlighting
anomalous regions. One of our main ﬁndings is that accurate data preprocessing
is indispensable. The advantage of using autoencoders is that they naturally
can provide pixel-level anomaly heatmaps, which can be used to understand
model decisions. In contrast, GAN-based approaches seem to be able to cope
with more noisy data, yet being only able to produce image-wise anomaly scores.
We envision that this methodology can be easily installed in clinical daily routine
to support doctors in quickly assessing X-ray images and spotting candidate
regions for anomalies.
In this work, we focus on a subset of the MURA dataset containing only
hand images. In total, we have 5,543 images of 2,018 studies of 1,945 patients.
Each study is labeled as negative or positive, where positive means that there was
an anomaly diagnosed in this study. There are 521 positive studies, with a total
of 1,484 images. Figure 1 shows some examples from the dataset. In summary,
our contributions are as follows:
1. We present a powerful preprocessing pipeline for the MURA dataset ,
enabling the construction of a high-quality training set.
2. We extensively survey unsupervised Deep Learning methods, and present
approaches on how to obtain image-level and even pixel-level anomaly scores.
3. We show extensive experiments on a real-world dataset evaluating the inﬂuence of proper preprocessing as well as the usability of the anomaly scores.
To foster reproducibility, we will make our code public in the camera-ready
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we describe our
approach. We start with the description of data preprocessing in 2.1 and describe
anomaly detection approaches along with anomaly scores in section 2.2. We
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
discuss related work in section 3. Finally, Section 4 shows quantitative and
qualitative experimental results on image-level and pixel-level anomaly detection.
Fig. 1. A few examples from the used subset of the MURA dataset containing X-ray
images of hands demonstrating the large variety of image quality.
Davletshina et al.
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Preprocessing
Real-life data is often noisy. This is especially problematic for unsupervised
approaches for anomaly detection. On the one hand, it is necessary to remove
noise to make sure that it is not recognized as an anomaly. On the other hand,
it is crucial that the data denoising process does not mistake anomalies for
noise and does not remove them. After experimenting a lot, we end up with the
preprocessing pipeline depicted in Figure 2. We distinguish oﬄine and online
processing steps, where the oﬄine processing is done once and then stored to disk
to save time, whereas the online preprocessing is done on-the-ﬂy while loading
the data. The individual steps are described in detail subsequently.
Hand Center
Localization
Segmentation
Augmentation
Normalization
Fig. 2. The full image preprocessing pipeline. Steps highlighted in green are performed
once and the result is stored to disk. Steps highlighted in orange are done on-the-ﬂy.
Cropping The ﬁrst step in our pipeline is to detect the X-ray image carrier
in the image. To this end, we apply OpenCV’s contour detection using Otsu
binarization , and retrieve the minimum size bounding box, which does not
need to be axis-aligned. This works suﬃciently well as long as the majority of the
image carrier is within the image (cf. Figure 3). However, the approach might fail
for heavily tilted images or those where larger parts of the image carrier reach
beyond the image border.
Hand Localization To further improve the detection of hands, and in particular
split the images where two hands are depicted on one image, we manually labeled
approximately 150 bounding boxes in the images. Using this small dataset, we
ﬁne-tune a pre-trained single shot multibox detector (SSD) with MobileNet
as taken from TensorFlow. An exemplary results can be seen in Figure 3.
Foreground Segmentation In a ﬁnal step, foreground segmentation is performed
using Photoshop’s "select subject" method in batch processing mode. Thereby,
we obtain a pixel-wise mask, roughly encompassing the scanned hand.
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
Fig. 3. Result of image carrier detection with OpenCV (left side). The ﬁrst image
shows the original image with a detected rectangle. Next to it is the extracted image.
The right image shows the result of running object detection on an image containing
two hands. We extract the image of both hands separately such that our preprocessed
data set does not contain images with more than one hand.
Data Augmentation Due to GPU memory constraints, the images for BiGAN and
α-GAN are resized to 128 pixels on the longer image side while maintaining aspect
ratio before applying the augmentation. For the auto-encoder models, this is not
necessary. Afterwards, standard data augmentation methods (horizontal/vertical
ﬂipping, channel-wise multiplication, rotation, scaling) using the imgaug4 library
are applied before ﬁnally padding the images to 512x512 (AE + DCGAN) or
128x128 (BiGAN + αGAN) pixels.
In this section, we describe the diﬀerent model types we trained in a fully
unsupervised / self-supervised fashion on the train data part comprising only
images from patients without attested anomalies. We also describe how to obtain
anomaly scores from the trained models. In the appendix we additionally provide
details about the architecture for every model.
Autoencoders
We studied diﬀerent auto-encoder architectures for the task at hand. Common
among them is their usage of a reconstruction loss, i.e. the input to the network is
also used as the target, and we evaluate how well the input is reconstructed. As the
information has to pass through an informational bottleneck, the model cannot
simply copy the input data, but instead has to perform a form of compression,
extracting features which suﬃce to reconstruct the image suﬃciently well. Hence,
we have an encoder part of the network (E), which transforms the input x
non-linearly to a latent space representation z. Analogously, there is a decoder
D that transforms an input z from latent space back to and element ˆx in the
input space.
4 
Davletshina et al.
For simplicity, we describe the general loss formulation using a vector input
x ∈Rn instead of a two-dimensional pixel-matrix. In its simplest form, the
reconstruction loss is given as the mean over pixel-wise squared diﬀerences. Let
x, ˆx = D(E(x)) ∈Rn, then
L(x, ˆx) = 1
(xi −ˆxi)2 = 1
As we are only interested in detecting anomalies on the hand part of the
image, we consider a variant of this loss, named masked reconstruction loss, where
only those pixels are considered that belong to the mask. Let m ∈{0, 1}n be the
mask, where mi = 1 if and only if the position i belongs to the hand. Then,
LM(x, ˆx, m) =
∥m ⊙(x −ˆx)∥2
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard product (i.e. element-wise multiplication). In the
following, we describe the architectures of the network in more detail.
In a convolutional auto-encoder (CAE), we implement encoder and decoder
as fully convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In general, the encoder is built
as a sequence of repeated convolution blocks. We apply Batch Normalization
 between every convolution and the respective activation, and use ReLU 
as activation function. A detailed model description is given in the appendix.
Similarly, the decoder consists of repeated blocks of transposed convolutions.
As before, we apply batch normalization before every activation function. As
bottleneck size, we use a spatial resolution of 16 × 16 and 512 channels.
Variational AE (VAE) is a generative model, which maps an input to a
Gaussian distribution in latent space, characterized by its mean and covariance
(µ(x), Σ(x)), instead of mapping it to a ﬁxed latent representation. The covariance
matrix is usually restricted to a diagonal matrix. For reconstruction, a sample
z ∼N(µ(x), Σ(x)) is drawn, and passed through the decoder sub-network. To
avoid very small values in Σ, and thereby approaching a delta distribution, i.e.
traditional AE, an additional loss term is introduced as the Kullback-Leibler
divergence (KLD) between N(µ(x), Σ(x)) and the standard normal distribution
Anomaly Detection Scores The rationale behind using AE for anomaly
detection is that as the AE is trained on normal data only, it has not seen
anomalies during training, and hence will fail to reproduce them. Due to the
convolutional nature of the network, the error is even expected to occur stronger
in regions close to the anomaly, and less strong further apart. If the receptive
ﬁeld is small enough, those regions outside of it are not aﬀected at all. Hence, we
can use the reconstruction error in two ways:
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
1. Pixel-wise to obtain a heatmap highlighting regions that were hardest to
reconstruct. If there is an anomaly, we expect the highest error in that region.
We show an example for such in the qualitative results, Figure 5.
2. Aggregated over all pixels (under the mask) to obtain an image-wise score.
As for aggregation, we explore diﬀerent aggregation strategies. In the simplest
case, we just average over all locations. By using only the highest k values
to compute the mean, we can obtain a score that is more sensitive towards
regions of high reconstruction error (i.e. anomalous regions).
We aim for using auto-encoder architectures which are strong enough to successfully reconstruct normal hands, without risking to learn identity mappings
by allowing too wide bottlenecks. While the architecture should generalize over
all normal hands, a too strong generalization might cause the eﬀect that also
anomalies can be reconstructed suﬃciently well.
A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) comprises two sub-networks, a
generator G, and a discriminator D, which can be seen as antagonists in a twoplayer game. The generator takes random noise as input and generates samples in
the target domain. The discriminator takes real data points, as well as generated
ones, and has to distinguish between real and fake data. The sub-networks are
trained alternatingly, and if successful, the generator can afterwards be used to
sample from the (approximated) data distribution, and the discriminator can be
used to decide whether a sample is drawn from the given data distribution.
Deep Convolutional GAN (DCGAN) is an extension of the original GAN
architecture to convolutional neural networks. Similarly to the CAE, the two
networks contain convolutions (discriminator) and transposed convolutions (generator) instead of the fully connected layers of the originally proposed GAN
architecture.
BiGAN / ALI extends DCGAN by an encoder E, which encodes the real
image into latent space5. The discriminator is now provided with both, the real
and fake image, as well as their latent codes, i.e. D((G(z), z), (x, E(x))).
α-GAN comprises four sub-networks:
– An encoder E(x) which transforms a real image into a latent representation.
– A code-discriminator CO(z) which distinguishes between the latent representations produced by the encoder and random noise used as generator
– A generator G(z) which generates an image from either the randomly sampled
z, or the encoded image E(x).
5 In the paper E is called Gz(x) as opposed to the generator G = Gx(z)
Davletshina et al.
– A discriminator D(x) which distinguishes between reconstructed real images
G(E(x)), and generated images G(z).
In addition to the classiﬁcation losses for both discriminators, a reconstruction
loss is applied for the auto-encoder formed by the encoder-generator pair. Hence,
the code-discriminator gives the encoder the incentive to transform the inputs to
match the random distribution, similarly as in VAE through the KL-divergence.
Likewise, the discriminator motivates matching the data distribution in the image
Anomaly Detection Scores For the GAN models, we generally use the discriminator’s output as the anomaly score. When converged, the discriminator
should be able to distinguish between images belonging to the data manifold,
i.e. images of hands without any anomalies, and those which lie outside, such
as those containing anomalous regions. For αGAN we use the mean over code
discriminator and discriminator probability.
Related Work
With the rapid advancement of deep learning methods, they have also found
their way into medical imaging, cf. e.g. . Despite the limited availability
of labels in medical contexts, supervised methods make up the vast majority.
Very likely, this is due to the easier trainability, but possibly also because the
interpretability of the results so far has often been secondary. Sato et al. 
use a 3D CAE for a pathology detection method in CT scans of brains. The
CAE is trained solely on normal images, and at test time, the MSE between
the image and its reconstruction is taken as the anomaly score. Uzunova et
al. use VAE for medical 2D and 3D CT images. Similarly, they use MSE
reconstruction loss as the anomaly score. Besides the KL-divergence in latent
space, they use a L1 reconstruction loss for training, which produced less smooth
output. GANomaly and its extension with skip-connections uses an AE and
maps the reconstructed input back to the latent space. The anomaly score is
computed in latent space between original and reconstructed input. They apply
their methods on X-Ray security imagery to detect anomalous items in baggage.
Recently, there have been a lot of publications using the currently popular GANs.
For example, uses a semi-supervised approach for anomaly detection in
chest X-ray images. They replace the standard discriminator classiﬁcation into
real and fake, with a three-way classiﬁcation into real-normal, real-abnormal,
and fake. While this allows training with fewer labels, it still requires them for
training. Schlegl et al , train a DC-GAN on slices of OCT scans, where the
original volume is cut along the x-z axis, and the slices are further randomly
cropped. At test time, they use gradient descent to iteratively solve the inverse
problem of obtaining a latent vector that produces the image. Stopping after
a few iterations, the L1 distance between the generated image and the input
image is considered as residual loss. To summarize, the focus of recent work for
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
anomaly detection approaches lies either in applying existing methods for a new
type of data or adapting unsupervised methods for anomaly detection. Instead,
we provide an extensive evaluation of state-of-the-art unsupervised learning
approaches that can be directly used for anomaly detection. Furthermore, we
evaluate the importance of diﬀerent preprocessing steps and compare methods
with regard to explainability.
Experiments
We demonstrate the capability of our preprocessing pipeline and all described
models in experiments on a subset of the MURA dataset containing only X-ray
images of hands. 3,062 images are stored in a single-channel PNG image, and
2,481 are stored with three RGB channels. However, all images look like gray-scale
images, which is why we convert all 3-channel images to a single channel. The
longest side of the images is always 512 pixels in size. The smaller side ranges
from 160 to 512, with the majority between 350 and 450.
validation
Fig. 4. Visualization of the applied data split scheme. "n" denotes patients which do
not have a abnormal study ("negative"), "p" the contrary ("positive"). Notice that the
training part of the split does not contain any images of anomalies, i.e. we do not use
anomalous images for training.
As our approach is unsupervised, we train only on negative images, i.e. images
without an anomaly. Furthermore, to avoid test leakage, we split the data by
patient, and not by study or image, to ensure that we do not have an image of a
patient in the training data, and another image of the same patient in the test
or validation data. To this end, we proceed as follows: Let P be the set of all
patients, and P + be the set of patients with a study that is labeled as abnormal.
The rest of the patients is denoted by P −:= P \ P +. For the test and validation
set, we aim at having balanced classes. Therefore, we distribute P + evenly at
random across test and validation. Afterwards, we randomly sample the same
number of patients without known anomalies for test and validation and use the
rest of the patients for training. The procedure is visualized in Figure 4. In total,
we end up with 2,554 training images, 1,494 validation images, and 1,495 test
Davletshina et al.
We trained all models on a machine with one NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU
with 16GiB of VRAM, 20 cores and 360GB of RAM. Following , we train
our models from scratch and do not use transfer learning from large image
classiﬁcation datasets. We performed a manual hyper-parameter search on the
validation set and selected the best-performing models per type with respect to
Area-under-Curve for the Receiver-Operator-Curve (ROC-AUC). We report the
ROC-AUC on the test set.
Quantitative Results
Table 1. Quantitative results for all models. We report ROC-AUC on the test set for
the best conﬁguration regarding validation set ROC-AUC. All numbers are mean and
standard deviation across four separate trainings with diﬀerent random seeds. For each
model we report results for various anomaly scores: Mean Squared Error (MSE), L1,
Kullback–Leibler Divergence (KLD), Discriminator Probability (D). Top-200 denotes
the case, when only 200 pixels with the highest error are taken into consideration.
.460 ± .033
.504 ± .034
.466 ± .022
.510 ± .021
.501 ± .013
.570 ± .019
MSE (top-200)
.466 ± .013
.448 ± .025
.486 ± .015
.473 ± .018
.506 ± .039
.553 ± .023
.488 ± .031
.491 ± .013
.470 ± .046
.496 ± .045
.520 ± .026
.533 ± .014
.432 ± .033
.446 ± .016
.438 ± .033
.438 ± .016
.435 ± .014
.483 ± .009
.432 ± .033
.446 ± .016
.438 ± .034
.437 ± .016
.438 ± .011
.488 ± .011
L1 (top-200)
.438 ± .017
.472 ± .010
.440 ± .025
.471 ± .013
.428 ± .013
.481 ± .010
.432 ± .033
.446 ± .016
.438 ± .033
.438 ± .016
.435 ± .014
.483 ± .009
.432 ± .033
.446 ± .016
.438 ± .033
.438 ± .016
.436 ± .013
.486 ± .010
MSE (top-200)
.438 ± .017
.472 ± .010
.440 ± .025
.471 ± .013
.428 ± .013
.481 ± .010
.497 ± .018
.491 ± .041
.493 ± .015
.493 ± .025
.530 ± .027
.527 ± .022
.471 ± .021
.438 ± .039
.491 ± .042
.522 ± .017
MSE (top-200)
.471 ± .011
.459 ± .030
.475 ± .033
.508 ± .026
.508 ± .007
.534 ± .016
.549 ± .006
.522 ± .019
Code-Disc. (C)
.500 ± .000
.500 ± .001
.500 ± .000
.500 ± .000
.476 ± .029
.466 ± .022
.442 ± .013
.528 ± .018
MSE (top-200)
.465 ± .031
.446 ± .018
.422 ± .016
.533 ± .013
.503 ± .022
.534 ± .022
.607 ± .016
.584 ± .012
.503 ± .022
.534 ± .022
.607 ± .016
.584 ± .012
Apart from the performance of single models, we also evaluate the importance
of the preprocessing steps. Therefore, we evaluate the models on the raw data,
the data after cropping the hand regions, as well as on the fully preprocessed data.
We also vary whether histogram equalization is applied before the augmentation
or not. We summarize the quantitative results in Table 1 showing the mean
and standard deviation across four runs. There is a clear trend in preprocessing:
All models have their best runs in the fully preprocessed setting, emphasizing
the importance of our preprocessing pipeline for noisy datasets. Interestingly,
without foreground segmentation, i.e. only by cropping the single hands, the
results appear to be worse than on the raw data. While histogram equalization is
a contrast enhancement method in particular useful to improve human perception
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
of low-contrast images, it seems to improve the results for AE-based models
consistently. For BiGAN and αGAN our experiments did not ﬁnish until the
deadline. As they comprise AE components we expect to see an improvement
there. On raw and also cropped data we frequently observe ROC-AUC values
smaller than 45%. Hence, we might be able to improve the ROC-AUC score
by ﬂipping the anomaly decision. Partially, we attribute this also to the rather
unstable results for these models. Regarding the aggregation of reconstruction
error, we observe that using only the top-k loss values across all pixels does
not improve the result. We attribute that partially to not tuning enough across
diﬀerent values for k, as we only used k = 200 for all models, which may be too
few pixels to detect some anomalies. Due to the lack of pixel-level annotation,
we did not investigate this issue so far. In total, we obtain the best ROC-AUC
score with 60.7% for α-GAN using the discriminator probability. CAE however
also achieves 57% ROC-AUC and additionally can naturally provide pixel-level
anomaly scores yielding higher interpretability.
Qualitative Results
In addition to the numerical results we also showcase some qualitative results.
For all methods with reconstruction loss, i.e. all AE as well as α-GAN, we can
generate heatmaps visualizing the pixel-wise losses. Thereby, we can highlight
regions that could not be reconstructed well. Following our assumption, these
regions should be the anomalous regions. In Figure 5, we can see prototypical
examples produced by CAE. The upper image shows a hand contained in a study
which was labeled as normal. We can see that the reconstruction error does not
occur concentrated, but is rather spread widely across the hand. The maxima
seem to occur around joints, which due to their more complex structure are likely
to be harder to reconstruct. Compared to the lower image, which shows a study
labeled as abnormal, we see a clear highlighting at the middle ﬁnger. Visible also
for a non-expert, we can spot metal parts in the X-ray image at the very same
location. For those anomalies which could be validated by a person without a
medical background, the highlighted regions seem to correspond largely to those
anomalous regions.
Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated methods for unsupervised anomaly detection in
X-ray images. To this end, we surveyed two families of unsupervised models,
auto-encoders and GANs, regarding their applicability to derive anomaly scores.
In addition, we provide a sophisticated multi-step preprocessing pipeline. In
our experiments, we compare the methods against each other, and furthermore,
reveal that the preprocessing is crucial for most models to obtain good results
on real-world data. For the auto-encoder family, we study the interpretability
of pixel-wise losses as anomaly heatmap and verify that in cases of anomalies
which a non-expert can detect (e.g. metal pieces in the hand), these heatmaps
Davletshina et al.
Fig. 5. Example heatmaps of reconstruction error of CAE. The left image-pair shows a
hand from a study labeled as normal hand. Here we can see that the reconstruction
error is relatively wide spread. The right image pair shows an abnormal hand, where
the abnormality is clearly highlighted.
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for X-Ray Images
closely match the anomalous regions. As future work, we envision the extension to
broader datasets such as the full MURA dataset, as well as obtaining pixel-level
anomaly scores for the GAN based models. To this end, methods from the ﬁeld
of explainable AI, such as grad-CAM or LRP can be applied to the
discriminator to obtain heatmaps similarly to those of the AE models. Moreover,
we see the potential for diﬀerent model architectures closer tailored to the speciﬁc
problem and data type, as well as the possibility of building an ensemble model
using the diﬀerent ways how to extract anomaly scores from single models, or
even across diﬀerent model types.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Franz Pﬁster and Rami Eisaway from deepc (www.deepc.
ai) for access to the data and support in understanding the use case. Part of
this work has been conducted during a practical course at Ludwig-Maximilians-
Unversität München funded by Z.DB. The infrastructure for the course was
provided by the Leibniz-Rechenzentrum. This work has been funded by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under Grant No.
01IS18036A. The authors of this work take full responsibilities for its content.