JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
EMOTION AND E-LEARNING
Kerry O’Regan
Learning and Teaching Development Unit
The University of Adelaide
South Australia, Australia 5005,
Telephone: +61 8 8303 4721
Fax: +61 8 8303 3553
Email: 
Traditionally, emotion and cognition have been viewed as polar opposites and this view has been
incorporated into theories of learning. One reason for this may be a lack of clarity in defining
emotion. In fact there are other perspectives on how emotion and cognition, emotion and learning, are
related. These considerations emerge with renewed vigor with the move to online education. The
author interviewed eleven students studying online. These students identified emotions which were
critical to their online learning. Evidence from the literature and from the interviews positions
emotion as central and essential to the teaching/ learning process.
Learning Effectiveness, Emotion, Student Satisfaction
I. EMOTION AND COGNITION—THE TRADITIONAL VIEW
The Western approach to thinking and feeling, cognition and emotion, has been to regard them as
polar opposites. Throughout the Western tradition of philosophy, from Plato who regarded emotions
as ‘irrational urges that needed to be controlled through the use of reason’ , through Descartes
whose attitude seemed to be ‘If I am because I think, then I am undone if I feel’ , and Kant for
whom emotion was ‘an illness of the mind’ , there has been a consistent and entrenched belief that
emotions are erratic and untrustworthy and that for sanity and civility to prevail, rationality and
intellect must function unfettered by the vagaries of emotion. This belief has underpinned much of
what goes on in Western society, its influence being felt nowhere more than in the world of teaching
and learning.
So it is that learning theories, particularly those concerned with learning at higher levels of education,
have largely treated emotion and cognition as occupying separate realms, cognitive processes having
prime (or even sole) place in the educational scheme of things . Martin and Briggs almost
twenty years ago now, challenged this view. They proposed the integration of the two domains,
affective and cognitive, into a more holistic and realistic framework for instructional design.
However, this proposal has proved to be rather more problematic and less popular than Martin and
Briggs may have envisaged. One of the reasons for the continuing separation of emotion and
cognition is the difficulty in defining just what it is we are talking about when we speak of emotion,
there being many perspectives and a multitude of definitions .
II. WHAT IS EMOTION?
Among the various attempts to understand and define emotion, a number of approaches can be
identified. Darwin was perhaps the first to systematically identify and categorize a
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
comprehensive range of emotions. He considered emotions to represent mechanisms for the
adaptation and survival of the individual. And this evolutionary function of emotion is still
acknowledged by some contemporary writers in the field of emotion .
Another perspective is to consider emotions in behaviorist terms, seeing them essentially as states
elicited by ‘the delivery, omission, or termination of rewarding or punishing stimuli’ . This
approach is based on the principle of a simple pleasure/pain dichotomy, the various possible emotions
representing seeking out or avoidance responses of an individual to the relevant positive or negative
stimuli . A variation of this view is to focus primarily on emotions as motivators of behavior or
‘transformations of dispositions to act’ . Within this framework, emotions are seen as instrumental
in influencing the choices made by an individual in response to certain stimuli .
Emotion can also be regarded as some combination (with various emphases and sequences) of
physiological, psychological and psychomotor components. James was an early proponent of this
general approach, defining emotion in terms of the feeling of the ‘bodily expressions’ which follow
the perception of an ‘exciting fact’. Other variations identify ‘affective’ and ‘somatic’ dimensions of
emotion , ‘experiential, behavioral and physiological’ aspects , or ‘corporeal’ and ‘cognitive’
dimensions .
The above approaches all construct emotion as an essentially individual phenomenon. Emotions,
however, can also be viewed in socio-cultural terms, Goleman , for example, describing them as
things we catch from each other ‘as though they were some kind of social virus.’ Denzin sees
emotions as ‘social acts involving interactions with self and interactions with others,’ while for
Averill an emotion is ‘a transitory social role’ which exists in both an interpersonal and a sociocultural context.
The most recent developments in the understanding of emotion have been in the field of
neurobiology. Rather than considering emotions as either psychological states or social phenomena,
here they are studied in terms of their corresponding brain function . Clinical studies of the brain
have identified emotion as being associated with complex biological processes in which neurological,
biochemical, and sociocultural factors all play a part. Evidence from such studies shows how
emotions ‘retain a primacy that subtly pervades our mental life…hav[ing] a say on how the rest of the
brain and cognition go about their business’ .
As well as consideration of the purpose and function of emotions there is also the question of just
what emotions exist. Darwin identified over thirty different emotions which he categorized into
seven groups, clustering similar emotions together. James identified ‘coarser’ (grief, fear, rage
and love) and ‘subtler’ emotions ‘whose organic reverberation is less obvious and strong’. Similar,
more recent classification systems include Damasio’s ‘primary’ (happiness, sadness, anger, fear
and disgust) and ‘secondary‘ emotions. The latter are ‘subtle variations’ of the primary ones and
include emotions such as euphoria, ecstasy, melancholy and wistfulness. Averill proposed a
system of emotional classes or ‘paradigms’, ‘impulsive’, ‘conflictive’ and ‘transcendental’. However,
some emotion theorists, James and Averill included, consider that there are numerous, and perhaps
endless, possibilities of emotions, these being determined to some extent by the socio-cultural context
in which they occur .
These various constructions of emotion each provide particular insights into what is a complex
phenomenon. Experiential knowing of emotion is part of the human condition. However, a clear,
agreed upon definition seems to be not easily arrived at. As LeDoux [10 p.23] said “everyone knows
what [emotion] is until they are asked to define it.” To the question what are emotions, LeDoux
responds “there are many answers. Many of them surprisingly unclear and ill-defined” . The
picture of emotions that emerges is diverse and multifaceted. This complexity makes the task of
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
exploring the relationship between emotion and learning a difficult one. Baulking at that task,
however, means limiting our understanding of what is happening in the teaching/learning process.
III. EMOTION AND COGNITION—OTHER POSSIBILITIES
While the oppositional relationship between emotion and cognition is deeply entrenched in our
philosophical psyche, this is by no means the whole or only story. Different juxtapositions of
cognition and emotion are evident in various teaching/learning theory frameworks. Some of these
frameworks recognize the importance of emotion but position the affective domain as being somehow
separate from, but nevertheless providing a basis for, functioning in the cognitive domain. In the
tradition of Bloom’s and Krathwohl, Bloom and Masia’s taxonomies of cognitive and
affective objectives, the existence of these two educationally relevant domains is acknowledged, but
they are positioned as being distinct from each other. This underpinning model persists in studies such
as McLeod’s review of research into emotion and learning in mathematics, which identifies
separate cognitive and affective domains. Shelton , too, writing of the importance of emotion in
learning addresses the need to develop certain ‘emotional competencies’ before learning can proceed
satisfactorily. Similarly, Postle talks of the importance of ‘emotional competence’ in relation to
learning. In his terms, learning can be inhibited by emotional incompetence. He draws on Heron’s
model of multi-modal learning in which action, conceptual and imaginal learning all depend on the
capacity to learn at an emotional level. So, with this approach, emotion is relevant to learning in that it
provides a base or substrate out of which healthy cognitive functioning can occur.
Another perspective sees emotion as being associated with cognition in some kind of parallel way.
Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences (including intrapersonal and interpersonal
intelligences) and Goleman’s theory of emotional intelligence both construct emotion as
analogous to the more traditional cognitive ‘intelligence’. Emotion is somehow like cognition but
operating in another, parallel, realm. ‘Our emotions have a mind of their own, one which can hold
views quite independently of our rational minds’ . Within this framework, the Gray-LaViolette
 ECS (emotional/cognitive structures) theory uses a couple of metaphors (musical tones and
woven fabric) to try to express a perceived relationship between emotion and cognition which is
perhaps more intertwined than parallel. The ECS model, as with Gardner’s and Goleman’s theories,
acknowledges the existence of emotion in relation to learning, but lacks a clear functional mechanism
to connect the two.
So there has been an ongoing, if at times tentative, exploration of the relationship between emotion
and cognition. This has led to a growing awareness that, far from being polar opposites, they are in
fact inextricably connected. “Cognition is not as logical as it was once thought and emotions are not
as illogical” . In particular, the field of neurobiology alluded to earlier, has produced clinical
evidence of connections between emotion and certain key cognitive processes. The work of Damasio
 for example has led him to propose that ‘there is a particular region in the human brain where
systems concerned with emotion/feeling, attention, and working memory interact so intimately that
they constitute the source for the energy of both external action (movement) and internal action
(thought animation, reasoning)’. This vital connection between emotion and the cognitive processes
of attention, memory and decision-making is being recognized by a range of researchers and
practitioners . And the practical implications of this are beginning to be felt. Stock ,
for example, found it ‘disquieting’ that he had spent so much time on developing a purely cognitive
model of performance in organizations. He felt compelled by the research to revise his model, coming
to acknowledge that ‘all sensory input is processed through our emotional center first…before it is
sent to be processed in our rational mind’. The centrality of emotion in many cognitive processes is
now being acknowledged. They are seen by some as ‘mak[ing] possible all creative thought’ , of
being ‘ways of disclosing the world for the person’ , of being ‘a sort of biological thermostat
[which] activates attention … which then activates a rich set of problem-solving and response
systems’ , of alerting us to specific kinds of problems , of serving as ‘the mind’s primary
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
architect’ . In fact, of ‘driv[ing] everything’ .
Despite the historical tradition which discounted the significance of emotion for any serious human
endeavor, the 1980s in particular saw a burgeoning of interest in the place of emotion in a whole
range of areas. ‘Philosophical, anthropological, psychological, and social psychological conceptions
of emotion are taking root in the human disciplines’ . This interest was reflected in a strand of
research into the significance of emotion for learning in the teaching/learning contexts of the time . But teaching and learning occurs now in a wide range of contexts, of particular significance being
the incursion of the teaching/learning experience into the online environment. The frontier nature of
online teaching and learning provides a stimulus to reconsider educational theory and practice and to
question the assumptions underlying these. What is their validity? What is missing?
IV. LEARNING ONLINE
It has been estimated that around 2 million students are now taking courses online from higher
education institutions in the United States . Teaching and learning online brings with it a whole
new and largely unknown set of parameters which have to do with every aspect of being and learning
in an online environment. Life online is not the same as life in the face to face world. Our very
identity becomes something uncertain and ambiguous. ‘The Internet is a mask of sorts. It hides the
color of our skin, the shape and size of our body, its beauty and its blemishes, our age, our accents,
our incomes and our fashion sense’ . Teaching and learning online can be, in Mezirow’s terms,
‘the ultimate disorienting dilemma’ where the familiar frameworks and markers of everyday life
and learning no longer exist, or at least exist in unfamiliar forms. There has been considerable
research into some aspects of this phenomenon, much of it having to do with the comparative
effectiveness of different modes of teaching and learning (including, specifically, the online mode).
As Russell’s website indicates, hundreds of such studies show there to be no significant
difference in students’ performance with variation in the mode of teaching and learning. He argues the
futility of carrying out such coarse grained research, maintaining that ‘individual differences in
learning styles dictate that technology will facilitate learning for some, but will probably inhibit
learning for others’. Other critiques of research in the area claim that the research focuses on the
technology, resource efficiency, policy and pedagogy, with little exploration of the student experience
and the implications of that . There has, however, been some research into the student experience,
and even into the emotions associated with that experience. Kort, Reilly and Picard , for example,
are attempting to develop a model of emotion related to various phases of learning. They have
identified several axes specifying a range of emotional states and hope eventually to devise a
computer-based system whereby both learner and teacher can recognize the student’s emotional
position in relation to learning.
There have also been studies of online learning in which emotion, while not being the major focus,
has at least been acknowledged. Martinez has carried out research into online learning and devised
a model of learning orientations which ‘recognizes a dominant influence of emotions, intentions and
social factors on how individuals learn differently.’ Some of the research has identified some of the
emotions experienced by students studying online. A study by Schaller and colleagues found that
students experienced bewilderment and confusion as they attempted to navigate their way through the
required learning site. Wegerif reported that students of the Open University were inhibited by
feelings of fear and alienation as they experienced the exposure and the isolation that learning online
can entail. Ng discovered that some students studying online reported considerable anxiety at
communicating electronically, realizing that this form of communication required new social and
communication skills. Hara and Kling set out specifically to investigate students’ distress
associated with studying a web based course. In their study, the expected problem of isolation did not
emerge as an issue. They did however, identify considerable frustration experienced by students with
the technical aspects of leaning online, with interpreting and following instructions and with
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
managing the enormous amounts of email they were required to deal with. They questioned the
apparently positive results of some surveys into online learning, suggesting that students’ private
revelations sometimes bore considerable contrast to their public responses in which they may be
reluctant to express negative attitudes.
V. EMOTION AND E-LEARNING
While the studies cited above have indicated, at least in a peripheral way, that emotion is associated
with learning online, there has been little exploration of the extent, nature and significance of this. The
growing body of research and scholarship relating to emotion and learning generally indicates the
significant part that emotion plays in learning. Models of learning online are still being developed. It
is important that the opportunity not be lost to include the emotional dimension in this development,
so that the theory and practice of teaching and learning online can be the richer for it and the more
authentic. Research, qualitative and quantitative, large-scale and small should be carried out in a range
of teaching and learning settings to inform more fully the theory and practice of teaching and learning
VI. THE STUDY
This present study is informed by the author’s experience of supporting the learning of students at
university. It occurs in the context of an Australian university which is increasingly committed to
providing courses online and attempts to explore the lived experience of some of those for whom this
institutional commitment is an educational reality. It is also informed by the author’s experiential and
theoretical interest in the connection between emotion and learning and sits beside those studies
which have begun to identify the emotions that students experience when learning online. As research
into this area is still in an early stage of development, it is appropriate that basic groundwork be laid
in terms of what is being established. This study attempts to open up a field of enquiry into the
following questions:
What emotions are associated with studying online?
What are the teaching-learning contexts of these emotions?
How do they relate to student learning?
What are the practical implications for teaching and learning online?
The study aimed to explore in qualitative terms the lived experience of students learning online
particularly in relation to its emotional dimensions. Various staff within the university offering
courses online were contacted and their agreement sought in regard to inviting students from their
courses to participate in the study. All contacted staff responded positively and the students enrolled
in these courses were sent an email inviting them to participate in the study. Eleven students
volunteered to take part and were subsequently interviewed. Bradley recommends that a sample
size for qualitative research be considered adequate when ‘the responses provide no new or
conflicting information’. While each participant’s story was singular, by the eleventh interview, their
stories had together formed a consistent pattern with general themes and individual variations but no
new surprises.
Qualitative research ‘seeks understandings of specific situations and communicates that understanding
through description’ . That description is reported, as much as practicable, through the
participants’ own voices, although the researcher selects and interprets from what the participants
have said. The distortion inherent in this selection and interpretation was countered in this study by
both the transcripts of interviews and the subsequent research paper being verified by the participants.
They were invited to check that their words and intentions had been faithfully represented and that the
chosen extracts spoke truly of their experiences.
The participants were interviewed in person or by phone regarding their experience of studying
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
online. They were asked particularly to comment on the emotions they had experienced in specific
teaching/learning contexts associated with their online learning and the relevance of these to their
learning. The interviews were around an hour in length and the interviewer identified particular
aspects of the online learning experience and asked the students to reflect on these as well as assessing
the experience overall. The aspects included such processes as logging on, following instructions, and
accessing resources. The participants were also provided with a checklist of named emotions which
the interviewer referred to in the latter part of the interview. This was used as a prompt to further
identify the emotions associated with particular learning experiences.
The interviews were recorded and transcribed and the transcriptions analyzed with a view to
identifying the emotions reported and the contexts and consequences of those. All the participants
spoke of a range of emotions both positive and negative which had been associated with, and had
impacted on, their learning. Those which occurred most frequently in the interviews are discussed
below. In each case the emotion was named by the participant spontaneously, in response to a probing
statement or question by the interviewer (That must have been very frustrating for you), or by referral
to the checklist (Can you tell me about any situations where you experienced any of the emotions on
the list?).
The chosen pseudonyms and demographic and general backgrounds of the participants are as follows:
Mature age (over 21), postgraduate student in occupational therapy, studying in distance mode, living
in a country town, rates himself as experienced with using computers and the internet (using email,
taking part in discussion groups, word processing, using other applications), studying the course
totally online.
Mature age, undergraduate student in social science, studying in distance mode, living in the
metropolitan area, rates herself as experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the
course totally online.
Mature age, undergraduate student in communication, studying on campus, living in the metropolitan
area, rates herself as very experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the course totally
Mature age, postgraduate student in occupational therapy, studying in distance mode, living in New
Zealand, rates himself as experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the course totally
Mature age, postgraduate student in occupational therapy, studying in distance mode, living interstate,
rates herself as experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the course totally online.
Mature age student with a physical disability, studying library and information management partly on
campus and partly in distance mode, living in the metropolitan area, rates himself as very experienced
in using computers and the internet, course totally online.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
School leaver, undergraduate student in social work, studying on campus, living in the metropolitan
area, rates herself as moderately experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the whole
course online.
School leaver, undergraduate student in marketing and communication, living in a country town,
studying partly on campus and partly in distance mode, rates herself as very experienced in using
computers and the internet except in the use of discussion forums, studying the whole of one course
and part of another online.
School leaver, undergraduate student in journalism, living in the metropolitan area, rates herself as
very experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the course totally online.
Mature age postgraduate student in professional communication, living interstate, rates herself as
experienced in using computers and the internet except for using discussion lists, studying the course
totally online.
School leaver, undergraduate student in communication, living in the metropolitan area, studying on
campus, rates herself as experienced in using computers and the internet, studying the course totally
An (unattributed) but typical quote from the interview transcripts has been included as part of the
relevant headings and excerpts from the transcripts are included in italics in the text.
A. Frustration—Well, that’s the university for you
Frustration appeared as the most pervasive emotion associated with studying online. All of the
students interviewed had experienced frustration of one kind or another with one aspect or another of
studying online. Sometimes, as with Betty, working full time at a demanding job and trying to fit
study into the nooks and crannies of life, it was all the little impediments that added cumulatively to a
growing frustration. I find that I’m continually frustrated with minor things. Because at the end of a
hard day’s work I’ve then got to sit down and study or look things up. And I’d like to be able to just sit
down and have it flow, because I’m probably short on patience by that time. For Andrew, working
fulltime at two different country centers and studying part time, it was the technology, the
unreliability of the internet connection, which was the source of his frustration. Although, unlike
Betty, Andrew accepted this frustration as a necessary and manageable aspect of studying online. I
guess it’s somewhat frustrating when the computer crashes. But that’s just part and parcel of using
the medium. You just get used to that. And if you can’t log on, you just attempt it another time. With
Mona it was more the unreliability of the web itself, although her philosophical attitude was similar to
Andrew’s. Following links…can be frustrating because the links don’t work…I basically just leave it
if it’s not working…I come to the conclusion that there’s nothing really I can do about that. For
Douglas, it was the university system that let him down. I had my user name, but I still couldn’t get
any access to [the discussion list]. …I thought I had all the information, but obviously there was
something wrong with the system at their end.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
For some the frustration was associated with a lack of clear instructions for locating the required site
or the convoluted process needed to do that. Catherine was one. I don’t believe I was given a web
page or a web site to look for... I don’t think there was any special mention made as to where I was
meant to log on. As was Elizabeth: I use the net all the time, but this thing…! I couldn’t navigate. I
couldn’t get in…I spent quite a lot of time wondering, do I really want to do this? And Fleck:. Well
after the first week I had heard nothing. Absolutely nothing. I had an email from [the lecturer] saying
that the information would be available online, on the web page, with no reference to where the web
page was. And Joan: It was really difficult to find the page. It took me about four months before I
actually found the resource. The tutor didn’t really explain to us what we were supposed to be looking
for and what the link actually was. Polly too experienced frustration navigating the system and
finding how to get to where she was supposed to be: Logging on was really difficult because I didn’t
know what my password was, and until you have a password you can’t get in to ask someone for help.
And when she did get in her problems were far from over. I thought that I was somewhere and I was
somewhere else often… And that common problem of people who know what’s going on think it’s
easy. And so the email was: Aw, you just go there and you do this and then that. And vroom, it’s done.
And I went there and did all the things that were followed and it didn’t work…The instructions were
very simple, but the application of them seemed quite difficult.
For some, there was frustration associated with the nature or structure of the online material. One of
these was Polly again. The way the web pages were set up I found somewhat bewildering…the
different pages had very similar layout and it took me quite a while to figure out where I was within
the site and so where I was with the instructions. And Mona: For one question I think I spent four
hours online trying to track down responses and I couldn’t find them. Sarah realized that her
frustration was associated with a feeling of being lost in cyber space. She needed to have a sense of
where she was in relation to the overall structure of the course, or at least the part of it she was
currently dealing with. And the online environment did not provide her with that. I basically had to
print out the whole web page, because my learning is more physical, one after the other…I don’t
know if you know what I mean, but there was no progression of reading it and thinking OK, I’ve got
that. And now I’ll go here and I’ve got that. Whereas when I printed it, I had them in a folder style.
Read it. Yep, I understand all that. Next page. Read it. Yep. And that’s really the only time I started
understanding.
There is also frustration with material being out of date. Betty. A lot of information is still there from
last year and I had also printed off all the course information and the weekly exercises before I
realized that it was actually still 2001. And Fleck: I just kept getting told by everyone to go see the
web site. And it wasn’t until the course coordinator tried to do things that she found out that yes, the
information’s too old.
Elizabeth, Douglas and Polly, all leading busy lives and all studying at postgraduate level, externally
from interstate or overseas, felt frustration at the rambling or superficial nature of unmoderated online
discussion. Elizabeth. If you don’t have really strong adjudication or facilitation, if you don’t have a
really strong lead in that, then you end up with, I think, a whole group of people who really don’t
have any better understanding of the issues than you do, all offering opinions and there doesn’t really
seem to be very much comes out of that. Polly. There were three main concerns I had. One was the
difficulty with students articulating ideas for the first time. And they flounder around…and it may not
make sense to anybody else. Another thing was a sort of group therapy session which I found
frustrating. This is supposed to be an academic learning environment, not a chance for us all to have
a big group hug. And a third thing was frustration with some people’s absolute stupidity. Good Lord!
And for Douglas: The thing I find frustrating is that it doesn’t feel like a discussion because it takes so
long to get a response from other people…I think it kind of lacks some of the depth you’d get if you
were in a face to face situation…The other thing I find frustrating with the online discussion is that
there isn’t much input from the lecturers…I think it would be useful to have some input from the
lecturer to kind of summarize what we’ve been saying or to point us in another direction or get us to
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
explore things in more detail.
There was a general desire to get things done quickly with a minimum expenditure of unnecessary
time, and frustration associated with that desire being thwarted. Joan: Frustration, yes, definitely,
with all the time that it takes. It just took so long to find [the discussion list]. I found it once and never
went back there. Catherine. [Accessing the data base] was slow and that in itself is very frustrating
when you’ve got timelines.
For Sarah and Douglas it was the overall experience of studying online. Douglas felt frustrated by the
isolation and lack of connection that online study represented. What I found quite hard and frustrating
is that I probably would have got more out of being in a room with people exploring ideas…I don’t
know what they look like. I don’t know where they live. I don’t know, yeah, who they really are. Sarah
just felt uncomfortable with the whole online experience. I just think I shouldn’t have done this
subject, because being on computers frustrates me anyway.
Frustration was an emotion experienced by all the students interviewed. For some, this was a
relatively minor aspect of learning online, whereas for others it caused them to question whether or
not they wanted to continue. Much of the frustration was associated with the technology, whether it
was working, and how difficult it was to access and navigate. Some was associated with the
associated administrative processes, with instructions that were unclear and obscure. Other
frustrations were with the design, structure and relevance of the web site content and with the learning
processes, especially discussion groups. For some, it was a more global frustration with the total
experience of learning online.
B. Fear, anxiety, apprehension—every single day
Many of the students experienced one or all of the fear, anxiety, and apprehension cluster of emotions
associated with their online learning. There was anxiety involved with delays in the system. This was
the case for Betty. Because I’m working fulltime and I have to arrange my time very carefully... it
caused quite a high level of anxiety, because it was the first week and we were due to have
assignments in by the Friday and I couldn’t get in. And for Fleck: Three weeks in and I hadn’t
started…I was getting behind before I even started. There was anxiety too with not knowing just
what to do and about finding out what to do. Elizabeth felt this particularly when she was studying
overseas. It was 10-14 days sometimes before I got a response about anything and I was really
starting to panic…A couple of times I had questions about a paper that was due and [the lecturer]
didn’t email me back until after the due date had passed… It caused a lot more stress and anxiety
than was really necessary. For Betty, it was also trying to work out online how to negotiate the new
library system. I had to take time off work, go into the library, sit down with someone and say what’s
going on? They ran through it all. I don’t think I’ve mastered it. It’s still a fearful unknown next time I
have to go into the library. There was anxiety for some with trusting the system to deliver
assignments electronically. Elizabeth: I don’t know whether it’s got through. I don’t know whether the
emails got through or whether the person’s been able to download it. Initially too for Mona: I was a
little apprehensive at the start because you wonder if it’s going to go through… Will something occur
in the transmission process?
The prospect of the public exposure associated with aspects of learning online caused anxiety for
some students; exposure to an unknown or maybe even non-existent audience. Catherine, for
example, was required to post assignment answers on a web page. I like to know. I like to know who’s
reading my work. Is it being read? Because then, why am I doing it? I mean, what’s the point?
Elizabeth was in a similar situation. Whatever you post is there for the semester. You know, people
have access to it on an ongoing basis, whereas if you’re sitting in a tutorial room and talking to
people, then it’s more ephemeral. I think that people take fewer risks in what they say and what
they’re prepared to talk about.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
For Polly the anxiety was one of general internet anxiety which did not diminish as she became more
familiar with the online environment. When asked if the experience of studying online reduced her
initial anxiety, she replied: No. Perhaps it was heightened…I was reaffirmed in my belief of my being
internet-challenged by not being able to follow simple instructions.
Although Mona acknowledged the significance of anxiety in relation to learning, she thought that this
was less a concern with learning online than in a face to face situation. I’ve found that I’ve probably
been more willing, not been more objective, but more willing to express my true feelings about
something online… If you don’t know the answer in a class quiz you do become quite
anxious…Online you’ve got the time and you think OK, I’m going to go out and get these answers.
The peculiar nature of the electronic environment was a source of anxiety for most of the participants.
For some it was anxiety associated with a lack of control over the processes of the system. Work or
ideas were submitted and then dealt with (or not) in some mysterious and invisible way over which
the student could have no influence. The public and relatively permanent nature of online
communication was also a source of fear and anxiety as was the impersonal and largely anonymous
nature of that communication. Demonstrating the principle that what appears to be the same
experience may engender different emotional responses in different people , the relative lack
of anxiety of the online environment, with more time and space being available, was also identified as
C. Shame/embarrassment—surely a three year old could maneuver through
Students experienced shame and embarrassment associated with the sense of feeling exposed and with
feeling incompetent at tasks they felt they should be able to complete. Catherine was one of them.
There were times when I was embarrassed because my work was there to see…You don’t even know
who they are and they’re critiquing your work. As was Elizabeth: Perhaps there’s some fear or some
sense of exposure or potential shame about putting something up there that’s going to be there for the
world to see for a long period of time. You might give yourself freer rein in a less public situation.
And Polly: And there’s some sort of feeling like a dork. I suppose that’s shame and embarrassment.
And Mona: Embarrassment when you find that you’ve posted something on the net and you’ve
misspelled it. And you look at it and go Aw no! I’ve got that there for everyone to see. I’m caught out!
Kate was so embarrassed at being so far behind that she held back from participating: I don’t really
use the discussion list because I’d look stupid. So I don’t use it.
Around half of the participants, interestingly all of them female, spoke of the shame and
embarrassment they experienced with having their inadequacies exposed, or potentially exposed,
online. Shame has been identified as a significant factor in learning, being associated with a reduced
disposition to learn . And the experiences of students, especially female students, in this study,
suggest that the emotions of shame and embarrassment have particular significance in the online
environment.
D. Enthusiasm /excitement—My goodness, this is fantastic!
For some of the students, learning online was associated with feelings of excitement, even if, like
Kate, this were not sustained. When I first started I was all excited about it. I thought: It’s going to be
great. Rah! Rah! But then at times I think, Cor, it’s hard. For Joan, it was the thrill of actually being
online: A bit of excitement the first year that I came and discovered I had my own email address and
could print out lecture notes and things like that. It was quite exciting that we were so technologically
advanced…It was good that I could go and log on to a computer and I could surf the net there and
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
that would be fine. For Mona and Andrew there was excitement associated with experiencing a new
way of learning. Mona: Excited as well, because it was a new tool of learning I guess. Which I like. It
offered the opportunity to become familiar with another method, which was pretty good. Andrew:
There is a sense of excitement… this journey that I’m back on again now, and I’m very happy to be
on, is a lot easier for me to manage [than previous study]. So, technology has made it a lot easier to
For Andrew there were other aspects of learning online that also engendered enthusiasm and
excitement. One of these was the actual content of the course, which he found related strongly to his
professional and personal life. It’s been more around that personal reflection and that personal
understanding and putting things into my own terms. He was also excited by the experience, while
living in a remote country town, of connecting with others embarked on a similar professional
journey. That potential to be connecting with people around the country and one overseas…the use of
technology… in enabling this sharing of information and this connection with people.
Catherine expressed some irony when speaking of her excitement with studying online. It was
occasioned by a brief comment from the lecturer in response to an assignment she had submitted. I
was excited when the lecturer actually did say something. When we got our results, he actually posts
our results to our email address. And that was exciting because you got two lines that said Good on
you, you got a Distinction or whatever it was. While Sarah acknowledged that excitement played an
important part in her learning, she felt that this dimension had been seriously lacking in her
experience of learning online. I feel that the way I learn is a lot more, well, what we talk about is a lot
more relevant if you’re in a big group in a tutorial having a discussion. I think. And that gets me
excited. It gets me into the subject. Whereas this has been, I feel like it’s a chore, this subject. And I’ve
never felt like that. I’ve been at uni for three years and I’ve never felt like that with another subject.
Because there’s no engagement. Elizabeth’s excitement, too, was less related to the course itself than
to the online resources she accessed along the way. I’ve used lots of things that are in other
commercial sites…through WHO, lots of government sites around the place…It’s certainly
exciting…I’m getting lots of good information from them…I’m not sure how much directly relates to
the study I’m doing.
Not all the emotions identified by the participants were negative ones. Enthusiasm and excitement
were among the positive emotions seen to play a significant part in the learning experience. There was
the excitement associated with learning in a new way, using new technologies. Excitement too with
what could be gained from learning online, both in terms of course content and of the connections
made possible with other sites and with other people. For some, the excitement associated with
learning was significant in its absence from the online context.
E. Pride—I made a good assignment
A sense of pride in their accomplishments was expressed by a number of the participants, including
pride at succeeding in the online environment. As Polly said: I wrote things I was proud of. And also
there was pride in managing this environment despite my fears. For Mona: When you know you’ve
done a good piece of work and you put that on the net and you get positive feedback. It makes you feel
quite proud. Andrew too derived a sense of pride from the affirming feedback of others. Recognition
as a practitioner. That what I say has some meaning or some relevance. That it is a considered sort of
response or a considered understanding of different issues.
Pride was identified by Ingleton and O’Regan as a critical emotion in nurturing student learning
and in engendering a positive disposition to learn. In the online environment, with its characteristics
of publicness and permanence, the potential for pride is very great.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper has examined some of the literature to do with emotion, emotion and cognition, learning
online and the relationships between all of these. It has also looked at the lived experience of eleven
students who are studying at a university committed to delivering more and more courses online. It
has identified emotions those students experienced learning online and the particular contexts in
which that experience occurred. From all of this, two kinds of conclusions can be drawn, one practical
and one theoretical.
In practical terms, implications can be based on the pragmatic assumption that learning will be
enhanced when negative emotions are minimized and positive emotions maximized. From the
experience of the students interviewed in this study, this is likely to occur when:
the technology is reliable, accessible and usable to the point of being invisible in its
functioning
instructions for accessing the required sites are clear, explicit, delivered upfront, and make no
unjustified assumptions as to students’ knowledge and awareness of online processes
sites are maintained and kept up to date
content is designed to make explicit the structure of the material and to facilitate the user’s
navigation through and awareness of location in that structure
guidance is provided for appropriate, relevant and constructive participation in discussion
groups; responsibility is taken for moderation and facilitation of discussion groups
posting processes are explicit with students receiving prompt and automatic acknowledgment
when postings are received
processes are put in place for students to have an indication of the actual make up of the
audience for any submissions they post online; provision is made for class members to
become known to each other as real people with their own idiosyncratic interests and
characteristics
where possible, online communication is augmented with face to face meetings
a culture of risk-taking is encouraged in which supportive process are put in place for dealing
with differences and experimenting with ideas and possibilities
criteria for excellence are made explicit and the attaining of these criteria is acknowledged
explicitly
Both the evidence from the literature and that from the student interviews strongly points to the
centrality of emotion to the process of learning, specifically here of learning online. The implication is
that any theory of learning which fails to take account of this centrality is lacking a critical element
and is, therefore, seriously deficient in its representation of reality. Emotion has been shown to be
significant in relation to attention, memory and decision making, all of which are of critical
importance in the learning process. Questions that emerge from that include what emotions, what
experiences engendering those emotions, determine where and to what extent students focus their
attention? Similarly, in what ways and to what ends is emotion involved in what is remembered?
What are the implications of that, both for what students remember from any learning situation and
for the emotion-related memories they bring from one learning experience to another? What part do
what emotions play in the various decisions related to all the learning experiences students encounter
when studying online?
This paper focused on emotions and learning and on the relationship between these two phenomena. It
also explored the emotional experiences of students learning online. Particular emotions were
identified
significant
frustration,
fear/anxiety,
shame/embarrassment, enthusiasm/excitement and pride. The participants in the study reported
particular contexts in which those emotions seemed to inhibit or enhance the teaching/learning
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
process. The effect of these emotions was variable, depending on the strength and nature of the
emotion involved as well as its associated learning context. For some, the emotions experienced and
the corresponding engagement with their learning was extreme. Elizabeth, for example had been so
emotionally traumatized by her online learning experience that she cried throughout the hour-long
telephone interview. She was seriously considering withdrawing from her program. Andrew, at the
other end of the emotional spectrum, was motivated by the excitement, enthusiasm and enjoyment
associated with his online learning. For the others, there were emotional experiences that contributed
positively to their learning as well as those that had detrimental effects, but not overwhelmingly so.
The importance of emotions is being acknowledged in many aspects of human endeavor and emotions
are claiming an increasingly respectable place in the theory and research of a diverse range of
academic disciplines. It is clear that emotions play a critical role in the teaching/learning process and
that this role must be addressed in both the theory and practice of teaching and learning. Exactly what
this role is and how it can best be dealt with is an area still requiring much exploration, particularly as
new technologies become an integral part of that process.
VIII. REFERENCES
1. Dirkx, J., The power of feelings: Emotion, imagination, and the construction of meaning in adult
learning, New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, Vol.89, pp 63-72, Spring, 2001.
2. Barbalet, J., Emotion, Social Theory and Social Structure, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998.
3. Frijda, N., Manstead, A. & Bem, S. The influence of emotions on beliefs. In: Frijda, N.,
Manstead, A. & Bem, S., Emotions and Beliefs: How Feelings Influence Thoughts, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1-9, 2000.
4. Ferro, T., The influence of affective processing in education and training, New Directions for
Adult and Continuing Education, Vol. 59, pp 25-33, 1995.
5. Martinez, M., Key design considerations for personalized learning on the Web, Educational
Technology and Society, Vol. 4, No.1, pp 26–40, 2001.
6. Boud, D., Cohen, R. & Walker, D., Introduction: Understanding learning from experience. In:
Boud, D., Cohen, R. & Walker, D., Using Experience for Learning, SRHE & Open University
Press, Buckingham, 1-18, 1993.
7. Martin, B. & Briggs, L., The Affective and Cognitive Domains: Integration for Instruction and
Research, Educational Technology Publications, Englewood Cliffs, 1986.
8. Denzin, N., On Understanding Emotion, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1984.
9. Rolls, E., The Brain and Emotion, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999.
10. LeDoux, J., The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life, Phoenix,
London, 1999.
11. Hinton, A., Introduction: Developing a biocultural approach to the emotions. In: Hinton, A.,
Biocultural Approaches to the Emotions, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1-38, 1999.
12. Darwin, C., The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals, The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1872/1965.
13. Frijda, N., Emotions are functional, most of the time, In: Ekman, P., & Davidson, R. (Eds.), The
Nature of Emotion: Fundamental Questions, Oxford University Press, New York/ Oxford, 112-
122, 1994.
14. Ekman, P., All emotions are basic time. In: Ekman, P. & Davidson, R. (Eds.). The Nature of
Emotion: Fundamental Questions, Oxford University Press, New York/ Oxford, 15-19, 1994.
15. Evans, P., Motivation and Emotion, Routledge, London & New York, 1989.
16. Lerner, J. & Keltner, D., Beyond valence: Toward a model of emotion-specific influences on
judgment and choice, Cognition and Emotion, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp 473–503, 2000.
17. James, W., The Principles of Psychology, Encyclopedia Britannica, Chicago, 1891/1952.
18. Shweder, R., ‘you’re not sick, you’re just in love’: Emotion as an interpretative system. In:
Ekman, P. & Davidson, R. (Eds.), The Nature of Emotion: Fundamental Questions, Oxford
University Press, New York/ Oxford, 32-44, 1994.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
19. Worthman, C., Emotions: You can feel the difference. In: Hinton, A. Biocultural Approaches to
the Emotions, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 41-74, 1999.
20. Goleman, D., Emotional Intelligence, Bantam Books, New York, 1995.
21. Averill, J., A constructionist view of emotion. In Plutchik, R. & Kellerman, H. (Eds.), Emotion:
Theory, Research and Experience, Vol.1, Theories of Emotion. Academic Press, New York, pp
305-337, 1980.
22. Damasio, A., Descartes’s Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain, Papermac, London,
23. Bloom, B. (Ed.), Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The Classification of Educational Goals:
Handbook I, Cognitive Domain. Longmans, Green, New York / Toronto, 1956.
24. Krathwohl, D., Bloom, B., & Masia, B., Taxonomy of educational objectives. Handbook II:
Affective Domain. David McKay, New York, 1956.
25. McLeod, D., Research on affect and Mathematics learning in the JRME: 1970 to the present,
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, Vol. 25, No. 6, pp 637–647, 1994
26. Shelton, C., Portraits in emotional awareness. Educational Leadership, pp 330 –32, September,
27. Postle, G., Putting the heart back into learning. In: Boud, D., Cohen, R. & Walker, D. (Eds.),
Using Experience for Learning, SRHE & Open University Press, Buckingham, 33-45, 1993.
28. Gardner, H., Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, Basic Books, New York,
29. LaViolette, P., Teaching with feeling in mind, On the Beam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 1986.
 
30. Palombo Weiss, R., Emotion and learning, Training and Development, Vol. 54, No. 11, pp 44–
31. Clore, G. & Gasper, K., Feeling is believing: Some affective influences on belief. In Frijda, N.,
Manstead, A. & Bem, S. (Eds.) Emotions and Beliefs: How Feelings Influence Thoughts,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1-9, 2000.
32. Stock, B., Getting to the heart of performance. Performance Improvement, Vol. 35, No. 8, pp 6-
33. Greenspan, S., The Growth of the Mind and the Endangered Origins of Intelligence, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, 1997.
34. Brandt, R., On teaching brains to think: A conversation with Robert Sylwester. Educational
Leadership, pp 72-75, April, 2000.
35. Sylwester, R., Unconscious emotions, conscious feelings. Educational Leadership, Vol. 58, No.
3, pp 20–24, 2000.
36. Salzberger-Wittenberg, I., Henry, G. & Osborne, E., The Emotional Experience of Learning
and Teaching, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1983.
37. Boyle, G., Effects on academic learning of manipulating emotional states and motivational
dynamics. British Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol 53, pp 347-357, 1983.
38. Symonds, W., Giving it the old online try. Business Week, Issue 3760, 3 December, 2001.
39. Wong, A., Cyberself: Identity, language and stylization on the Internet. In: Gibbs, D. & Krause,
K. (Eds.) Cyberlines: Languages and Cultures of the Internet, James Nicholas, Albert Park, 175-
206, 2000.
40. Campbell-Gibson, C., The ultimate disorienting dilemma: The online learning community. In:
Evans, T. & Nation, D. (Eds.), Changing University Teaching: Reflections on Creating
Educational Technologies, Kogan Page, London, 2000.
41. Russell, T., Technology wars: Winners and losers, Educom Review, Vol 23, No. 2, 1997.
42. Cookson, P., Implications of internet technologies for higher education: North American
perspectives, Open Learning, Vol.15, No.1, pp 71-81, 2000.
JALN Volume 7, Issue 3 — September 2003
43. Kort, B., Reilly, R. & Picard, R., External representation of learning process and domain
knowledge: Affective state as a determinate of its structure and function. Paper presented at the 10th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, San Antonio, Texas, 2001.
 
44. Schaller, D., Allison-Bunnell, S., Borun, M. & Chambers, M., How do you like to learn?
Comparing user preferences and visit length of educational web sites. Paper presented at the Museums
and the Web Conference, Boston, Massachusetts, 2002. 
45. Wegerif, R., The social dimension of asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1998.
 
46. Ng, K-C., Using e-mail to foster collaboration in distance education. Open Learning, Vol. 16, No. 2,
pp 191–200, 2001.
47. Hara, N. & Kling, R., Students’ distress with a Web-based distance education course: An
ethnographic study of participants’ experiences, Center for Social Informatics, Indiana University,
Working paper, 2000. 
48. Bradley, J., Methodological issues and practices in qualitative research, The Library Quarterly, Vol.
63, No. 4, pp 431-449.
49. Ingleton, C., Gender and learning: Does emotion make a difference? Higher Education, Vol 30, pp
323-335, 1995.
50. Ingleton, C. & O’Regan, K., Recounting mathematical experiences: Exploring the development of
confidence in mathematics. Paper presented at AARE (Australasian Association for Research in
Education) Conference, Adelaide, December 1998.
IX. ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Kerry O’Regan is Coordinator of Student Development at The University of Adelaide. Prior to taking up
that appointment she worked for many years in learning support at the University of South Australia. She
is particularly interested in the lived experience of students associated with the various processes of
teaching and learning and of the implications these have for teaching at university. She is part of an
award-winning team of Learning Advisers who have been acknowledged for their innovation in
developing online support for student learning. Address: Learning and Teaching Development Unit, The
University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia 5005, Telephone: +61 8 8303 4721 Fax: +61 8 8303
3553 Email: