Automatic Liver Segmentation Using an
Adversarial Image-to-Image Network
Dong Yang1, Daguang Xu2, S. Kevin Zhou2, Bogdan Georgescu2, Mingqing
Chen2, Sasa Grbic2, Dimitris Metaxas1 and Dorin Comaniciu2
1 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
2 Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare Technology Center, Princeton,
NJ 08540, USA
Abstract. Automatic liver segmentation in 3D medical images is essential in many clinical applications, such as pathological diagnosis of hepatic diseases, surgical planning, and postoperative assessment. However,
it is still a very challenging task due to the complex background, fuzzy
boundary, and various appearance of liver. In this paper, we propose an
automatic and eﬃcient algorithm to segment liver from 3D CT volumes.
A deep image-to-image network (DI2IN) is ﬁrst deployed to generate the
liver segmentation, employing a convolutional encoder-decoder architecture combined with multi-level feature concatenation and deep supervision. Then an adversarial network is utilized during training process
to discriminate the output of DI2IN from ground truth, which further
boosts the performance of DI2IN. The proposed method is trained on an
annotated dataset of 1000 CT volumes with various diﬀerent scanning
protocols (e.g., contrast and non-contrast, various resolution and position) and large variations in populations (e.g., ages and pathology). Our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions in terms of segmentation accuracy and computing eﬃciency.
Introduction
Accurate liver segmentation from three dimensional (3D) medical images , e.g.
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is essential
in many clinical applications, such as pathological diagnosis of hepatic diseases,
surgical planning, and postoperative assessment. However, automatic liver segmentation is still a highly challenging task due to the complex background, fuzzy
boundary, and various appearance of liver in medical images.
To date, several methods have been proposed for automatic liver segmentation from 3D CT scans. Generally, they can be categorized into non-learningbased and learning-based approaches. Non-learning-based approaches usually
rely on the statistical distribution of the intensity, including atlas-based , active shape model (ASM)-based , levelset-based , and graph-cut-based 
methods, etc. On the other hand, learning-based approaches take the advantage
of hand-crafted features to train the classiﬁers to achieve good segmentation.
For example, in , the proposed hierarchical framework applies marginal space
learning with steerable features to handle the complicated texture pattern near
the liver boundary.
Until recently, deep learning has been shown to achieve superior performance
in various challenging tasks, such as classiﬁcation, segmentation, and detection.
 
Fig. 1. Proposed deep image-to-image network (DI2IN). The front part is a convolutional encoder-decoder network with feature concatenation, and the backend is deep
supervision network through multi-level. Blocks inside DI2IN consist of convolutional
and upscaling layers.
Several automatic liver segmentation approaches based on convolutional neural
network (CNN) have been proposed. Dou, et, al. demonstrated a fully convolutional network (FCN) with deep supervision, which can perform end-to-end
learning and inference. The output of FCN is reﬁned with a fully connected
conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) approach. Similarly, Christ, et, al. proposed
cascaded FCNs followed by CRF reﬁnement. Lu, et, al. used a FCN with
graph-cut based reﬁnement. Although these methods demonstrated good performance, they all used pre-deﬁned reﬁnement approaches. For example, both
CRF and graph-cut methods are limited to the use of pairwise models, and timeconsuming as well. They may cause serious leakage at boundary regions with low
contrast, which is common in liver segmentation.
Meanwhile, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) has emerged as a
powerful framework in various tasks. It consists of two parts: generator and
discriminator. The generator tries to produce the output that is close to the
real samples, while the discriminator attempts to distinguish between real and
generated samples. Inspired by , we propose an automatic liver segmentation approach using an adversarial image-to-image network (DI2IN-AN). A deep
image-to-image network (DI2IN) is served as the generator to produce the liver
segmentation. It employs a convolutional encoder-decoder architecture combined
with multi-level feature concatenation and deep supervision. Our network tries to
optimize a conventional multi-class cross-entropy loss together with an adversarial term that aims to distinguish between the output of DI2IN and ground truth.
Ideally, the discriminator pushes the generator’s output towards the distribution
of ground truth, so that it has the potential to enhance generator’s performance
by reﬁning its output. Since the discriminator is usually a CNN which takes the
joint conﬁguration of many input variables, it embeds the higher-order potentials into the network (the geometric diﬀerence between prediction and ground
truth is represented by the trainable network model instead of heuristic hints).
The proposed method also achieves higher computing eﬃciency since the discriminator does not need to be executed at inference.
All previous liver segmentation approaches were trained using dozens of volumes which did not take the full advantage of CNN. In contrast, our network
leverages the knowledge of an annotated dataset of 1000+ CT volumes with various diﬀerent scanning protocols (e.g., contrast and non-contrast, various resolution and position) and large variations in populations (e.g., ages and pathology).
To the best of our knowledge, our experiment is the ﬁrst time that more than
1000 annotated 3D CT volumes are adopted in liver segmentation tasks. The
experimental result shows that training with such a large dataset signiﬁcantly
improves the performance and enhances the robustness of the network.
Methodology
Deep Image-to-Image Network (DI2IN) for Liver Segmentation
In this section, we present a deep image-to-image network (DI2IN), which is a
multi-layer convolutional neural network (CNN), for the liver segmentation. The
segmentation task is deﬁned as the voxel-wise binary classiﬁcation.
DI2IN takes the entire 3D CT volumes as input, and outputs the probability
maps that indicate how likely voxels belongs to the liver region. As shown in
Fig. 1, the main structure of DI2IN is designed following a symmetric way as a
convolutional encoder-decoder. All blocks in DI2IN consist of 3D convolutional
and bilinear upscaling layers. The details of the network is described in Fig. 3.
In the encoder part of DI2IN, only the convolution layers are used in all
blocks. In order to increase the receptive ﬁeld of neurons and lower the GPU
memory consumption, we set stride as 2 at some layers and reduce the size of
feature maps. Moreover, larger receptive ﬁeld covers more contextual information
and helps to preserve liver shape information in the prediction. The decoder of
DI2IN consists of convolutional and bilinear upscaling layers. To enble end-toend prediction and training, the upscaling layers are implemented as bilinear
interpolation to enlarge the activation maps. All convolutional kernels are 3 ×
3 × 3. The upscaling factor in decoder is 2 for x, y, z dimension. The Leaky
rectiﬁed linear unit (Leaky ReLU) and batch normalization are adopted in all
convolutional layers for proper gradient back-propagation.
In order to further improve the performance of DI2IN, we adopt several
mainstream technologies with the necessary changes . First, we use the
feature layer concatenation in DI2IN. Fast bridges are built directly from the
encoder layers to the decoder layers. The bridges pass the information from the
encoder forward and then concatenate it with the decoder feature layers. The
combined feature is used as the input for the next convolution layer. Following
the steps above to explicitly combine advanced and low-level features, DI2IN
beneﬁts from local and global contextual information. The deep supervision of
the neural network during end-to-end training is shown to achieve good boundary detection and segmentation results. In the network, we introduced a more
complex deep supervision scheme to improve performance. Several branches are
separated from layers of the decoder section of main DI2IN. With the appropriate upscaling and convolution operations, the output size of each channel for
Fig. 2. Proposed adversarial training scheme. The generator produces the segmentation
prediction, and discriminator classiﬁes the prediction and ground truth during training.
all branches matches the size of the input image (Upscaling factors are 16,4,1 in
block 10,11,12 repectively). By calculating the loss item li with the same ground
truth data, the supervision is enforced at the end of each branch i. In order to
further utilize the results of diﬀerent branches, the ﬁnal output is determined by
the convolution operations of all branches with the leaky ReLU. During training, we apply binary cross entropy loss to each voxel of the output layers. The
total loss ltotal is the weighted combination of loss terms for all output layers,
including the ﬁnal output layer and the output layers for all branches, as follows:
wi · li + wfinal · lfinal
Network Improvement with Adversarial Training
We adopt the prevailing idea of the generative adversarial networks to boost the
performance of DI2IN. The proposed scheme is shown in Fig.2. An adversarial
network is adopted to capture the high-order appearance information, which
distinguishes between the ground truth and the output from DI2IN. In order
to guide the generator to better prediction, the adversarial network provides an
extra loss function for updating the parameters of generator during training. The
purpose of the extra loss is to make the prediction as close as possible to the
ground truth labeling. We adopt the binary cross-entropy loss for training of the
adversarial network. D and G represent the discriminator and generator (DI2IN,
in the context), respectively. For the discriminator D
, the ground truth
label Ygt is assigned as one, and the prediction Ypred = G
is assigned as
zero where X is the input CT volumes. The structure of discriminator network
D is shown in Fig. 3. The following objective function is used in training the
adversarial network:
lD = −Ey∼pgt log
−Ey′∼ppred log
= −Ey∼pgt log
−Ex∼pdata log
During the training of network D, the gradient of loss lD is propagated back to
update the parameters of the generator network (DI2IN). At this stage, the loss
for G has two components shown in the Equation 2. The ﬁrst component is the
conventional segmentation loss lb: voxel-wise binary cross-entropy between the
prediction and ground truth. Minimizing the second loss component enables the
discriminator D to confuse the ground truth with the prediction from G.
lG = Ey∼ppred,y′∼pgt [lseg (y, y′)] −λEy∼ppred log
= Ey∼ppred,y′∼pgt [lseg (y, y′)] −λEx∼pdata log
Algorithm 1: Adversarial training of generator and discriminator.
: pre-trained generator (DI2IN) with weights θG
Output: updated generator weights θG
1 for number of training iterations do
for kD steps do
sample a mini-batch of training images x ∼pdata;
generate prediction ypred for x with G
θD ←propagate back the stochastic gradient ▽lD (ygt, ypred);
for kG steps do
sample a mini-batch of training images x′ ∼pdata;
generate y′
pred for x′ with G
and compute D (G (x′));
1 ←propagate back the stochastic gradient ▽lG
Following suggestions in , we replace −log (1 −D (G (x))) with log (D (G (X))).
In another word, we would like to maximize the probability that prediction to
be the ground truth in Equation 2, instead of minimizing the probability that
prediction not to be the generated label map. Such replacement provides strong
gradient during training of G and speed up the training process in practice.
lG = Ey∼ppred,y′∼pgt [lseg (y, y′)] + λEx∼pdata log D
The generator and discriminator are trained alternatively for several times shown
in Algorithm 1, until the discriminator is not able to easily distinguish between
ground truth label and the output of DI2IN. After the training process, the
adversarial network is no longer required at inference. The generator itself can
provide high quality segmentation results and its performance is improved.
Experiments
Most public dataset for liver segmentation only consists of tens of cases. For
example, the MICCAI-SLiver07 dataset only contains 20 CT volumes for
training and 10 CT volumes for testing. All the data are contrast enhanced.
Such a small dataset is not suitable to show the power of CNN: it has been well
known that neural network trained with more labelled data can usually achieve
much better performance. Thus, in this paper, we collected more than 1000
CT volumes. The liver of each volume was delineated by human experts. These
data covers large variations in populations, contrast phases, scanning ranges,
pathologies, and ﬁeld of view (FOV), etc. The inter-slice distance varies from
0.5mm to 7.0mm. All scans covers the abdominal regions but may extend to
head and feet. Tumor can be found in multiple cases. The volumes may also
have various other disease. For example, pleural eﬀusion, which brights the lung
region and changes the pattern of upper boundary of liver. Then we collected
Fig. 3. Parametric setting of blocks in neural network. s stands for the stride, f is ﬁlter
number. Conv. is convolution, and Up. is bilinear upscaling.
additional 50 volumes from clinical sites for the independent testing. The livers of
these data were also annotated by human experts for the purpose of evaluation.
We down-sampled the dataset into 3.0mm resolution isotropically to speed up
the processing and lower the consumption of computing memory without loss
of accuracy. Training DI2IN from scratch takes 200 iterations using stochastic
gradient descent with a batch size of 4 samples. The learning rate is 0.01 in the
beginning and divided by 10 after 100 iterations. In the adversarial training, we
set λ to 0.01, and the number of overall training iterations is 100. For training D,
kD is 10 and the mini-batch size is 8. For training G, kG is 1 and the mini-batch
size is 4. Less training iterations are required for G than that for D because G
is pre-trained before adversarial training. wi is set as 1 in the loss.
Table 1 compares the performance of ﬁve diﬀerent methods. The ﬁrst method,
the hierarchical, learning-based algorithm proposed in , was trained using 400
CT volumes. More training data did not show performance improvement for this
method. For comparison purpose, the DI2IN network, which is similar to deep
learning based algorithms proposed in without post-processing steps, and
the DI2IN-AN were trained using the same 400 cases. Both the DI2IN network
and the DI2IN-AN were also trained using all 1000+ CT volumes. The average symmetric surface distance (ASD) and dice coeﬃcients are computed for all
methods on the test data. As shown in Table 1, DI2IN-AN achieves the best
performance in both evaluation metrics. All deep learning based algorithms outperform the classic learning based algorithm with the hand-craft features, which
shows the power of CNN. The results show that more training data enhances the
performance of both DI2IN and DI2IN-AN. Take DI2IN for example, training
with 1000+ labelled data improves the mean ASD by 0.23mm and the max ASD
by 3.84mm compared to training with 400 labelled data. Table 1 also shows that
the adversarial structure can further boost the performance of DI2IN. The maximum ASD error is also reduced. Typical test samples are provided in Fig. 4. We
also tried CRF and graph cut to reﬁne the output of DI2IN. However, the results became worse, since a large portion of testing data had no contrast and the
boundary of liver bottom at many locations was very fuzzy. CRF and graph cut
both suﬀer from serious leakage in these situations. Using an NVIDIA TITAN X
GPU and the Theano/Lasagne library, the run time of our algorithm is less than
one second, which is signiﬁcantly faster than most of the current approaches. For
example, it requires 1.5 minutes for one case in . More experimental results
can be found in the supplementary material.
Table 1. Comparison of ﬁve methods on 50 unseen CT data.
Mean Std Max Median Mean Std Min Median
Ling et al. (400) 2.89 5.10 37.63
0.92 0.11 0.20
DI2IN (400)
2.25 1.28 10.06
0.94 0.03 0.79
DI2IN-AN (400)
2.00 0.95 7.82
0.94 0.02 0.85
DI2IN (1000)
2.15 0.81 6.51
0.94 0.02 0.87
DI2IN-AN (1000)
1.90 0.74 6.32
0.95 0.02 0.88
Our proposed DI2IN has clear advantages comparing with other prevailing methods. First, previous studies show that DI2IN, which incorporates the
encoder-decoder structure, skip connections, and deep supervision scheme within
one framework, has better structure design than U-Net or deep supervised network (DSN) for 3D volumetric datasets . DI2IN is a diﬀerent design from
other prevailing networks, but it gathers the merits of them. Second, the CNNbased methods (no upsampling or deconvolution) are often time-consuming at
inference, and their performance is sensitive to the selection of training sample. We examined the aforementioned networks with internal implementation,
and DI2IN achieved better performance (20% improvement in terms of average
symmetric surface distance).
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed an automatic liver segmentation algorithm based on
an adversarial image-to-image network. Our method achieves good segmentation
quality as well as faster processing speed. The network is trained on an annotated
dataset of 1000+ 3D CT volumes. We demonstrate that training with such a
large dataset can improve the performance of CNN by a large margin.