Multiple Instance Ranking
Charles Bergeron
 
Mathematical Sciences Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA
Jed Zaretzki
 
Curt Breneman
 
Chemistry Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA
Kristin P. Bennett
 
Mathematical Sciences Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA
This paper introduces a novel machine learning model called multiple instance ranking
(MIRank) that enables ranking to be performed in a multiple instance learning setting.
The motivation for MIRank stems
from the hydrogen abstraction problem in
computational chemistry, that of predicting
the group of hydrogen atoms from which
a hydrogen is abstracted (removed) during
metabolism.
The model predicts the preferred hydrogen group within a molecule by
ranking the groups, with the ambiguity of
not knowing which hydrogen atom within the
preferred group is actually abstracted. This
paper formulates MIRank in its general context and proposes an algorithm for solving
MIRank problems using successive linear programming. The method outperforms multiple instance classiﬁcation models on several
real and synthetic datasets.
1. Introduction
introduces
paradigm called multiple instance ranking (MIRank),
bringing the concept of ranking to the framework of
multiple instance learning. Some problems that MI-
Rank could potentially solve based on prior data are:
1. For a given country, predict the city that contains
the most proﬁtable store.
Appearing in Proceedings of the 25 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Helsinki, Finland, 2008. Copyright 2008 by the author(s)/owner(s).
2. For a given state, predict the congressional district that contains the politician that delivers the
most subsidies.
paragraph/passage that contains the most pertinent
sentence/phrase/word.
4. For a given molecular class, predict the molecule
with the conformation having the highest human
immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) inhibition eﬃcacy.
5. For a given state, predict the division that contains the town with the highest median housing
unit price.
metabolism from which a hydrogen atom is abstracted (removed).
It is this last application, that of hydrogen abstraction
from the ﬁeld of computational chemistry, that motivated this work. The ﬁfth application, which involves
making predictions from the census, is also explored
here. Later in this paper, a general formulation for
multiple instance ranking is provided, an algorithm
for MIRank is proposed, and this algorithm is tested
on datasets that stem from both applications as well
as synthetic data.
As introduced by Dietterich et al. , the setup
for multiple instance learning diﬀers somewhat from
the standard learning framework. In standard classi-
ﬁcation, the task is to predict the class of each item.
Each item has a corresponding binary classiﬁcation label, and features deﬁned for each item are used to build
the model. In multiple instance classiﬁcation (MIC),
each item belongs to a bag. The task is to predict the
class of each bag of items.
Features are deﬁned for
Multiple Instance Ranking
Figure 1. Schematic of multiple instance classiﬁcation.
Bags are ellipses, active bags contain stars and inactive
bags contain parallelograms.
each item, but the class label is assigned to each bag.
For simplicity of presentation, assume there are two
classes: active and inactive. By deﬁnition, an active
bag must contain at least one active item, while an
inactive bag contains exclusively inactive items. It is
not known which item is active.
Figure 1 illustrates MIC, in which bags are ellipses,
items in active bags are represented as stars, and items
in inactive bags are marked as parallelograms.
straight line is the separating line representing the classiﬁcation function. Notice that at least one item from
each active bag is found above the line, while all items
in inactive bags are located below the line.
The diﬃculty is that there exists an ambiguity as to
which items in an active bag are actually active. For
example, consider the drug discovery application , with molecules as bags and conformations (three-dimensional molecular shapes that
diﬀer from each other by the rotation of atom groups
about one or more bonds) as items. If a molecule possesses one—or possibly several—conformations that
are active, then it is known that the molecule is active.
However, it is not known which conformation
is active. On the other hand, if none of a molecule’s
conformations are active, then the molecule is deemed
inactive, and in this case, it is inferred that all of that
molecule’s conformations are inactive.
Other applications of MIC include automatic image
annotation , context-based image indexing , text categorization and hard-drive failure prediction . Algorithms for
MIC stem from diverse density , neural networks , and generalisations of support vector
machines . The drug discovery application later inspired
Ray & Davis to formulate multiple instance regression, where this time the response assigned to each
bag is a real number quantifying the activity of the
molecules.
Multiple instance ranking diﬀers in that a classiﬁcation
label is not known for each bag. Rather, some preference information is available for pairs of bags. For
example, it may be known that bag A ranks higher
than both bags B and C, while the relative ranking
of bags B and C may not be known. In many applications, even more structure exists. In these cases, it
is convenient to think of every bag as belonging to a
box. Within each box, exactly one bag ranks higher
than the other ones in the box, and this bag is designated the preferred bag. It is not known how the
other bags in the box rank with respect to each other.
Further, it is not known how bags rank with respect to
each other across boxes. Additionally, there remains
the ambiguity of which items in the preferred bags are
preferred and which ones are not preferred.
2 illustrates the situation. Large rectangles represent
boxes. As was the case in Figure 1, bags are ellipses,
items in preferred bags are represented as stars and
items in the other bags are marked as parallelograms.
Instead of being ﬁxed, the separating line (representing the ranking function) slides from one box to the
next. For each box, the ranking function separates at
least one item of the preferred bag from the remaining
items of the box.
The hydrogen abstraction application ﬁts perfectly
into this framework. For each molecule (box), the task
Multiple Instance Ranking
is to ﬁnd the group (bag) from which a hydrogen atom
(item) is abstracted. It is not known which hydrogen
atom is abstracted, only to which group it belongs.
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section
2 deﬁnes some mathematical notation. Section 3 motivates multiple instance ranking through the computational chemistry problem of hydrogen abstraction.
Multiple instance ranking is formulated, and an algorithm for MIRank is proposed, in Section 4. The
model and algorithm are generalized to nonlinear MI-
Rank problems in Section 5. Section 6 describes the
datasets used in this paper, and Section 7 speciﬁes the
modeling results. Finally, Sections 8 and 9 constitute
a discussion and outlook, respectively.
2. Notation
Let x denote a vector in Rn and let xT mark the
transpose of x. Let 0 denote the vector of all zeros
and e denote the vector of all ones. Let |x| denote
the cardinality of x, that is, the number of entries in
the vector. Let ∥x∥1 denote the 1-norm of x, equal
to the sum of the absolute values of the entries of the
vector. If x has nonnegative entries, then this equals
eT x. Let X ∈Rk×n and H ∈Rm×n denote matrices.
I and J indicate index sets.
The cardinality of the
set I is indicated by |I|. The matrix XI indicates the
matrix in R|I|×n with rows restricted to the index set
I. A kernel matrix K(X, H′) maps Rk×n and Rn×m
into Rk×m. Each entry of the mapping results from a
function (such as the radial basis function) applied to
one row of X applied to one row of H.
3. Motivating application
Bioavailability of a drug, or its ability to be administered orally, is a major concern to the pharmaceutical industry. This characteristic depends on a drug’s
capability to withstand degradation by intestinal and
hepatic enzymes during ﬁrst-pass metabolism in order to cross the intestinal lining and make it into
the bloodstream so that its medicinal eﬀect may be
felt .
Hence, this process of
drug metabolism needs to be better understood. More
speciﬁcally, it is important to discover the attributes
of molecules that identify sites which are vulnerable to
enzymatic degradation.
Cytochrome CYP3A4 is but one of many metabolising enzymes found in the human liver and small intestine, yet this enzyme metabolises nearly 50% of marketed drugs .
CYP3A4 substrates, approximately half of the known
metabolism reactions occur via hydroxylation, the rate
Figure 3. Stick model of an Adinazolam molecule. Large
spheres represent nonhydrogen atoms while small spheres
represent hydrogen atoms. Two groups of hydrogens are
evidenced. The top group, indicated by a thick arrow, has a
hydrogen abstracted during metabolism. The lower group,
indicated by a thin arrow, does not.
limiting step of which is hydrogen atom abstraction
 . Knowing where a molecule is
preferentially oxidized by this cytochrome would aid
the modiﬁcation of compounds to improve their kinetic
or pharmacological proﬁles .
Normally, experimental techniques are used to identify
the molecular sites susceptible to metabolism. This is
a time- and labor-intensive process.
While in vitro
studies are increasingly high throughput, the in silico
identiﬁcation of metabolic liability early on in the drug
discovery process will help prevent taking forward poor
drug candidates. In addition, the constraints of the
biological problem ﬁt perfectly into the framework of
a MIRank application, leading to a potential in silico
The goal is to build a model that predicts, for each
molecule, the site of abstraction of a hydrogen atom
during metabolism. In order to accomplish this, individual hydrogen atoms are ﬁrst grouped together
according to molecular equivalence:
hydrogens are
placed within the same group if and only if the abstraction of any hydrogen from within the group would
result in the same metabolised molecule. In this way,
groups are equivalent representations of potential sites
Multiple Instance Ranking
of metabolism. Note that experimental data do not
show which individual hydrogen is abstracted during
metabolism, but rather to which group this hydrogen
atom belongs. This setup perfectly ﬁts that of multiple instance ranking.
Molecules can be viewed as
boxes, groups as bags, and individual hydrogens as
items. Figure 3 illustrates these using a stick representation of a molecule.
Two prior modeling attempts are described. Firstly,
Singh et al. chose the hydrogen atom that has
the minimum estimated abstraction energy, with a suf-
ﬁciently large surface area (of 8 squared Angstroms),
as the abstracted hydrogen.
Allowing 1 guess per
molecule, their rule-based model performed correctly
in 44% of molecules.
Sheridan et al.
 later
reported that this model has a prediction rate of
51%, allowing for 2 guesses per molecule. Secondly,
Sheridan et al.
 assembled a database of 316
molecules ). They used a random forest applied to
molecular descriptors, and found a model that correctly predicted the site of abstraction for 77% of
molecules, allowing for 2 guesses per molecule.
4. Formulation
Let (I, J) denote an ordered pair of bags where I and
J are lists of indices referring to their items. Let xi
denote a vector of n features for an item i, and let
matrix XI’s rows contain the features for each index
in I. Further let f denote the ranking function. Then
the statement bag I is preferred over bag J is expressed
mathematically as
i∈I f(xi) > max
j∈J f(xj).
The maximum operator on the right hand side can be
replaced with all of the items it operates over, hence
the inequality is rewritten as
i∈I f(xi) > f(xj) ∀j ∈J.
The maximum operator on the left hand side is also
replaced. A convex combination of the items in bag
I is taken, following the lead of Mangasarian & Wild
 in their formulation of MIC. This convex combination is achieved through vector vI,J whose cardinality is that of I. In a slight abuse of notation, vI,J
means the vector corresponding to the pair of bags
(I, J). This vector is nonnegative vI,J ≥0, and its
entries sum to one: eT vI,J = 1. This vector multiplies matrix XI:
I vI,J) > f(xj) ∀j ∈J.
Let the model be linear deﬁned by vector w, i.e.
f(x) = xT w.
In this case, we have
T XIw > xT
This paper focuses on linear models, because chemists
are interested model interpretation. However, this formulation is readily kernelized, as discussed in Section
Now introduce an empirical risk scalar ξI,j based
on the hinge-loss, allowing for errors in training the
j w ≥1 −ξI,j.
This inequality resembles the main constraint in
Joachims’ ranking support vector machine . It
is also the key constraint in an optimization problem
whose objective function is to minimize
νLemp(ξ) + Lreg(w)
where ν > 0 is the tradeoﬀparameter and Lemp and
Lreg are arbitrary loss functions.
Choosing the 1-norm for both loss functions makes the
objective linear in the variables, a choice that was also
made by Mangasarian & Wild . Furthermore,
using the 1-norm on w makes for sparse models, facilitating the interpretability of linear models. Thereupon, the 1-norm MIRank optimization problem is
νeT ξ + ∥w∥1
subject to
j w ≥1 −ξI,j ∀(I, J, j)
eT vI,J = 1 ∀(I, J)
vI,J ≥0 ∀(I, J)
The entries of empirical risk vector ξ are ξI,j as they
appear in the ﬁrst constraint. This notation signiﬁes
that, for each pair (I, J), there is an empirical risk
contribution from each item j ∈J. These are nonnegative quantities, as per 6. Note that there are as
many vectors vI,J as there are pairs (I, J). These vectors are forced to be nonnegative and to sum to one in
constraints 4 and 5.
Since the ﬁrst constraint is linear and the remaining
terms are linear, this is a bilinear optimization problem. We use the successive linear programming algorithm given in Algorithm 1 to ﬁnd a locally optimal
Multiple Instance Ranking
Algorithm 1 Multiple instance ranking algorithm
Select tolerance τ and tradeoﬀparameter ν.
Initialise uI,J = e
|I| ∀(I, J).
Set vI,J = uI,J ∀(I, J).
Fix the vI,J’s and solve the linear program 2-6
for ξ and w.
Fix w and solve the linear program 2-6 for ξ and
the uI,J’s.
until ∥vI −uI∥1 ≤τ ∀(I, J)
solution of the bilinear problem. This proposed MI-
Rank algorithm belongs to a family of algorithms that
has proven to ﬁnd good local solutions on a variety of
bilinear machine learning problems. The subproblem
solutions are not necessarily unique, but this has no
impact on algorithm convergence.
The convergence proof for the MIC algorithm in Mangasarian & Wild can be readily adapted to Algorithm 1. Speciﬁcally, the algorithm converges because the sequence of objective function values
{νeT ξ + ∥w∥1}
at each iteration is nonincreasing and bounded below
by zero, and every accumulation point satisﬁes a local minima property. The formal proof is omitted for
brevity; see Mangasarian & Wild .
Mangasarian
 algorithm for MIC, were implemented in Matlab using the linear programming solver MOSEK
(www.mosek.com).
5. Nonlinear Formulation
A nonlinear MIRank function can be generated by
kernel transformations . We adopt the notation and direct kernel approach used for MIC in Mangasarian & Wild .
The linear ranking function 1 is replaced by the nonlinear function:
f(x) = K(xT , HT )α
where x ∈Rn is an item, α ∈Rm are the dual variables and the matrix H ∈Rn×m has as its rows all
of the m items found collectively in all of the bags
and boxes, and K(xT , HT ) is an arbitrary kernel map.
The bilinear program generating the nonlinear MI-
Rank function becomes:
νeT ξ + ∥w∥1
subject to
T K(XI, HT )w−K(xT
j , HT )α ≥1−ξI,j ∀(I, J, j)
eT vI,J = 1 ∀(I, J)
vI,J ≥0 ∀(I, J)
The kernel formulation remains a bilinear program and
thus can be solved using Algorithm 1 by substituting
α for w and bilinear program 8-12 for bilinear program
6. Datasets
In addition to the hydrogen abstraction dataset, several additional datasets are used in modeling experiments. All three are described here.
6.1. CYP3A4 substrate dataset
The CYP3A4 substrate dataset is made up of 227
small drug-like compounds. A series of 36 descriptors
for each hydrogen atom for all molecules are calculated:
• the charge of the hydrogen;
• the surface area of the hydrogen;
• the non hydrogen surface area of the base atom
the hydrogen is attached to;
• the hydrophobic moment: the hydrogen’s location
with regards to the hydrophobic or hydrophilic
end of the molecule;
• the span: a measure of whether the candidate hydrogen is located at the end or within the middle
of the molecule.
• the topological neighborhood: the distributions of
atom types within a various topological distances
from the hydrogen.
Recall that, for each molecule, the goal is to predict
from which group a hydrogen atom is abstracted, and
it is not known which hydrogen from the abstracted
site is removed.
These 227 molecules form are a subset of the 305 nonproprietary molecules used by Sheridan et al. ,
and represent all those for which descriptor generation
could be completed.
Multiple Instance Ranking
first feature
second feature
Figure 4. Synthetic dataset visualisation.
Preferred bags
contain circles and other bags contain dots. Sliding line
represents the ranking function found by MIRank that separates at least one circle from remaining items in each box.
6.2. Synthetic datasets
This dataset consists of 227 boxes, ﬁve bags per box
and ﬁve items per bag. There are two features. Each
feature is calculated as follows:
distribution
U(−1, 1), µbag
drawn from the distribution U(−A, A)
drawn from the distribution U(−B, B). Put
in words, the center of each box is chosen from a uniform distribution, and the center of each bag with
respect to its box is chosen from a diﬀerent uniform
distribution, and each item with respect to its bag is
chosen from yet another uniform distribution. Parameters A and B characterize these synthetic datasets.
For each item, the response is the sum of the features.
The goal is, for each box, to ﬁnd the bag containing the
item of greatest response. Five boxes of this dataset
are portrayed as Figure 4. It illustrates the diﬃculty in
constructing a linear function separating at least one
circle from each box from the remaining circles and
dots, as MIC attempts to do. On the other hand, it
it possible to ﬁnd a ranking function (the sliding line)
that does this for each box, as MIRank does.
Diﬀerent values for dataset parameters A and B were
attempted:
• Synthetic-1 set A = B = 0.01.
• Synthetic-2 set A = 0.1 and B = 0.01.
Table 1. Prediction accuracies
CYP3A4 substrate
67.1% ± 7.1
70.9% ± 6.9
Synthetic-1
90.8% ± 8.6
99.8% ± 0.53
Synthetic-2
96.8% ± 4.6
99.1% ± 1.8
Synthetic-3
95.5% ± 8.3
99.9% ± 0.38
Synthetic-4
95.7% ± 5.2
99.7% ± 0.91
Census-16h
52.8% ± 17.4
60.3% ± 15.1
Census-16l
46.2% ± 17.7
57.5% ± 16.0
• Synthetic-3 set A = 0.01 and B = 0.1.
• Synthetic-4 set A = B = 0.1.
6.3. Census datasets
(census-16h
census-16l)
Evaluating
Experiments
 
repository. It consists of 22784 towns spread amongst the
50 states of the United States of America. This study
only considered the 3054 towns of more than 10000
inhabitants. Each town is assigned a 5-digit Federal
Information Processing Standard (FIPS) place code
(that is not a zip code). Typically, this dataset is used
in a regression setting to model the response—which is
the town’s median housing unit price. The census-16h
and census-16l datasets diﬀer in their features: each
consists of 16 features drawn from the 1990 census.
These datasets are ﬁtted into the multiple instance
ranking framework as follows.
States are boxes, divisions of towns are bags and towns are items. For
each state, towns whose place code begin with the
same number are assigned to the same division. As
no place code commences with the number 9, there
are up to 9 divisions per state. The task is to predict,
for each state, the division that contains the town with
the highest median housing unit price.
7. Results
For each dataset, results were obtained using both the
MIC and MIRank algorithms. For MIC, preferred bags
were treated as active bags and other bags were treated
as inactive bags.
All results reported are for linear
functions.
The experimental design is as follows. Each dataset
was randomly split into training, validation and testing subsets consisting of 60%, 20% and 20% of the
boxes, respectively. The training subset was used to
Multiple Instance Ranking
Table 2. Hypothesis testing
CYP3A4 substrate
5.59 · 10−3
Synthetic-1
1.62 · 10−6
Synthetic-2
1.31 · 10−2
Synthetic-3
5.84 · 10−3
Synthetic-4
1.46 · 10−4
Census-16h
4.51 · 10−2
Census-16l
3.92 · 10−4
train both MIC and MIRank models for 19 values of
tradeoﬀparameter ν spread logarithmically over the
range [10−3, 106].
The model corresponding to the
value of ν that resulted in the best prediction accuracy over the validation set was retained, and a prediction using this model was obtained for the testing
subset. This process was repeated 32 times, and the
average performance across these 32 testing subsets is
reported in Table 1, along with the standard deviation
as a measure of spread.
All results in Table 1 are presented as a percentage
of boxes for which the preferred bag was accurately
predicted, allowing for 2 guesses per box, which is the
metric employed by Sheridan et al. . The algorithm tolerance τ deﬁned in Algorithm 1 was set to
For all datasets, the hypothesis that MIC and MIRank
results are statistically equal is dismissed using paired
t-testing at a 5% signiﬁcance level. The p-values are
reported in Table 2.
8. Discussion
The results of Section 7 make a strong case supporting
the hypothesis that these problems, when framed in a
multiple instance ranking paradigm, are better solved
by an algorithm that is designed to solve problems of
that paradigm over one that is not. Forcing MIRank
problems into a MIC paradigm was not as successful.
In other words, the improvement is due to choosing a
model that better ﬁts the problem.
The MIRank result for the CYP3A4 substrate dataset
reported in this paper compare favourably with existing approaches to hydrogen abstraction. It clearly
outperforms the results of Singh et al. . Their
results are reproducible and their reported error holds
on new molecules. Comparison with Sheridan et al.
 is more diﬃcult. Reproduction of their results
is challenging since since their descriptors are not public and the details of the learning and model selection
methods they used are not entirely clear.
Our descriptors attempt to reproduce those of Sheridan et al.
 , but could not be generated for all molecules.
Hence, we regard their results as optimistic.
A future controlled experiment is needed to fully compare the approaches of Sheridan et al.
 and
those of this paper.
This experiment would validate which descriptor set and modeling paradigm
application. To facilitate future investigations into MIRank
and hydrogen abstraction, the datasets and Matlab
source codes used in this paper are available from
 
9. Conclusion
This paper introduced a framework that tackles a
novel machine learning question arising from an important chemistry problem. A ﬁrst working algorithm
produces excellent results on it and other problems.
We believe that this ﬁrst paper for MIRank will generate future research into new algorithms and applications. This section explores several possible extensions.
In the chemistry domain, we often restrict ourselves to
sparse and linear models because model interpretability is a desired property in the particular application of
drug discovery. However, this interpretability analysis
is a paper of its own, and does not appear here.
Hydrogen abstraction is an important application of
MIRank modeling of great practical value for drug discovery. We are working to expand the eﬃcacy and applicability of the MIRank hydrogen abstraction models
in several ways. First, we are increasing the number of
molecules in the database of CYP3A4 substrates that
can be used to develop and test new MIRank models.
Second, we hope to build databases and models for new
substrates, such as CYP2D6 and CYP2C9. Third, we
are developing novel descriptors that are believed to
be indicative of hydrogen abstraction.
We are working to improve the MIRank modeling
paradigm and investigating other potential multiple
instance ranking problems. Reports here are limited
to the linear MIRank models, but as discussed the approach can be readily applied with nonlinear models
using kernel functions. Research is needed to investigate how modeling results are aﬀected by changing the
loss functions in the empirical risk and/or regularization terms of the optimization problem.
Finally, further improvements to the MIRank algo-
Multiple Instance Ranking
rithm are possible. More scalable and eﬃcient algorithms for ﬁnding locally optimal solutions could be
developed by exploiting recent developments in large
scale support vector machine algorithms. In addition,
integer programming or cutting plane algorithms could
be used to ﬁnd global minima of the optimization problem, but at much greater computational cost.
Acknowledgments
Charles Bergeron is under fellowship from the Fonds
qu´eb´ecois de la recherche sur la nature et les technologies. This work was done under, and all authors belong
to, the Rensselaer Exploratory Center for Cheminformatics Research (RECCR, reccr.chem.rpi.edu).