Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
ORDER-EMBEDDINGS OF IMAGES AND LANGUAGE
Ivan Vendrov, Ryan Kiros, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{vendrov,rkiros,fidler,urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu
Hypernymy, textual entailment, and image captioning can be seen as special cases
of a single visual-semantic hierarchy over words, sentences, and images. In this
paper we advocate for explicitly modeling the partial order structure of this hierarchy. Towards this goal, we introduce a general method for learning ordered representations, and show how it can be applied to a variety of tasks involving images
and language. We show that the resulting representations improve performance
over current approaches for hypernym prediction and image-caption retrieval.
INTRODUCTION
Computer vision and natural language processing are becoming increasingly intertwined. Recent
work in vision has moved beyond discriminating between a ﬁxed set of object classes, to automatically generating open-ended lingual descriptions of images . Recent methods
for natural language processing such as Young et al. learn the semantics of language by
grounding it in the visual world. Looking to the future, autonomous artiﬁcial agents will need to
jointly model vision and language in order to parse the visual world and communicate with people.
But what, precisely, is the relationship between images and the words or captions we use to describe
them? It is akin to the hypernym relation between words, and textual entailment among phrases:
captions are simply abstractions of images. In fact, all three relations can be seen as special cases
of a partial order over images and language, illustrated in Figure 1, which we refer to as the visualsemantic hierarchy. As a partial order, this relation is transitive: “woman walking her dog”, “woman
walking”, “person walking”, “person”, and “entity” are all valid abstractions of the rightmost image.
Our goal in this work is to learn representations that respect this partial order structure.
Figure 1: A slice of the visual-semantic hierarchy
Most recent approaches to modeling the hypernym, entailment, and image-caption relations involve
learning distributed representations or embeddings. This is a very powerful and general approach
which maps the objects of interest—words, phrases, images— to points in a high-dimensional vector
space. One line of work, exempliﬁed by Chopra et al. and ﬁrst applied to the caption-image
relationship by Socher et al. , requires the mapping to be distance-preserving: semantically
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
similar objects are mapped to points that are nearby in the embedding space. A symmetric distance
measure such as Euclidean or cosine distance is typically used. Since the visual-semantic hierarchy
is an antisymmetric relation, we expect this approach to introduce systematic model error.
Other approaches do not have such explicit constraints, learning a more-or-less general binary relation between the objects of interest, e.g. Bordes et al. ; Socher et al. ; Ma et al. .
Notably, no existing approach directly imposes the transitivity and antisymmetry of the partial order,
leaving the model to induce these properties from data.
In contrast, we propose to exploit the partial order structure of the visual-semantic hierarchy by
learning a mapping which is not distance-preserving but order-preserving between the visualsemantic hierarchy and a partial order over the embedding space. We call embeddings learned
in this way order-embeddings. This idea can be integrated into existing relational learning methods simply by replacing their comparison operation with ours. By modifying existing methods in
this way, we ﬁnd that order-embeddings provide a marked improvement over the state-of-art for
hypernymy prediction and caption-image retrieval, and near state-of-the-art performance for natural
language inference.
This paper is structured as follows. We begin, in Section 2, by giving a uniﬁed mathematical treatment of our tasks, and describing the general approach of learning order-embeddings. In the next
three sections we describe in detail the tasks we tackle, how we apply the order-embeddings idea
to each of them, and the results we obtain. The tasks are hypernym prediction (Section 3), captionimage retrieval (Section 4), and textual entailment (Section 5).
In the supplementary material, we visualize novel vector regularities that emerge in our learned
embeddings of images and language.
LEARNING ORDER-EMBEDDINGS
To unify our treatment of various tasks, we introduce the problem of partial order completion. In
partial order completion, we are given a set of positive examples P = {(u, v)} of ordered pairs
drawn from a partially ordered set (X, ⪯X), and a set of negative examples N which we know to
be unordered. Our goal is to predict whether an unseen pair (u′, v′) is ordered. Note that hypernym
prediction, caption-image retrieval, and textual entailment are all special cases of this task, since
they all involve classifying pairs of concepts in the (partially ordered) visual-semantic hierarchy.
We tackle this problem by learning a mapping from X into a partially ordered embedding space
(Y, ⪯Y ). The idea is to predict the ordering of an unseen pair in X based on its ordering in the
embedding space. This is possible only if the mapping satisﬁes the following crucial property:
Deﬁnition 1. A function f : (X, ⪯X) →(Y, ⪯Y ) is an order-embedding if for all u, v ∈X,
u ⪯X v if and only if f(u) ⪯Y f(v)
This deﬁnition implies that each combination of embedding space Y , order ⪯Y , and orderembedding f determines a unique completion of our data as a partial order ⪯X. In the following,
we ﬁrst consider the choice of Y and ⪯Y , and then discuss how to ﬁnd an appropriate f.
THE REVERSED PRODUCT ORDER ON RN
The choice of Y and ⪯Y is somewhat application-dependent. For the purpose of modeling the
semantic hierarchy, our choices are narrowed by the following considerations.
Much of the expressive power of human language comes from abstraction and composition. For any
two concepts, say “dog” and “cat”, we can name a concept that is an abstraction of the two, such
as “mammal”, as well as a concept that composes the two, such as “dog chasing cat”. So, in order
to represent the visual-semantic hierarchy, we need to choose an order ⪯Y that is rich enough to
embed these two relations.
We also restrict ourselves to orders ⪯Y with a top element, which is above every other element in the
order. In the visual-semantic hierarchy, this element represents the most general possible concept;
practically, it provides an anchor for the embedding.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Finally, we choose the embedding space Y to be continuous in order to allow optimization with
gradient-based methods.
A natural choice that satisﬁes all three properties is the reversed product order on RN
+, deﬁned by
the conjunction of total orders on each coordinate:
x ⪯y if and only if
for all vectors x, y with nonnegative coordinates. Note the reversal of direction: smaller coordinates
imply higher position in the partial order. The origin is then the top element of the order, representing
the most general concept.
Instead of viewing our embeddings as single points x ∈RN
+, we can also view them as sets {y :
x ⪯y}. The meaning of a word is then the union of all concepts of which it is a hypernym, and the
meaning of a sentence is the union of all sentences that entail it. The visual-semantic hierarchy can
then be seen as a special case of the subset relation, a connection also used by Young et al. .
PENALIZING ORDER VIOLATIONS
Having ﬁxed the embedding space and order, we now consider the problem of ﬁnding an orderembedding into this space. In practice, the order embedding condition (Deﬁnition 1) is too restrictive
to impose as a hard constraint. Instead, we aim to ﬁnd an approximate order-embedding: a mapping
which violates the order-embedding condition, imposed as a soft constraint, as little as possible.
More precisely, we deﬁne a penalty that measures the degree to which a pair of points violates the
product order. In particular, we deﬁne the penalty for an ordered pair (x, y) of points in RN
E(x, y) = || max(0, y −x)||2
Crucially, E(x, y) = 0
x ⪯y according to the reversed product order; if the order is not
satisﬁed, E(x, y) is positive. This effectively imposes a strong prior on the space of relations, encouraging our learned relation to satisfy the partial order properties of transitivity and antisymmetry.
This penalty is key to our method. Throughout the remainder of the paper, we will use it where
previous work has used symmetric distances or learned comparison operators.
Recall that P and N are our positive and negative examples, respectively. Then, to learn an approximate order-embedding f, we could use a max-margin loss which encourages positive examples to
have zero penalty, and negative examples to have penalty greater than a margin:
E(f(u), f(v)) +
max{0, α −E(f(u′), f(v′))}
In practice we are often not given negative examples, in which case this loss admits the trivial
solution of mapping all objects to the same point. The best way of dealing with this problem depends
on the application, so we will describe task-speciﬁc variations of the loss in the next several sections.
HYPERNYM PREDICTION
To test the ability of our model to learn partial orders from incomplete data, our ﬁrst task is to predict
withheld hypernym pairs in WordNet . A hypernym pair is a pair of concepts where
the ﬁrst concept is a specialization or an instance of the second, e.g., (woman, person) or (New York,
city). Our setup differs signiﬁcantly from previous work in that we use only the WordNet hierarchy
as training data. The most similar evaluation has been that of Baroni et al. , who use external
linguistic data in the form of distributional semantic vectors. Bordes et al. and Socher et al.
 also evaluate on the WordNet hierarchy, but they use other relations in WordNet as training
data (and external linguistic data, in Socher’s case).
Additionally, the latter two consider only direct hypernyms, rather than the full, transitive hypernymy relation. But predicting the transitive hypernym relation is a better-deﬁned problem because
individual hypernym edges in WordNet vary dramatically in the degree of abstraction they require.
For instance, (person, organism) is a direct hypernym pair, but it takes eight hypernym edges to get
from cat to organism.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
LOSS FUNCTION
To apply order-embeddings to hypernymy, we follow the setup of Socher et al. in learning
an N-dimensional vector for each concept in WordNet, but we replace their neural tensor network
with our order-violation penalty deﬁned in Eq. (2). Just like them, we corrupt each hypernym pair
by replacing one of the two concepts with a randomly chosen concept, and use these corrupted
pairs as negative examples for both training and evaluation. We use their max-margin loss, which
encourages the order-violation penalty to be zero for positive examples, and greater than a margin α
for negative examples: X
(u,v)∈W ordNet
E(f(u), f(v)) + max{0, α −E(f(u′), f(v′))}
where E is our order-violation penalty, and (u′, v′) is a corrupted version of (u, v). Since we learn
an independent embedding for each concept, the mapping f is simply a lookup table.
The transitive closure of the WordNet hierarchy gives us 838073 edges between 82192 concepts in
WordNet. Like Bordes et al. , we randomly select 4000 edges for the test split, and another
4000 for the development set. Note that the majority of test set edges can be inferred simply by
applying transitivity, giving us a strong baseline.
DETAILS OF TRAINING
We learn a 50-dimensional nonnegative vector for each concept in WordNet using the max-margin
objective (4) with margin α = 1, sampling 500 true and 500 false hypernym pairs in each batch. We
train for 30-50 epochs using the Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.01 and
early stopping on the validation set. During evaluation, we ﬁnd the optimal classiﬁcation threshold
on the validation set, then apply it to the test set.
2-dim order-embedding of a
small subset of the WordNet hypernym relation. All the true hypernym pairs (green arrows) are correctly embedded, but two spurious pairs (pink arrows), are introduced.
Only direct hypernyms are shown.
Since our setup is novel, there are no published numbers
to compare to. We therefore compare three variants of our
model to two baselines, with results shown in Table 1.
The transitive closure baseline involves no learning; it
simply classiﬁes hypernyms pairs as positive if they are
in the transitive closure of the union of edges in the training and validation sets. The word2gauss baseline evaluates the approach of Vilnis & McCallum to represent words as Gaussian densities rather than points in
the embedding space. This allows a natural representation of hierarchies using the KL divergence. We used
50-dimensional diagonal Gaussian embeddings, trained
for 200 epochs on a max-margin objective with margin
7, chosen by grid search1.
order-embeddings (symmetric) is our full model, but
using symmetric cosine distance instead of our asymmetric penalty. order-embeddings (bilinear) replaces our
penalty with the bilinear model used by Socher et al.
 . order-embeddings is our full model.
Only our full model can do better than the transitive baseline, showing the value of exploiting partial
order structure in contrast to using symmetric similarity or learning a general binary relation as most
previous work and our bilinear baseline do.
The resulting 50-dimensional embeddings are difﬁcult to visualize. To give some intuition for the
structure being learned, Figure 2 shows the results of a toy 2D experiment.
1We used the code of 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Accuracy (%)
transitive closure
word2gauss
order-embeddings (symmetric)
order-embeddings (bilinear)
order-embeddings
Table 1: Binary classiﬁcation accuracy on 4000 withheld edges from WordNet.
CAPTION-IMAGE RETRIEVAL
The caption-image retrieval task has become a standard evaluation of joint models of vision and
language . The task involves ranking a large dataset of
images by relevance for a query caption (Image Retrieval), and ranking captions by relevance for
a query image (Caption Retrieval). Given a set of aligned image-caption pairs as training data, the
goal is then to learn a caption-image compatibility score S(c, i) to be used at test time.
Many modern approaches model the caption-image relationship symmetrically, either by embedding
into a common “visual-semantic” space with inner-product similarity , or by using Canonical Correlations Analysis between distributed representations of
images and captions . While Karpathy & Li and Plummer et al. 
model a ﬁner-grained alignment between regions in the image and segments of the caption, the
similarity they use is still symmetric. An alternative is to learn an unconstrained binary relation,
either with a neural language model conditioned on the image or using a multimodal CNN .
In contrast to these lines of work, we propose to treat the caption-image pairs as a two-level partial
order with captions above the images they describe, and let
S(c, i) = −E(fi(i), fc(c))
with E our order-violation penalty deﬁned in Eq (2), and fc, fi are embedding functions from captions and images into RN
LOSS FUNCTION
To facilitate comparison, we use the same pairwise ranking loss that Socher et al. , Kiros et al.
 and Karpathy & Li have used on this task—simply replacing their symmetric similarity measure with our asymmetric order-violation penalty. This loss function encourages S(c, i) for
ground truth caption-image pairs to be greater than that for all other pairs, by a margin:
max{0, α −S(c, i) + S(c′, i)} +
max{0, α −S(c, i) + S(c, i′)}
where (c, i) is a ground truth caption-image pair, c′ goes over captions that no describe i, and i′ goes
over image not described by c.
IMAGE AND CAPTION EMBEDDINGS
To learn fc and fi, we use the approach of Kiros et al. except, since we are embedding into
+, we constrain the embedding vectors to have nonnegative entries by taking their absolute value.
Thus, to embed images, we use
fi(i) = |Wi · CNN(i)|
where Wi is a learned N × 4096 matrix, N being the dimensionality of the embedding space.
CNN(i) is the same image feature used by Klein et al. : we rescale images to have smallest
side 256 pixels, we take 224 × 224 crops from the corners, center, and their horizontal reﬂections,
run the 10 crops through the 19-layer VGG network of Simonyan & Zisserman (weights
pre-trained on ImageNet and ﬁxed during training), and average their fc7 features.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Caption Retrieval
Image Retrieval
1k Test Images
MNLM 
m-RNN 
DVSA 
FV 
m-CNN 
order-embeddings (reversed)
order-embeddings (1-crop)
order-embeddings (symm.)
order-embeddings
5k Test Images
order-embeddings (symm.)
order-embeddings
Table 2: Results of caption-image retrieval evaluation on COCO. R@K is Recall@K, in %. Med r
is median rank. Metrics for our models on 1k test images are averages over ﬁve 1000-image splits of
the 5000-image test set, as in . Best results overall are in bold; best results using
1-crop VGG features are underlined.
To embed the captions, we use a recurrent neural net encoder with GRU activations , so fc(c) = |GRU(c)|, the absolute value of hidden state after processing the last word.
We evaluate on the Microsoft COCO dataset , which has over 120,000 images,
each with at least ﬁve human-annotated captions per image. This is by far the largest dataset commonly used for caption-image retrieval. We use the data splits of Karpathy & Li for training
(113,287 images), validation (5000 images), and test (5000 images).
DETAILS OF TRAINING
To train the model, we use the standard pairwise ranking objective from Eq. (5). We sample minibatches of 128 random image-caption pairs, and draw all contrastive terms from the minibatch,
giving us 127 contrastive images for each caption and captions for each image. We train for 15-30
epochs using the Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001, and early stopping on the validation set.
We set the dimension of the embedding space and the GRU hidden state N to 1024, the dimension of
the learned word embeddings to 300, and the margin α to 0.05. All these hyperparameters, as well
as the learning rate and batchsize, were selected using the validation set. For consistency with Kiros
et al. and to mitigate overﬁtting, we constrain the caption and image embeddings to have unit
L2 norm. This constraint implies that no two points can be exactly ordered with zero order-violation
penalty, but since we use a ranking loss, only the relative size of the penalties matters.
Given a query caption or image, we sort all the images or captions of the test set in order of increasing
penalty. We use standard ranking metrics for evaluation. We measure Recall@K, the percent of
queries for which the GT term is one of the ﬁrst K retrieved; and median and mean rank, which are
statistics over the position of the GT term in the retrieval order.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Table 2 shows a comparison between all state-of-the-art and some older methods2 along with our
own; see Ma et al. for a more complete listing.
The best results overall are in bold, and the best results using 1-crop VGG image features are underlined. Note that the comparison is additionally complicated by the following:
• m-CNNENS is an ensemble of four different models, whereas the other entries are all
single models.
• STV and FV use external text corpora to learn their language features, whereas the other
methods learn them from scratch.
To facilitate the comparison and to evaluate the contributions of various components of our model,
we evaluate four variations of order-embeddings:
order-embeddings is our full model as described above.
order-embeddings (reversed) reverses the order of captions and image embeddings in our orderviolation penalty—placing images above captions in the partial order learned by our model. This
seemingly slight variation performs atrociously, conﬁrming our prior that captions are much more
abstract than images, and should be placed higher in the semantic hierarchy.
order-embeddings (1-crop) computes the image feature using just the center crop, instead of averaging over 10 crops.
order-embeddings (symm.) replaces our asymmetric penalty with the symmetric cosine distance,
and allows embedding coordinates to be negative—essentially replicating MNLM, but with better
image features. Here we ﬁnd that a different margin (α = 0.2) works best.
Between these four models, the only previous work whose results are incommensurable with ours is
DVSA, since it uses the less discriminative CNN of Krizhevsky et al. but 20 region features
instead of a single whole-image feature.
Aside from this limitation, and if only single models are considered, order-embeddings signiﬁcantly
outperform the state-of-art approaches for image retrieval even when we control for image features.
EXPLORATION
Why would order-embeddings do well on such a shallow partial order? Why are they much more
helpful for image retrieval than for caption retrieval?
Intuitively, symmetric similarity should fail when an image has captions with very different levels
of detail, because the captions are so dissimilar that it is impossible to map both their embeddings
close to the same image embedding. Order-embeddings don’t have this problem: the less detailed
caption can be embedded very far away from the image while remaining above it in the partial order.
To evaluate this intuition, we use caption length as a proxy for level of detail and select, among pairs
of co-referring captions in our validation set, the 100 pairs with the biggest length difference. For
image retrieval with 1000 target images, the mean rank over captions in this set is 6.4 for orderembeddings and 9.7 for cosine similarity, a much bigger difference than over the entire dataset.
Some particularly dramatic examples of this are shown in Figure 3. Moreover, if we use the shorter
caption as a query, and retrieve captions in order of increasing error, the mean rank of the longer
caption is 34.0 for order-embeddings and 47.6 for cosine similarity, showing that order-embeddings
are able to capture the relatedness of co-referring captions with very different lengths.
This also explains why order-embeddings provide a much smaller improvement for caption retrieval
than for image retrieval: all the caption retrieval metrics are based on the position of the ﬁrst ground
truth caption in the retrieval order, so the embeddings need only learn to retrieve one of each image’s
ﬁve captions well, which symmetric similarity is well suited for.
2Note that the numbers for MNLM come not from the published paper but from the recently released code
at 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Image rank
a sitting area with furniture and ﬂowers makes a backdrop for a boy with headphones sitting in the foreground at one of the chairs at a dining table that holds
glasses and a handbag working at a laptop
a kid is wearing headphone while on a laptop
view of top of a white building with tan speckled area
an uncovered awning with a pigeon in ﬁght below and
a red umbrella behind balcony wall
a pigeon ﬂying near white beams of a building
Figure 3: Images with captions of very different lengths, and the rank of the GT image when using
each caption as a query.
TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT / NATURAL LANGUAGE INFERENCE
Natural language inference can be seen as a generalization of hypernymy from words to sentences.
For example, from “woman walking her dog in a park” we can infer both “woman walking her dog”
and “dog in a park”, but not ”old woman” or ”black dog”. Given a pair of sentences, our task is to
predict whether we can infer the second sentence (the hypothesis) from the ﬁrst (the premise).
LOSS FUNCTION
To apply order-embeddings to this task, we again view it as partial order completion—we can infer
a hypothesis from a premise exactly when the hypothesis is above the premise in the visual-semantic
hierarchy.
Unlike our other tasks, for which we had to generate contrastive negatives, datasets for natural
language inference include labeled negative examples. So, we can simply use a max-margin loss:
E(f(p), f(h)) +
max{0, α −E(f(p′), f(h′))}
where (p, h) are positive and (p′, h′) negative pairs of premise and hypothesis. To embed sentences,
we use the same GRU encoder as in the caption-image retrieval task.
To evaluate order-embeddings on the natural language inference task, we use the recently proposed
SNLI corpus , which contains 570,000 pairs of sentences, each labeled with
“entailment” if the inference is valid, “contradiction” if the two sentences contradict, or “neutral”
if the inference is invalid but there is no contradiction. Our method only allows us to discriminate between entailment and non-entailment, so we merge the “contradiction” and “neutral” classes
together to serve as our negative examples.
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Just as for caption-image ranking, we set the dimensions of the embedding space and GRU hidden
state to be 1024, the dimension of the word embeddings to be 300, and constrain the embeddings to
have unit L2 norm. We train for 10 epochs with batches of 128 sentence pairs. We use the Adam
optimizer with learning rate 0.001 and early stopping on the validation set. During evaluation, we
ﬁnd the optimal classiﬁcation threshold on validation, then use the threshold to classify the test set.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Neural Attention 
EOP classiﬁer 
skip-thoughts
order-embeddings (symmetric)
order-embeddings
Table 3: Test accuracy (%) on SNLI.
The state-of-the-art method for 3-class classiﬁcation on SNLI is that of Rockt¨aschel et al. .
Unfortunately, they do not compute 2-class accuracy, so we cannot compare to them directly.
As a bridge to facilitate comparison, we use a challenging baseline which can be evaluated on both
the 2-class and 3-class problems. The baseline, referred to as skip-thoughts, involves a feedforward neural network on top of skip-thought vectors , a state-of-the-art semantic
representation of sentences. Given pairs of sentence vectors u and v, the input to the network is
the concatenation of u, v and the absolute difference |u −v|. We tuned the number of layers, layer
dimensionality and dropout rates to optimize performance on the development set, using the Adam
optimizer. Batch normalization and PReLU units were
used. Our best network used 2 hidden layers of 1000 units each, with dropout rate of 0.5 across both
the input and hidden layers. We did not backpropagate through the skip-thought encoder.
We also evaluate against EOP classiﬁer, a 2-class baseline introduced by ,
and against a version of our model where our order-violation penalty is replaced with the symmetric
cosine distance, order-embeddings (symmetric).
The results for all models are shown in Table 3. We see that order-embeddings outperform the skipthought baseline despite not using external text corpora. While our method is almost certainly worse
than the state-of-the-art method of Rockt¨aschel et al. , which uses a word-by-word attention
mechanism, it is also much simpler.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We introduced a simple method to encode order into learned distributed representations, which allows us to explicitly model the partial order structure of the visual-semantic hierarchy. Our method
can be easily integrated into existing relational learning methods, as we demonstrated on three challenging tasks involving computer vision and natural language processing. On two of these tasks,
hypernym prediction and caption-image retrieval, our methods outperform all previous work.
A promising direction of future work is to learn better classiﬁers on ImageNet ,
which has over 21k image classes arranged by the WordNet hierarchy. Previous approaches, including Frome et al. and Norouzi et al. have embedded words and images into a shared
semantic space with symmetric similarity—which our experiments suggest to be a poor ﬁt with the
partial order structure of WordNet. We expect signiﬁcant progress on ImageNet classiﬁcation, and
the related problems of one-shot and zero-shot learning, to be possible using order-embeddings.
Going further, order-embeddings may enable learning the entire semantic hierarchy in a single model
which jointly reasons about hypernymy, entailment, and the relationship between perception and
language, unifying what have been until now almost independent lines of work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Kaustav Kundu for many fruitful discussions throughout the development of this paper.
The work was supported in part by an NSERC Graduate Scholarship.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016