APS/123-QED
Quantum Simulation
I. M. Georgescu∗
CEMS, RIKEN, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan
S. Ashhab†
Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute, Doha, Qatar
Franco Nori‡
Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1040, USA
Department of Physics, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
 
Simulating quantum mechanics is known to be a diﬃcult computational problem, especially when
dealing with large systems. However, this diﬃculty may be overcome by using some controllable
quantum system to study another less controllable or accessible quantum system, i.e., quantum
simulation. Quantum simulation promises to have applications in the study of many problems
in, e.g., condensed-matter physics, high-energy physics, atomic physics, quantum chemistry and
cosmology. Quantum simulation could be implemented using quantum computers, but also with
simpler, analog devices that would require less control, and therefore, would be easier to construct. A number of quantum systems such as neutral atoms, ions, polar molecules, electrons in
semiconductors, superconducting circuits, nuclear spins and photons have been proposed as quantum simulators. This review outlines the main theoretical and experimental aspects of quantum
simulation and emphasizes some of the challenges and promises of this fast-growing ﬁeld.
PACS numbers: 03.65.-w, 03.67.Ac
I. Introduction
II. The problem
III. Deﬁnitions
IV. Digital and analog quantum simulation
A. Digital quantum simulation (DQS)
B. Analog quantum simulation (AQS)
C. Quantum-information-inspired algorithms for the
classical simulation of quantum systems
V. Resource estimation and fault tolerance
A. Resource estimation
B. Decoherence and errors
VI. Physical realizations
A. Atoms and ions
B. Nuclear and electronic spins
C. Superconducting circuits
D. Photons
E. Other systems
F. Current state of the art
∗I. M. Georgescu was the lead author of the ﬁrst version of the
manuscript. Subsequent revisions were made mainly by S. Ashhab
and F. Nori.
†Electronic address: 
‡Electronic address: 
VII. Applications
A. Condensed-matter physics
1. Hubbard model
2. Spin models
3. Quantum phase transitions
4. Disordered and frustrated systems
5. Spin glasses
6. Superconductivity
7. Metamaterials
8. Topological order
B. High-energy physics
C. Cosmology
D. Atomic physics
E. Quantum chemistry
F. Open quantum systems
G. Quantum chaos
H. Nuclear physics
I. Interferometry
J. Other applications
VIII. Concluding remarks
Acknowledgments
References
I. INTRODUCTION
“Let the computer itself be built of quantum
mechanical elements which obey quantum mechanical laws.” .
 
Thirty years ago, in the early 1980s, it had become
clear that simulating quantum mechanics is a very challenging problem . One obvious diﬃculty is the huge amount of computer memory
needed to store the quantum state of a large physical system. This state is described by a number of parameters
that grows exponentially with the system size (which is
generally deﬁned as the number of particles or degrees
of freedom in the system). In particular, one needs to
keep track of the probability amplitudes for all the possible classical conﬁgurations of the system. Furthermore,
simulating the temporal evolution of the system requires
a number of operations that also increases exponentially
with the size of the system. This exponential explosion is
unavoidable, unless approximation methods (e.g. Monte
Carlo methods) are used.
However, depending on the
speciﬁcs of the problem under study, good approximations are not always available or they also face some limitations. Therefore, the simulation of quantum systems
in general remains a hard task even for today’s supercomputers.
A proposed solution to this problem came in the new
type of computer envisaged by Richard Feynman — the quantum computer. In fact, as has
become clear over the past three decades, a quantum
computer promises to do much more than simulating
quantum mechanics, and today quantum computation
and quantum information theory are very active research
ﬁelds ).
Feynman realized at the time that a quantum machine
would itself experience an exponential explosion, but
with good consequences. The machine would have the
capacity to contain an exponentially large amount of information without using an exponentially large amount
of physical resources, thus making it a natural tool to
perform quantum simulation. Despite the great importance of his insight, however, he was not very speciﬁc
about how his proposed quantum mechanical computer
was supposed to function or how the simulation itself
would be realized, as can be seen from the quote given
at the beginning of this section: “Let the computer itself be built of quantum mechanical elements which obey
quantum mechanical laws. ” .
More than a decade later, it was shown 
that a quantum computer (i.e., an ensemble of welldeﬁned qubits that can be initialized, measured and on
which universal quantum gates can be performed) can
indeed act as a universal quantum simulator. Here, the
word universal refers to the fact that, except for changes
in the programs that it runs, the same machine is capable of tackling vastly diﬀerent problems. However, a
quantum computer (as deﬁned above) is not necessarily required for implementing quantum simulation. Simpler quantum devices that mimic the evolution of other
quantum systems in an analog manner could be used for
this task (note that these are not universal simulators,
but rather problem-speciﬁc machines). It is therefore expected that practical quantum simulation will become a
reality well before full-ﬂedged quantum computers.
In recent years, the interest in quantum simulation has
been growing rapidly, and the reason for this is twofold.
First, there are a large number of potential applications
of quantum simulation in physics, chemistry and even biology. Second, the technologies required for the coherent
control of quantum systems have matured enough to allow for the physical implementation of practical quantum
simulation in the very near future. In fact, some proofof-principle experiments on quantum simulation have already been realized ).
Quantum simulation will provide a valuable tool that
researchers from numerous ﬁelds will wish to add to their
toolbox of research methods. For instance, in condensedmatter physics, quantum simulation would allow the
study of many diﬃcult problems, such as quantum phase
transitions, quantum magnetism or high-Tc superconductivity.
Other potential application areas include highenergy physics, quantum chemistry, cosmology and nuclear physics.
With the latest advances in the coherent manipulation
of quantum systems , such as atoms in optical lattices, trapped ions,
nuclear spins, superconducting circuits, or spins in semiconductors, practical applications of quantum simulation
can be expected in the coming years. Several research
groups are now actively aiming at the experimental realization of quantum simulators with tens of qubits, which
would be the ﬁrst practical applications in which quantum computers outperform their classical counterparts.
There is by now a sizable literature on quantum simulation, especially papers published in the past decade.
However, besides the brief overview of quantum simulators in and the specialized reviews focused on cold atoms , ions
 , photons
 , superconducting circuits and quantum chemistry , a global review of the ﬁeld
is missing.
Moreover, a comprehensive, pedagogic introduction to the subject would beneﬁt researchers just
entering the ﬁeld, as well as those already working on
quantum simulation and looking for a quick reference
guide. Since quantum simulation is a subject of interest to a broad audience, this review attempts to provide
a self-contained description of the current status of theoretical and experimental research on the subject. However, given the breadth of the topics touched by quantum
simulation, not all technical details can be provided here,
and the reader is directed to the relevant references instead.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Sections II–V discuss in some detail the basic theory.
Readers interested only in the physical implementations
of quantum simulation can concentrate on Section VI,
while those interested in the applications of quantum
simulation can concentrate on Section VII. Tables I, II
and III provide quick reference guides for the content of
Sections VI and VII. In Section VIII we discuss the challenges and prospects of quantum simulation.
II. THE PROBLEM
“The rule of simulation that I would like to
have is that the number of computer elements
required to simulate a large physical system
is only to be proportional to the space-time
volume of the physical system. I don’t want
to have an explosion.” 
Let us consider a rather general quantum simulation
problem, namely that of ﬁnding the state of a quantum system described by the wavefunction |φ⟩at some
time t and computing the value of some physical quantity of interest.
Focusing for simplicity on timeindependent Hamiltonians (denoted H), the solution of
the Schr¨odinger equation:
dt |φ⟩= H |φ⟩
is given by |φ(t)⟩= exp{−iℏHt} |φ(0)⟩. In order to compute |φ(t)⟩numerically, it is ﬁrst necessary to discretize
the problem such that it can be encoded in the computer
memory. As mentioned earlier, the amount of memory
required for representing quantum systems grows exponentially with the system size, and so does the number
of operations required to simulate the time evolution.
For instance, representing the state of N spin-1/2 particles requires 2N numbers (namely the complex probability amplitudes for the diﬀerent spin conﬁgurations),
and this is without including the particles’ motional degrees of freedom. Calculating the time evolution of this
system requires exponentiating a 2N ×2N matrix. Let us
take the standard “threshold” N = 40 frequently cited
in the literature ). This
implies storing 240 ≈1012 numbers for |φ⟩(For the moment, we will not worry about the Hamiltonian with its
240 × 240 ≈1024 matrix elements, because for realistic
physical problems the Hamiltonian has a very regular
structure and just encoding it in the computer memory
does not suﬀer form the exponential-explosion problem).
Assuming single precision, about ∼3.2 × 1013 bits, that
is 4 TB (terabytes), are required to represent the spin
state of 40 particles in a computer memory. In order to
put this in perspective, the US Library of Congress has
almost 160 TB of data. Double the number of spins, and
∼3.8×1025 bits (or 5×1012 TB) would be required. This
is roughly ten thousand times more than the amount of
information stored by humankind in 2007, which was estimated to be 2.4 × 1021 bits .
Classical stochastic methods, namely Monte Carlo algorithms , have been developed as a way
of tackling the diﬃcult problem of simulating large quantum systems.
These methods allow the evaluation of
phase space integrals for many-body problems in a time
that scales polynomially with the number of particles.
Such stochastic methods generally work well when the
functions being integrated do not change sign (and ideally vary slowly with respect to the relevant variables),
such that sampling the function at a relatively small number of points gives a good approximation to the integral
of the function. For some quantum systems, especially
fermionic and frustrated systems, the numerical evaluation of the integrals encounters the problem of sampling
with non-positive-semideﬁnite weight functions, which is
the so-called sign problem [see, e.g. ]. This results in an exponential growth of the statistical error, and hence the required simulation time,
with the number of particles, which cancels the advantage of the Monte Carlo methods. Other methods of solving quantum many-body problems such as density functional theory, mean-ﬁeld theories, many-body perturbation theories or Green’s function-based methods, coupled
clusters, etc., ) have similar validity criteria that
restrict their applicability to well-behaved systems.
III. DEFINITIONS
The alternative simulation method initially proposed
by Feynman, i.e., quantum simulation, can be loosely de-
ﬁned as simulating a quantum system by quantum mechanical means. This very general deﬁnition allows us to
include three types of simulation:
• Digital quantum simulation
• Analog quantum simulation
• Quantum-information-inspired algorithms for the
classical simulation of quantum systems
These will be discussed in some detail in the following
By quantum simulator, we understand a controllable
quantum system used to simulate/emulate other quantum
systems ).
Let us denote the state of the simulated system by |φ⟩.
The system evolves from the initial state |φ(0)⟩to |φ(t)⟩
via the unitary transformation U
= exp{−iℏHsyst},
where Hsys is the Hamiltonian of the system. The quantum simulator is a controllable system: the initial state
|ψ(0)⟩can be prepared, the desired unitary evolution
U ′ = exp{−iℏHsimt}, with Hsim being the controllable
Hamiltonian of the simulator, can be engineered, and the
ﬁnal state |ψ(t)⟩can be measured. If a mapping between
the system and the simulator (i.e., between |φ(0)⟩and
|ψ(0)⟩, and between |φ(t)⟩and |ψ(t)⟩, exists, then the
FIG. 1 (color online) Schematic representation of a quantum
system and a corresponding quantum simulator. The quantum state |φ(0)⟩evolves to |φ(t)⟩via the unitary transformation U = exp{−iℏHsyst}. The quantum simulator evolves
from the state |ψ(0)⟩to |ψ(t)⟩via U ′ = exp{−iℏHsimt}. The
simulator is designed such that there is a mapping between the
simulator and the simulated system, in particular the mappings |φ(0)⟩↔|ψ(0)⟩, |φ(t)⟩↔|ψ(t)⟩and U ↔U ′. While
the simulated system may not be controllable (or not experimentally accessible in some cases), the quantum simulator
is. Namely, the initial state |ψ(0)⟩can be prepared, the unitary evolution U ′ can be engineered, and the ﬁnal state |ψ(t)⟩
can be measured. The result of this measurement provides
information about the simulated system. The color arrows
denote the controllable operations.
The solid black arrows
describe the time evolution of the system and the simulator.
The dashed arrows indicate the correspondence between the
quantum states of the simulator and the simulated system.
system can be simulated.
The basic idea of quantum
simulation is represented schematically in Figure 1.
IV. DIGITAL AND ANALOG QUANTUM SIMULATION
The advantage of quantum simulators over classical
devices is that, being quantum systems themselves, they
are capable of storing large amounts of information in a
relatively small amount of physical space. For example,
the storage capacity of N qubits is exponentially larger
than that of N classical bits. Going back to the example given in the previous section, the quantum state of
N = 40 spin-1/2 particles, which would require a 4TB
classical memory register, can be represented by a 40qubit (i.e. 5-quantum-byte) register. If the time evolution of the simulator reproduces the time evolution of
the simulated system, the desired ﬁnal state can be obtained without the need for numerically exponentiating
a 2N × 2N matrix. This sounds very promising, but the
quantum simulation problem is not really solved unless
the initial state preparation, the implementation of the
time evolution and the measurement are realized using
only polynomial resources. The importance of measurement must be stressed because the success of quantum
simulation ultimately depends on the ability to extract
useful information from the simulator. As will be discussed later, these are not easy tasks, even for quantum
simulators.
A. Digital quantum simulation (DQS)
We consider the well-known circuit model for quantum computation . First, the
wavefunction |φ⟩has to be encoded using the computational basis, i.e., as a superposition of binary bit strings.
A very simple example is the simulation of spin-1/2 particles. Each particle is represented by a qubit: the spin-up
state |↑⟩is encoded as the qubit state |1⟩, and the spindown state |↓⟩as |0⟩. For example, the three-spin state
|φ⟩= |↑↑↓⟩is represented in the simulator by |ψ⟩= |110⟩.
In order to obtain |ψ(t)⟩= exp{−iℏHt} |ψ(0)⟩, U =
exp{−iℏHt} must be applied to the initial state. The
complicated many-qubit unitary transformation U is
implemented through the application of a sequence of
single- and two-qubit gates (we will come back and discuss the decomposition of U into these simple gates
shortly). Such a circuit-based quantum simulation recreating the evolution |ψ(0)⟩→|ψ(t)⟩is usually referred
to as digital quantum simulation (DQS). Some of the
representative studies on DQS are .
Since any unitary operation can be written in terms of
universal quantum gates, it follows that in principle “anything” can be simulated, i.e. DQS is universal . However, it must be noted that not any unitary
operation can be eﬃciently simulated (that is with polynomial resources) and, therefore, there are Hamiltonians
that cannot be eﬃciently simulated in this way.
Nevertheless, it is possible to eﬃciently simulate any ﬁnitedimensional local Hamiltonian. This is particularly important since all local spin systems, and all Hamiltonians
that can be eﬃciently mapped to such systems, are included in this class.
In other words, although not all
mathematically allowed Hamiltonians can be simulated
eﬃciently, those that appear in most physical theories
can be simulated eﬃciently. Note that ﬁnding an eﬃcient
decomposition in terms of universal gates can in itself be
a diﬃcult problem .
Furthermore, it must be stressed that the implemented unitary
operation (i.e. that obtained from the decomposition into
single- and two-qubit gates) is generally an approximation of the desired unitary evolution. In principle, this
approximation can be made arbitrarily accurate (by re-
ﬁning the decomposition), but this comes at the cost of
an ever-increasing number of gates.
Although DQS algorithms rely on applying a time-
FIG. 2 Initial state preparation. Quantum circuit for the recursive procedure used to ﬁnd an eﬃcient gate sequence for
preparing a given target state |ψT (n, 1)⟩of one electron occupying n possible orbitals. The procedure uses reverse engineering, where one considers the problem of transforming the
target state to the initial state |0⟩⊗n. This reverse problem
allows an intuitive, systematic solution.
Once the solution
of this inverse problem is found, it can be inverted in order
to prepare the target state |ψT (n, 1)⟩from the initial state
|0⟩⊗n. The unitary operations ˜H and ˜H′ can be calculated
easily from the given target state: each one of them transforms the known state of the corresponding qubit to |0⟩. The
unitary operation Q(n −2, 1) transforms |ψT (n −2, 1)⟩into
|0⟩⊗(n−2) ).
ordered sequence of gates, thus implementing a unitary
evolution of the simulator, DQS is not restricted to recreating the temporal evolution of the simulated system.
Applications of DQS also include obtaining certain properties of a given quantum system , or computing partition
functions ). Moreover, according to it should also be possible to use
quantum computers to simulate classical physics more
eﬃciently ⟩, unitary evolution U and the ﬁnal
measurement. These steps will be discussed in detail in
the remainder of this subsections (see also (Brown et al.,
Initial state preparation — The ﬁrst step of the
simulation is to initialize the quantum register to the
state |ψ(0)⟩. In many cases the preparation of the initial state is diﬃcult and an eﬃcient algorithm may not
be available. Fortunately, for particular cases of interest eﬃcient state preparation is possible. For example,
a method for generating a state that encodes the antisymmetrized many-particle state of fermions (including all the possible permutations), starting from an unsymmetrized state (e.g. |000 · · · 0⟩), with polynomial resources was given in .
preparation of N-particle fermionic states of the form:
where |vac⟩is the vacuum state and b†
j and bj are the
fermionic creation and annihilation operators, was discussed in . A quantum algorithm for the eﬃcient preparation
of physically realistic quantum states on a lattice (arbitrary pure or mixed many-particle states with an arbitrary number of particles) was proposed in , while in it was shown that
most commonly used chemical wave functions can be ef-
ﬁciently prepared. A quantum algorithm for preparing
a pure state of a molecular system with a given number
m of electrons occupying a given number n of spin orbitals that exhibits polynomial scaling in m (regardless
of n) was proposed in (see Figure 2).
In a state-preparation algorithm that
incorporates quantum simulation was proposed: the time
evolution of the quantum system is simulated including
the interaction with ancilla, i.e. auxiliary, qubits that can
inject or absorb any speciﬁed amount of energy from the
system, thus preparing any desired energy eigenstate.
Unitary evolution — Let us now discuss in some
more detail how to obtain U. We assume that the Hamiltonian can be written as a sum of many terms that describe local interactions:
Examples of Hamiltonians of this form include the Hubbard and Ising Hamiltonians. If [Hl, Hl′] = 0 for all l and
exp{−iℏHlt}.
In this case, the decomposition of U into a sequence of local gates is straightforward. Unfortunately, in most cases
of practical interest [Hl, Hl′] ̸= 0 in general. As a result,
when taken as a whole, the decomposition of U cannot
be obtained eﬃciently using classical methods. An important step in this regard is breaking up the evolution
time into a large number of small time steps of duration
U = (exp{−iℏH∆t})t/∆t .
There are approximations available for decomposing
exp{−iℏH∆t} into local gates. For example, the ﬁrstorder Trotter formula ) gives
U(∆t) = e−iℏP
e−iℏHl∆t + O((∆t)2).
As a result, when ∆t →0,
exp{−iℏHl∆t}.
The drawback of this approach is that high accuracy
comes at the cost of very small ∆t and therefore a
very large number of quantum gates.
Recent results
have re-emphasized the shortcomings of using this ﬁrstorder Trotter formula 
in order to achieve the desired eﬀective Hamiltonian .
2009a; Whitﬁeld et al., 2011), showing that higher-order
decompositions can be more eﬃcient ). Recently quantum algorithms for simulating time-dependent Hamiltonian evolutions on a quantum computer have also been investigated . The topic was further discussed in where it was shown that using randomness, it is
possible to eﬃciently simulate local bounded Hamiltonians with arbitrary time dependence.
Let us now consider an example of constructing rather
complex operations from simple quantum gates.
the Hamiltonian
2 ⊗· · · ⊗σz
i is the Pauli matrix acting on spin (qubit) i.
Throughout the paper we denote by σα
i , with α = x, y, z,
the corresponding Pauli matrix acting on spin (qubit)
i. The quantum circuit in Figure 3 realizes the unitary
transformation U = exp{−iℏHt} for N = 3 . It is composed of six two-qubit (CNOT)
gates and one single-qubit gate.
Note that an ancilla
qubit is used. Similar quantum circuits can be written
for any product of Pauli matrices
Although the example above might look simple, the
eﬃcient simulation of a general many-body interaction
Hamiltonian using two-body interactions is by no means
easy .
question has been thoroughly studied, and several methods have been developed ), but
it still remains a diﬃcult problem. Moreover, note that
ancilla qubits are required, which adds to the resource
requirements (see Section V. B).
Let us now take a look at another example: the algorithm given in for the calculation of molecular energies using a recursive phaseestimation algorithm. The quantum circuit is shown in
Figure 4. This procedure provides an arbitrarily accurate
estimate of the energy, with the accuracy increasing with
increasing number of iterations. The ﬁrst iteration gives
FIG. 4 Quantum circuit for the calculation of molecular energies in . The circuit implements
the recursive phase estimation algorithm. The ﬁrst iteration
gives the phase φ (which represents the molecular energy)
to four bits of accuracy. Each subsequent iteration incorporates the previous estimate and increases the accuracy by one
bit, i.e. reduces the uncertainty by a factor of 2.
denotes the Hadamard gate, QFT + is the inverse quantum
Fourier transform and Vk = [exp(−i2πφk−1) ˆVk−1]2 ).
a rough estimate for the energy. This estimate is then
used as a reference point for the next iteration, which
yields a better estimate. The procedure is repeated until
the desired precision is obtained.
So far, the literature has generally focused on the discrete evolution of a quantum system, but recently, continuous evolution has also been discussed . Furthermore, it is usually
assumed that there is no restriction in applying one- and
two-qubit gates and that all qubits of the simulator can
be individually addressed and measured. An interesting
question is what Hamiltonians can be simulated under
certain control constraints. For example, discussed the class of Hamiltonians that can be
simulated when one is restricted to applying translationally invariant Hamiltonians.
The authors showed that
if both local and nearest-neighbor interactions are controllable, then the simulation of interactions in quadratic
fermionic and bosonic systems is possible. However, for
spins this is still an open problem.
Measurement — After obtaining |ψ(t)⟩= U |ψ(0)⟩
via the unitary evolution, we need to perform the ﬁnal
measurement in order to extract the desired information.
In general, for characterizing a quantum state, quantum
state tomography (QST) )
can be used. However, QST requires resources that grow
exponentially with the size of the system, making it inef-
ﬁcient for large quantum systems. In order to avoid this
problem, the direct estimation of certain physical quantities such as correlation functions or spectra of operators is more desirable than taking the long route through
QST. A detailed discussion is given in .
We consider two examples.
The ﬁrst one refers to
measurements of quantities that can be written in the
form ⟨U †V ⟩, where U and V are unitary operators. The
measurement circuit is shown in Figure 5. One ancilla
qubit that is initially in the state |+⟩= (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
FIG. 5 Quantum circuits (A) for the measurement of the
quantity ⟨U †V ⟩for two unitary operators U and V , and (B)
for the measurement of the spectrum of a Hermitian operator
ˆQ. Both algorithms use one ancilla qubit, which is initially
prepared in the state |+⟩= (|0⟩+|1⟩)/
2. The black dot represents a |1⟩-controlled gate and the white dot a |0⟩-controlled
gate ).
needed. The desired quantity, i.e. ⟨U †V ⟩, is given by the
expectation value ⟨2σa
+⟩of the ancilla at the end of the
simulation (Here 2σa
y). The second example pertains to measuring the spectrum of a Hermitian
operator ˆQ. Again, one ancilla qubit that is initially in
the state |+⟩= (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
2 is needed, and the desired
spectrum is obtained by analyzing the time dependence
+⟩. The measurement circuit is shown in Figure 5.
B. Analog quantum simulation (AQS)
“...there is to be an exact simulation, that the
computer will do exactly the same as nature.”
 
Another approach to simulating quantum systems by
quantum mechanical means is analog quantum simulation (AQS), in which one quantum system mimics (emulates) another ).
The Hamiltonian of the system to be simulated, Hsys, is
directly mapped onto the Hamiltonian of the simulator,
Hsim, which can be controlled at least to some extent:
Hsys ←→Hsim.
This can be done if there is a mapping between the system and the simulator .
|φ(0)⟩can be mapped to |ψ(0)⟩via an operator f
[|ψ(0)⟩= f |φ(0)⟩], and |ψ(t)⟩can be mapped back to
|φ(t)⟩via f −1.
For Hamiltonians Hsim = fHsysf −1.
Note that the simulator may only partly reproduce the
dynamics of the system. The choice of the mapping depends on what needs to be simulated and on the capabilities of the simulator. In AQS one is usually emulating
an eﬀective many-body model of the simulated system.
A controllable “toy-model” of the system is used to reproduce the property of interest, e.g. the dynamics or
ground state.
An important advantage of AQS is that it could be
useful even in the presence of errors, up to a certain tolerance level. For example, one is sometimes interested in
knowing whether a certain set of physical conditions leads
to a given quantum phase transition. Even without having the full quantitative details, a qualitative answer can
be quite valuable in this context. If the quantum simulator suﬀers from uncertainties in the control parameters,
the phase transition under study could still be observed,
hence providing the answer to the question of interest.
Finding the mapping in an AQS might, at ﬁrst glance,
look simpler than obtaining the most eﬃcient gate decomposition for a given Hamiltonian in DQS. Sometimes
the mapping is indeed straightforward, but this is not
always the case, and quite often clever mappings have
to be devised, sometimes involving additional externally
applied ﬁelds or ancillary systems to mediate various interactions.
Let us now look at two examples of mappings between
quantum systems and the corresponding simulators. The
ﬁrst is the Hamiltonian describing a gas of interacting
bosonic atoms in a periodic potential
ˆni(ˆni −1), (11)
i and ˆai correspond to the bosonic creation and
annihilation operators of atoms on the ith lattice site,
iˆai is the atomic number operator counting the
number of atoms on the ith lattice site, and ϵi denotes
the energy oﬀset of the ith lattice site due to an external
conﬁning potential. The coeﬃcient J quantiﬁes the hopping strength between lattice sites, and U quantiﬁes the
interaction strength between atoms occupying the same
lattice site. This Hamiltonian has a similar form to the
Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian
ˆni(ˆni −1) −µ
where J and U are the same as above, and µ is the
chemical potential. The analog simulation of the Bose-
Hubbard model using atoms in optical lattices is therefore straightforward.
However, in other situations one
must rewrite Hsim in order to obtain the mapping Hsys ↔
Hsim. For example, in the case of an array of Josephson junctions as in 
the system is described by the quantum phase model,
which can be connected to the Bose-Hubbard model via
a mapping where the ﬁeld operators ˆai are reformulated
in terms of the amplitude and phase of the superconducting order parameter at diﬀerent points in the circuit.
The second example of a mapping between a quantum
system and its simulator is the trapped-ion simulation of
the Dirac equation . The Dirac equation in (1 + 1) dimensions for a
spin-1/2 particle with rest mass m is
∂t = HDφ = (cˆpσx + mc2σz)φ,
where c is the speed of light, ˆp is the momentum operator,
σx and σz are the Pauli matrices. The Hamiltonian of
a single trapped ion interacting with a bichromatic light
ﬁeld can be written as
HI = 2η∆¯Ωσxˆp + ℏΩσz,
where η is the Lamb-Dicke parameter, ∆is the spatial
size of the ground-state wavefunction, and ¯Ωis controlled
via the intensity of the bichromatic light ﬁeld. With the
identiﬁcations c ≡2ηˆω∆and mc2 ≡ℏΩ, HI has the
same form as HD.
With this analogy, eﬀects such as
Zitterbewegung and the Klein paradox can be studied
in a non-relativistic quantum system .
In the following sections the Hamiltonians of several
proposed quantum simulators and those of the systems
to be simulated will be discussed in more detail and the
relation in equation 10 will become clearer for each particular case.
The initial-state preparation and measurement in AQS
have not been thoroughly discussed in the literature. Because the system and simulator are presumed to be very
similar, it is expected that the preparation of the initial state can occur naturally in processes mimicking the
natural relaxation of the simulated system to an equilibrium state. Moreover, directly measuring some physical
quantity of the simulator would yield information about
its analogue in the simulated system. In this sense, AQS
has the additional advantage that physical quantities can
be measured directly, without the need for computational
manipulation of measurement results as in DQS. Nevertheless, both the initial state preparation and measurement process in AQS will need to be studied in more
detail as AQS becomes a widely used research tool.
C. Quantum-information-inspired algorithms for the
classical simulation of quantum systems
In an interesting recent development, classical numerical algorithms for the simulation of quantum many-body
systems came out of research on quantum information
theory and thereafter a signiﬁcant
eﬀort has been made to explore this idea.
Using matrix product states (MPS) and projected entangled-pair
states (PEPS) one can simulate more eﬃciently inﬁnitesize quantum lattice systems in one and two dimensions.
This new class of algorithms makes it possible to simulate spin systems for longer times, and to study physical phenomena which would have been inaccessible with
previous methods. Moreover, these methods can be combined with Monte Carlo techniques.
For more details
we direct the reader to the two reviews and the references
therein. Another widely used stochastic method is the
Metropolis algorithm. Its quantum version allows for the
direct sampling from the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian,
overcoming in this way the sign problem (Temme et al.,
V. RESOURCE ESTIMATION AND FAULT TOLERANCE
A. Resource estimation
Using a quantum simulator instead of a classical computer does not necessarily provide an eﬃcient solution
to the problem of simulating quantum systems. This is
because it is not always easy to prepare the initial state,
evolve it, and measure it with polynomial resources. The
amount of physical resources (i.e., number of qubits,
number of operations, number of steps, etc.) needed for
the quantum simulation in the case of an N-body problem strongly depends on the type of problem and the
particularities of the simulator. In this subsection, we
review some results on the estimation of the required resources for some particular cases.
How many particles or qubits are needed to realize useful quantum simulations? The answer to this question
depends on the type of simulation one wishes to implement. As a general rule of thumb, it is sometimes said
that in order to outperform classical computers quantum
simulators require somewhere between 40 and 100 qubits
 . However, there are some interesting applications that could be realized with fewer
qubits. For instance, with ten or fewer qubits one could
perform proof-of-principle simulations, including the simulation of frustrated spin systems , quantum
chaos ,
some simple chemical reactions ,
Dirac particles , the Unruh eﬀect , or anyons (Note that these few-qubit simulations can
in principle be readily performed on a present-day clas-
sical computer). With a few tens of qubits, one could
perform frustrated-spin simulations or molecular-energy
calculations at the limits of present-day supercomputers.
There have been rather extensive studies on the resource estimation for DQS. The estimation of the requirements for simulating N particles interacting through a
pairwise potential has been performed in (Kassal et al.,
The results are reproduced in Figure 6.
discrete-variable representation of the wave function in
an n qubit basis is used. Furthermore, a number m of
ancilla qubits is required to represent the desired range
of potential values with a certain precision, four of which
give a reasonably high accuracy for the Coulomb potential. This gives a total of n(3N −6) + 4m qubits. The
Coulomb potential can be evaluated in O(N 2m2) steps,
so chemical dynamics could be simulated on a quantum computer in O(N 2m2) steps, which is exponentially
faster than known classical algorithms. However, from
the graph in Figure 6, it follows that in order to outperform current classical computers at least 100 qubits and
over 200,000 quantum gates per step would be required.
Compared with the studies on scaling with the system size, less attention has been paid in the literature to
the scaling of required resources with desired accuracy.
For example, if one considers a case where increasing the
accuracy of the answer (i.e., the desired number of bits
in the ﬁnal answer) leads to an exponential increase in
the number of quantum gates, it is not obvious that the
quantum simulation can be called eﬃcient. Indeed, it was
pointed out in that several current
algorithms for quantum simulation exhibit poor scaling
as a function of desired accuracy, even if they seem eﬃcient based on the scaling with system size. One should
also note here that, at ﬁrst sight, one might think that
making the step size for the Trotter decomposition in
DQS smaller does not aﬀect the total run time of the
algorithm, because the gates can be implemented more
quickly for small time steps. However, there is typically
an overhead that is proportional to the number of gates
that need to be implemented, and this number can increase rapidly with decreasing step size. The precision
requirements in a given quantum simulation is therefore
an important question for purposes of resource estimation.
Recently, the resource requirements (total number of
physical qubits and computation time) for computing
the ground state energy of the one-dimensional quantum
transverse Ising model with N spin-1/2 particles, as functions of the system size and the numerical precision, were
investigated in . The quantum circuit was decomposed into fault-tolerant operations, and
the total number of qubits and the total number of steps
were estimated as functions of the desired precision. The
authors found that the computation time grows exponentially with desired precision. In order to obtain polynomial scaling, new quantum simulation algorithms are
needed. Alternatively, systems where the phase estima-
Resource requirements for the quantum simulation
of the dynamics of N particles interacting through a pairwise potential, maintaining a relatively small error level. The
chemical symbols are a guide to show what type of problem
can be simulated with a given computation size. The vertical
dashed line represents the current limit of numerically-exact
quantum simulations on classical computers on a grid. ; Copyright National
Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.).
tion algorithm can be implemented without the Trotter
formula could be used.
A related recent study compared the
resource requirements for two alternatives that could be
used in fault-tolerant DQS: topologically protected surface codes and circuit models with quantum error correction. By analyzing the Ising model as a representative example, and using parameters that are relevant to
present-day experiments, the authors concluded that surface codes are superior for quantum simulation.
Another example of resource estimation for a DQS
implementation is given in . The
results are reproduced in Figure 7, where the error in
the ground state energy as a function of the time step
duration ∆t is shown. The ground state energies were
obtained via direct diagonalization on a classical computer. A precision of ±10−4Eh, where Eh ≈27.21 eV, is
achieved for about 522 gates. The gate count includes
both one- and two-qubit operations and the estimate
does not take into consideration error correction for the
(color online) Trotter error analysis and gate count
for a simulation of the hydrogen molecule using a DQS algorithm. a) The calculated ground state energy of the hydrogen molecule as a function of the time step duration ∆t.
The green horizontal lines indicate the bounds for ±10−4Eh
precision. (b) Total number of gates for a single construction
of the approximate unitary as a function of ∆t. supplementary material)
qubits. An extended discussion of the resource estimation for such molecular energy simulations is provided in
 .
There has not been much work in the literature on
resource estimation for AQS. However, it is sometimes
said that AQS has less stringent resource requirements
in order to produce useful results that are intractable for
classical computational methods.
This statement does
not necessarily imply that few particles are suﬃcient in
order to obtain results in AQS, but rather that large
numbers of particles could be collectively manipulated
in AQS using a small number of controls. For example,
in hundreds of thousands of atoms
were trapped using three laser beams.
B. Decoherence and errors
Although quantum simulators are aﬀected by the interactions with the environment in the same way as quantum computers, it is generally believed that the eﬀects
of decoherence are less dramatic. This is most clearly
seen with AQS, where only limited precision (or just a
qualitative answer) might be required.
As a result, a
few imperfections in an ensemble of particles performing
AQS might not aﬀect the overall behavior of the ensemble, such that the AQS might still produce useful results
even in the presence of these imperfections. Moreover, it
has been suggested that the decoherence of the simulator
might be useful as it could serve as a rough
way of modeling the decoherence of the simulated system. A simple argument could go as follows: if the noise
level that is naturally present in the simulator is lower
than the noise level in the simulated system, then it is
rather straightforward to artiﬁcially supplement noise in
the simulator so that the combined noise in the simulator
faithfully mimics that present in the simulated system.
This idea has in fact been demonstrated recently in experiment . More sophisticated methods
of dealing with noise are also possible. In it was demonstrated, through calculations and a
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiment, that in
the quantum simulation of open systems it is possible to
exploit the natural decoherence of the simulator by varying the choice of mapping between the simulated system
and the simulator. In principle, one could characterize
how decoherence aﬀects a simulation. Then, by an appropriate choice of the mapping between the system and
simulator, one may take advantage of the natural symmetries in order to modify the eﬀective decoherence of
the simulator. It was also suggested 
that it should be possible to simplify decoherence eﬀects
in a simulation within certain subspaces. Decoherence
may also provide a useful tool for extracting information about a critical system (spectral structure or critical point of its quantum phase transition) as suggested
in . This idea has been investigated in an NMR setting with the
simulation of the Ising Hamiltonian.
Unfortunately, there are certain limitations and the inclusion of the simulator’s decoherence in the simulation
must be carefully considered. The interaction between
the system and the environment could be qualitatively
diﬀerent from that between the simulator and its environment . For example, when simulating
spin Hamiltonians with degenerate ground states using
trapped ions, spontaneous emission of the ions drives the
system to states outside the Hilbert space used in the
system-simulator mapping .
This shows
that one should be cautious when trying to include decoherence in the simulation. First, one needs to understand
how decoherence will aﬀect the simulation and, whenever
possible, ﬁnd clever mappings in order to take advantage
of the uncontrollable properties of the simulator. Sec-
ond, one needs to pay attention to the way the system
and simulator are described. It is therefore necessary to
pay more attention to the role of errors in AQS than has
been done so far in the literature. Note that the simulation of open quantum systems does not necessarily
require the inclusion of the decoherence of the simulator . The ideal situation therefore remains that uncontrollable errors should be minimized as much as possible.
In a detailed study of the algorithm for ﬁnding the low-lying spectrum of a pairing
Hamiltonian was conducted in an NMR implementation.
Such simulations were found to be sensitive to systematic
errors in the applied Hamiltonian and fault-tolerant implementations to be ineﬃcient with respect to precision
in the current Trotter approximation methods.
studies have shown that for simulating the Schr¨odinger
equation the minimization of amplitude errors would be
required . In the twoqubit entanglement in a simulation of a dynamically localized system was found to be exponentially sensitive
both to small changes of the Hamiltonian and to the locations of the chosen qubits. This sensitivity is due to the
natural ordering introduced on the qubit by the coding
of the simulated system. More recently, there have been
studies on the eﬀect of noise (timing
errors in pairwise interactions and noisy pairwise interactions described by master equations of Lindblad form) in
two-body interactions and local control operations used
for the simulation of many-body interaction Hamiltonians.
Further problems may arise for each physical implementation.
In this context, the speciﬁc limitations of
each system should be considered in more detail.
far there are few studies investigating how the simulator’s imperfections aﬀect the quantum simulation ).
Recently, the reliability, complexity and eﬃciency of
analog quantum simulations have been considered in
more detail than in past studies . Reliability refers to the need to ensure that the results of the
simulation faithfully reﬂect the simulated system. Crossvalidation over a number of diﬀerent physical systems
could be used, and in this way the particular imperfections of each implementation could be ruled out as possible sources of error. However, this approach is limited
as implementations in diﬀerent systems are not always
available. The quantum simulation results can also be
validated against analytical and numerical predictions,
but this is possible only for small systems.
Complexity/eﬃciency refers to the requirement that the quantum
simulator is able to solve problems that cannot be solved
on a classical computer in polynomial time (i.e., the simulator is more eﬃcient than a classical computer). Note
that in the case of the quantum simulation of experimentally challenging problems (see Section VII) this is not
a necessary requirement. Disorder, noise and other imperfections might aﬀect the reliability of the quantum
simulation . This issue is illustrated
in the case of a disordered quantum spin chain where
strong disorder introduces large errors.
VI. PHYSICAL REALIZATIONS
The physical implementation of a quantum simulator
requires a controllable quantum mechanical system. Any
physical system that can be used as a quantum computer would also be a universal machine for DQS. Possible routes and experimental progress towards building a
quantum computer have been thoroughly discussed in the
last decade and references therein). However, a quantum system that is not a potential quantum
computer could still implement AQS. For instance, the
propagation of sound waves in a two-component BEC
was proposed for the study of cosmic inﬂation , and a rotating Fermi gas
could be used to understand nuclear physics phenomena
 . We will not discuss the physical realization of such highly specialized quantum simulators, but focus on a more widely studied design of a quantum simulator: quantum simulators for various models
in condensed matter physics. For many problems in this
class, an array of qubits plus their controls (see Figure 8)
would make an ideal quantum simulator because it can
be thought of as the simpliﬁed, magniﬁed lattice structure of a “solid”, that can be manipulated in a number
of diﬀerent ways in order to test various models. Each
qubit resides in its own potential energy well and is used
to encode a spin 1/2 particle. The array is conﬁgurable
in the sense that its dimensionality and geometry can be
changed. Such an array could be realized, for example,
with atoms in optical lattices ,
atoms in arrays of cavities , ions either in microtrap arrays 
or in two-dimensional crystals ,
electrons in arrays of quantum dots , and so on. The desired evolution of the system would be induced by the simulator’s
control ﬁelds. This can either directly realize the desired
Hamiltonian (AQS) or reconstruct it out of elementary
one- and two-qubit gates (DQS). The control can be applied individually or to the entire array. In this section,
we will look at diﬀerent physical systems and describe
how the array and controls can be realized experimentally. For a recent review of the state-of-the-art capabilities of the physical systems that we consider here see
 .
FIG. 8 (color online) Diﬀerent systems that could implement
a specialized quantum simulator for the study of problems in
condensed-matter physics.
Examples of such analog quantum simulators include: atoms, ions, photons, nuclear and
electronic spins, as well as superconducting circuits. These
systems could be designed such that they form one- or twodimensional arrays of qubits that can be manipulated in different manners. They can be thought of as toy-models of the
magniﬁed lattice structure of a “solid”, with a magniﬁcation
factor of a few orders of magnitude.
A. Atoms and ions
Neutral atoms in optical lattices are very well suited
for mimicking solid-state systems.
Indeed, optical lattices provide the highly desirable properties of being easily tunable and essentially defect-free. The optical potentials can be adjusted to allow the change of the geometry
and dimensionality of the lattice and Kagome lattice ,
etc.). Interestingly, the optical potential can be tuned in
situ rather easily via the intensity, frequency or phase of
the applied lasers.
Since the ﬁrst experiment on the simulation of the
quantum phase transition from a superﬂuid to a Mott
insulator using a cold atomic gas in an optical lattice
 , there has been increasing interest
in the study of condensed matter physics with atoms in
optical lattices. A theoretical review discusses in detail atoms in optical lattices as potential quantum simulators, providing various examples
of quantum systems that could be simulated. Other reviews describe recent experimental progress.
Atoms in optical lattices are ﬂexible systems with several controllable parameters: tunneling strength, on-site,
nearest-neighbor, long-range and multiparticle interactions, nonuniform potentials and coupling between internal quantum states. Furthermore, there are both bosonic
and fermionic elements that can be used for quantum
simulation with atoms in optical lattices. A rather general type of Hubbard Hamiltonian that can be realized
in these systems is:
H = Hhop + Hinteraction + Hpot + Hinternal,
where Hhop describes the tunneling of atoms from one
lattice site to another, Hinteraction is the interaction part,
Hpot combines all the eﬀects of the nonuniform potentials
felt by the atoms, and Hinternal describes coherent on-site
transitions between the internal levels of the atoms.
A quantum simulation of the Mott insulator-superﬂuid
phase transition in the Hubbard model can be realized by
adjusting the depth of the optical lattice, which mainly
modiﬁes the tunneling strength and to a lesser extent
modiﬁes the on-site interaction strength, or by controlling the on-site interactions via Feschbach resonances
 (see Section VII.A.1 on the simulation of the Hubbard model).
By tuning interatomic interactions using Feshbach resonances, it was possible to investigate the crossover from
a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieﬀer (BCS) state of weakly attractive fermions to a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC)
of tightly bound fermion pairs . The continuous tunability of the interaction strength also allowed access to the so-called unitarity regime , where the interaction
strength is comparable to the Fermi energy, meaning that
there is a single energy scale in the problem. This regime
was previously inaccessible and served as one more example demonstrating the power of atoms as quantum simulators.
Using laser-assisted tunneling and lattice tilting, achieved the simulation of an antiferromagnetically coupled spin chain in an external magnetic
ﬁeld. In this simulation the occupation of lattice sites
was mapped onto the spin states of a quantum magnet.
In particular, a pair of neighboring lattice sites sharing a
single particle are mapped onto a (static) spin-1/2 particle in the quantum magnet. It should also be possible to
utilize the intrinsic spins of atoms in optical lattices for
this purpose. However, no such simulations have been
performed to date.
Another recently emerging direction for quantum simulation using atomic gases is the simulation of artiﬁcial
gauge ﬁelds . At a basic level, an
overall rotation of the trapping potential can be used to
simulate a magnetic ﬁeld (for the orbital degree of freedom). More intricate techniques that rely on additional
lasers have been devised in the past few years for the
simulation of various types of gauge ﬁelds, allowing the
observation of spin-orbit coupling in a BEC (Lin et al.,
Currently, addressing individual atoms in optical lattices is diﬃcult because the separation between neighboring lattice sites is comparable to the best achievable
focusing widths of laser beams (both typically being 0.5-
0.8 µm), but recent progress suggests that there may be
methods for overcoming this diﬃculty .
Atoms could also be used for DQS. One possible
method for implementing conditional quantum operations on atoms in optical lattices is
schematically illustrated in Figure 9. Two optical lattice
potentials are applied to the atomic ensembles, one for
each of the two internal atomic states (which represent
the qubit states). The interaction between neighboring
atoms is realized by displacing one of the lattices with respect to the other [Figure 9 (a)]. With a suﬃciently large
relative displacement of the two lattices, interactions between more distant atoms can be achieved. Moreover,
thanks to their weak interaction with the environment,
neutral atoms have long decay times of the order of seconds.
Alternative systems that can be used for quantum simulation include Rydberg atoms 
and polar molecules . In the case of Rydberg atoms in optical lattices
or magnetic traps the lattice spacing is ∼µm or higher,
allowing single-site addressability. Furthermore, dipoledipole and van der Waals interactions oﬀer a means for
implementing eﬀective spin-spin interactions.
With polar molecules (see Figure 10) microwave excitations, dipole-dipole interactions,
and spin-rotation couplings, provide a universal toolbox
for eﬀective spin models. The advantage of using polar
molecules is that their large electric dipole moments produce strong dipole-dipole interactions that can be manipulated relatively easily via external dc and ac microwave
This control may be used to study stronglycorrelated systems.
Furthermore, extended Hubbard
models , quantum phase transitions
 and the supersolid
phase in a triangular lattice could
also be simulated with these systems.
Ions can be trapped by electric (or magnetic) ﬁelds,
laser-cooled and manipulated with high precision for realizing quantum simulation . In fact,
one of the earliest theoretical studies on the physical implementation of quantum simulation dealt with trapped
ions . Both the internal energy
levels and the vibrational modes of the trapped ions can
be exploited for encoding quantum information. In contrast with neutral atoms, which interact weakly with each
other, ions, being charged, interact rather strongly via
Coulomb repulsion. This facilitates the implementation
of two-qubit gates and the control of the qubit positions
and motion. Ion qubits also have long coherence times
of the order of seconds, and sequences of high-ﬁdelity
quantum gates have been demonstrated in experiment
 .
The quantum states of trapped ions are typically ma-
(color online) Manipulation of atoms and ions as
proposed in : (a) Neutral atoms in a double
optical potential: the interaction between neighboring atoms
is realized by displacing one of the lattices with respect to the
other. Gray circles denote the state |1⟩and white ones denote
the state |0⟩.
(b) Ions in independent trapping potentials:
the interaction between two neighboring ions is achieved by
conditionally displacing the corresponding ions with a statedependent force. Blue circles denote the state |1⟩and white
ones denote the state |0⟩ ).
nipulated by either resonantly driving transitions between diﬀerent internal states of the ions or resonantly
driving sideband transitions involving the internal states
and the vibrational states of the ions in the external trapping potential. For example, the Hamiltonian describing
the coupling between the internal and vibrational modes
due to the laser driving at the red-sideband frequency
can be written in the form:
H = iℏηΩ[exp(iφ)σ+a −exp(−iφ)σ−a†],
where Ωis the Rabi frequency of the transition between the internal states, σ+ and σ−are the two-level
atom transition operators, η is the Lamb-Dicke parameter (which is assumed to be small here), a† and a are
the creation and annihilation operators of the vibrational
mode, and φ is the laser phase. Using this Hamiltonian,
as well as those corresponding to blue-sideband driving
and to resonant driving of the ionic internal states, a variety of eﬀective Hamiltonians for AQS or quantum gates
for DQS can be realized. The high-ﬁdelity one-, two-,
and even three-qubit (Toﬀoli) gates implemented with
(color online) Polar molecules trapped in a plane
by an optical potential created by two counter-propagating
laser beams with wavevectors indicated by blue arrows. The
dipoles are aligned perpendicular to the plane by a dc electric
ﬁeld, indicated by the red arrow.
The green arrow represents the ac microwave ﬁeld (reproduced from (Pupillo et al.,
FIG. 11 (color online) Arrangement of electrodes for the realization of a bilayer honeycomb lattice. The micro-trapping regions are shown as ellipsoids, while the locations of unwanted
spurious microtraps are indicated with small spheres ).
trapped ions have resulted in the most advanced implementations of DQS to date . Analog quantum simulations of frustrated
spin systems and of relativistic singleparticle motion have also been
demonstrated recently.
Ions have generally been trapped using linear harmonic
traps in quantum-simulation experiments to date. It is
possible, however, to obtain diﬀerent arrangements of
many ions in anharmonic one-dimensional traps (long ion
A one-dimensional array of cavities with atoms
trapped in the cavities. Photons can hop between the diﬀerent cavities because of the overlap between the light modes in
adjacent cavities. The atoms can be driven using externally
applied lasers. The atoms and cavities form hybrid excitations (polaritons) that can hop between the diﬀerent cavities
and that eﬀectively interact with each other. The polaritonpolariton interaction strength can, for example, be tuned via
the atom-cavity detuning ), two-dimensional traps or arrays of microtraps ) or three-dimensional traps.
It would also be possible to combine trapped ions with
optical lattices, as suggested in .
With optimized electrode structures, various microtrap
arrays where ions are arranged in diﬀerent lattice con-
ﬁgurations (see Figure 11), can be constructed . In fact a two-dimensional ion array
was recently used to implement a quantum simulation
of a spin system with hundreds of ions .
This method is particularly useful
for ions trapped in diﬀerent harmonic potentials (e.g.,
in arrays of microtraps), but in most of the experiments done to date it has been realized with ions in
the same potential. In Figure 9 (b), the manipulation
of ions in a one-dimensional array of microtraps is depicted schematically. Two-qubit interactions are usually
realized with optical forces, but a method for laserless
simulation (avoiding the problem of scattering) with ions
in arrays of microtraps has been proposed in and very recently demonstrated in
 .
Atoms in cavity arrays (see Figure 12) could also be used as quantum
simulators ). This system provides an alternative way of simulating the Bose-Hubbard
model and quantum phase transitions as well as spin
models .
In the absence of atoms, the cavity array is described
by the Hamiltonian:
RaR′+h.c.), (17)
R creates a photon in the cavity at site R, ωc is
the frequency of the relevant cavity mode, and α is the
inter-cavity coupling coeﬃcient .
One now introduces an atom or ensemble of atoms in
each cavity, and these atoms can be driven by external
lasers. The atoms trapped in a cavity together with the
photons in the same cavity form hybrid excitations called
polaritons.
The nonlinearity introduced by the atoms
results in eﬀective polariton-polariton interactions, which
can be utilized for simulating, for example, the Mottinsulator-superﬂuid phase transition.
Arrays of cavities in an arbitrary geometry may be
realized with photonic bandgap cavities and toroidal or
spherical microcavities coupled via tapered optical ﬁbers
 . However, these might be quite
challenging to realize experimentally.
A recent proposal suggested measurement and feedback control as tools for realizing quantum simulation in
atom-cavity systems , while
others considered the possibility of using atom-cavity systems for simulating the high-spin Heisenberg model and the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect . Arrays of cavities could also be used to
study the quantum analogue of Fabry-Perot interferometers as suggested in .
B. Nuclear and electronic spins
Nuclear spins manipulated by means of NMR have
been among the ﬁrst experimental systems to implement
small quantum algorithms and quantum simulation . Nuclear spin qubits have long coherence times (> 1 s), and high-ﬁdelity quantum gates
and the coherent control of up to 12 qubits have been
demonstrated.
In the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld pointing
along the z-axis, the general form of the NMR Hamiltonian is:
where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, B is the magnetic ﬁeld,
I is the angular momentum operator, and Jij are the
spin-spin coupling coeﬃcients . The
diﬀerent transitions between pairs of energy levels generally have distinct resonance frequencies, allowing the
addressing of the individual transitions based on their
frequencies. Using RF pulses various one-, two- and possibly multi-qubit gates can be implemented. The ﬁeld
of NMR beneﬁts from very well developed control techniques.
However, it is not very ﬂexible and its main
An array of quantum dots realized by a metallic
gate with an array of two diﬀerent size holes placed on top
of an AlxGa1−xAs/GaAs heterostructure.
A negative gate
voltage is applied to this gate in order to create a potential
for the two-dimensional electron gas that is otherwise free
to move at the AlxGa1−xAs/GaAs interface. This was one
of the early theoretical proposals for AQS. ).
disadvantage is the lack of scalability, one of the main
reasons being the spectral crowding that occurs as the
number of energy levels increases exponentially with increasing number of spins. Although in solid-state NMR
the scalability drawback may be overcome to some extent, individual addressing and measurement would still
be impractical. Nevertheless, nuclear spins provide a very
good testbed for various small simulation problems and
allow the implementation of both DQS and AQS. Furthermore, a recent proposal suggested that nuclear spins
attached to a diamond surface and addressed through
nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers could oﬀer an attractive
route toward large-scale quantum simulator for strongly
correlated systems .
Another system that could be used for quantum simulation is electron spins in semiconductor quantum dots
 . Quantum dots are semiconductor systems in which the excitations are conﬁned
in a very small region in one or two dimensions. If the
region is roughly the same size as the wavelength of
the charge carrier, the energy levels are quantized and
the quantum dot becomes very similar to a real atom
(and can therefore be referred to as an “artiﬁcial atom”).
Moreover, quantum dots allow ﬂexible control over the
conﬁnement potential and they can also be excited optically.
Furthermore, quantum dots with large tunnel
coupling can act as “artiﬁcial molecules”. These features
make electron spins in quantum dots particularly attractive for quantum simulation.
Quantum dots can be deﬁned at fabrication or by applying bias voltages using electrodes placed above a twodimensional electron gas. They can be designed to have
certain characteristics and assembled in large arrays. The
manipulation and readout can be done both electrically
and optically. State-of-the-art quantum-dot qubits now
have long decay times of > 1 s .
Arrays of quantum dots could be realized using two-
(color online) Schematic diagram of an array of
superconducting ﬂux qubits ).
The green circuits are used to couple the ﬂux qubits (blue),
while the brown circuits are used to read out the states of the
qubits. The gaps represent tunnel junctions.
dimensional mesh gates (see Figure 13). Alternatively, in it was proposed that interfering acoustic waves
could be used to form an analogue of optical lattices in
a two-dimensional electron-gas, but this latter approach
has the disadvantage of heating and complicated engineering. By adjusting the mesh-gate design and voltage,
various lattice geometries could be created.
spins in quantum dots may provide an advantage over
atoms in optical lattices due to the very low temperatures
(relative to the Fermi temperature) that can be reached
and the natural long-range Coulomb interaction. In a recent experiment, the predictions of the two-dimensional
Mott-Hubbard model were tested for electrons in an artiﬁcial honeycomb lattice .
The Hamiltonian for an array of quantum dots is given
µBgj(t)Bj(t) · Sj +
Jjk(t)Sj · Sk, (19)
where the ﬁrst term is the energy due to an applied magnetic ﬁeld Bj, and the second term is the exchange interaction energy, which is a result of virtual tunneling
between the quantum dots. Here, Sj is the spin of the
electric charge quanta of the j-th dot .
The interactions between the qubits can be engineered by
adjusting the gate voltages together with a careful choice
of the mesh hole sizes and doping .
C. Superconducting circuits
Superconducting circuits (see Figure 14) can also be
used as quantum simulators. Quantum information can
be encoded in diﬀerent ways: in the number of superconducting electrons on a small island, in the direction
of a current around a loop, or in oscillatory states of
the circuit. The circuit can be manipulated by applied
voltages and currents (including both dc and microwavefrequency ac signals) and measured with high accuracy
using integrated on-chip instruments. Although macroscopic in size, these circuits can display quantum behavior and can be seen as “artiﬁcial atoms”. The advantage
over real atoms is that superconducting circuits can be
designed and constructed to tailor their characteristic frequencies, interaction strengths and so on. The frequencies can also be tuned in situ by adjusting an external
parameter (typically an external magnetic ﬁeld), and the
coupling energy between two qubits can be turned on
and oﬀat will.
Furthermore, superconducting circuits
can be coupled to “cavities”, which are actually electrical resonators (and the “photons” are, for the most
part, electron-density oscillations).
This setup is very
useful for the study of electric-circuit analogues of cavity
quantum electrodynamics (circuit QED) .
State-of-the-art superconducting qubits have coherence times exceeding 100µs (i.e. decoherence rates below
10 kHz), which is quite high considering that other energy scales in the circuit are typically in the range 10
MHz - 10 GHz.
Individual control and measurement
have been demonstrated . Furthermore high-ﬁdelity one-, two and three-qubit quantum
gates have been demonstrated. With this level of control,
DQS could be implemented in a superconducting circuit
in the near future.
The Hamiltonian for N charge (ﬂux) qubits biased at
their symmetry points (which is optimal for quantum coherence) coupled capacitively (inductively) is:
where ∆i is the level splitting and Jij is the strength of
the coupling between qubits i and j. It should be noted,
however, that superconducting circuits have more than
two energy levels, and these additional levels could also
be utilized. Indeed, a recent experiment demonstrated
AQS of a spin larger than 1/2 using this approach .
As for scalability, circuits containing 512 qubits have
been fabricated , although quantum coherence was not tested on these circuits in the same way that coherence is commonly tested
in other experiments using small numbers of qubits.
Furthermore, more than 200 superconducting resonators
were recently fabricated on a single chip . If qubits are integrated into such a circuit, it could
realize the proposal of atom-cavity arrays (or Jaynes-
Cummings lattices), performed with artiﬁcial atoms and
cavities (see Figure 15). It has also been proposed that
artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds could be simulated with such circuits . A related study proposed an
approach to universal quantum computation and simu-
(color online) A possible design for implementing
the Jaynes-Cummings lattice using superconducting qubits.
The blue strips are superconducting resonators and the yellow
dots are superconducting qubits. An eﬀective particle-particle
interaction is created by the qubit-cavity interactions. ).
lation using the single-excitation subspace of an array of
coupled superconducting qubits . Although unscalable, this approach may still enable a universal quantum simulation speedup relative to presentday classical computer.
The fact that superconducting circuits can be produced in large numbers and “wired” together on a chip
oﬀers a rather straightforward way of realizing various
lattice geometries. Examples include the Kitaev model
on a honeycomb lattice , networks for
simulating Anderson and Kondo models , highly-connected networks and fractals .
D. Photons
Photons can carry quantum information over long distances, hardly being aﬀected by noise or decoherence.
They naturally possess the ability to encode qubit states,
e.g. in the polarization of the photon, and one-qubit gates
can be easily realized with linear optical components. Although the diﬃculty in implementing two-qubit gates is
a serious drawback for photonic systems in the context
of quantum computation, there have been some notable
achievements for quantum simulation using photons.
Photons have been used to calculate the possible fractional statistics of anyons using a six-photon graph state
 , to calculate the energy spectrum of the
hydrogen molecule to 20 bits of precision and to simulate frustrated spin systems . It has also been proposed that photons propagating or trapped inside materials doped with atoms that
have suitable energy-level structures could be used for the
simulation of Luttinger liquids 
and relativistic ﬁeld theories .
Recently, it was shown that the propagation of photons
in a network of beam splitters is in general a computationally diﬃcult task for classical computers even for
a few tens of photons ,
and corresponding experiments with up to four photons
were performed . However, with
limited ﬂexibility and scalability, it remains to be seen
how far photon-based quantum simulation can go.
E. Other systems
One of the systems that are being considered as candidate platforms for implementing quantum computation is
NV centers in diamond ).
Another system that could be used for the quantum simulation of condensed matter physics is electrons
trapped on the surface of liquid helium .
This setup could be used to simulate the Ising model. In principle it could be scaled up,
but the control would be very diﬃcult. A related system that was proposed recently to implement DQS is a
chain of molecular nanomagnets controlled by external
magnetic ﬁelds .
A rather unconventional example of a quantum simulator is a two-component BEC in which the propagation
of sound waves could simulate some aspects of cosmic
inﬂation . Although such
a quantum simulator would be limited to a narrow class
of problems, it provides an alternative possibility for the
simulation of such systems.
F. Current state of the art
The above discussion of the physical systems that could
implement quantum simulation is summarized in Table I
which lists the strengths and weaknesses of each potential
quantum simulator, and in Figure 16.
Currently only with neutral atoms in an optical lattice
is it possible to perform quantum simulations with more
than a few particles, and these systems can at present
be considered the most advanced platform for AQS. Although individual control and readout is not yet available, recent progress in this direction has been made
and alternative approaches using Rydberg atoms or polar molecules are now being pursued. Meanwhile, recent
experiments with trapped ions have demonstrated exotic
quantum simulations beyond condensed-matter physics
 or the Klein paradox ) and superconducting circuits
provide a way to study intriguing quantum phenomena
(color online) One- or two-dimensional arrays of qubits and controls can be used to simulate various models in
condensed-matter physics. Examples of such analog quantum simulators include: atoms in optical lattices (A), one-dimensional (B) or two-dimensional (C) arrays of cavities ;
ions in linear chains (D), two-dimensional arrays of planar traps (E), or two-dimensional
Coulomb crystals (F); electrons in quantum dot arrays created by a mesh gate (G), in arrays of superconducting circuits (H), or trapped on the surface of liquid helium (I). The average distance between the atoms in optical lattices is less than 1 µm. Cavity arrays based on
photonic bandgap cavities would also have sub-micron inter-site separations. As for the inter-ion distances in ion trap arrays,
they are about 10-50 µm and about the same for two-dimensional Coulomb crystals. In arrays of quantum dots, the spacing
between dots is about 0.1 µm. In superconducting circuits, the distance between qubits is typically a few microns. In the case
of electrons on helium the distance between neighboring sites would be about 1 µm. These inter-qubit distances (from 0.1 to
10 µm) are to be compared with the far smaller average inter-atomic distances in solids, which are ≤1 nm. The systems shown
above realize a one- or two-dimensional array of qubits which can be manipulated in diﬀerent manners. The larger distances
between qubits make quantum simulators more controllable and easier to measure. Therefore, they can be thought of as models
of the magniﬁed lattice structure of a solid, with a magniﬁcation factor of two to four orders of magnitude. ).
such as the dynamical Casimir eﬀect .
With the current experimental state-of-the-art techniques, the most advanced DQS has been realized with
trapped ions . In these experiments,
simulations of various spin models with up to six spins
have been demonstrated, with one experiment requiring
sequences of more than 100 quantum gates.
error correction was used, the ﬁdelity of the DQS implementation was somewhat lower than for the AQS implementation in the same system ). With error correction and improved control of
laser intensity ﬂuctuations, quantum simulations with
> 10 qubits and hundreds of high-ﬁdelity gates seem possible in the coming years. Moreover, the DQS approach
allows the simulation of complex spin-spin interactions
and could potentially be combined with AQS techniques.
VII. APPLICATIONS
Quantum simulators will ﬁnd numerous applications
in diverse areas of physics and chemistry , and possibly even biology 
Individual control and readout∗,
tunability
Superconducting circuits
Individual control and readout∗,
tunability
Scaling (some recent progress)
Photons (linear optics)
Flexibility∗
Nuclear spins (NMR)
Well-established, readily available
technology∗
Scaling, no individual control
classical simulators (e.g., the eﬀects of decoherence and
the transition from quantum to classical). In this section we discuss how diﬀerent problems could be studied
using the quantum simulators described in the previous
section. While some problems are classically intractable
(e.g., Hubbard models, spin frustration and disorder, lattice gauge theories and quantum chemistry calculations),
others can be treated classically (e.g., James-Cummings
Hamiltonian and interferometry) but are discussed here
as benchmarks for the progress of quantum simulation.
A. Condensed-matter physics
The diﬃculty in solving quantum many-body problems
is reﬂected in the open questions in condensed matter
physics. Among the best-known challenges in this ﬁeld
are understanding high-Tc superconductivity and disordered and frustrated systems. In this subsection we discuss the quantum simulation of these problems.
1. Hubbard model
The Hubbard model is the simplest model of interacting particles on a lattice.
However, for large numbers
of particles in more than one dimensions, the model is
diﬃcult to treat using classical computers.
As discussed in Section VI.A, an AQS of the Bose-
Hubbard model using atoms in optical lattices was
proposed in and implemented in
 . Recent experiments on the subject
include the realization of a Tonks-Girardeau gas in one
dimension and the investigation
of atoms trapped in a graphene-like lattice . There have also been proposals to simulate
this model with polar molecules ,
trapped ions or atoms in arrays of coupled cavities . The
simulation of the Fermi-Hubbard model in quantum-dot
arrays was proposed in . The
simulation of the Hubbard model with attractive interactions using atoms in optical lattices was discussed in . Proposals for the AQS of the related Holstein model have also been put forward. These include
simulations using polar molecules , ions 
and superconducting circuits .
The simulation of the Hubbard model has also been
considered in the context of DQS. In 
it was shown how to obtain the energy spectrum of the
Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian:
(i,j);σa(i+1,j);σ + a†
(i+1,j);σa(i,j);σ)
(i,j);σa(i,j+1);σ + a†
(i,j+1);σa(i,j);σ)]
n(i,j);↑n(i,j);↓,
where tx and ty are the hopping matrix elements allowing fermions to move on the lattice. The ﬁrst terms describe the kinetic energy, and the last term ( ˜U) is the
on-site repulsion potential energy. The authors explicitly
gave the mapping between the operators of the Hubbard
model and the DQS; the initialization, evolution, and
measurement steps were described in detail. Note that
the mapping between the fermionic operators and the
Pauli matrices employs the Jordan-Wigner transformation. A possible implementation of DQS for the Holstein
model was analyzed in .
2. Spin models
Spin systems are typically described by Hamiltonians
of the form
i+1 + Jyσy
i+1 + Jzσz
As mentioned in Section IV.A, along with the Hubbard
Hamiltonian spin Hamiltonians can be simulated on a
DQS. It is also worth noting that in certain limits the
Hubbard model reduces to spin models.
The DQS implementation of various spin Hamiltonians with atoms in optical lattices or trapped ions was
discussed in . A recent trapped-ion experiment demonstrated the DQS of diﬀerent spin Hamiltonians using sequences of elementary quantum gates
 .
The AQS of spin models is also possible. For instance,
with trapped ions, an AQS for the Ising [Eq. (23)], XY
[Eq. (22) with Jz = 0], or XY Z [Eq. (22)] interactions
can be realized using the collective vibrational modes
 .
These interactions can be
switched and tuned by lasers and by the choice of trapping conditions.
This direction has been pursued further in and put into practice in
the experiments of .
An earlier paper 
had shown that the conditional displacement of the vibrational mode of trapped ions can be used to simulate
nonlinear collective and interacting spin systems. Furthermore, spin chains and ladders can be investigated
with atoms in optical lattices ,
and a scheme to realize the anisotropic XXZ [Eq. (22)
with Jx = Jy ̸= Jz] and isotropic XXX [Eq. (22) with
Jx = Jy = Jz] Heisenberg spin Hamiltonians in an arbitrary array of coupled cavities was proposed in . Reference discussed
the possibility of engineering Hamiltonians of spin lattice models with polar molecules stored in optical lattices
(see Figure 17). The spins are represented by single electrons of heteronuclear molecules. Using a combination
of microwave excitation, dipole-dipole interactions and
spin-rotation couplings enables the realization of eﬀective two-spin interactions with designable range, spatial
anisotropy and coupling strength.
Recently, in the simulation of
spin and Hubbard models in higher or fractal dimensions with superconducting qubits and resonators was
proposed. The ability to access arbitrary dimensions is
made possible by the ﬂexible connectivity, which derives
from the ﬂexibility in designing tunable couplers between
superconducting qubits and resonators.
Spin systems
with s > 1/2 can also be naturally realized using superconducting circuits, because these circuits generally have
(color online) Schematic diagram of a proposal
for the simulation of anisotropic spin models using polar
molecules trapped in an optical lattice: a two-dimensional
square lattice with nearest-neighbor orientation-dependent
Ising interactions.
The eﬀective interactions between the
spins S1 and S2 of the molecules in their rovibrational ground
states are generated with a microwave ﬁeld E(t) inducing
dipole-dipole interactions between the molecules with dipole
moments D1 and D2, respectively. )
more than two quantum states that can be employed in
the simulation. In the
emulation of the dynamics of single spins with principal
quantum number s = 1/2, 1 and 3/2 was demonstrated
(see Figure 18). The antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model
with long-range interactions could be realized with solidstate NMR . Itinerant ferromagnetism could be studied in a two-component Fermi gas
 .
3. Quantum phase transitions
Having introduced the Hubbard model and spin models, we now discuss quantum phase transitions, especially
in these models. Quantum phase transitions occur when
one varies a physical parameter at absolute zero temperature, when all thermal ﬂuctuations have ceased. The
transition describes an abrupt change in the ground state
of the many-body system governed by its quantum ﬂuctuations. Quantum phase transitions are an interesting
and fundamental subject, but are diﬃcult to investigate
both by classical simulation and via experimental methods. Analog quantum simulators can help in understanding this purely quantum phenomenon, and the ﬁrst steps
in this direction have already been explored.
For example, the quantum phase transition from a superﬂuid to a Mott insulator phase, predicted in , was ﬁrst observed in 2002 in an ensemble of atoms trapped in an optical
The physical model is described by the Bose-
FIG. 18 (color online) Illustration of the experiment of , in which the states of a superconducting circuit were used to emulate a particle with spin s, up to s = 3/2.
For simulating a spin s, 2s + 1 quantum states of the circuit
are used. For example, in (D) four of the circuit’s quantum
states are mapped onto the four quantum states of a spin 3/2
particle, while a ﬁfth state was used in the experiment as a
reference state for phase measurement. By applying carefully
tuned microwave-frequency drive signals, the circuit can simulate the interaction between the spin and a magnetic ﬁeld
with arbitrary strength and direction.
An analogy with a
classical system (a football game), shown on the left side, can
also be used to give a simple explanation of the redistribution
of the population among the diﬀerent energy levels in terms
of football players passing a ball among each other, with the
goalkeeper serving as the anchor.
(reproduced from (Nori,
Hubbard Hamiltonian given in Eq. (12). The phase transition is perhaps easiest to understand in the case of unit
ﬁlling factor, i.e. when there are as many particles as
lattice sites. Deep in the superﬂuid phase, when J ≫˜U,
delocalization minimizes the kinetic energy and the system is said to be in the weakly interacting regime (the
ground state being approximately given by
all the particles are in the single-particle ground
state). When ˜U ≫J, the energy is minimized when the
particles are distributed evenly among the lattice sites
and the ground state is approximately given by Q
This state is sometimes called strongly correlated, and it
corresponds to the Mott phase. By adjusting the lattice
potential depth, the ratio between the tunneling energy
J and the on-site interaction energy ˜U can be controlled
and brought to the point where the transition between
the Mott insulator phase and the superﬂuid phase is induced. Then an abrupt change in the ground state of the
system is observed . A schematic diagram of this quantum phase transition is illustrated in
Figure 19a.
In quantum magnets, the transition from a para- to an
anti-ferromagnet was emulated using two trapped calcium ions in . The system is
described by the quantum Ising model.
The Hamiltonian for a chain (with two or more spins) is given by
where Bx is the magnetic ﬁeld strength and Jij are the
spin-spin coupling coeﬃcients.
The ﬁrst term, denoting the interactions of individual spins with an external
magnetic ﬁeld, is simulated by coupling the internal levels (representing the two spin 1/2 states) with a resonant
RF ﬁeld. The spin-spin interaction in the second term
is simulated by a state-dependent optical dipole force,
implemented by a walking wave formed by two perpendicular laser beams. When the strength of the spin-spin
interaction is increased adiabatically (increasing J while
keeping Bx constant), the system undergoes a transition from paramagnetic (|→⟩|→⟩· · · |→⟩) to ferromagnetic (|↓⟩|↓⟩· · · |↓⟩+ |↑⟩|↑⟩· · · |↑⟩) or anti-ferromagnetic
order (|↓⟩|↑⟩· · · |↓⟩|↑⟩+ |↑⟩|↓⟩· · · |↑⟩|↓⟩). This is illustrated in Figure 19b.
The same technique for realizing the spin-spin interaction, namely the state-dependent
force, can be applied for many ions in a string or ion array. Further experimental investigations in this direction
have been performed in . A recent experiment demonstrated the quantum
simulation of antiferromagnetic spin chains using neutral
atoms in an optical lattice .
4. Disordered and frustrated systems
Disordered systems appear in many diﬃcult problems
in condensed-matter physics such as transport, conductivity, spin glasses and some models of high-Tc superconductivity. The can exhibit characteristic phenomena
that are not present in perfectly ordered systems. For
example, the wave functions of particles can be localized
in disordered media in spite of the presence of hopping
terms in the Hamiltonian. This phenomenon can occur
at the single-particle level by coherent back scattering
from random impurities. Since the theoretical treatment
of these problems is particularly challenging, several proposals for quantum simulation have been put forward.
The Fano-Anderson Hamiltonian can be studied using
DQS. This idea was pursued theoretically and experimentally (with liquid-state NMR) in . The fermionic Fano-Anderson model in one dimension consists of an n-site ring with an impurity in the
center. The fermions can hop between nearest-neighbor
sites on the ring or between a site on the ring and the
impurity (with matrix element V/√n for the latter). The
(color online) Examples of analog quantum simulators of quantum phase transitions using ultracold neutral atoms
(a) and trapped ions (b). (a) The quantum phase transition from a superﬂuid to a Mott insulator phase realized in using rubidium atoms trapped in an optical lattice.
The ratio between the tunneling energy and the on-site
interaction energy was controlled in by adjusting the lattice potential depth, such that the quantum
phase transition was observed. There are other alternative ways of simulating this quantum phase transition with arrays of
cavities , or arrays of Josephson junctions . (b) Magnetic quantum
phase transition simulated in using trapped calcium ions. The interactions between individual spins
and an external magnetic ﬁeld were simulated by coupling the internal levels (representing the spin-1/2 states) with a resonant
RF ﬁeld, while the spin-spin interactions were simulated using a state-dependent optical dipole force implemented by a walking
wave ).
Fano-Anderson Hamiltonian can be written as follows:
klckl + ϵb†b + V (c†
k0b + ck0b†),
where the fermionic operators c†
kl (ckl) and b† (b) create
(destroy) a spinless fermion in the conduction mode kl
and in the impurity, respectively. Note that in principle
the Hamiltonian in Eq. (24) can be diagonalized exactly.
Nevertheless, the experiment serves as a benchmark for
the experimental progress of quantum simulators. Recently, the decoherence-induced localization of the size
of spin clusters was investigated in an NMR quantum
simulator . Thermal states of
frustrated spin systems were also simulated recently using NMR .
As for AQS, optical lattices have been used to experimentally realize a disordered system that may lead to the
observation of a Bose glass phase .
In a recent experiment, the motional degrees of freedom of atoms trapped in an optical lattice were used
to simulate ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic and frustrated classical spin conﬁgurations .
A rich phase diagram with diﬀerent types of phase transitions was observed. Figure 20 shows examples of spin
conﬁgurations in a triangular lattice and their experimental signatures. Furthermore, theoretical and experimental studies have investigated possible routes towards
Anderson-like localization of atomic BECs in disordered
potentials . A review focused on the simulation of disordered quantum systems with quantum gases can be
found in . A chain of trapped ions could
also be used to explore the physics of disordered quantum systems . In the authors proposed a mapping between
superconducting circuits and the Hamiltonians describing magnetic impurities in conduction bands (Anderson
and Kondo models). A recent experiment on a driven
superconducting qubit , along
with the appropriate mapping, exhibited an analogue of
universal conductance ﬂuctuations, which are typically
studied in the context of particle propagation in twodimensional disordered media.
Geometric frustration refers to the situation in which
the geometric properties of the crystal lattice forbid the
simultaneous minimization of all the interaction energies
acting in a given region (see Figure 21).
Well-known
examples include the antiferromagnetic Ising model on
a triangular lattice or the antiferromagnetic Heisenberg
(color online) Spin conﬁgurations in a triangular
lattice and their experimental signatures, simulated using the
motional degrees of freedom of atoms trapped in an optical
lattice, averaged over several experimental runs.
The coupling parameters can be tuned to ferro- (solid lines) or antiferromagnetic values (dashed lines), and these determine the
resulting spin conﬁguration , NMR
 , photons and atoms
in optical lattices and references therein, ).
5. Spin glasses
Spin glasses typically occur when the interactions between spins are ferromagnetic for some bonds and antiferromagnetic for others, so the spin orientation cannot
be uniform in space even at low temperatures, and the
spin orientation can become random and almost frozen
in time. Spin glasses can be eﬃciently simulated using
DQS. In an algorithm for the construction of the Gibbs distribution of
conﬁgurations in the Ising model was developed. The algorithm can be applied to any dimension, to the class of
spin-glass Ising models with a ﬁnite portion of frustrated
plaquettes, to diluted Ising models and to models with a
magnetic ﬁeld.
FIG. 21 An example of the simulation of the simplest case
of spin frustration: three antiferromagnetically coupled spins
(a). This simulation was realized with three ytterbium ions
in a one-dimensional trap (b). J1 is the nearest-neighbor coupling and J2 the next-nearest-neighbor coupling. In (c) the
expected form of the Ising interactions J1 and J2, controlled
through the laser detuning, ˜µ, used to generate an optical
spin-dependent force, is depicted. The three oscillation modes
shown at the top of Panel C are used as markers, as the parameter ˜µ is deﬁned relative to their frequencies ).
An analog approach to the simulation of spin glasses
using magnetic impurities embedded in inert matrices,
such as solid helium, was proposed in (Lemeshko et al.,
A proposal for the analog simulation of the
Lipkin-Meshkov-Glick model and complex quantum systems, such as Sherrington-Kirkpatrick (SK) spin glasses,
using superconducting qubits in circuit QED was given
in . Spin glasses could also be
studied using Fermi-Bose mixtures in inhomogeneous and
random optical lattices as suggested in .
6. Superconductivity
high-temperature
superconductivity
compounds containing copper-oxide planes is still a puzzle
that might be solved using large-scale simulations. The
CuO2 plane in a high-Tc superconductor could be simulated in an analog manner
by an array of electrostatically deﬁned quantum dots,
as suggested in in one of the early
proposals for AQS. Moreover, the analog simulation of
the t-J model was proposed in . The t-J model describes strongly cor-
related fermions on a lattice and it is used in various attempts to understand high-Tc superconductivity. Here, t
represents the size of the kinetic energy of a hole disrupting an antiferromagnet with spin-spin interaction energy
The study of BCS pairing in superconductors could be
done using DQS. The general BCS pairing Hamiltonian
has the form:
where the fermionic c†
m (cm) are creation (annihilation)
operators, |m| = 1, 2, . . . , N, denotes all relevant quantum numbers, the number operator nF
and the matrix element V +
ml = ⟨m, −m|V |l, −l⟩.
polynomial-time algorithm to model this BCS Hamiltonian has been proposed in and a two-qubit version of the algorithm was
experimentally realized using NMR .
In another direction related to the quantum simulation of superconductivity, several groups have observed
signatures of the crossover between a BCS and a BEC
superﬂuid as the strength of attractive interactions between fermionic particles is varied and 
and references therein).
7. Metamaterials
The behavior of tunable metamaterials (regular structures obtained from the periodic arrangement of mesoscopic building blocks) in the quantum regime could
be seen as a quantum simulation of materials composed of regular atomic structures . One example of a quantum metamaterial is an inﬁnite chain of identical qubits
inside a resonator. Such a system oﬀers new ways of controlling the propagation of electromagnetic ﬁelds, which
are not available to standard materials.
8. Topological order
Anyons are two-dimensional particles whose quantum
statistics are neither bosonic nor fermionic. Anyons have
been used to describe two-dimensional systems such as
sheets of graphene or the quantum Hall eﬀect. Moreover,
they have been proposed as media for implementing topological quantum computation . The fractional statistics of anyons in the Kitaev model involving four-body interactions could be studied
using AQS with cold atoms in optical lattices or alternatively using DQS . The latter approach
has been experimentally realized with linear optics (Lu
(color online) Schematic diagram of the basic building block of a Kitaev lattice, consisting of four superconducting charge qubits (labelled 1 to 4): (i) Qubits 1 and 2 are
inductively coupled via a mutual inductance M; (ii) qubits
1 and 3 are coupled via an LC oscillator; and (iii) qubits 1
and 4 are capacitively coupled via a mutual capacitance Cm.
Inset: These three types of inter-qubit couplings are denoted
as X, Y and Z bonds ).
et al., 2009). The Hamiltonian
is the sum of mutually commuting stabilizers Av =
i and Bp = Q
i , where v runs over the vertices and p over the plaquettes (i.e. the small squares
deﬁned by four neighboring vertices) in a square lattice
and the products involve the qubits surrounding the vertices or plaquettes (Note that in this setup the qubits are
placed at the centers of lines connecting neighboring vertices). In optical lattices the creation and manipulation
of abelian and non-abelian anyons in topological lattice
models could be realized using ancilla particles . Furthermore, it could be possible to construct a Kitaev honeycomb lattice with superconducting
circuits (see Figure 22). Topological
models have also been investigated in . The implementation of these proposals would also contribute to
the development of topological quantum computation.
B. High-energy physics
Another area for the application of quantum simulation that is already showing promising developments is
high-energy physics. The study of relativistic quantum
systems such as gauge ﬁelds or Dirac fermions with quan-
(a) Proposed setup for the simulation of ringexchange models . The bosons (black
dots) reside on a square lattice with the molecules (gray dots)
at the centers of the plaquettes ). (b) Simulation of compact U(1) lattice gauge theories
 . Dipolar bosons reside on the sites of the
Kagome lattice (black dots); the hexagonal dual lattice is the
lattice formed by the centers of the corner-sharing triangles
(gray dots) ).
tum simulators was ﬁrst suggested in .
More recently, a mapping between the dynamics of the
2+1 Dirac oscillator and the Jaynes-Cummings model (in
particular in connection with trapped-ion experiments)
was proposed in . Such mappings
would allow the study of relativistic quantum mechanics described by the Dirac equation in a non-relativistic
quantum system.
A method for simulating the Dirac
equation in 3 + 1 dimensions for a free spin-1/2 particle
using a single trapped ion was proposed in . This simulation oﬀers the possibility of studying
eﬀects such as Zitterbewegung and the Klein paradox.
Zitterbewegung refers to the rapid oscillatory motion of
a free particle obeying the Dirac equation. Zitterbewegung has never been observed in its original form with
free relativistic particles, but it has been simulated with
a trapped ion . A recent paper
extended this work to the study of Zitterbewegung in
a magnetic ﬁeld ). The Klein paradox refers to the
situation in relativistic quantum mechanics where a potential barrier of the order of the electron mass becomes
nearly transparent for the electron. A quantum simulation of this phenomenon was recently implemented with
trapped ions .
A proposal for
a simulation using graphene was put forward in .
Note that it is also possible to
simulate classically the Zitterbewegung of a free Dirac
electron in an optical superlattice .
Dirac particles could also be investigated with neutralatom quantum simulators .
The simulation of gauge theories can be a very computationally intensive quantum many-body problem, and
there have been several recent proposals for the quantum
simulation of such theories. For example, several theoretical studies have considered abelian and non-abelian lattice gauge theories using neutral atoms.
A review on the subject was given in .
There have also been related proposals using trapped ions
 , cavity QED systems and superconducting circuits . A recent experiment used a superconducting
circuit to simulate a massless Klein-Gordon ﬁeld with
tunable speed of propagation, which was used to simulate the generation of photons in the dynamical casimir
eﬀect. In the possible simulation of
the Schwinger model using a chain of trapped ions was
considered. The simulation of lattice gauge theories on a
DQS was investigated in .
The authors gave the mapping between the operators
in the lattice gauge Hamiltonian for the U(1), SU(2),
and SU(3) (which is particularly important for quantum
chromodynamics) lattice gauge theories and spin operators, and they showed that the algorithm is eﬃcient.
Another proposal for the DQS of ﬁeld theories was given
in .
Atoms in optical lattices oﬀer the possibility of realizing the AQS of ring-exchange models .
Ring-exchange models describe elementary excitations in a solid, where, e.g., a
ring of hard-core bosons collectively rotate like a ring
around a central boson. The ring exchange Hamiltonian,
plaquettes
2b1 −n1n2 −n3n4
can be realized using atoms with two internal states: one
state trapped in a square lattice (see Figure 23a) and described by the simple Bose-Hubbard model, and a second
one trapped at the centers of the plaquettes. In trapped
atomic gases a microscopic Hamiltonian can be implemented and its phase diagram can be studied experimentally via controlling the strength of the interaction terms
 . Furthermore, with this system it
is possible to simulate a certain class of strong coupling
Hamiltonians, and in doing so, study exotic phases with
strong correlations. By implementing a Hubbard model
with an additional, strong nearest-neighbor interaction
on certain two- or three-dimensional lattices (for example a two-dimensional Kagome lattice) the simulation of
a U(1) lattice gauge theory would be possible (see Figure 23b). Non-interacting relativistic fermionic theories or topological insulators could also
be investigated using these systems .
In a quantum-circuit
simulation of the state of a nucleon was proposed. This
simulation could be implemented using a photonic net-
work. Finally, we also note the possible simulation of the
O(3) nonlinear sigma model using an array of superconducting and insulating spheres with electrons trapped in
the insulating spheres, as discussed in .
C. Cosmology
Quantum simulation could also ﬁnd applications in
analog gravity/cosmology models. For example, acoustic
waves in a two-component BEC could be used to investigate scalar ﬁelds within the curved space-time structure of an expanding universe . The simulation would be performed by varying
the interparticle coupling and/or expanding the condensate in a temporal ramp. This idea might be experimentally challenging but it opens up a new possible way to
study cosmology. The study of the analogue of cosmological particle creation with trapped ions was proposed in
 , and more recently, the analogue
of quantum ﬁeld eﬀects in cosmological spacetimes was
investigated in . There are also
numerous similarities between the behavior of superﬂuid
helium and cosmological phenomena, such as processes
in the early universe, as discussed in detail in . These similarities could be exploited, and a system of liquid helium could be used for the quantum simulation of problems in cosmology.
With analog models it would be possible to test predicted phenomena that have not yet been observed in
experiment. Examples include the possible observation
of an Unruh-like eﬀect (i.e., the observation by an accelerating observer of a thermal ﬂux of particles in vacuum) using the phonon excitation of trapped ions and the simulation of the Schwinger effect (i.e., the production of electron-positron pairs from
the vacuum under the action of a strong electric ﬁeld)
with atoms in an optical lattice . Furthermore, analogues of Hawking radiation can be investigated with atoms ,
ions and superconducting circuits , exciton-polariton superﬂuids
in semiconductors or even
with ultrashort pulses of light in microstructured optical ﬁbers ). Recently it has been demonstrated that Hawking
radiation can be measured in a classical analog system,
namely water surface waves .
D. Atomic physics
There is a deep analogy between natural atoms and
the artiﬁcial atoms formed, for example, by electrons
in small superconducting circuits . Both have discrete energy levels and exhibit coherent quantum oscillations between those levels.
(color online) Sisyphus cooling and ampliﬁcation in
a superconducting circuit .
The two energy levels of a superconducting qubit are shown
as a function of the current applied to the circuit. The current
in a nearby superconducting resonator drives the qubit, and
a microwave drive signal (green) is applied to the qubit. The
cycle a →b →c →d on the right side mimics Sisyphus cooling in atomic physics: the energy of emitted photons (blue)
is higher than the energy of photons absorbed from the drive
signal, causing a constant removal of energy from the resonator. In the analogy with Sisyphus in Greek mythology he
current in the resonator plays the role of Sisyphus and the
qubit plays the role of the rock. Sisyphus is constantly pushing the rock uphill (as can be seen in steps a and c), and
the rock keeps going back to the bottom of the hill. The cycle e →f →g →h on the left side represents the opposite
scenario, Sisyphus ampliﬁcation, where energy is constantly
added to the resonator ).
whereas natural atoms are driven using visible or microwave photons that excite electrons from one state to
another, the artiﬁcial atoms in the circuits are driven by
currents, voltages, and microwave photons. The resulting electric and magnetic ﬁelds control the tunneling of
electrons across Josephson junctions. The eﬀects of those
ﬁelds on the circuits are the analogues of the Stark and
Zeeman eﬀects in atoms. Diﬀerences between quantum
circuits and natural atoms include how strongly each system couples to its environment (the coupling is weak for
atoms and strong for circuits) and the energy scales of
the two systems.
In contrast with naturally occurring
atoms, artiﬁcial atoms can be lithographically designed
to have speciﬁc characteristics, such as a large dipole moment or particular transition frequencies. This tunability
is an important advantage over natural atoms. Superconducting circuits can also be used for new types of
masers, lasers and single-photon generators . These circuits can provide analogues of sideband
cooling and Sisyphus cooling (see Figure 24). Moreover, they can be used to
test Bell inequalities , produce
Schr¨odinger-cat states, study Landau-Zener-St¨uckelberg
interferometry and simulate
the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment . Superconducting circuits have also been used to
engineer selection rules and thus create combinations of
selection rules that are not possible with natural atoms
 .
One of the most important models in atomic physics
and quantum optics is the Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian, which describes the interaction of a single quantized mode of the electromagnetic ﬁeld with a two-level
HJC = iℏg0
where g0 is the atom-ﬁeld coupling strength, the operators a† and a are the bosonic creation and annihilation
operators, and σ+ and σ−are the atomic raising and
lowering operators.
The Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian can be realized
with superconducting circuits ).
E. Quantum chemistry
Quantum simulators could also have an important
contribution in quantum chemistry ). For example, an eﬃcient algorithm for calculating the thermal rate constant was given in . The algorithm involves the initialization
of the DQS to an equal superposition of position eigenstates, followed by a unitary evolution that makes use of
the quantum Fourier transform and ﬁnally, a sequence of
measurements yielding the energy spectrum and eigenstates.
The algorithm would run in polynomial time
while any exact classical simulation is bound to exhibit
exponential scaling. Another example is the multiconﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld wave function-based quantum
algorithm proposed in for obtaining
the energy spectrum of a molecular system.
Moreover, a quantum computer could be used to simulate the static and dynamical chemical properties of
molecules. In it was shown
how to compute molecular energies using DQS and the
required number of qubits was estimated (see also Figure
4). The number of qubits scales linearly with the number of basis functions, and the number of gates grows
polynomially with the number of qubits, so simulations
with a few tens or a hundred qubits would already outperform classical computers. The simulation of chemical
dynamics is also achievable in polynomial time .
The molecular energies of the hydrogen
molecule have been calculated using a small photonic
DQS . More recently, chemical reaction dynamics have been investigated using NMR DQS
 .
Using AQS it would be possible to simulate chemical
reactions. In a proposal for using the redistribution of electrons between semiconductor quantum dots to simulate the redistribution of electrons in a chemical reaction was put forward. The authors showed how a quantum dot with one electron can
be considered an artiﬁcial hydrogen atom and a quantum dot containing four electrons can be viewed as an
artiﬁcial oxygen atom.
Depending on the tunnel coupling strengths, electron distribution, and shell structure, the dots can form both ionic- and covalent-like
bonds. Various reaction regimes and diﬀerent reaction
products can be obtained by varying the speed of voltage
changes applied to the gates forming the quantum dots.
This promises the modeling of various chemical reactions
 . Furthermore, a recent proposal
suggests that chemical reactions can also be simulated
with ultracold atoms in a waveguide and investigated experimentally in (see also
the discussion in Section V.B). Second, it would also be
possible to simulate open quantum systems with closed
quantum systems. A simulation of decoherence caused
by classical noise that was artiﬁcially added to the control signal of a superconducting qubit was reported in . In it was theoretically shown that a driven harmonic oscillator can act
as a quantum simulator for the non-Markovian damped
harmonic oscillator. Other studies considered the Dicke
model ,
the open-system dynamics of a harmonic oscillator coupled to an artiﬁcially engineered reservoir or open quantum
systems in thermal equilibrium .
Reference discussed an open-system
quantum simulator with Rydberg states of neutral atoms
in an optical lattice.
General methods for simulating
the markovian dynamics of open quantum systems have
been investigated in .
A recent experiment with trapped ions demonstrated the possibility of
engineering open-system dynamics using the dissipative
preparation of entangled states .
Another recent experiment simulated non-markovian Dynamics using a linear-optics setup .
G. Quantum chaos
An application of DQS with a few qubits is the study of
the dynamics of simple quantum maps . For instance, the quantum baker’s map, a prototypical example in quantum chaos, has an eﬃcient realization in terms of quantum gates . The
quantum baker’s map has been experimentally realized
in NMR and with linear optics
 . Another example is the kicked
Harper model . It has been
shown that in some cases the quantum approach to the
kicked Harper model can provide a polynomial gain as
compared to classical algorithms. It should exhibit observable interesting behavior even with only eight qubits.
H. Nuclear physics
In nuclear physics one must solve an N-body quantum
problem. Even though N is not as large as in condensed
matter physics (in this case N, the atomic mass number,
is smaller than 300), the calculation of the nuclear force
is diﬃcult and therefore nuclear physics simulations require signiﬁcant computing power. Several phenomenological models have been developed, one of which is the
superﬂuid model of the atomic nucleus.
As suggested
in , this model could be simulated using an analog controllable system: a superﬂuid
gas of fermionic atoms. Given the ease of rotating atomic
clouds, this approach oﬀers the possibility of studying
the response of nuclei to increasing angular momentum
with unprecedented control over the relevant parameters
such as the interaction strength, particle number, external trapping potential and rotation frequency. The reviews detail similarities
between atomic nuclei and cold atomic gases, which could
be utilized for designing quantum simulators of nuclei using atomic ensembles.
I. Interferometry
Nonlinear interferometers were ﬁrst investigated in
trapped-ion experiments .
was among the ﬁrst experimental realizations of quantum
simulation. More recently, the study of Mach-Zehnder interferometry with an array of trapped ions was explored
in .
Boson sampling is another interferometry problem that is closely related to
quantum simulation.
Several recent experiments have
demonstrated boson sampling using photons , and Ref.
 
proposed an implementation using trapped ions.
Superconducting
example, to perform Landau-Zener-St¨uckelberg interferometry and Fano and Fabry-Perot
interferometry . These latter phenomena can be realized
using quasi-one-dimensional open systems where photons
are injected from one side and move towards the opposite
side of the device. Along the way, the photons interact
with either one or two qubits acting as tunable mirrors,
controlled by changing the applied electric and/or magnetic ﬁelds on the qubits.
These qubits, operating as
tunable mirrors, can change the reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients of photons conﬁned in waveguides.
J. Other applications
Some recent topics in physics research, such as Majorana fermions ,
graphene or neutrino oscillations
 are now discussed in the context of
quantum simulation.
The possibility of simulating the Schr¨odinger equation
on a DQS was ﬁrst discussed in 1996 , with
concrete algorithms given in 1998 , where a quantum lattice-gas model for the
many-particle Schr¨odinger equation in d dimensions was
proposed. More recently, the single-particle Schr¨odinger
equation was considered in more detail in , where it was shown that six to ten qubits
would be suﬃcient for a simulation of the single-particle
Schr¨odinger equation.
Another direction of interest is quantum heat engines, quantum Brownian motion and quantum thermodynamics . The quantum versions
of the Carnot and other heat engines were discussed in
 . A proposal for the implementation
of a quantum heat engine assisted by a Maxwell demon
with superconducting circuits was given in (Quan et al.,
There are many potential applications for quantum
simulators in various ﬁelds of physics and chemistry. As
mentioned at the beginning of this section, with quantum simulation one could address problems that are either classically intractable (such as the numerous examples from condensed-matter physics discussed above) or
experimentally diﬃcult or inaccessible (such as the examples from high-energy physics and cosmology).
practical quantum simulators become available, it is to
be expected that more disciplines will wish to add quantum simulation to their toolbox of research methods and
many new applications will be uncovered.
VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Recent theoretical and experimental results on quantum simulation lead us to believe that practical quan-
Potential applications of quantum simulators and the physical systems in which they could be implemented, along
with relevant references. Asterisks denote experimental realizations. We note that this is not an exhaustive list.
Application
Proposed implementation
Condensed matter physics:
Hubbard models
Atoms , *
Ions 
Polar molecules 
Quantum dots 
Cavities ,
 
Spin models
Atoms ,
 *
Ions ,
 ,
 *,
 *
Cavities 
Nuclear spins on diamond surface 
Superconducting circuits 
Electrons on helium 
Quantum phase transitions Atoms *
Polar molecules ,
 
Ions ,
 , *,
NMR, ,
 
Superconducting circuits *
Spin glasses
DQS 
Superconducting circuits 
Disordered systems
Atoms *,
 *
Ions 
Superconducting circuits 
NMR *
Frustrated systems
Ions , *
Photons *
High-Tc superconductivity DQS 
Quantum dots 
BCS pairing
NMR *
BCS-BEC crossover
Atoms *
Metamaterials
Superconducting circuits 
Time-symmetry breaking
Superconducting circuits 
Topological order
Atoms 
Polar molecules 
Linear optics *
Superconducting circuits 
Continuation of Table II, but focused on applications other than condensed-matter physics. As in Table II, this
is not an exhaustive list.
Application
Proposed implementation
High-energy physics:
Lattice gauge theories
DQS 
Atoms 
Dirac particles
Ions ,
 *, 
Atoms 
Photons 
Cosmology:
Unruh eﬀect
Ions 
Hawking radiation
Atoms 
Ions 
Superconducting circuits 
Universe expansion
BEC 
Ions 
Atomic physics:
Cavity QED
Superconducting circuits , *
Superconducting circuits *, 
Open systems:
NMR *
Ions , *
Superconducting circuits *
Chemistry:
Thermal rate calculations
DQS 
Molecular energies
DQS 
Linear optics *, NMR *
Chemical reactions
DQS 
Quantum dots 
Quantum chaos:
NMR *
Linear optics 
Interferometry:
Ions *, 
Photons , *,
 *
Superconducting circuits 
Other applications:
Schr¨odinger equation
DQS 
Quantum thermodynamics Superconducting circuits 
tum simulators will be built in the near future.
demonstration of quantum simulations using more than
a few tens of qubits would mark the point where quantum computers (whether digital or analog) surpass their
classical counterparts, at least for certain applications.
This would be a milestone for physics, computer science,
and science in general.
However, there are still issues that must be addressed.
From the experimental point of view, in all proposed
quantum simulators improved controllability and scalability are required. With the exception of atoms in optical lattices, quantum simulators cannot yet handle large
arrays of qubits. On the other hand, individual control
and readout are diﬃcult to realize for atoms in optical
lattices, while for other systems that is not a problem.
We note here that for some problems where bulk properties are of interest, individual control and measurement
may not be required. It is also important to note that,
as some recent experiments with trapped ions and superconducting qubits have demonstrated, even with a
small-scale quantum simulator exciting physical phenomena could be explored.
From the theoretical point of view, further studies of
decoherence and control would be very useful, especially
the estimation of the experimental requirements for each
quantum simulator.
It is also of both theoretical and
practical importance to investigate when and to what
extent one can make use of the simulator’s decoherence.
Quantum simulators would not only provide insights
into new physical phenomena, but also help solve dif-
ﬁcult quantum many-body problems.
Moreover, theoretical and experimental progress in quantum simulation will also have a positive impact on the development
of other ﬁelds such as adiabatic quantum computation
 , measurement-based quantum computation , topological quantum
computation and the theory of quantum
computation .
For example, adiabatic quantum computation can be viewed as
a special case of quantum simulation where the ground
state of the simulated Hamiltonian encodes the solution to a computational problem. The ability to simulate various Hamiltonians could then be useful for realizing practical adiabatic quantum computation . Progress on the experimental implementation of quantum simulation would also be relevant for
measurement-based quantum computation. For instance,
ions in planar Coulomb crystals and atoms in optical lattices
 have been proposed for implementing
measurement-based quantum computation. The study of
entanglement in many-body systems and its relation with
quantum phase transitions should
also be mentioned as an exciting direction closely related
to quantum simulation. Finally, the ability to incorporate non-physical operations into quantum simulations
of physical systems could lead
to new possibilities for studying quantum simulation and
quantum systems in general.
Quantum simulation will profoundly impact physics research.
It will provide a new tool for testing physical
theories or predicting the behavior of physical systems in
various possible conditions, in addition to allowing access
to new physical regimes that are currently beyond experimental reach. Even in the absence of a theory to be tested
or realistically motivated conditions under which the behavior of a physical system is to be predicted, quantum
simulators will also oﬀer scientists a new realm of exploration. It might very well happen that unpredicted
discoveries are made through the curiosity-driven experimentation with future quantum simulators.
Acknowledgments
We thank N. Lambert and P. Nation for useful comments on the manuscript. This work was partially supported by the ARO, RIKEN iTHES Project, MURI Center for Dynamic Magneto-Optics, JSPS-RFBR contract
12-02-92100, Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research
(S), MEXT Kakenhi on Quantum Cybernetics and the
JSPS via its FIRST program.