A Survey of the Recent Architectures of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Asifullah Khan1, 2*, Anabia Sohail1, 2, Umme Zahoora1, and Aqsa Saeed Qureshi1
1 Pattern Recognition Lab, DCIS, PIEAS, Nilore, Islamabad 45650, Pakistan
2 Deep Learning Lab, Center for Mathematical Sciences, PIEAS, Nilore, Islamabad 45650, Pakistan
 
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a special type of Neural Networks, which has
shown exemplary performance on several competitions related to Computer Vision and Image
Processing. Some of the exciting application areas of CNN include Image Classification and
Segmentation, Object Detection, Video Processing, Natural Language Processing, and Speech
Recognition. The powerful learning ability of deep CNN is primarily due to the use of multiple
feature extraction stages that can automatically learn representations from the data. The
availability of a large amount of data and improvement in the hardware technology has
accelerated the research in CNNs, and recently interesting deep CNN architectures have been
reported. Several inspiring ideas to bring advancements in CNNs have been explored, such as the
use of different activation and loss functions, parameter optimization, regularization, and
architectural innovations. However, the significant improvement in the representational capacity
of the deep CNN is achieved through architectural innovations. Notably, the ideas of exploiting
spatial and channel information, depth and width of architecture, and multi-path information
processing have gained substantial attention. Similarly, the idea of using a block of layers as a
structural unit is also gaining popularity. This survey thus focuses on the intrinsic taxonomy
present in the recently reported deep CNN architectures and, consequently, classifies the recent
innovations in CNN architectures into seven different categories. These seven categories are
based on spatial exploitation, depth, multi-path, width, feature-map exploitation, channel
boosting, and attention. Additionally, the elementary understanding of CNN components, current
challenges, and applications of CNN are also provided.
Keywords: Deep Learning, Convolutional Neural Networks, Taxonomy, Representational
Capacity, Residual Learning, and Channel Boosted CNN.
 
 
1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are known to learn the underlying relationship in data and
thus make decisions without requiring explicit instructions. In literature, various exciting works
have been reported to understand and/or emulate the human sensory responses such as speech
and vision . In 1989, a new class of Neural Networks
(NN), called Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was reported, which has
shown enormous potential in Machine Vision (MV) related tasks.
CNNs are one of the best learning algorithms for understanding image content and have
shown exemplary performance in image segmentation, classification, detection, and retrieval
related tasks . The success of CNNs has captured attention
beyond academia. In industry, companies such as Google, Microsoft, AT&T, NEC, and
Facebook have developed active research groups for exploring new architectures of CNN . At present, most of the frontrunners of image processing and computer vision (CV)
competitions are employing deep CNN based models.
The attractive feature of CNN is its ability to exploit spatial or temporal correlation in
data. The topology of CNN is divided into multiple learning stages composed of a combination
of the convolutional layers, non-linear processing units, and subsampling layers . CNN is a feedforward multilayered hierarchical network, where each layer, using a bank
of convolutional kernels, performs multiple transformations . Convolution
operation helps in the extraction of useful features from locally correlated data points. The output
of the convolutional kernels is then assigned to the non-linear processing unit (activation
function), which not only helps in learning abstractions but also embeds non-linearity in the
feature space. This non-linearity generates different patterns of activations for different responses
and thus facilitates in learning of semantic differences in images. The output of the non-linear
activation function is usually followed by subsampling, which helps in summarizing the results
and also makes the input invariant to geometrical distortions . CNN, with the automatic feature extraction ability, reduces the need for a separate feature
extractor . Thus, CNN without exhaustive processing can learn good
internal representation from raw pixels. Notable attributes of CNN are hierarchical learning,
 
 
automatic feature extraction, multi-tasking, and weight sharing .
CNN first came to limelight through the work of LeCuN in 1989 for processing of gridlike topological data (images and time series data) . The architectural design of CNN was inspired by Hubel and Wiesel’s work and thus
mostly follows the basic structure of primate’s visual cortex .
Different stages of the learning process in CNN show quite a resemblance to the primate’s
ventral pathway of the visual cortex (V1-V2-V3-V4-IT/VTC) . The visual
cortex of primates first receives input from the retinotopic area. Whereby, the lateral geniculate
nucleus performs multi-scale highpass filtering and contrast normalization. After this, detection
is performed by different regions of the visual cortex categorized as V1, V2, V3, and V4. In fact,
V1 and V2 regions of the visual cortex are similar to convolutional and subsampling layers. In
contrast, the inferior temporal region resembles the higher layers of CNN, which makes an
inference about the image .
During training, CNN learns through backpropagation algorithm, by regulating the
change in weights according to the target. Optimization of an objective function using a
backpropagation algorithm is similar to the response based learning of the human brain. The
multilayered, hierarchical structure of deep CNN, gives it the ability to extract low, mid, and
high-level features. High-level features (more abstract features) are a combination of lower and
mid-level features. The hierarchical feature extraction ability of CNN emulates the deep and
layered learning process of the Neocortex in the human brain, which dynamically learns features
from the raw data . The popularity of CNN is primarily due to its hierarchical
feature extraction ability.
Deep architectures often have an advantage over shallow architectures when dealing with
complex learning problems. The stacking of multiple linear and non-linear processing units in a
layer-wise fashion provides the ability to learn complex representations at different levels of
abstraction. Consequently, in recognition tasks consisting of hundreds of image categories, deep
CNNs have shown substantial performance improvement over conventional vision-based models
 . The observation that the deep
architectures can improve the representational capacity of a CNN heightened the use of CNN in
image classification and segmentation tasks . The availability of big data
and advancements in hardware are also the main reasons for the recent success of deep CNNs.
 
 
Empirical studies showed that if given enough training data, deep CNNs can learn the invariant
representations and may achieve human-level performance. In addition to its use as a supervised
learning mechanism, the potential of deep CNNs can also be exploited to extract useful
representations from a large scale of unlabeled data. Recently, it is shown that different levels of
features, including both low and high-level, can be transferred to a generic recognition task by
exploiting the concept of Transfer Learning (TL) .
From the late 1990s up to 2000, various improvements in CNN learning methodology
and architecture were performed to make CNN scalable to large, heterogeneous, complex, and
multiclass problems. Innovations in CNNs include different aspects such as modification of
processing units, parameter and hyper-parameter optimization strategies, design patterns and
connectivity of layers, etc. CNN based applications became prevalent after the exemplary
performance of AlexNet on the ImageNet dataset in 2012 . Significant
innovations in CNN have been proposed since then and are largely attributed to the restructuring
of processing units and designing of new blocks. Zeiler and Fergus 
gave the concept of layer-wise visualization of CNN to improve the understanding of feature
extraction stages, which shifted the trend towards extraction of features at low spatial resolution
in deep architecture as performed in VGG . Nowadays, most of
the new architectures are built upon the principle of simple and homogenous topology, as
introduced in VGG. Google deep learning group introduced an innovative idea of a split,
transform and merge, with the corresponding block known as inception block. The inception
block for the very first time gave the concept of branching within a layer, which allows
abstraction of features at different spatial scales . In 2015, the concept of
skip connections introduced by ResNet for the training of deep CNNs gained
popularity. Afterward, this concept was used by most of the succeeding networks, such as
Inception-ResNet, Wide ResNet, ResNeXt, etc., .
Different architectural designs such as Wide ResNet, ResNeXt, Pyramidal Net, Xception,
PolyNet, and many others explore the effect of multilevel transformations on CNNs learning
capacity by introducing cardinality or increasing the width . Therefore, the focus of research shifted from
parameter optimization and connections readjustment towards the improved architectural design
 
 
of the network. This shift resulted in many new architectural ideas such as channel boosting,
spatial and feature-map wise exploitation and attention-based information processing etc., .
In the past few years, different interesting surveys are conducted on deep CNNs that
elaborate on the essential components of CNN and their alternatives. The survey reported in reviewed the famous architectures from 2012-2015 along with their basic
components. Similarly, there are prominent surveys that discuss different algorithms and
applications of CNN . Likewise, the survey presented in discusses the
taxonomy of CNNs based on acceleration techniques. On the other hand, in this survey, we
discuss the intrinsic taxonomy present in the recent and prominent CNN architectures reported
from 2012-2020. The various CNN architectures discussed in this survey are broadly classified
into seven main categories, namely; spatial exploitation, depth, multi-path, width, feature-map
exploitation, channel boosting, and attention-based CNNs.
This survey also gives an insight into the basic structure of CNN as well as its historical
perspective, presenting different eras of CNN that trace back from its origin to its latest
developments and achievements. This survey will help the readers to develop the theoretical
insight into the design principles of CNN and thus may further accelerate the architectural
innovations in CNN.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following order (shown in Fig. 1): Section 1
develops the systematic understanding of CNN, discusses its resemblance with primate’s visual
cortex, as well as its contribution to MV. In this regard, Section 2 provides an overview of
essential CNN components, and Section 3 discusses the architectural evolution of deep CNNs.
Whereas, Section 4 discusses the recent innovations in CNN architectures and categorizes CNNs
into seven broad classes. Section 5 and 6 shed light on applications of CNNs and current
challenges, whereas section 7 discusses future work. Finally, the last section concludes.
 
 
Fig. 1 Organization of the survey paper showing different sections.
2 Basic CNN components
Nowadays, CNN is considered as one of the most widely used ML technique, especially in
vision-related applications. CNN can learn representations from the grid-like data, and recently it
has shown substantial performance improvement in various ML applications. A typical block
diagram of an ML system is shown in Fig. 2. Since CNN possesses both good feature generation
and discrimination ability, therefore in a typical ML system, CNN capabilities are exploited for
feature generation and classification.
 
 
A typical CNN architecture generally comprises alternate layers of convolution and
pooling followed by one or more fully connected layers at the end. In some cases, a fully
connected layer is replaced with a global average pooling layer. In addition to different mapping
functions, different regulatory units such as batch normalization and dropout are also
incorporated to optimize CNN performance . The arrangement of CNN
components plays a fundamental role in designing new architectures and thus achieving
enhanced performance. This section briefly discusses the role of these components in a CNN
architecture.
Convolutional layer
The convolutional layer is composed of a set of convolutional kernels where each neuron acts as
a kernel. However, if the kernel is symmetric, the convolution operation becomes a correlation
operation . Convolutional kernel works by dividing the image into
small slices, commonly known as receptive fields. The division of an image into small blocks
helps in extracting feature motifs. Kernel convolves with the images using a specific set of
weights by multiplying its elements with the corresponding elements of the receptive field
 . Convolution operation can be expressed as follows:
i x y e u v
ci x y is an element of the input image tensor
CI , which is element wise
multiplied by
u v index of the kth convolutional kernel
lk of the lth layer. Whereas output
feature-map
convolutional
(1,1),...,
( , ),...,
. The different mathematical symbols used are defined in
Due to weight sharing ability of convolutional operation, different sets of features within
an image can be extracted by sliding kernel with the same set of weights on the image and thus
makes CNN parameter efficient as compared to the fully connected networks. Convolution
operation may further be categorized into different types based on the type and size of filters,
type of padding, and the direction of convolution .
 
 
Fig. 2 Basic layout of a typical ML system having several stages.
 
 
Table 1 Definition of mathematical symbols
Description
Total 𝑥 coordinates of an image
𝑥𝑡ℎ coordinate under consideration of an image
Total y coordinates of an image
coordinate under consideration of an image
Channel index
(𝑥, 𝑦) element of
c channel of an image
Total number of layers
Layer number
Total number of kernels of
Kernel number of
Total number of rows of
row under consideration
Total number of columns of
v column under consideration
u v element of
Input feature matrix for
Total number of rows of feature matrix
row under consideration
Total number of columns of feature matrix
q column under consideration
p q element of feature matrix
Convolution operation
Pooling operation
Activation function
Concatenation operation
Transformation gate
Carry gate
Squeeze operation
Excitation operation
Weight vector showing feature-maps importance learned using SE operation
Transformation function for two layer NN implemented by SE block
Sigmoid gate implemented by SE block
Trunk mask
Channel boosted input tensor
 
 
Pooling layer
Feature motifs, which result as an output of convolution operation, can occur at different
locations in the image. Once features are extracted, its exact location becomes less important as
long as its approximate position relative to others is preserved. Pooling or down-sampling is an
interesting local operation. It sums up similar information in the neighborhood of the receptive
field and outputs the dominant response within this local region .
Equation (2) shows the pooling operation in which
Z represents the pooled feature-map
of lth layer for kth input feature-map
lF , whereas
defines the type of pooling operation.
The use of pooling operation helps to extract a combination of features, which are invariant to
translational shifts and small distortions . Reduction in
the size of feature-map to invariant feature set not only regulates the complexity of the network
but also helps in increasing the generalization by reducing overfitting. Different types of pooling
formulations such as max, average, L2, overlapping, spatial pyramid pooling, etc. are used in
CNN .
Activation function
Activation function serves as a decision function and helps in learning of intricate patterns. The
selection of an appropriate activation function can accelerate the learning process. The activation
function for a convolved feature-map is defined in equation (3).
In the above equation,
lF is an output of a convolution, which is assigned to activation
that adds non-linearity and returns a transformed output
lT for lth layer. In
literature, different activation functions such as sigmoid, tanh, maxout, SWISH, ReLU, and
variants of ReLU, such as leaky ReLU, ELU, and PReLU are used to inculcate non-linear
combination of features . However, ReLU and its variants are preferred as they help in overcoming
the vanishing gradient problem . One of the recently
 
 
proposed activation function is MISH, which has shown better performance than ReLU in most
of the recently proposed deep networks on benchmark datasets .
Batch normalization
Batch normalization is used to address the issues related to the internal covariance shift within
feature-maps. The internal covariance shift is a change in the distribution of hidden units’ values,
which slows down the convergence (by forcing learning rate to small value) and requires careful
initialization of parameters. Batch normalization for a transformed feature-map
lF is shown in
equation (4).
In equation (4),
N represents normalized feature-map,
lF is the input feature-map,
 depict mean and variance of a feature-map for a mini batch respectively. In order to
avoid division by zero,  is added for numerical stability. Batch normalization unifies the
distribution of feature-map values by setting them to zero mean and unit variance . Furthermore, it smoothens the flow of gradient and acts as a regulating factor,
which thus helps in improving the generalization of the network.
Dropout introduces regularization within the network, which ultimately improves generalization
by randomly skipping some units or connections with a certain probability. In NNs, multiple
connections that learn a non-linear relation are sometimes co-adapted, which causes overfitting
 . This random dropping of some connections or units produces several
thinned network architectures, and finally, one representative network is selected with small
weights. This selected architecture is then considered as an approximation of all of the proposed
networks .
Fully connected layer
Fully connected layer is mostly used at the end of the network for classification. Unlike pooling
and convolution, it is a global operation. It takes input from feature extraction stages and
 
 
globally analyses the output of all the preceding layers . Consequently, it makes
a non-linear combination of selected features, which are used for the classification of data
 .
3 Architectural evolution of deep CNNs
Nowadays, CNNs are considered as the most widely used algorithms among biologically
inspired Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques. CNN history begins with the neurobiological
experiments conducted by Hubel and Wiesel . Their
work provided a platform for many cognitive models, and CNN replaced almost all of these.
Over the decades, different efforts have been carried out to improve the performance of CNNs.
The evolutionary history of deep CNN architectures is pictorially represented in Fig. 3.
Improvements in CNN architectures can be categorized into five different eras that are discussed
Origin of CNN: Late 1980s-1999
CNNs have been applied to visual tasks since the late 1980s. In 1989, LeCuN et al. proposed the
first multilayered CNN named ConvNet, whose origin rooted in Fukushima’s Neocognitron
 . LeCuN proposed a supervised training of
ConvNet using the backpropagation algorithm, in comparison to the unsupervised reinforcement
learning scheme used by its predecessor Neocognitron .
LeCuN’s work thus made a foundation for the modern 2D CNNs. This ConvNet showed
successful results for handwritten digit and zip code recognition related problems . In 1998, LeCuN proposed an improved version of ConvNet, which was famously
known as LeNet-5, and it started the use of CNN in classifying characters in a document
recognition related applications . Due to the good performance of CNN
in optical character and fingerprint recognition, its commercial use in ATM and Banks started in
1993 and 1996, respectively. In this era, LeNet-5 achieved many successful milestones for
optical character recognition tasks, but it didn’t perform well on other image recognition
 
 
Fig. 3 Evolutionary history of deep CNNs showing architectural innovations from ConvNet till
to date architectures.
 
 
Stagnation of CNN: Early 2000
In the late 1990s and early 2000, researchers had little insight into the internal working of CNN,
and it was considered as a black box. Complicated architecture design and heavy processing
made it hard to train CNN. It was widely presumed in early 2000 that the backpropagation
algorithm used for training of CNN was not effective in converging to the global minima of the
error surface. Thus, CNN was considered as a less effective feature extractor compared to
handcrafted features . Moreover, no comprehensive dataset of diverse
categories of images was available at that time. Therefore, because of the insignificant
improvement in CNN performance at the cost of high computational time, little attention was
given to explore its role in different applications such as object detection, video surveillance, etc.
At that time, other statistical methods and in particular, SVM became more popular than CNN
due to their relatively high performance . This improvement in performance
expedited the research in CNNs by extending their application’s beyond optical character
recognition to other script’s character recognition, deployment in image sensors for face
detection in video conferencing, and regulation of street crimes, etc. . Likewise, CNN based systems were industrialized in
markets for customers’ tracking . Moreover, CNN’s potential in other applications such as medical image segmentation,
anomaly detection, and robot vision was also explored .
Revival of CNN: 2006-2011
Deep CNNs generally have complex architecture and time-intensive training phase that
sometimes may span over weeks. In early 2000, there were a few parallel processing techniques
and limited hardware resources for the training of deep Networks. Training of a deep CNNs with
a typical activation function such as sigmoid may suffer from exponential decay and explosion of
 
 
a gradient. Since 2006, significant efforts have been made to tackle the CNN optimization
problem. In this regard, several interesting initialization and training strategies were reported to
overcome the difficulties encountered in the training of deep CNNs and the learning of invariant
features. Hinton reported the concept of greedy layer-wise pre-training in 2006, which revived
the research in deep learning . Experimental studies
showed that both supervised and unsupervised pre-training could initialize a network in a better
way than random initialization. Bengio and other researchers proposed that the sigmoid
activation function is not suitable for the training of deep architectures with random initialization
of weights. This observation started the use of activation functions other than sigmoid such as
ReLU, tanh etc., . The revival of deep learning was one of the factors,
which brought deep CNNs into limelight .
Ranzato et al. used max-pooling instead of subsampling, which showed good
results by learning invariant features . In late 2006,
researchers started using graphics processing units (GPUs) to accelerate the training of deep NN
and CNN architectures . In 2007, NVIDIA launched the CUDA programming platform, which allows exploitation
of parallel processing capabilities of GPU with a greater degree . In essence, the use of GPUs for NN and CNN training and other hardware
improvements were the main factors, which revived the research in CNN . In 2010, Fei-Fei Li’s group at Stanford, established a large database of
images known as ImageNet, containing millions of annotated images belonging to a large
number of classes . This database was coupled with the annual
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC), where the performances of
various models have been evaluated and scored . Similarly, in the same year,
Stanford released PASCAL 2010 VOC dataset for object detection. ILSVRC and Neural
Information Processing Systems Conference (NIPS) are the two platforms that play a dominant
role in strengthening research and increasing the use of CNN and thus making it popular.
Rise of CNN: 2012-2014
The availability of extensive training data and hardware advancements are the factors that
contributed to the advancement in CNN research. But the main driving forces that have
accelerated the research and give rise to the use of CNNs in image classification and recognition
 
 
tasks are parameter optimization strategies and new architectural ideas . The main breakthrough in CNN performance was brought by
AlexNet, which showed exemplary performance in 2012-ILSVRC (reduced error rate from 25.8
to 16.4) as compared to conventional CV techniques .
In this era, several attempts were made to improve the performance of CNN; depth and
parameter optimization strategies were explored with a significant reduction in computational
cost. Similarly, different architectural designs were proposed, whereby each new architecture
tried to overcome the shortcomings of previously proposed architectures in combination with
new structural reformulations. With the trend of designing very deep CNNs, it generally
becomes difficult to independently determine filter dimensions, stride, padding, and other hyperparameters for each layer. This problem is resolved by designing convolutional layers with a
fixed topology that can be repeated multiple times. This shifted the trend from custom layer
design towards modular and uniform layer design. The concept of modularity in CNNs made it
easy to tailor them for different tasks effortlessly . In this connection, a different idea of branching and block within a layer was
introduced by the Google group . It should be noted that in this era, two
different types of architectures, deep and narrow, as well as deep and wide, were in use.
Rapid increase in architectural innovations and applications of CNN: 2015-
The research in CNN is still going on and has a significant potential for improvement. It is
generally observed that the significant improvements in CNN performance occurred from 2015-
2019. The representational capacity of a CNN usually depends on its depth, and in a sense, an
enriched feature set ranging from simple to complex abstractions can help in learning complex
problems. However, the main challenge faced by deep architectures is that of the diminishing
gradient. Initially, researchers tried to subside this problem by connecting intermediate layers to
auxiliary learners . In 2015, the emerging area of research was mainly the
development of new connections to improve the convergence rate of deep CNN architectures. In
this regard, different ideas such as information gating mechanism across multiple layers, skip
connections, and cross-layer channel connectivity was introduced . Different experimental studies showed that state-of-the-art deep
 
 
architectures such as VGG, ResNet, ResNext, etc. also showed good results for challenging
recognition and localization problems like semantic and instance-based object segmentation,
scene parsing, scene location, etc. Most of the famous object detection and segmentation
architectures such as Single Shot Multibox Detector (SSD), Region-based CNN (R-CNN), Faster
R-CNN, Mask R-CNN and Fully Convolutional Neural Network (FCN) are built on the lines of
ResNet, VGG, Inception, etc. Similarly, many interesting detection algorithms such as Feature
Pyramid Networks, Cascade R-CNN, Libra R-CNN, etc., modified the architectures as
mentioned earlier to improve the performance . Applications of deep CNN were also extended to image captioning by combining
these networks with recurrent neural network (RNN) and thus showed state-of-the-art results on
MS COCO-2015 image captioning challenge .
Similarly, in 2016, it was observed that the stacking of multiple transformations not only
depth-wise but also in parallel fashion showed good learning for complex problems . Different researchers used a hybrid of the already
proposed architectures to improve deep CNN performance . In 2017, the focus
of researchers was mainly on designing of generic blocks that can be inserted at any learning
stage in CNN architecture to improve the network representation . Designing of
new blocks is one of the growing areas of research in CNN, where generic blocks are used to
assign attention to spatial and feature-map (channel) information . In 2018, a new idea of channel boosting was introduced by Khan et al.
 to boost the performance of a CNN by learning distinct features as well as
exploiting the already learned features through the concept of TL.
However, two main concerns observed with deep and wide architectures are the high
computational cost and memory requirement. As a result, it is very challenging to deploy stateof-the-art wide and deep CNN models in resource-constrained environments. Conventional
convolution operation requires a huge number of multiplications, which increases the inference
time and restricts the applicability of CNN to low memory and time constraint applications
 . Many real-world applications, such as autonomous vehicles, robotics,
healthcare, and mobile applications, perform the tasks that need to be carried on computationally
limited platforms in a timely manner. Therefore, different modifications in CNN are performed
 
 
to make them appropriate for resource-constrained environments. Prominent modifications are
knowledge distillation, training of small networks, or squeezing of pre-trained networks (such as
pruning, quantization, hashing, Huffman coding, etc.) . GoogleNet exploited the idea of small networks, which
replaces the conventional convolution with point-wise group convolution operation to make it
computationally efficient. Similarly, ShuffleNet used point-wise group convolution but with a
new idea of channel shuffle that significantly reduces the number of operations without affecting
the accuracy. In the same way, ANTNet proposed a novel architectural block known as
ANTBlock, which at low computational cost, achieved good performance on benchmark datasets
 .
From 2012 up till now, many improvements have been reported in CNN architectures. As
regards the architectural advancement of CNNs, recently, the focus of research has been on
designing of new blocks that can boost network representation by exploiting feature-maps or
manipulating input representation by adding artificial channels. Moreover, along with this, the
trend is towards the design of lightweight architectures without compromising the performance
to make CNN applicable for resource constraint hardware.
4 Architectural innovations in CNN
Different improvements in CNN architecture have been made from 1989 to date. These
improvements can be categorized as parameter optimization, regularization, structural
reformulation, etc. However, it is observed that the main thrust in CNN performance
improvement came from the restructuring of processing units and the designing of new blocks.
Most of the innovations in CNN architectures have been made in relation to depth and spatial
exploitation. Depending upon the type of architectural modifications, CNNs can be broadly
categorized into seven different classes, namely; spatial exploitation, depth, multi-path, width,
feature-map exploitation, channel boosting, and attention-based CNNs. The taxonomy of CNN
architectures is pictorially represented in Fig. 4. Architectural details of the state-of-the-art CNN
models, their parameters, and performance on benchmark datasets are summarized in Table 2.
On the other hand, different online resources on deep CNN architectures, vision-related dataset,
and their implementation platforms are mentioned in Table 3. In addition to this, the strengths
and weaknesses of various architectures based on their category are presented in Table 5a-g.
 
 
Fig. 4 Taxonomy of deep CNN architectures showing seven different categories.
Spatial Exploitation based CNNs
CNNs have a large number of parameters and hyper-parameters, such as weights, biases, number
of layers, and processing units (neurons), filter size, stride, activation function, learning rate, etc.
 . As convolutional operation considers the neighborhood
(locality) of input pixels, therefore different levels of correlation can be explored by using
different filter sizes. Different sizes of filters encapsulate different levels of granularity; usually,
small size filters extract fine-grained and large size extract coarse-grained information.
Consequently, in early 2000, researchers exploited spatial filters to improve performance and
explored the relation of a spatial filter with the learning of the network. Different studies
conducted in this era suggested that by the adjustment of filters, CNN can perform well both on
coarse and fine-grained details.
4.1.1 LeNet
LeNet was proposed by LeCuN in 1998 . It is famous due to its historical
importance as it was the first CNN, which showed state-of-the-art performance on hand digit
recognition tasks. It has the ability to classify digits without being affected by small distortions,
 
 
Table 2 Performance comparison of the recent architectures of different categories. Top 5 error rate is
reported for all architectures.
Architecture
Main contribution
Parameters
Error Rate
- First popular CNN architecture
[dist]MNIST: 0.8
MNIST: 0.95
Spatial Exploitation
 
- Homogenous topology
- Uses small size kernels
ImageNet: 7.3
Spatial Exploitation
 
- Introduced block concept
- Split transform and merge idea
ImageNet: 6.7
Spatial Exploitation
 
- Allows cross layer information flow in
deep networks
CIFAR-10: 3.76
CIFAR-100: 19.02
Multi-path
 
- Depth wise convolution followed by point
wise convolution
ImageNet: 0.055
 
Attention Neural
- Introduced an attention mechanism
CIFAR-10: 3.90
CIFAR-100: 20.4
ImageNet: 4.8
 
Excitation
- Models interdependencies between
feature-maps
ImageNet: 2.3
Feature-Map
Exploitation
 
- Cross-layer information flow
CIFAR-10+: 3.46
CIFAR100+:17.18
CIFAR-10: 5.19
CIFAR-100: 19.64
Multi-Path
 
Convolutional
Block Attention
 
Concurrent
Excitation
- Spatial attention
- Feature-map attention
- Concurrent placement of spatial and
channel attention
MALC: 0.12
Visceral: 0.09
 
Channel Boosted
- Boosting of original channels with
additional information rich generated
artificial channels
Channel Boosting
 
 
 
Table 3 Different online available resources for deep CNNs.
Description
Cloud based Platforms
Online free access to
GPU and other deep
learning accelerators
Google Colab: 
Colac: 
Commercial platforms
offered by world
leading companies
FloydHub: 
Amazon SageMaker: 
Microsoft Azure ML Services: 
Google Cloud: 
IBM Watson Studio: 
Deep Learning Libraries
Deep learning libraries
that provide built-in
classes of NNs, fast
numerical computation
and automated
estimation of gradients
both for CPU and GPU
Pytorch: 
Tensorflow: 
MatConvNet: 
Keras: 
Theano: 
Caffe: 
Julia: 
Lecture Series
Online available and
freely accessible deep
learning courses
Stanford Lecture Series:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vision Datasets
Online freely accessible
datasets of different
categories of annotated
ImageNet: 
COCO: 
Visual Genome: 
Open images: 
Places: 
Youtube-8M: 
CelebA: 
CIFAR10: 
Indoor Scene Recognition: 
Computer Vision Datasets: 
Fashion MNIST:
 
Deep Learning
Accelerators
Energy and
computation efficient
deep learning
accelerators
NVIDIA: 
FPGA: 
Eyeriss: 
Google’s TPU: 
 
 
rotation, and variation of position and scale. LeNet is a feed-forward NN that constitutes of five
alternating layers of convolutional and pooling, followed by two fully connected layers. In early
2000, GPU was not commonly used to speed up training, and even CPUs were slow . The main limitation of traditional multilayered fully connected NN was that it
considers each pixel as separate input and applies a transformation on it, which was a substantial
computational burden, specifically at that time . LeNet exploited the
underlying basis of the image that the neighboring pixels are correlated to each other and feature
motifs are distributed across the entire image. Therefore, convolution with learnable parameters
is an effective way to extract similar features at multiple locations with few parameters. Learning
with sharable parameters changed the conventional view of training where each pixel was
considered as a separate input feature from its neighborhood and ignored the correlation among
them. LeNet was the first CNN architecture, which not only reduced the number of parameters
but was able to learn features from raw pixels automatically.
4.1.2 AlexNet
LeNet though, begin the history of deep CNNs, but at that time, CNN was
limited to hand digit recognition tasks and didn’t perform well to all classes of images. AlexNet
 is considered as the first deep CNN architecture, which showed
groundbreaking results for image classification and recognition tasks. AlexNet was proposed by
Krizhevesky et al., which enhanced the learning capacity of the CNN by making it deeper and by
applying several parameter optimizations strategies . The basic
architectural design of AlexNet is shown in Fig. 5. In early 2000, hardware limitations curtailed
the learning capacity of deep CNN architectures by restricting them to small size. In order to get
the benefit of the representational capacity of deep CNNs, Alexnet was trained in parallel on two
NVIDIA GTX 580 GPUs to overcome shortcomings of the hardware.
In AlexNet, depth was extended from 5 (LeNet) to 8 layers to make CNN applicable for
diverse categories of images. Despite the fact that generally, depth improves generalization for
different resolutions of images but, the main drawback associated with an increase in depth is
overfitting. To address this challenge, Krizhevesky et al. exploited the idea of Hinton
 , whereby their algorithm randomly skips some
transformational units during training to enforce the model to learn more robust features. In
addition to this, ReLU was employed as a non-saturating activation function to improve the
 
 
convergence rate by alleviating the problem of vanishing gradient to some extent . Overlapping subsampling and local response normalization were
also applied to improve the generalization by reducing overfitting. Other adjustments made were
the use of large size filters (11x11 and 5x5) at the initial layers, compared to previously proposed
networks. Due to the efficient learning approach of AlexNet, it has significant importance in the
new generation of CNNs and has started a new era of research in the architectural advancements
Fig. 5 Basic layout of AlexNet architecture showing its five convolution and three fully
connected layers.
4.1.3 ZfNet
The learning mechanism of CNN, before 2013, was based mainly on hit-and-trial, without
knowing the exact reason behind the improvement. This lack of understanding limited the
performance of deep CNNs on complex images. In 2013, Zeiler and Fergus proposed an
interesting multilayer Deconvolutional NN (DeconvNet), which got famous as ZfNet . ZfNet was developed to visualize network performance quantitatively. The idea of
the visualization of network activity was to monitor CNN performance by interpreting neuron’s
activation. In one of the previous studies, Erhan et al. exploited the same idea and
optimized the performance of Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) by visualizing the hidden layers’
feature . Similarly, Le et al. evaluated the learning of deep
 
 
unsupervised autoencoder (AE) by visualizing the image classes generated by the neurons of last
layer . DeconvNet works in the same manner as the forward pass CNN but
reverses the order of convolutional and pooling operation. This reverse mapping projects the
output of the convolutional layer back to visually perceptible image patterns, consequently gives
the neuron-level interpretation of the internal feature representation learned at each layer
 .
The idea of feature visualization proposed by ZfNet was experimentally validated on
AlexNet using DeconvNet, which showed that only a few neurons were active. In contrast, other
neurons were dead (inactive) in the first and second layers of the network. Moreover, it showed
that the features extracted by the second layer exhibited aliasing artifacts. Based on these
ﬁndings, Zeiler and Fergus adjusted CNN topology and performed parameter optimization.
Zeiler and Fergus maximized the learning of CNN by reducing both the filter size and stride to
retain the maximum number of features in the ﬁrst two convolutional layers. This readjustment
in CNN topology resulted in performance improvement, which suggested that features
visualization can be used for the identification of design shortcomings and for timely adjustment
of parameters.
The successful use of CNNs in image recognition tasks has accelerated the research in
architectural design. In this regard, Simonyan et al. proposed a simple and effective design
principle for CNN architectures. Their architecture, named as VGG, was modular in layers
pattern . VGG was made 19 layers deep compared to AlexNet
and ZfNet to simulate the relation of depth with the representational capacity of the network
 . ZfNet, which was a frontline network of 2013-
ILSVRC competition, suggested that small size filters can improve the performance of the
CNNs. Based on these findings, VGG replaced the 11x11 and 5x5 filters with a stack of 3x3
filters layer and experimentally demonstrated that concurrent placement of small size (3x3)
filters could induce the effect of the large size filter (5x5 and 7x7). The use of the small size
filters provides an additional benefit of low computational complexity by reducing the number of
parameters. These findings set a new trend in research to work with smaller size filters in CNN.
VGG regulates the complexity of a network by placing 1x1 convolutions in between the
convolutional layers, which, besides, learn a linear combination of the resultant feature-maps.
 
 
For the tuning of the network, max-pooling is placed after the convolutional layer, while padding
was performed to maintain the spatial resolution . VGG showed good
results both for image classification and localization problems. VGG was at 2nd place in the
2014-ILSVRC competition but, got fame due to its simplicity, homogenous topology, and
increased depth. The main limitation associated with VGG was the use of 138 million
parameters, which make it computationally expensive and difficult to deploy it on low resource
4.1.5 GoogleNet
GoogleNet was the winner of the 2014-ILSVRC competition and is also known as Inception-V1.
The main objective of the GoogleNet architecture was to achieve high accuracy with a reduced
computational cost . It introduced the new concept of inception block in
CNN, whereby it incorporates multi-scale convolutional transformations using split, transform
and merge idea. The architecture of the inception block is shown in Fig. 6. In GoogleNet,
conventional convolutional layers are replaced in small blocks similar to the idea of substituting
each layer with micro NN as proposed in Network in Network (NIN) architecture . This block encapsulates filters of different sizes (1x1, 3x3, and 5x5) to capture spatial
information at different scales, including both fine and coarse grain level. The exploitation of the
idea of split, transform, and merge by GoogleNet, helped in addressing a problem related to the
learning of diverse types of variations present in the same category of images having different
resolutions. GoogleNet regulates the computations by adding a bottleneck layer of 1x1
convolutional filter, before employing large size kernels. In addition to it, it used sparse
connections (not all the output feature-maps are connected to all the input feature-maps), to
overcome the problem of redundant information and reduced cost by omitting feature-maps that
were not relevant. Furthermore, connection’s density was reduced by using global average
pooling at the last layer, instead of using a fully connected layer. These parameter tunings caused
a significant decrease in the number of parameters from 138 million to 4 million parameters.
Other regulatory factors applied were batch normalization and the use of RmsProp as an
optimizer . GoogleNet also introduced the concept of auxiliary learners to
speed up the convergence rate. However, the main drawback of the GoogleNet was its
heterogeneous topology that needs to be customized from module to module. Another limitation
 
 
of GoogleNet was a representation bottleneck that drastically reduces the feature space in the
next layer and thus sometimes may lead to loss of useful information.
Fig. 6 Basic architecture of the inception block showing the split, transform, and merge concept.
Depth based CNNs
Deep CNN architectures are based on the assumption that with the increase in depth, the network
can better approximate the target function with a number of nonlinear mappings and more
enriched feature hierarchies . Network depth has played an essential role in the
success of supervised training. Theoretical studies have shown that deep networks can represent
certain classes of function more efficiently than shallow architectures .
Csáji represented a universal approximation theorem in 2001, which states that a single hidden
layer is sufficient to approximate any function. However, this comes at the cost of exponentially
many neurons; thus, it often makes it computationally non-realistic . In this regard,
Bengio and Delalleau suggested that deeper networks can maintain
the expressive power of the network at a reduced cost . In 2013, Bengio et
al. empirically showed that deep networks are computationally more efficient for complex tasks
 . Inception and VGG, which showed the best
performance in 2014-ILSVRC competition, further strengthen the idea that the depth is an
essential dimension in regulating learning capacity of the networks .
 
 
4.2.1 Highway Networks
Based on the intuition that the learning capacity can be improved by increasing the network
depth, Srivastava et al. in 2015, proposed a deep CNN, named as Highway Networks . The main problem concerned with deep networks is slow training and convergence
speed . Highway Networks exploited depth for learning enriched feature
representation and introducing a new cross-layer connectivity mechanism (discussed in Section
4.3.1) for the successful training of the deep networks. Therefore, Highway Networks are also
categorized as multi-path based CNN architectures. Highway Networks with 50-layers showed a
better convergence rate than thin but deep architectures .
Srivastava et al. experimentally showed that the performance of a plain network decreases after
adding hidden units beyond 10 layers . Highway Networks, on the
other hand, was shown to converge signiﬁcantly faster than the plain ones, even with the depth of
900 layers.
4.2.2 ResNet
ResNet was proposed by He et al., which is considered as a continuation of deep networks . ResNet revolutionized the CNN architectural race by introducing the concept of
residual learning in CNNs and devised an efficient methodology for the training of deep
networks. Similar to Highway Networks, it is also placed under the Multi-Path based CNNs;
thus, its learning methodology is discussed in Section 4.3.2. ResNet proposed 152-layers deep
CNN, which won the 2015-ILSVRC competition. The architecture of the residual block of
ResNet is shown in Fig. 7. ResNet, which was 20 and 8 times deeper than AlexNet and VGG,
respectively, showed less computational complexity than previously proposed networks
 . He et al. empirically showed that
ResNet with 50/101/152 layers has less error on image classification task than 34 layers plain
Net. Moreover, ResNet gained a 28% improvement on the famous image recognition benchmark
dataset named COCO . Good performance of ResNet on image recognition and
localization tasks showed that representational depth is of central importance for many visual
recognition tasks.
 
 
Fig. 7 Residual block as a basic structural unit of ResNet.
4.2.3 Inception-V3, V4 and Inception-ResNet
Inception-V3, V4 and Inception-ResNet, are improved versions of Inception-V1 and V2
 . The idea of Inception-V3 was to reduce the computational cost
of deep networks without affecting the generalization. For this purpose, Szegedy et al. replaced
large size filters (5x5 and 7x7) with small and asymmetric filters (1x7 and 1x5) and used 1x1
convolution as a bottleneck before the large filters . Concurrent placement
of 1x1 convolution with a large size filter makes the traditional convolution operation more like
a cross-channel correlation. In one of the previous works, Lin et al. exploited the potential of 1x1
filters in NIN architecture . Szegedy et al. intelligently
used the same concept. In Inception-V3, 1x1 convolutional operation was used, which maps the
input data into 3 or 4 separate spaces that are smaller than the original input space, and then
maps all correlations in these smaller 3D spaces, via regular (3x3 or 5x5) convolutions. In
Inception-ResNet, Szegedy et al. combined the power of residual learning and inception block
 . In doing so, filter concatenation was replaced by the
 
 
residual connection. Moreover, Szegedy et al. experimentally showed that Inception-V4 with
residual connections (Inception-ResNet) has the same generalization power as plain Inception-
V4 but with increased depth and width. However, they observed that Inception-ResNet
converges more quickly than Inception-V4, which depicts that training with residual connections
accelerates the training of Inception networks significantly.
Multi-Path based CNNs
Training of deep networks is a challenging task, and this has been the subject of recent research
on deep networks. Deep CNNs generally perform well on complex tasks. However, they may
suffer from performance degradation, gradient vanishing, or explosion problems, which are not
caused by overfitting but instead by an increase in the depth .
Vanishing gradient problem not only results in higher test error but also higher training error
 . For training deep networks, the
concept of multi-path or cross-layer connectivity was proposed . Multiple paths or shortcut connections can
systematically connect one layer to another by skipping some intermediate layers to allow the
specialized flow of information across the layers . Cross-layer
connectivity partitions the network into several blocks. These paths also try to solve the
vanishing gradient problem by making gradient accessible to lower layers. For this purpose,
different types of shortcut connections are used, such as zero-padded, projection-based, dropout,
skip connections, and 1x1 connections, etc.
4.3.1 Highway Networks
The increase in depth of a network improves performance mostly for complex problems, but it
also makes training of the network difficult. In deep networks, due to a large number of layers,
the backpropagation of error may result in small gradient values at lower layers. To solve this
problem, in 2015, a new CNN architecture named Highway Networks was proposed based on the
idea of cross-layer connectivity . In Highway Networks, the unimpeded
flow of information across layers is enabled by imparting two gating units within a layer
(equation (5)). The idea of a gating mechanism was inspired by Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) . The aggregation of information by combining the
thl layer and previous l
information creates a regularizing effect, making gradient-based training of very deep networks
easy. This cross-layer connectivity enables the training of a network with more than 100 layers,
even as deep as 900 layers with a stochastic gradient descent algorithm. Cross-layer connectivity
for Highway Network is defined in equation (5 & 6).
In equation (5),
represents the working of the lth hidden layer, whereas
gc are two gates that decide the flow of information across the layers. When
gt gate is open,
gt =1 then transformed input is assigned to the next layer. Whereas, when the value of
gc gate establishes an effect of information highway and input
lF of lth layer is directly
assigned to the next layer l+1 without any transformation.
4.3.2 ResNet
In order to address the problems faced during training of deep networks, ResNet exploited the
idea of bypass pathways used in Highway Networks . Mathematical formulation
of ResNet is expressed in equations (7, 8 & 9).
is a transformed signal, and
lF is an input of lth layer. In equation
shows the kth processing unit (kernel), whereas l
suggests that the residual block
can be consists of one or more than one hidden layers. Original input
lF is added to transformed
) through bypass pathway (equation (7)) and thus results in an aggregated
, which is assigned to the next layer after applying activation function
 
 
, returns a residual information, which is used to perform reference based
optimization of weights. The distinct feature of ResNet is reference based residual learning
framework. ResNet suggested that residual functions are easy to optimize and can gain accuracy
for considerably increased depth.
ResNet introduced shortcut connections within layers to enable cross-layer connectivity;
however, these connections are data-independent and parameter-free in comparison to the gates
of Highway Networks. In Highway Networks, when a gated shortcut is closed, the layers
represent non-residual functions. However, in ResNet, residual information is always passed, and
identity shortcuts are never closed. Residual links (shortcut connections) speed up the
convergence of deep networks, thus giving ResNet the ability to avoid gradient diminishing
4.3.3 DenseNet
Similar to Highway Networks and ResNet, DenseNet was proposed to solve the vanishing
gradient problem . The problem with
ResNet was that it explicitly preserves information through additive identity transformations due
to which many layers may contribute very little or no information. To address this problem,
DenseNet used cross-layer connectivity but, in a modified fashion. DenseNet connected each
preceding layer to the next coming layer in a feed-forward fashion; thus, feature-maps of all
previous layers were used as inputs into all subsequent layers as expressed in equation (10 & 11).
lF are the resultant feature-maps of 1st and l-1th transformation layers and
is a function, which enables cross-layer connectivity by concatenating proceeding layers
information before assigning to new transformation layer l. This establishes . However, Kawaguchi et al. reported that the width of the network is also
important . Multilayer perceptron gained the advantage of mapping
complex functions over perceptron by making parallel use of multiple processing units within a
layer. This suggests that width is an essential parameter in defining principles of learning along
with depth. Lu et al. , and Hanin and Sellke have recently shown that NNs with
ReLU activation function have to be wide enough to hold universal approximation property
along with an increase in depth . Moreover, a class of continuous
functions on a compact set cannot be arbitrarily well approximated by an arbitrarily deep
network, if the maximum width of the network is not larger than the input dimension . Although, stacking of multiple layers (increasing depth) may learn
diverse feature representations, but may not necessarily increase the learning power of the NN.
One major problem linked with deep architectures is that some layers or processing units may
not learn useful features. To tackle this problem, the focus of research shifted from deep and
narrow architecture towards thin and wide architectures.
4.4.1 Wide ResNet
It is concerned that the main drawback associated with deep residual networks is the feature
reuse problem in which some feature transformations or blocks may contribute very little to
learning . This problem was addressed by Wide ResNet . Zagoruyko and Komodakis suggested that the main learning potential of deep
residual networks is due to the residual units, whereas depth has a supplementary effect. Wide
ResNet exploited the power of the residual blocks by making ResNet wide rather than deep . Wide ResNet increased the width by introducing an additional factor k, which
controls the width of the network. Wide ResNet showed that the widening of the layers might
provide a more effective way of a performance improvement than by making the residual
networks deep.
Deep networks improved representational capacity, but they have some demerits such as
time-intensive training, feature reuse, and gradient vanishing and exploding problem. He et al.
addressed feature reuse problem by incorporating dropout in residual blocks to regularize
network effectively . Similarly, Huang et al. introduced the concept of stochastic
depth by exploiting dropouts to solve vanishing gradient and slow learning problems . It was observed that even fraction improvement in performance might require the
addition of many new layers. However, Zagoruyko and Komodakis , empirically showed
that though Wide ResNet was twice in a number of parameters as compared to ResNet, but can
be trained in a better way than the deep networks . Wide
ResNet was based on the observation that almost all architectures before residual networks,
including the most successful Inception and VGG, were wide as compared to ResNet. In Wide
ResNet, learning is made effective by adding a dropout in between the convolutional layers
rather than inside a residual block.
4.4.2 Pyramidal Net
In earlier deep CNN architectures such as AlexNet, VGG, and ResNet, due to the deep stacking
of multiple convolutional layers, depth of feature-maps increases in subsequent layers. However,
the spatial dimension decreases, as each convolutional layer or block is followed by a subsampling layer .
Therefore, Han et al. argued that in deep CNNs, a drastic increase in the feature-map depth and,
at the same time, the loss of spatial information limits the learning ability of CNN . ResNet has shown remarkable results for image classification problems. However, in
ResNet, the deletion of a residual block, where the dimension of both spatial and feature-map
(channel) varies (feature-map depth increases, while spatial dimension decreases), generally
deteriorates performance. In this regard, stochastic ResNet improved the performance by
reducing information loss associated with the dropping of the residual unit .
To increase the learning ability of ResNet, Han et al. proposed the Pyramidal Net . In contrast to drastic decrease in spatial width with an increase in depth by ResNet,
 
 
Pyramidal Net increases the width gradually per residual unit. This strategy enables pyramidal
Net to cover all possible locations instead of maintaining the same spatial dimension within each
residual block until down-sampling occurs. Because of a gradual increase in the depth of features
map in a top-down fashion, it was named as pyramidal Net. In pyramidal network, depth of
feature-maps is regulated by factorl , and is computed using equation (12).
ld denotes the dimensions of thl residual block and n describes the number of the
residual block, whereas  is a step size and n
 regulates the increase in depth. The depth
regulating factor tries to distribute the burden of increase in depth of feature-maps. Residual
connections were inserted in between the layers by using zero-padded identity mapping. The
advantage of zero-padded identity mapping is that it needs less number of parameters as
compared to the projection-based shortcut connection, hence may result in better generalization
 . Pyramidal Net uses two different approaches for the widening of the
network, including addition and multiplication based widening. The difference between the two
types of widening is that additive pyramidal structure increases linearly, whereas multiplicative
one increases geometrically . However, a major
problem with Pyramidal Net is that with the increase in width, a quadratic times increase in both
space and time occurs.
4.4.3 Xception
Xception can be considered as an extreme Inception architecture, which exploits the idea of
depthwise separable convolution . Xception modified the original inception block
by making it wider and replacing the different spatial dimensions (1x1, 5x5, 3x3) with a single
dimension (3x3) followed by a 1x1 convolution to regulate computational complexity.
The Architecture of the Xception block is shown in Fig. 8. Xception makes the network
computationally efficient by decoupling spatial and feature-map (channel) correlation, which is
mathematically expressed in equation (13 & 14). It works by first mapping the convolved output
 
 
Fig. 8 Xception building block and its n sets of transformation.
to low dimensional embeddings using 1x1 convolutions. It then spatially transforms it n times,
where n is a width defining cardinality, which determines the number of transformations.
In equation (14),
k is a kth kernel of lth layer having depth one, which is spatially
convolved across kth feature-map
lF , where ( , )
x y and ( , )
u v show the spatial indices of featuremap and kernel respectively. In depthwise separable convolution, it is to be noted that number of
kernels K is equal to number of input feature-maps contrary to conventional convolutional layer
where number of kernels are independent of previous layer feature-maps. Whereas
kernel of (1x1) spatial dimension for l+1th layer, which performs depthwise convolution across
output feature-maps
of lth layer, used as input of l+1th layer.
Xception makes computation easy by separately convolving each feature-map across
spatial axes, which is followed by pointwise convolution (1x1 convolutions) to perform crosschannel correlation. In conventional CNN architectures; convolutional operation uses only one
 
 
transformation segment, inception block uses three transformation segments, whereas in
Xception number of transformation segments is equal to the number of feature-maps. Although
the transformation strategy adopted by Xception does not reduce the number of parameters, it
makes learning more efficient and results in improved performance.
4.4.4 ResNeXt
ResNeXt, also known as Aggregated Residual Transform Network, is an improvement over the
Inception Network . Xie et al. exploited the concept of the split, transform, and
merge in a powerful but simple way by introducing a new term; cardinality . Cardinality is an additional dimension, which refers to the size of the set of
transformations . The Inception network has not only
improved the learning capability of conventional CNNs, but it also makes a network resourceefficient. However, due to the use of diverse spatial embedding’s (such as the use of 3x3, 5x5,
and 1x1 filter) in the transformation branch, each layer needs to be customized separately.
ResNeXt utilized the deep homogenous topology of VGG and simplified GoogleNet architecture
by fixing spatial resolution to 3x3 filters within the split, transform, and merge block. Whereas, it
used residual learning to improve the convergence of deep and wide network . The building block for ResNeXt is shown
in Fig. 9. ResNeXt used multiple transformations within a split, transform and merge block and
defined these transformations in terms of cardinality. Xie et al. showed that an increase in
cardinality significantly improves performance. The complexity of ResNeXt was regulated by
applying low embedding’s (1x1 filters) before 3x3 convolution, whereas training was optimized
by using skip connections .
4.4.5 Inception Family
Inception family of CNNs also comes under the class of width based methods . In Inception networks, within a layer, varying sizes of the filters were used,
which increased the output of the intermediate layers. The use of the different sizes of filters
helps capture the diversity in high-level features. Salient characteristics of the Inception family
are discussed in section 4.1.5 and 4.2.3.
 
 
Fig. 9 ResNeXt building block showing the different paths of transformation.
Feature-Map (ChannelFMap) Exploitation based CNNs
CNN became popular for MV tasks because of its hierarchical learning and automatic feature
extraction ability . Feature selection plays a vital role in determining the
performance of classification, segmentation, and detection modules. In CNN, features are
dynamically selected by tuning the weights associated with a kernel also known as mask. Also,
multiple stages of feature extraction are used, which can extract diverse types of features (known
as feature-maps or channels in CNN). However, some of the feature-maps impart little or no role
in object discrimination . Enormous feature sets may create an effect of noise
and thus lead to over-fitting of the network. This suggests that apart from network engineering,
 
 
selection of feature-maps can play an important role in improving the generalization of the
network. In this section, feature-maps and channels will be interchangeably used as many
researchers have used the word channels for the feature-maps.
4.5.1 Squeeze and Excitation Network
Squeeze and Excitation Network (SE-Network) was reported by Hu et al. . They
proposed a new block for the selection of feature-maps (commonly known as channels) relevant
to object discrimination. This new block was named as SE-block (shown in Fig. 10), which
suppresses the less important feature-maps, but gives high weightage to the class specifying
feature-maps. SE-Network reported a record decrease in error on the ImageNet dataset. SE-block
is a processing unit that is designed generically and therefore, can be added in any CNN
architecture before the convolution layer. The working of this block consists of two operations;
squeeze and excitation. Convolution kernel captures information locally, but it ignores the
contextual relation of features (correlation) that are outside of this receptive field . Squeeze operation is performed to get a global view of feature-maps. The squeeze block
generates feature-map wise statistics (also known as feature-map motifs or descriptors) by
suppressing spatial information of the convolved input. As global average pooling has the
potential to learn the extent of target object effectively ,
therefore, it is employed by the squeeze operation
using the following equation (15):
ls represents a feature descriptor for kth feature-map of lth layer, and P Q
defines the spatial dimension of feature-map
lF . Whereas output of squeeze operation
for K number of convolved feature-maps for lth layer is assigned to the
excitation operation
, which models motif-wise interdependencies by exploiting gating
mechanism. Excitation operation assigns weights to feature-maps using two layer feed forward
NN, which is mathematically expressed in equation (16).
In equation (16),
ly + denotes weightage for input feature-map
of next layer (l +1),
apply the ReLU based non-linear transformation and sigmoid gate,
 
 
respectively. Similarly,
shows the weightage for K number of convolved
feature-maps that are used to rescale them before assigning to the l+1th layer. In excitation
operation,
w both are used as transformation weight vectors and regulating factors to
limit the model complexity and aid the generalization . The output
of the first hidden transformation in NN is preceded by the ReLU activation function, which
inculcates non-linearity in motif responses. The gating mechanism is exploited in SE-block using
the sigmoid activation function, which models the non-linear responses of the feature-maps and
assigns a weight based on feature-map relevance . SE-block adaptively
recalibrates the feature-maps of each layer by multiplying convolved input with the motif
responses.
Fig. 10 Squeeze and Excitation block showing the computation of masks for the recalibration of
feature-maps that are commonly known as channels in literature.
4.5.2 Competitive Squeeze and Excitation Networks
Competitive Inner-Imaging Squeeze and Excitation for Residual Network also known as CMPE-
SE Network was proposed by Hu et al. in 2018 . Hu et al. used the idea of SEblock to improve the learning of deep residual networks . SE-Network
recalibrates the feature-maps based upon their contribution in class discrimination. However, the
main concern with SE-Net is that in ResNet, it only considers the residual information for
determining the weight of each feature-map . This minimizes the impact of SEblock and makes ResNet information redundant. Hu et al. addressed this problem by generating
 
 
feature-map wise motifs (statistics) from both residual and identity mapping based feature-maps.
In this regard, global representation of feature-maps is generated using global average pooling
operation (equation (17)), whereas relevance of feature-maps is estimated by establishing
competition between feature descriptors of residual and identity mappings. This phenomena is
termed as inner imaging . CMPE-SE block not only models the relationship
between residual feature-maps but also maps their relation with identity feature-map. The
mathematical expression for CMPE-SE block is represented using the following equation:
are the identity and residual mapping of input
lF respectively. SE
block is implemented by applying squeeze operation
both on residual and the identity
feature-maps and their receptive output is used as joint input of excitation operation
represents the concatenation operation. The output masks of excitation operation
(equation (18)) are multiplied with residual information (equation (19)) to rebuild each featuremap importance. The backpropagation algorithm thus tries to optimize the competition between
identity and residual feature-maps and the relationship between all feature-maps in the residual
Channel(Input) Exploitation based CNNs
Image representation plays an important role in determining the performance of the image
processing algorithms, including both conventional and deep learning algorithms. A good
representation of the image is one that can define the salient features of an image from a compact
code. In MV tasks, various types of conventional filters are applied to extract different levels of
information for a single type of image . These diverse
representations are then used as an input of the model to improve performance . Now CNN is a compelling feature learner that can automatically
extract discriminating features depending upon the problem . However, the
learning of CNN relies on input representation. The lack of diversity and the absence of class
 
 
discernable information in the input may affect CNN’s performance as a discriminator. For this
purpose, the concept of channel boosting (input channel dimension) using auxiliary learners is
introduced in CNNs to boost the representation of the network .
4.6.1 Channel Boosted CNN using TL
In 2018, Khan et al. proposed a new CNN architecture named as Channel boosted CNN (CB-
CNN)based on the idea of boosting the number of input channels for improving the
representational capacity of the network . The Block diagram of CB-CNN is
shown in Fig. 11. Channel boosting is performed by artificially creating extra channels (known
as auxiliary channels) through auxiliary deep generative models and then exploiting it through
the deep discriminative models. CB-CNN is mathematically expressed in equation (20 & 21).
In equation (20),
I represents the original input channels, where
is an artificial
channel generated by Mth auxiliary learner. Whereas
is used as a combiner function that
concatenates the original input channels with auxiliary channels to generates the channel boosted
I for the discriminator. Equation (21) shows the kth resultant feature-map
lF , which is
generated by convolving the boosted input
I with kernel
k of lth layer.
Bengio et al. in 2013, empirically showed that data representation plays an important role
in determining the performance of a classifier, as different representations may present different
aspects of information . For improving the representation of the data, Khan et
al. exploited the power of TL and deep generative learners . Generative learners attempt to characterize the data generating
distribution during the learning phase. In CB-CNN, AEs are used as the generative learners to
learn explanatory factors of variation behind the data. The concept of inductive TL is used in a
novel way to build a boosted input representation by augmenting learned distribution of the input
data with the original channel space (input channels). CB-CNN encodes channel-boosting phase
into a generic block, which is inserted at the start of a deep network. CB-CNN provides the
concept that TL can be used at both generation and discrimination stages. The significance of the
study is that multi-deep learners are used, where generative learning models are used as auxiliary
learners. These leaners enhance the representational capacity of deep CNN based discriminator.
 
 
Although the potential of the channel boosting was only evaluated by inserting a boosting block
at the start, however, Khan et al. suggested that this idea can be extended by providing auxiliary
channels at any layer in the deep architecture. CB-CNN has also been evaluated on the medical
image dataset , where it has shown improved results, as shown in Table 4.
Fig. 11 Basic architecture of CB-CNN showing the deep auxiliary learners for creating artificial
Table 4 Results of CNN and CB-CNN on mitosis dataset.
CNN Architecture
26 layers deep CNN
26 layers deep CB-CNN
Attention based CNNs
Different levels of abstractions have an important role in defining the discrimination power of
the NN. In addition to learning of multiple hierarchies of abstractions, focusing on features
relevant to the context also plays a significant role in image localization and recognition. In the
human visual system, this phenomenon is referred to as attention. Humans view the scene in a
 
 
succession of partial glimpses and pay attention to context-relevant parts. This process not only
serves to focus selected regions but also deduces different interpretations of objects at that
location and thus helps in capturing visual structure in a better way. A more or less similar kind
of interpretability is added into RNN and LSTM .
RNN and LSTM networks exploit attention modules for the generation of sequential data, and
the new samples are weighted based on their occurrence in previous iterations. The concept of
attention was incorporated into CNN, by various researchers to improve representation and
overcome the computational limits. This idea of attention also helps in making CNN intelligent
enough to recognize objects even from cluttered backgrounds and complex scenes.
4.7.1 Residual Attention Neural Network
Wang et al. proposed a Residual Attention Network (RAN) to improve the feature representation
of the network . The motivation behind the incorporation of attention in CNN
was to make a network capable of learning object aware features. RAN is a feed-forward CNN,
which was built by stacking residual blocks with attention module. The attention module is
branched off into trunk and mask branches that adopt bottom-up, top-down learning strategy.
The assembly of two different learning strategies into the attention module enables fast feedforward processing and top-down attention feedback in a single feed-forward process. The
bottom-up feed-forward structure produces low-resolution feature-maps with strong semantic
information. Whereas, top-down architecture produces dense features to make an inference of
each pixel.
In the previously proposed studies, a top-down, bottom-up learning strategy was used by
Restricted Boltzmann Machines . Similarly, Goh et al.
exploited the top-down attention mechanism as a regularizing factor in Deep Boltzmann
Machine during the reconstruction phase of the training. The top-down learning strategy globally
optimizes the network in such a way that it gradually output the maps to input during the
learning process . The
attention module in RAN generates object aware soft mask
at each layer for input featuremap
lF . Soft mask
assigns attention towards object using equation (22)
by recalibrating trunk branch
output and thus, behaves like a control gate for every
neuron output.
 
 
In one of the previous studies, Transformation network also exploited the idea of attention in a simple way by incorporating it with convolution
block, but the main problem was that attention modules in Transformation network are fixed and
cannot adapt to changing circumstances. RAN was made efficient towards recognition of
cluttered, complex, and noisy images by stacking multiple attention modules. Hierarchical
organization of RAN endowed the ability to adaptively assign weight to each feature-map based
on their relevance in the layers . Learning of deep hierarchical structure was
supported through residual units. Moreover, three different levels of attention: mixed, channel,
and spatial attention were incorporated, thus leveraging the capability to capture object-aware
features at different levels .
4.7.2 Convolutional Block Attention Module
The significance of attention mechanism and feature-map exploitation is validated through RAN
and SE-Network . In this regard, Woo et al. came up with
new attention-based CNN, named as Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) . CBAM is simple in design and similar to SE-Network. SE-Network only considers the
contribution of feature-maps in image classification, but it ignores the spatial locality of the
object in images. The spatial location of the object has a vital role in object detection.
CBAM infers attention maps sequentially by first applying feature-map (channel)
attention and then spatial attention, to find the refined feature-maps. In literature, generally, 1x1
convolution and pooling operations are used for spatial attention. Woo et al. showed that the
pooling of features along the spatial axis generates an efficient feature descriptor. CBAM
concatenates average pooling operation with max-pooling, which generates a strong spatial
attention map. Likewise, feature-map statistics were modeled using a combination of maxpooling and global average-pooling operation. Woo et al. showed that max-pooling could
provide the clue about distinctive object features, whereas the use of global average pooling
returns suboptimal inference of feature-map attention. The exploitation of both average-pooling
and max-pooling improves the representational power of the network. These refined featuremaps not only focus on the important part but also increase the representational power of the
selected feature-maps. Woo et al. empirically showed that the formulation of a 3D attention map
 
 
via the serial learning process helps in the reduction of the parameters as well as computational
cost. Due to the simplicity of CBAM, it can be integrated easily with any CNN architecture.
4.7.3 Concurrent Spatial and Channel Excitation Mechanism
In 2018, Roy et al. extended the work of Hu et al. by incorporating the effect of spatial
information in combination with feature-map (channel) information to make it applicable to
segmentation tasks . They introduced three different modules:
(i) squeezing spatially and exciting feature-map information (cSE), (ii) squeezing feature-map
and exciting spatial information (sSE), and (iii) concurrent squeeze and excitation of spatial and
feature-map information (scSE). In this work, AE based convolutional NN was used for
segmentation, whereas proposed modules were inserted after the encoder and decoder layers. In
the cSE module, the same concept as that of SE-block is exploited. In this module, the scaling
factor is derived based on the combination of feature-maps used for object detection. As spatial
information has an important role in segmentation, therefore in the sSE module, the spatial
locality has been given more importance than feature-map information. For this purpose,
different combinations of feature-maps are selected and exploited spatially to use them for
segmentation. In the last module, scSE, attention to each feature-map, is assigned by deriving
scaling factor both from spatial and feature-map information and thus to highlight the objectspecific feature-maps selectively .
Applications of CNNs
CNNs have been successfully applied to different ML related tasks, namely object detection,
recognition, classification, regression, segmentation, etc., . However, CNN generally needs a large amount of data for
learning. All of the areas mentioned earlier in which CNN has shown tremendous success have
relatively sufficient labeled data, such as traffic sign recognition, segmentation of medical
images, and the detection of faces, text, pedestrians, and humans in natural images. Some of the
interesting applications of CNN are discussed below.
CNN based computer vision and related applications
Computer vision (CV) focuses on developing an artificial system that can process visual data,
including images and videos and can effectively understand, and extract useful information from
 
 
it. CV encompasses a number of application areas such as face recognition, pose estimation,
activity recognition, etc.
Face recognition is one of the difficult tasks in the CV. Face recognition systems have to
cope with variations such as caused by illumination, change in pose, and different facial
expressions. Farfade et al. proposed deep CNN for detecting faces from different poses as
well as from occluded faces . In another work, Zhang et al. performed face
detection using a new type of multitasking cascaded CNN . Zhang’s
technique showed good results when compared to state-of-the-art techniques .
Human pose estimation is one of the challenging tasks related to CV because of the high
variability in body pose. Li et al. proposed a heterogeneous deep CNN based pose
estimation related technique . In Li’s technique, empirical results have shown that
the hidden neurons can learn the localized part of the body. Similarly, another cascade based
CNN technique is proposed by Bulat et al. . In their cascaded
architecture, first heat maps are detected, whereas, in the second phase, regression is performed
on the detected heat maps.
Action recognition is one of the important areas of activity recognition. The difficulties in
developing an action recognition system are to solve the translations and distortions of features
in different patterns, which belong to the same action class. Earlier approaches involved the
construction of motion history images, the use of Hidden Markov Models, action sketch
generation, etc. Recently, Wang et al. proposed a three dimensional CNN
architecture in combination with LSTM for recognizing different actions from video frames.
Experimental results have shown that Wang’s technique outperforms other activity recognition
based techniques . Similarly, another three dimensional CNN based action
recognition system is proposed by Ji et al. . In Ji’s work, three-dimensional CNN
is used to extract features from multiple channels of input frames. The final action recognition
based model is developed on combined extracted feature space. The proposed three dimensional
CNN model is trained in a supervised way and can perform activity recognition in real-world
applications.
 
 
CNN based natural language processing
Natural Language Processing (NLP) converts language into a presentation that can easily be
exploited by any computer. Although RNNs are very suitable for NLP applications, however,
CNNs have also been utilized in NLP based applications such as language modeling, and
analysis, etc. Especially, language modeling or sentence molding has taken a twist after the
introduction of CNN as a new representation learning algorithm. Sentence modeling is
performed to know semantics of the sentences and thus offer new and appealing applications
according to customer requirements. Traditional methods of information retrieval analyze data,
based on words or features, but ignore the core of the sentence. Kalchbrenner et al. 
proposed a dynamic CNN and dynamic k-max pooling during training. This approach finds the
relations between words without taking into account any external source like parser or
vocabulary . In a similar way, Collobert and Weston proposed
CNN based architecture that can perform various MLP related tasks at the same time as
chunking, language modeling, recognizing name-entity, and role modeling related to semantics
 . In another work, Hu et al. proposed a generic CNN based
architecture that performs matching between two sentences and thus can be applied to different
languages .
CNN based object detection and segmentation
Object detection focuses on identifying different objects in images. Recently, R-CNN has been
widely used for object detection. Ren et al. proposed an improvement over R-CNN
named as fast R-CNN for object detection . In their work, a fully connected
convolutional neural network is used to extract feature space that can simultaneously detect the
boundary and score of objects located at different positions. Similarly, Dai et al. proposed
region-based object detection using fully connected CNN . In Dai’s work, results
are reported on the PASCAL VOC image dataset. Another object detection technique is reported
by Gidaris et al. , which is based on multi-region based deep CNN
that helps to learn the semantic aware features. In Gidaris’s approach, objects are detected with
high accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 dataset. Recently, AE based CNN architectures
have shown success in segmentation tasks. In this regard, various interesting CNN architectures
have been reported for both semantic and instance-based segmentation tasks such as FCN,
 
 
SegNet, Mask R-CNN, U-Net etc., .
CNN based image classification
CNN has been widely used for image classification . One of the primary applications of CNN is in medical images, especially
for the diagnosis of cancer using histopathological images . Recently,
Spanhol et al. used CNN for the diagnosis of breast cancer images, and results are
compared against a network trained on a dataset containing handcrafted descriptors . Another recently proposed CNN based technique for breast cancer diagnosis is
developed by Wahab et al. . In Wahab’s work, two phases are involved. In
the first phase, hard non-mitosis examples are identified. In the second phase, data augmentation
is performed to cope with the class skewness problem. Similarly, Ciresan et al. used the German benchmark dataset related to a traffic sign signal. They designed CNN
based architecture that performed traffic sign classification related task with a good recognition
CNN based speech recognition
Deep CNN is mostly considered as the best option to deal with image processing applications,
however; recent studies have shown that it also performs well on speech recognition tasks.
Hamid et al. reported a CNN based speaker-independent speech recognition system . Experimental results showed a ten percent reduction in error rate in
comparison to the earlier reported methods . In another
work, various CNN architectures, which are either based on the full or limited number of weight
sharing within the convolution layer, are explored . Furthermore, the
performance of CNN is also evaluated after the initialization of the network using the pretraining phase . Experimental results showed that almost all of the
explored architectures yield good performance on phone and vocabulary recognition related
tasks. Nowadays, the utilization of CNNs for speech emotion recognition is also gaining
attention. Huang et al. used CNN in combination with LSTM for recognizing emotions of
speech. In Huang’s approach, CNN was trained both on verbal and nonverbal segments of
 
 
speech, and CNN learned features were used by LSTM for recognizing speech emotions .
CNN based video processing
In video processing techniques, temporal and spatial information from videos is exploited. Many
researchers have used CNN to solve various video processing-related problems . Tong et al.
proposed CNN based short boundary detection system. In Tong’s approach, TAGs are generated
using CNN . During the experiment, the merging of TAGs against one-shot is
performed to annotate video against that shot. Similarly, Wang et al. used 3-D CNN along with
LSTM to recognize action within the video . In another technique, Frizzi et
al. used CNN for detecting smoke and fire within the video . In Frizzi’s
approach, CNN architecture not only extracts salient features but also performs the classification
task. In the field of action recognition, the gathering of spatial and temporal information is
considered as a tedious task. In order to overcome the deficiencies of traditional feature
descriptors, Tian et al. proposed a three stream-based structure, which is capable
of extracting spatial-temporal features along with short and long term motion within the video.
Similarly, in another technique, CNN, in combination with bi-directional LSTM, is used for
recognizing action from the video . Their approach comprises of two phases.
In the first phase, features are extracted from the sixth frame of the videos. In the second phase,
sequential information between features of the frame is exploited using the bi-directional LSTM
framework.
CNN for low resolution images
In the field of ML, different researchers have used CNN based image enhancement techniques
for enhancing the resolution of the images . Peng et al. used deep CNN based approach, which categorizes the objects in images
having low resolution . Similarly, Chevalier et al. introduced LR-CNN for lowresolution image classification . Another, the deep learning based
technique is reported by Kawashima et al., in which convolutional layers, along with a layer of
 
 
LSTM is used to recognize action from thermal images of low resolution . Lee et al.
developed the number plate recognition system, which is capable of quickly recognizing the
number on the license plate . In Lee’s technique, the deep learning based
embedded recognition system comprises of simple AlexNet architecture. In order to address
power efficiency and portability for embedded platforms, Bettoni et al. implemented CNN on the
FPGA platform . In another technique, the FPGA embedded platform is used
for efficiently performing different CNN based ML tasks . Similarly, resourcelimited CNN architectures such as MobileNet, ShuffleNet, ANTNets, etc. are highly applicable
for mobile devices . Shakeel et al.
developed a real-time based driver drowsiness detection application for smart devices such as
android phones. They used MobileNet architecture in combination with SSD to exploit the
benefit of the lightweight architecture of MobileNet that can be easily deployed on resourceconstrained hardware and can learn enriched representation from the incoming video .
CNN for 1D-Data
CNN has not only shown good performance on images but also on 1D-data. The use of 1D-CNN
as compared to other ML methods is becoming popular because of its good feature extraction
ability. Vinayakumar et al. used 1D-CNN in combination with RNN, LSTM, and gated recurrent
units for intrusion detection in network traffic . They evaluated the
performance of the proposed models on the KDDCup 99 dataset consisting of network traffic of
TCP/IP packets and showed that CNN significantly surpasses the performance of classical ML
models. Abdeljaber et al. showed that 1D-CNN could be used for real-time structural damage
detection problem . They developed an end-to-end system that can
automatically extract damage-sensitive features from accelerated signals for detection purposes.
Similarly, Yildirim et al. showed the successful use of CNN for the 1D biomedical dataset.
 
 
Yildirim et al. developed 16 layers deep 1D-CNN based application for mobile devices and a
cloud-based environment for detecting cardiac irregularity in ECG signals. They achieved
91.33% accuracy on the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database .
Table 5a Major challenges associated with implementation of Spatial exploitation based CNN architectures.
Exploitation
As convolutional operation considers the neighborhood (correlation) of input pixels, therefore different levels of
correlation can be explored by using different filter sizes.
Architecture
• Exploited spatial correlation to reduce the computation and number of parameters
• Automatic learning of feature hierarchies
Poor scaling to diverse classes of
Large size filters
Low level feature extraction
• Low, mid and high-level feature extraction using large and small size filters on initial (5x5
and 11x11) and last layers (3x3)
• Give an idea of deep and wide CNN architecture
• Introduced regularization in CNN
• Started parallel use of GPUs as an accelerator to deal with complex architectures
Inactive neurons in the first and
second layers
Aliasing artifacts in the learned
feature-maps due to large filter
• Introduced the idea of parameter tuning by visualizing the output of intermediate layers
• Reduced both the filter size and stride in the first two layers of AlexNet
Extra information processing is
required for visualization
• Proposed an idea of effective receptive field
• Gave the idea of simple and homogenous topology
computationally
expensive fully connected layers
• Introduced the idea of using Mutiscale Filters within the layers
• Gave a new idea of split, transform, and merge
• Reduce the number of parameters by using bottleneck layer, global average-pooling at last
layer and Sparse Connections
• Use of auxiliary classifiers to improve the convergence rate
• Tedious parameter customization
due to heterogeneous topology
• May lose the useful information
due to representational bottleneck
Table 5b Major challenges associated with implementation of Depth based CNN architectures.
With the increase in depth, the network can better approximate the target function with a number of nonlinear mappings
and improved feature representations. Main challenge faced by deep architectures is the problem of vanishing gradient and
negative learning.
Architecture
Inception-V3
• Exploited asymmetric filters and bottleneck layer to lessen the computational cost of deep
architectures
• Complex architecture design
• Lack of homogeneity
• Introduced training mechanism for deep networks
• Used auxiliary connections in addition to direct connections
• Parametric gating mechanism,
difficult to implement
Inception-
• Combined the power of residual learning and inception block
Inception-V4
• Deep hierarchies of features, multilevel feature representation
• Slow in learning
• Decreased the error rate for deeper networks
• Introduced the idea of residual learning
• Alleviates the effect of vanishing gradient problem
• A little complex architecture
• Degrades information of
feature-map in feed forwarding
• Over adaption of hyperparameters for specific task, due
to the stacking of same modules
 
 
Table 5c Major challenges associated with implementation of Multi-Path based CNN architectures.
Multi-Path
Shortcut paths provides the option to skip some layers. Different types of the shortcut connections used in literature are
zero padded, projection, dropout, 1x1 connections, etc.
Architecture
• Mitigates the limitations of deep networks by introducing cross layer connectivity.
• Gates are data dependent and
thus may become parameter
• Use of identity based skip connections to enable cross layer connectivity
• Information flow gates are data independent and parameter free
• Can easily pass the signal in both directions, forward and backward
• Many layers may contribute
very little or no information
• Relearning of redundant featuremaps may happen
• Introduced depth or cross-layer dimension
• Ensures maximum data flow between the layers in the network
• Avoid relearning of redundant feature-maps
• Low and high level both features are accessible to decision layers
• Large increase in parameters
due to increase in number of
feature-maps at each layer
Table 5d Major challenges associated with implementation of Width based CNN architectures.
Earlier, it was assumed that to improve accuracy, the number of layers have to be increased. However, by increasing the
number of layers, the vanishing gradient problem arises and training might get slow. So, the concept of widening a layer
was also investigated.
Architecture
Wide ResNet
• Showes the effectiveness of parallel use of transformations by increasing the width of
ResNet and decreasing its depth
• Enables feature reuse
• Have shown that dropouts between the convolutional layer are more effective
• Over fitting may occur
• More parameters than thin deep
Pyramidal Net
• Introduces the idea of increasing the width gradually per unit
• Avoids rapid information loss
• Covers all possible locations instead of maintaining the same dimension till last unit
• High spatial and time
complexity
• May become quite complex, if
layers are substantially
• Introduce the concept that learning across 2D followed by 1 D is easier than to learn filters
in 3 D space
• Depth-wise separable convolution is introduced
• Use of cardinality to learn good abstractions
• High computational cost
• Varying size filters inside inception module increases the output of the intermediate layers
• Varying size filters are helpful to capture the diversity in high-detail images
• Increase in space and time
complexity
• Introduced cardinality to avail diverse transformations at each layer
• Easy parameter customization due to homogenous topology
• Uses grouped convolution
• High computational cost
Table 5e Major challenges associated with implementation of Feature-Map exploitation based CNN architectures.
As the deep learning topology is extended, more and more features maps are generated at each step. Many of the Featuremaps might be important for classification task, others might redundant or less important. Hence, feature-map selection is
another important dimension in deep learning architectures.
Architecture
Squeeze and
Excitation
• It is a block-based concept
• Introduced a generic block that can be added easily in any CNN model due to its
simplicity
• Squeezes less important features and vice versa
• In ResNet, it only considers the
residual information for
determining the weight of each
Competitive
Squeeze and
Excitation
• Uses feature-map wise statistics from both residual and identity mapping based features
• Makes a competition between residual and identity feature-maps
• Doesn’t support the concept of
 
 
Table 5f Major challenges associated with implementation of Channel Boosting based CNN architectures.
The learning of CNN also relies on the input representation. The lack of diversity and absence of class discernable
information in the input may affect CNN performance. For this purpose, the concept of channel boosting (input channel
dimension) using auxiliary learners is introduced in CNN to boost the representation of the network .
Architecture
Boosted CNN
using Transfer
It boosts the number of input channels for improving the representational capacity of
the network
Inductive Transfer Learning is used in a novel way to build a boosted input
representation for CNN
• Increases in computational load
may happen due to the
generation of auxiliary channels
Table 5g Major challenges associated with implementation of Attention based CNN architectures.
Attention Networks advantages to choose which patch is the area of the focus or most important in an image
Architecture
• Generates attention aware feature-maps
• Easy to scale up due to residual learning
• Provides different representations of the focused patches
• Adds soft weights on features using bottom up top-down feedforward attention
• Complex model
Convolutional
• CBAM is a generic block designed for feed forward convolutional neural networks.
• Generate both feature-map and spatial attention in a sequential manner
• Channel attention maps help what to focus.
• Spatial attention helps where to focus.
• Increases efficient flow of information.
• Uses global average pooling and max pool simultaneously.
• Increase in computational load
may happen
CNN challenges
Deep CNNs have achieved good performance on data that either is of the time series nature or
follows a grid-like topology. However, there are also some other challenges, where deep CNN
architectures have been put to tasks. Major challenges associated with different CNN
architectures are mentioned in Table 5a-g. The different researchers related to the performance of
CNN on different ML tasks have interesting discussions. Some of the challenges faced during
the training of deep CNN models are given below:
• Deep CNNs are generally like a black box and thus may lack in interpretation and
explanation. Therefore, sometimes it is difficult to verify them.
• Szegedy et al. showed that training of CNN on noisy image data could cause an
increase of misclassification error . The addition of the small
quantity of random noise in the input image is capable of fooling the network in such a
way that the model will classify the original and its slightly perturbed version differently.
• Each layer of CNN automatically tries to extract better and problem-specific features
related to the task. However, for some tasks, it is imperative to know the nature of
 
 
features extracted by the deep CNNs before classification. The idea of feature
visualization in CNNs can help in this direction. Similarly, Hinton reported that lower
layers should handover their knowledge only to the relevant neurons of the next layer. In
this regard, Hinton proposed an interesting Capsule Network approach .
• Deep CNNs are based on supervised learning mechanisms, and therefore, the availability
of large and annotated data is required for its proper learning. In contrast, humans can
learn and generalize from a few examples.
• Hyper-parameter selection highly influences the performance of CNN. A little change in
the hyper-parameter values can affect the overall performance of a CNN. That is why
careful selection of hyper-parameters is a major design issue that needs to be addressed
through some suitable optimization strategy.
The efficient training of CNN demands powerful hardware resources such as GPUs.
However, it is still needed to employ CNNs in embedded and smart devices efficiently. A
few applications of deep learning in embedded systems are wound intensity correction,
law enforcement in smart cities, etc., .
• In vision-related tasks, one shortcoming of CNN is that it is generally unable to show
good performance when used to estimate the pose, orientation, and location of an object.
In 2012, AlexNet solved this problem to some extent by introducing the concept of data
augmentation. Data augmentation can help CNN in learning diverse internal
representations, which ultimately may lead to improved performance.
Future directions
The exploitation of different innovative ideas in CNN architectural design has changed the
direction of research, especially in image processing and CV. Good performance of CNN on a
grid-like topological data presents it as a powerful representational model for images.
Architectural design of CNN is a promising research field and in future, it is likely to be one of
the most widely used AI techniques.
• Ensemble learning is one of the prospective areas of research in CNNs . The combination of multiple and diverse architectures can aid
the model in improving generalization and robustness on diverse categories of images by
 
 
extracting different levels of semantic representations. Similarly, concepts such as batch
normalization, dropout, and new activation functions are also worth mentioning.
• The potential of a CNN as a generative learner is exploited in image segmentation tasks,
where it has shown good results . The exploitation of generative
learning capabilities of CNNs at feature extraction stages can boost the representational
power of the model. Similarly, new paradigms are needed that can enhance the learning
capacity of CNN by incorporating informative feature-maps that can be learned using
auxiliary learners at the intermediate stages of CNN .
• In the human visual system, attention is one of the important mechanisms in capturing
information from images. The attention mechanism operates in such a way that it not
only extracts the essential information from image but also stores its contextual relation
with other components of image . In the future, research may be
carried out in the direction that preserves the spatial relevance of objects along with their
discriminating features at later stages of learning.
• The learning capacity of CNN is generally enhanced by increasing the size of the
network, and it can be done in a reasonable time with the help of the current advanced
hardware technology such as Nvidia DGX-2 supercomputer. However, the training of
deep and high capacity architectures is still a significant overhead on memory usage and
computational resources .
Consequently, we still require many improvements in hardware technology that can
accelerate research in CNNs. The main concern with CNNs is the run-time applicability.
Moreover, the use of CNN is hindered in small hardware, especially in mobile devices,
because of its high computational cost. In this regard, different hardware accelerators are
needed for reducing both execution time and power consumption .
Some of the very interesting accelerators are already proposed. For example, Application
Specific Integrated Circuits, FPGA, and Eyeriss are well known . Moreover, different operations have been performed to minimize the hardware
resources in terms of chip area and energy requirement, by reducing floating-point
precision of operands and ternary quantization or minimizing the number of matrix
operations. Now it is also time to redirect research towards hardware-oriented
approximation models .
 
 
• Deep CNN has a large number of hyper-parameters such as activation function, kernel
size, number of neurons per layers, and arrangement of layers, etc. The selection of
hyper-parameters and the evaluation time of a deep network, make parameter tuning
quite a difficult job. Hyper-parameter tuning is a tedious and intuition driven task, which
cannot be defined via explicit formulation. In this regard, Genetic algorithms can also be
used to automatically optimize the hyper-parameters by performing searches both in a
random fashion as well as by directing search by utilizing previous results .
• In order to overcome hardware limitations, the concept of pipeline parallelism can be
exploited to scale up deep CNN training. Google group has proposed a distributed ML
library GPipe that offers a model parallelism option for training. In
the future, the concept of pipelining can be used to accelerate the training of large models
and to scale the performance without tuning hyper-parameters.
• In the future, it is expected that the potential of cloud-based platforms will be exploited
for the development of computationally intensive CNN applications . Deep and wide CNNs present a critical challenge in implementing
and executing them on resource-limited devices. Cloud computing not only allows
dealing with a massive amount of data but also leverages the benefit of high
computational efficiency at a negligible cost. World-leading companies such as Amazon,
Microsoft, Google, and IBM offer the public cloud computing facilities at high
scalability, speed, and flexibility to train resource-hungry CNN architectures. Moreover,
the cloud environment makes it easy to configure libraries both for researchers and new
practitioners.
• CNNs are mostly used for image processing applications, and therefore, the
implementation of the state-of-the-art CNN architectures on sequential data requires the
conversion of 1D-data into 2D-data. Due to the good feature extraction ability and
efficient computations with the limited number of parameters, the trend of using 1D-
CNNs is being promoted for sequential data .
Conclusion
CNN has made remarkable progress, especially in image processing and vision-related tasks, and
has thus revived the interest of researchers in ANNs. In this context, several research works have
been carried out to improve CNN’s performance on such tasks. The advancements in CNNs can
be categorized in different ways, including activation, loss function, optimization, regularization,
learning algorithms, and innovations in architecture. This paper reviews advancement in the
CNN architectures, especially based on the design patterns of the processing units and thus has
proposed the taxonomy for recent CNN architectures. In addition to the categorization of CNNs
into different classes, this paper also covers the history of CNNs, its applications, challenges, and
future directions.
The learning capacity of CNN is significantly improved over the years by exploiting
depth and other structural modifications. It is observed in recent literature that the main boost in
CNN performance has been achieved by replacing the conventional layer structure with blocks.
Nowadays, one of the paradigms of research in CNN architectures is the development of new
and effective block architectures. The role of a block in a network can be that of an auxiliary
learner. These auxiliary learners either exploit spatial or feature-map information or even boost
input channels to improve performance. These blocks play a significant role in boosting CNN
performance by making problem-aware learning.
Moreover, the block-based architecture of CNN encourages learning in a modular fashion
and thereby, making architecture simpler and more understandable. The concept of the block
being a structural unit is going to persist and further enhance CNN performance. Additionally,
the idea of attention and exploitation of channel information, in addition to spatial information, is
expected to gain more importance.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Pattern Recognition lab at DCIS, and PIEAS for providing them
computational facilities. The authors express their gratitude to M. Waleed Khan of PIEAS for the
detailed discussion related to the Mathematical description of the different CNN architectures.