Techinical Report
A Multi-View Embedding Space for
Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
Yunchao Gong · Qifa Ke · Michael Isard · Svetlana Lazebnik
Abstract This paper investigates the problem of modeling
Internet images and associated text or tags for tasks such as
image-to-image search, tag-to-image search, and image-totag search (image annotation). We start with canonical correlation analysis (CCA), a popular and successful approach
for mapping visual and textual features to the same latent
space, and incorporate a third view capturing high-level image semantics, represented either by a single category or
multiple non-mutually-exclusive concepts. We present two
ways to train the three-view embedding: supervised, with
the third view coming from ground-truth labels or search
keywords; and unsupervised, with semantic themes automatically obtained by clustering the tags. To ensure high
accuracy for retrieval tasks while keeping the learning process scalable, we combine multiple strong visual features
and use explicit nonlinear kernel mappings to efﬁciently approximate kernel CCA. To perform retrieval, we use a specially designed similarity function in the embedded space,
which substantially outperforms the Euclidean distance. The
resulting system produces compelling qualitative results and
outperforms a number of two-view baselines on retrieval
tasks on three large-scale Internet image datasets.
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
E-mail: 
Project website: 
Q. Ke, M. Isard
Microsoft Research Silicon Valley, Mountain View, CA
E-mail: , 
S. Lazebnik
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
E-mail: 
Image-to-image
Tag-to-image
Image-to-tag
ship, boat,
Fig. 1 Retrieval scenarios considered in this paper. Top: Given a query
image, retrieve similar images from the database. Middle: Given a
search keyword or tag, retrieve relevant images. Bottom: Given a query
image, retrieve keywords or tags describing this image (automatic image annotation).
1 Introduction
The goal of this work is modeling the statistics of images
and associated textual data in large-scale Internet photo collections in order to enable a variety of retrieval scenarios:
similarity-based image search, keyword-based image search,
and automatic image annotation (Figure 1). Practical models
for these tasks must meet several requirements. First, they
must be accurate, which is a big challenge given that the imagery is extremely heterogeneous and user-provided annotations are noisy. Second, they must be scalable to millions of
images. Third, they must be ﬂexible, accommodating crossmodal retrieval tasks such as tag-to-image or image-to-tag
search in the same framework, and enabling, for example,
tag-based search of images without any tags.
 
Yunchao Gong et al.
Text: 1024 x 768 Au Revoir Trompette . All Things
Chill » Blog Archive » Wallpapers
Keywords: trumpet
Text: Arc de Triomphe and Champs Elysees.
Arc de Triomphe If you are foolhardy enough to.
Arc de Triomphe and Champs Elysees, Paris,
France - intoFrance .
Keywords: Arc de Triomphe
(a) Flickr-CIFAR (b) NUS WIDE
(c) INRIA web images
Tags: sunset, night,
colors, pink, tower,
shot, kuwait, stunning
Keywords: buildings
sky tower water
Tags: keywest,
Florida, tropics,
fauna, deer, keywest,
Keywords: deer
Tags: yellow, frog,
amphibian, canon,
550d, eos, picture,
Keywords: frog
Tags: interestingness,
window, mexico,
Keywords: window
Number of images: 230,173
Number of tags: 2494
Number of keywords: 10
Number of images: 269,648
Number of tags: 1000
Number of keywords: 81
Number of images: 71,478
Number of tags: 20,602
Number of keywords: 353
Tags: ladder, truck,
sparten, quint,
Keywords: truck
Text: PSG-ASSE: les Notes - MoreFoot.com. Beckham
amoureux du maillot blanc PSG ASSE les Notes.
France Une fin de match haletante n aura pas
Keywords: Paris Saint-Germain FC
Tags: red, natural,
landscape, sunset,
evening, seascape,
Keywords: lake, plants,
Fig. 2 An overview of the Internet image datasets used in this paper. Each image has three views associated with it: the visual features; the text
or tags; and the semantics or ground-truth keywords. For Flickr-CIFAR dataset (collected by ourselves as described in Section 5) and INRIA-
Websearch dataset , each image only has one ground-truth keyword. For the NUS-WIDE dataset , each
image has multiple keywords.
Several promising recent approaches for modeling images and associated text rely on canonical correlation analysis (CCA),
a classic technique that maps two views, given by visual and
and textual features, into a common latent space where the
correlation between the two views is maximized . This space is cross-modal, in the sense that embedded vectors representing visual and textual information are
treated as the same class of citizens, and thus image-to-image,
text-to-image, and image-to-text retrieval tasks can in principle all be handled in exactly the same way.
While CCA is very attractive in its simplicity and ﬂexibility, existing CCA-based approaches have several shortcomings. In particular, the works cited above use classic
two-view CCA, which only considers the direct correlations
between images and corresponding textual feature vectors.
However, as we will show in this paper, signiﬁcant improvements can be obtained by considering a third view with which
the ﬁrst two are correlated – that of the underlying semantics
of the image.
In this work, we use the term “semantics” to refer to
high-level labels or topics that characterize the content of an
image for the sake of a given application. For concrete examples, consider Figure 2, which illustrates the three-view
datasets used in our experiments. In these datasets, the semantic view of an image consists of one or more groundtruth keywords. Even though our approach does not rely on a
probabilistic generative model, we can think of the other two
views, i.e., visual features and tags/text, as being stochastically generated based on the keywords. In particular, the tags
tend to come from a larger vocabulary than the keywords
and they tend to be noisier. As in Figure 2 (a), the semantics of an image may be given by a single object category
(“deer”), while the user-provided tags may include a number
of additional terms correlated with that category (“keywest,
Florida, tropics, fauna, wedding” etc.). Alternatively, the semantics might be given by multiple keywords corresponding to objects, scene types, or attributes. Thus, as in Figure
2 (b), an image may be annotated by multiple ground-truth
keywords “buildings, sky, tower, water” and tags “sunset,
night, colors, pink, tower, shot, kuwait, stunning.” Or, as in
Figure 2 (c), the semantics may be given by the name of a
logo or landmark, and the text may be taken from the surrounding webpage, and may or may not explicitly mention
the ground-truth keyword.
In this paper, we present a three-view CCA model that
explicitly incorporates the high-level semantic information
as a third view. The difference between the standard twoview CCA and our proposed three-view embedding is visualized in Figure 3. In the two-view embedding space (Figure 3 (a)), which is produced by maximizing the correlations
between visual features and the corresponding tag features,
images from different classes are very mixed. On the other
hand, the three-view embedding (Figure 3 (b)) provides a
much better separation between the classes. As our experiments will conﬁrm, a third semantic view – which may be
derived from a variety of sources – is capable of considerably increasing the accuracy of retrieval on very diverse
In all the examples of Figure 2, the ground-truth semantic keywords are deﬁned ahead of time and accurately an-
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
Fig. 3 A visualization of the ﬁrst two directions of the common latent space for (a) standard two-view CCA and (b) our proposed three-view
CCA model. Different colors indicate different image categories (though note that category information is not used in learning the three-view
embedding). Black points indicate sample tag queries, and the corresponding images are their nearest neighbors in the latent space.
notated for the express purpose of training recognition algorithms. However, in most realistic situations, it is easy
to gather noisy text and tags, but not so easy to get at the
underlying semantics. Fortunately, we will show that even
in cases when clean ground-truth annotation for the third
view is unavailable, it is still possible to learn a better embedding for the photo collection by representing the semantics explicitly. In some cases, we can get an informative additional signal from search keywords. For example, if we
retrieve a number of images together with their tags from
Flickr using a search for “frog,” then knowing the original
search keyword gives us additional modeling power even if
many of these images do not actually depict frogs. Furthermore, if ground truth category or search keyword information is absent completely, we will demonstrate that an effective third view can be derived in an unsupervised way
by clustering the noisy tag vectors constituting the second
view. This approach is inspired by cluster-based information retrieval and the “cluster assumption”
in semi-supervised learning . In effect, the tag clustering can be thought of as “reconstructing”
or “recovering” the absent topics or distinct types of image
To obtain high retrieval accuracy, most modern methods
have found it necessary to combine multiple high-dimensional
visual features, each of which may come with a different
similarity or kernel function. Retrieval approaches of Hwang
and Grauman ; Yakhnenko and Honavar 
accomplish this combination using nonlinear kernel CCA
(KCCA) ,
but the standard KCCA formulation scales cubically in the
number of images in the dataset. Instead of KCCA, we use
a scalable approximation scheme based on efﬁcient explicit
kernel mapping followed by linear dimensionality reduction
and linear CCA. Finally, we speciﬁcally design a similarity
function suitable for our learned latent embedding, and show
that it achieves signiﬁcant improvement over the Euclidean
distance. Experiments on the three large-scale datasets of
Figure 2 show the promise of the proposed approach.
The following is a preview of the structure and main contributions of this paper:
– A novel three-view CCA framework that explicitly incorporates the dependence of visual features and text on
the underlying image semantics (Section 3.1).
– A similarity function specially adapted to CCA that improves the accuracy of retrieval in the embedded space
(Section 3.2).
– Scalable yet discriminative representations for the visual
and textual views based on multiple feature combination, explicit kernel mappings, and linear dimensionality
reduction (Sections 4.1 and 4.2).
– Two methods for instantiating the third semantic view:
supervised, or derived from ground-truth annotations by
unsupervised clustering; and unsupervised, or derived
by clustering the tag vectors from the second (textual)
view. In both cases, our experiments conﬁrm that adding
the third view helps to improve retrieval accuracy. For
the unsupervised case, we perform a comparative evaluation of several tag clustering methods from the literature (Section 4.3).
– Extensive evaluation of the proposed three-view models on three tasks – image-to-image, tag-to-image, and
image-to-tag search. Section 5 will give an overview of
our experimental protocol, and Sections 6-8 will present
results on the three large-scale datasets introduced in
Yunchao Gong et al.
2 Related Work
In the vision and multimedia communities, jointly modeling
images and text has been an active research area. This section gives a non-exhaustive survey of several important lines
of research related to our work.
Some of the earliest research on images and text has focused on
learning the co-occurrences between image regions and tags
using a generative model. Since most datasets used for training such models lack image annotation at the region level,
learning to associate tags with image regions is a very challenging problem, especially for contaminated Internet photo
collections with very large tag vocabularies. Moreover, image tags frequently refer to global properties or characteristics that cannot be easily localized. Therefore, we focus on
establishing relationships between whole images and words.
Conceptually, our three-view formulation may be compared to the generative model that attempts to capture the
relationships between the image class, annotation tags, and
image features. One example of such a model in the literature is Wang et al. . Unlike Wang et al. ,
though, we do not concern ourselves with the exact generative nature of the dependencies between the three views,
but simply assign symmetric roles to them and model the
pairwise correlations between them. Also, while Wang et al.
 tie annotation tags to image regions following Blei
and Jordan ; Blei et al. , we treat both the image
appearance and all the tags assigned to the image as global
feature vectors. This allows for much more scalable learning
and inference is only
tested on datasets of under 2,000 images and eight classes
The major goal of our work is learning a joint latent
space for images and tags, in which corresponding images
and tags are mapped to nearby locations, so that simple nearestneighbor methods can be used to perform cross-modal tasks,
including image-to-image, tag-to-image, and image-to-tag
search. A number of successful recent approaches to learning such an embedding rely on Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) . Hardoon et al. and
Rasiwasia et al. have applied CCA to map images
and text to the same space for cross-modal retrieval tasks.
Hwang and Grauman have presented a crossmodal retrieval approach that models the relative importance
of words based on the order in which they appear in userprovided annotations. Blaschko and Lampert have
used KCCA to develop a cross-view spectral clustering approach that can be applied to images and associated text.
CCA embeddings have also been used in other domains,
such as cross-language retrieval . Unlike all the other CCA-based
image retrieval and annotation approaches, ours adds a third
view that explicitly represents the latent image semantics.
Our approach also has connections to supervised multiview learning, in which images are characterized by visual
and textual views, both of which are linked to the underlying semantic labels. The literature contains a number of sophisticated methods for multi-view learning, including generalizations of CCA/KCCA , metric learning and large-margin formulations . Fortunately, we have found
that our basic CCA formulation already gives very promising results without having to pay the price of increased complexity for learning and inference.
Since learning a projection for the data is equivalent to
learning a Mahalanobis metric in the original feature space,
our work is related to metric learning . For
example, the large-margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) approach
 learns a distance metric that is optimized for nearest neighbor classiﬁcation, and neighborhood component analysis (NCA) 
optimizes leave-one-out loss for nearest neighbor classiﬁcation. Metric learning has been used for image classiﬁcation and annotation . However, all of these approaches learn an embedding or a metric for visual features
only, so they cannot be used to perform cross-modal retrieval.
The two main tasks we use for evaluating our system are
image-to-image search, which has been traditionally studied
as content-based image retrieval , and tag-to-image search, or image retrieval
using text-based queries .
A task related to tag-to-image search, though one we do
not consider directly, is re-ranking of contaminated image
search results for the purpose of dataset collection .
The third task we are interested in evaluating is imageto-tag search or automatic image annotation .
This task has traditionally been addressed with the help of
sophisticated generative models such as Blei and Jordan ;
Carneiro et al. ; Lavrenko et al. . More recently,
a number of publications have reported better results with
simple data-driven schemes based on retrieving database images similar to a query and transferring the annotations from
those images . We will adopt this strategy in our experiments and
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
demonstrate that retrieving similar images in our embedded
latent space can improve the accuracy of tag transfer.
The data-driven image annotation approaches of Guillaumin et al. ; Makadia et al. ; Verma and Jawahar use discriminative learning to obtain a metric or
a weighting of different features to improve the relevance
of database images retrieved for a query. Unfortunately, the
learning stage is very computationally expensive – for example, in the TagProp method of Guillaumin et al. ,
it scales quadratically with the number of images. In fact,
the standard datasets used for image annotation by Makadia
et al. ; Guillaumin et al. ; Verma and Jawahar consist of 5K-20K images and have 260-290 tags
each.By contrast, our datasets (shown in Figure 2) range in
size from 71K to 270K and have tag vocabularies of size 1K-
20K. While it is possible to develop scalable metric learning
algorithms using stochastic gradient descent ), our work shows that learning a linear embedding using CCA can serve as a simpler attractive alternative.
Perhaps the largest-scale image annotation system in the
literature is the Wsabie (Web Scale Annotation by Image
Embedding) system by Weston et al. . It uses stochastic gradient descent to optimize a ranking objective function
and is evaluated on datasets with ten million training examples. Like our approach, Wsabie learns a common embedding for visual and tag features. Unlike ours, however, it has
only a two-view model and thus does not explicitly represent
the distinction between the tags used to describe the image
and the underlying image content. Also, Wsabie is not explicitly designed for multi-label annotation, and evaluated
on datasets whose images come with single labels (or single
paths in a label hierarchy).
One of the shortcomings of data-driven annotation approaches as well as Wsabie is that they not
account for co-occurrence and mutual exclusion constraints
between different tags for the same image. If the retrieved
nearest neighbors of an image belong to incompatible semantic categories (e.g., “bird” and “plane”), then the tags
transferred from them to the query may be incoherent as
well (see Figure 13 (a) for an example). To better exploit
constraints between multiple tags, it is possible to treat image annotation as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem . In the present work, we limit
ourselves to learning the joint visual-textual embedding. It
would be interesting to impose multi-label prediction constraints in the joint latent space – in fact, Zhang and Schneider have recently proposed an approach combining
CCA with multi-label decoding – but doing so is outside the
scope of our paper.
Finally, our work has connections to approaches that use
Internet images and accompanying text as auxiliary training
data to improve performance on tasks such as image classiﬁcation, for which cleanly labeled training data may be
scarce . In particular, Quattoni et al. use the
multi-task learning framework of Ando and Zhang 
to learn a discriminative latent space from Web images and
associated captions. We will use this embedding method as
one of our baselines, though, unlike our approach, it can
only be applied to images, not to tag vectors. Apart from
multi-task learning, another popular way to obtain an intermediate embedding space for images is by mapping them to
outputs of a bank of concept or attribute classiﬁers . Once again,
unlike our method, this produces an embedding for images
only; also, training of a large number of concept classiﬁers
tends to require more supervision and be more computationally intensive than training of a CCA model.
3 Modeling Images, Tags, and High-Level Semantics
3.1 Scalable three-view CCA formulation
In this section, we introduce a three-view kernel CCA formulation for learning a joint space for visual, textual, and semantic information. Then we show how to obtain a scalable
approximation using explicit kernel embeddings and linear
We assume we have n training images each of which is
associated with a v-dimensional visual feature vector and a
t-dimensional tag feature vector (our speciﬁc feature representations for both views will be discussed in Section 4).
The respective vectors are stacked as rows in matrices V ∈
Rn×v and T ∈Rn×t. In addition, each training image is also
associated with semantic class or topic information, which
is encoded in a matrix C ∈Rn×c, where c is the number
of classes or topics. Each image may be labeled with exactly one of the c classes (in which case only one entry in
each row of C is 1 and the rest are 0); alternatively, each
image may be described by several of the c keywords (in
which case, multiple entries in each row of C may be 1). Another possibility is that C is a soft indication matrix, where
the i, jth entry indicates the degree (or posterior probability)
with which image i belongs to the jth class or topic. In the
supervised learning scenario, C is obtained from (possibly
noisy) annotations that come with the training data. In the
unsupervised scenario (where only images and tags are initially given), C is “latent” and must be obtained by clustering the tags, as will be discussed in Section 4.3. To simplify
the notation in the following, we will also use X1, X2, X3
to denote V, T, C respectively.
Let x, y denote two points from the ith view. The similarity between these points is deﬁned by a kernel function
Ki such that Ki(x, y) = ϕi(x)ϕi(y)⊤, where ϕi(·) is a
Yunchao Gong et al.
(a) Two-view model.
(b) Three-view model.
Fig. 4 (a) Traditional two-view CCA minimizes the distance (equivalently, maximizes the correlation) between images (triangles) and their
corresponding tags (circles). (b) Our proposed approach is to incorporate semantic classes or topics (black squares) as a third view. Images
and tags belonging to the same semantic cluster are forced to be close
to each other, imposing additional high-level structure. See also Figure
3 for a visualization of two embeddings on real data.
function embedding the original feature vector into a nonlinear kernel space. Practical kernel-based learning schemes do
not work in the embedded space directly, relying on the kernel function instead. However, we will formulate KCCA as
solving for a linear projection from the kernel space, because
this leads directly to our scalable approximation scheme based
on explicit embeddings.
In KCCA, we want to ﬁnd matrices Wi that project the
embedded vectors ϕi(x) from each view into a low-dimensional common space such that the distances in the resulting
space between each pair of views for the same data item
are minimized. The objective function for this formulation
is given by
∥ϕi(Xi)Wi −ϕj(Xj)Wj∥2
subject to W ⊤
i ΣiiWi = I, w⊤
ikΣijwjl = 0,
i, j = 1, . . . , 3, i ̸= j , k, l = 1, . . . , d, k ̸= l,
where Σij is the covariance matrix between ϕ(Xi) and ϕ(Xj),
and wik is the kth column of Wi (the number of columns in
each Wi is equal to the dimensionality of the resulting common space). To better understand this objective function, let
us consider its three terms:
W1,W2,W3 ∥ϕ1(V )W1 −ϕ2(T)W2∥2
∥ϕ1(V )W1 −ϕ3(C)W3∥2
F + ∥ϕ2(T)W2 −ϕ3(C)W3∥2
The ﬁrst term tries to align corresponding images and tags,
and it is the sole term in the standard two-view CCA objective . The remaining two terms, which
are introduced in our three-view model, try to align images
(resp. tags) with their semantic topic. Figure 4 illustrates
the difference between the two- and three-view formulations
graphically.
In the standard KCCA formulation, instead of directly
solving for linear projections of data explicitly mapped into
the kernel space by ϕi, one applies the “kernel trick” and
expresses the coordinates of a data point in the CCA space as
linear combinations of kernel values of that point and several
training points. To ﬁnd the weights in this combination, one
must solve a 3n × 3n generalized eigenvalue problem ; Hardoon et al. for details),
which is infeasible for large-scale data.
To handle large numbers of images and high-dimensional
features, we propose a scalable approach based on the idea
of approximate kernel maps . Let ˆϕ(x) denote an approximate kernel mapping such that Ki(x, x′) ≃ˆϕi(x) ˆϕi(x′)⊤. The dimensionality of ˆϕ(x) needs to be much lower than n to reduce the
complexity of the problem. The speciﬁc kernel mappings
used in our implementation will be described in Section 4.1.
Then, instead of using the kernel trick, we can directly substitute ˆϕ(x) into the linear CCA objective function (1). The
solution is given by the following generalized eigenvalue
S11 S12 S13
S21 S22 S23
S31 S32 S33
where Sij = ˆϕi(Xi)⊤ˆϕj(Xj) is the covariance matrix between the ith and jth views, and wi is a column of Wi. The
size of this problem is (d1 + d2 + d3) × (d1 + d2 + d3),
where the di are the dimensionalities of the respective explicit mappings ˆϕi(·). This is independent of training set
size, and much smaller than 3n×3n. To regularize the problem, we add a small constant (10−4 in the experiments) to
the diagonal of the covariance matrix.
In order to obtain a d-dimensional embedding for different views, we form projection matrices Wi ∈Rdi×d from
the top d eigenvectors corresponding to each wi. Then the
projection of a data point x from the ith view into the latent CCA space is given by ˆϕi(x)Wi. Note that once they
are learned, the respective projection matrices are applied to
each view individually, which means that at test time, we
can compute the embedding for data for which one or two
views are missing (e.g., an image without tags or groundtruth semantic labels). In the latent CCA space, points from
different views are directly comparable, so we can do imageto-image, image-to-tag, and tag-to-image retrieval by nearest neighbor search.
In the implementation, we select the embedding dimensionality d by measuring the retrieval accuracy in embedded
spaces with different values of d on validation images set
aside from each of our datasets (details will be given in Sections 6-8). We search a range from 16 to 1,024, doubling the
dimensionality each time, and the resulting values typically
fall around 128-256 on all our datasets.
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
3.2 Similarity function in the latent space
In the CCA-projected latent space, the function used to measure the similarity between data points is important. An obvious choice is the Euclidean distance between embedded
data points, as used in Foster et al. ; Hwang and Grauman ; Rasiwasia et al. . However, for our learned
embedding, we were able to ﬁnd a similarity function that
produces better empirical results. In particular, we scale the
dimensions in the common latent space by the magnitude of
the corresponding eigenvalues , and
then compute normalized correlation between projected vectors. Indeed, the CCA objective can be reformulated as maximizing the normalized correlation between different views
 .
Let x and y be points from the ith and jth views, respectively (we can have i = j). Then we deﬁne the similarity
function between x and y as
sim(x, y) = ( ˆϕi(x)WiDi)( ˆϕj(y)WjDj)⊤
∥ˆϕi(x)WiDi∥2∥ˆϕj(y)WjDj∥2
where Wi and Wj are the CCA projections for data points x
and y, and Di and Dj are diagonal matrices whose diagonal elements are given by the p-th power of the corresponding eigenvalues . We ﬁx p = 4 in all
our experiments as we have found this leads to the best performance. Section 6.4 will experimentally conﬁrm that the
above similarity measure leads to much higher retrieval accuracy than Euclidean distance.
4 Representations of the Three Views
In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we will present our visual and text
features with their respective kernel mappings. Next, in Section 4.3, we will discuss different text clustering approaches
that can be used to extract semantic topics in the unsupervised scenario, where the third view is not given for the
training data.
4.1 Visual feature representation
We represent image appearance using a combination of nine
different visual cues:
GIST : We resize each image to
200×200 and use three different scales to ﬁlter each
RGB channel, resulting in 960-dimensional (320 × 3) GIST
feature vectors.
SIFT: We extract six different texture features based on two
different patch sampling schemes: dense sampling and Harris corner detection. For each local patch, we extract SIFT
 , CSIFT , and RG-
BSIFT . For each feature, we
form a codebook of size 1,000 using k-means clustering and
build a two-level spatial pyramid , resulting in a 5000-dimensional vector. We will refer to these
six features as D-SIFT, D-CSIFT, D-RGBSIFT, H-SIFT, H-
CSIFT, and H-RGBSIFT.
HOG : To represent texture and
edge information on a larger scale, we use 2 × 2 overlapping HOG as described in Xiao et al. . We quantize
the HOG features to a codebook of size 1,000 and use the
same spatial pyramid scheme as above, once again resulting
in 5,000-dimensional feature vectors.
Color: We use a joint RGB color histogram of 8 bins per
dimension, for a 512-dimensional feature.
Recall from Section 3.1 that we transform all the features by nonlinear kernel maps ˆϕ(x) and then apply linear
CCA to the result. We discuss the speciﬁc feature maps we
use here. For GIST features, we use the random Fourier feature mapping that approximates
the Gaussian kernel. We compute this mapping with 3,000
dimensions and set its standard deviation equal to the average distance to the 50th nearest neighbor in each dataset.
All the other descriptors above are histograms, and for them
we adopt the exact Bhattacharyya kernel mapping given by
term-wise square root . To combine
different features, we simply average the respective kernels,
which has been proven to be quite effective in Gehler and
Nowozin . This corresponds to concatenating all the
different visual features after putting them through their respective explicit kernel mappings. However, the resulting
concatenated feature has 38,512 dimensions, necessitating
additional dimensionality reduction. To do this, we perform
PCA on top of each kernel-mapped feature ˆϕi(·). This is essentially using the low-rank approximation of kernel PCA
(KPCA) to approximate the combined multiple feature kernel matrix.
In our experiments, we reduce each kernel-mapped feature to 500 dimensions and the ﬁnal concatenated feature is
a 4, 500-dimensional vector. As validated in Section 6.2, this
dimensionality achieves good balance between efﬁciency and
accuracy. Note that for multiple feature combination, we
have found it important to center all feature dimensions at
the origin.
4.2 Tag feature representation
For the tags associated with the images, we construct a dictionary consisting of t most frequent tags (the vocabulary
sizes used for the different datasets are summarized in Figure 2 and will be further detailed in Section 5) and manually remove a small set of stop words. These include camera brands (e.g., “canon,” “nikon,” etc.), lens characteristics
(e.g., “eos,” “70-200mm,” etc.), and words like “geo.” The
Yunchao Gong et al.
tag feature matrix T is binary: Tij = 1 if image i is tagged
with tag j and 0 otherwise. Note that even though the dimensionality of the tag feature may be high (our vocabularies
range from 1,000 to over 20,000 on the different datasets),
this representation is highly sparse.
Like Guillaumin et al. , we use the linear kernel
for T, which corresponds to counting the number of common tags between two images. However, because of the high
dimensionality of the tag features, additional compression is
required, just as with the concatenated visual features. We
apply sparse SVD to the tag feature T to obtain a low-rank decomposition as T = U1SU ⊤
2 . It is easy
to show that U1S is actually the PCA embedding for T, but
directly applying sparse SVD to T is more efﬁcient. In our
implementation, the compressed representation of T is given
by the top 500 columns of U1S.
We have also investigated more sophisticated tag features such as the ranking-based representation of Hwang and
Grauman , which is based on the idea that tags listed
earlier by users are more salient to the image content. However, we have found almost no improvement from our chosen representation.
4.3 Semantic view representation
As initially discussed in Section 3, the third view of our
CCA model is given by the class or topic indicator matrix
C ∈Rn×c for n images and c topics. In the supervised
training scenario, C is straightforwardly given by groundtruth annotations or noisy search keywords used to download the data. In the more interesting unsupervised scenario,
training images come with noisy text or tags, but no additional semantic annotations. In this case, we choose to obtain C by clustering the tags. Given the raw tag feature T
(prior to the application of sparse SVD), our goal is to ﬁnd
c semantic clusters. For this purpose, we investigate several
models that have proven successful for text clustering. We
brieﬂy describe these models below; quantitative and qualitative evaluation results will be presented in Section 6.3.
K-means clustering: The simplest baseline approach is kmeans clustering on raw tag feature T using c centers. The
resulting matrix C has a 1 in the i, jth position if the ith tag
feature vector belongs to the jth cluster.
Normalized cut (NC) :
For text clustering, the normalized cut model is usually formulated as computing the eigenvectors of
L = I −D−1/2TT ⊤D−1/2 ,
in which D = diag(T(T ⊤1)). This is equivalent to computing the ﬁrst c singular vectors of the sparse matrix D−1/2T.
Following Ng et al. , we normalize each row of the
matrix of top c eigenvectors to have unit norm and perform
k-means clustering of rows of the resulting matrix eU. Directly using eU as C would represent a “soft” version of NC,
but we have found that the “hard” version obtained by kmeans produces better results.
Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) :
The data matrix is normalized as D−1/2T, where D is de-
ﬁned the same way as for NC, and then factorized into two
nonnegative matrices U and V such that T = U ⊤V (if T
is n × t, then U is c × n and V is c × t). Then, as in Xu
et al. , we obtain a normalized matrix eU with entries
ij. Finally, we do hard cluster assignment based
on the highest value of eU in each row. Just as with NC, this
produces better results than using eU as a “soft” cluster indicator matrix directly.
Probabilistic latent semantic analysis (pLSA) : This approach models each document (vector of tags
for an image) as a mixture of topics. The output of pLSA
is the posterior probability of each topic given each document. Directly using this matrix of posterior probabilities
as C leads to “soft” pLSA clustering. However, once again,
we get better performance with “hard” pLSA where we map
each document to the cluster index with the highest posterior
probability. We have also investigated latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and found the performance
to be similar to pLSA, so we omit it.
Because the number of topics used in this work is not
very high (from 10 to 100), we simply use a linear kernel on
C with no further dimensionality reduction.
5 Overview of Experimental Evaluation
This section will present the components of our experimental evaluation, including datasets, retrieval tasks, multi-view
models being compared, and baselines. Subsequently, Sections 6-8 will present results on our three datasets.
5.1 Datasets
Our selection of datasets is motivated by two considerations.
First, we want datasets that are as large as possible, both in
the number of images and in the number of tags. Second,
we want datasets that have the right kind of annotations for
evaluating our method – speciﬁcally, images that are accompanied both by noisy text or tags, and ground-truth labels.
We have considered a number of datasets used in recent related papers, but unfortunately, most of them are unsuitable for our goals. In particular, standard image annotation datasets used by Makadia et al. ; Guillaumin
et al. ; Rasiwasia and Vasconcelos ; Verma and
Jawahar – namely, Corel5K ,
ESP Game , and IAPR-TC
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
 – have only two views and are rather
small-scale (5K-20K images and 260-290 tags). Rasiwasia
et al. , who have ﬁrst proposed a two-view CCA model
for cross-modal retrieval of Internet images, perform experiments on a Wikipedia dataset that has rich textual views
as well as ground-truth labels, but it consists of only 2,866
documents. Weston et al. evaluate their Wsabie annotation system on millions of images. However, one of their
datasets is drawn from ImageNet , which
is more appropriate for image classiﬁcation, and the other
one is proprietary; neither has the three-view structure we
are looking for.
The three datasets we have chosen are shown in Figure
2. The ﬁrst one is collected by ourselves, while the other two
are publicly available.
Flickr-CIFAR dataset: We have downloaded 230,173 images from Flickr by running queries for categories from the
CIFAR10 dataset : airplane, automobile,
bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse, ship, and truck. We keep tags
that appear at least 150 times, resulting in a tag dictionary
with dimensionality 2,494. On average, there are 6.84 tags
per image. The Flickr images come with search keywords
and user-provided tags, but no ground-truth labels. To quantitatively evaluate retrieval performance we need another set
of cleanly labeled test images. We get this set by collecting
the same ten categories from ImageNet ,
resulting in 15,167 test images with no tags but ground-truth
class labels.
NUS-WIDE dataset: This dataset was
collected at the National University of Singapore. It also
originates from Flickr, and contains 269,648 images. The
dataset is manually annotated with 81 ground truth concept
labels, e.g., animal, snow, dog, reﬂection, city, storm, fog,
etc. One important difference between NUS-WIDE and other
datasets is that NUS-wide images may be associated with
multiple ground truth labels. For the tags, we use the list
of 1,000 words provided by Chua et al. ; on average,
each image has 5.78 tags and 1.86 ground truth annotations.
Each ground truth concept is also in the tag dictionary.
INRIA-Websearch dataset: Finally, we use the INRIA Web
query dataset , which contains 71,478
web images and 353 different concepts or categories, which
include famous landmarks, actors, ﬁlms, logos, etc. Each
concept comes with a number of images retrieved via Internet search, and each image is marked as either relevant
or irrelevant to its query concept. This dataset is especially
challenging in that it contains a very large number of concepts relative to the total number of images. The second
view for this dataset consists of text surrounding images on
web pages, not tags. We keep words that appear more than
20 times and remove stop words using a standard list for
text document analysis, which gives us a tag dictionary of
size 20,602. On this dataset, we also apply tf-idf weighting
to the tag feature.
The above three datasets have different characteristics
and present different challenges for our method. Flickr-CIFAR
has the fewest classes but the largest number of images per
class. It is also the only dataset whose training images have
no ground-truth semantic annotation, and whose test images
come from a different distribution than the training images.
We use this dataset for detailed comparative validation of
the different implementation choices of our method (Section 6). NUS-WIDE images are fully manually annotated
and come with multiple ground truth concepts per image.
INRIA-Websearch is the only one not collected from Flickr,
and its images are the most inconsistent in quality. It has the
largest number of classes but the smallest number of images
per class. It also has by far the largest vocabulary for the
second view and the noisiest statistics for this view.
5.2 Retrieval tasks
For evaluation, we consider the following tasks.
Image-to-image search (I2I): Given a query image, project
its visual feature vector into the CCA space, and use it to
retrieve the most similar visual features from the database.
Recall that our similarity function in the CCA space is given
by eq. (2).
Tag-to-image search (T2I): Given a search tag or combination of tags, project the corresponding feature vector into the
CCA space and retrieve the most similar database images.
This is a cross-modal task, in that the CCA-embedded tag
query is used to directly search CCA-embedded visual features. Note that with our method, we can use tags to search
database images that do not initially come with any tags. In
scenarios where ground-truth labels or keywords are available for the database images, we also consider a variant of
this task where we use the keywords as queries, which we
refer to as keyword-to-image search (K2I).
Image-to-tag search (I2T): Given an image, retrieve a set
of tags that accurately describe it. This task is more challenging than the other two because going from a feature
vector in CCA space to a coherent set of tags requires a sophisticated reconstruction or decoding algorithm ; Zhang and Schneider ). The design of such an algorithm is beyond the scope of our present
work, but to get a preliminary idea of the promise of our latent space representation for this task, we evaluate a simple
data-driven scheme similar to that of Makadia et al. .
Namely, given a query image, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the ﬁfty nearest neighbor tag vectors in CCA space, and then return the
ﬁve tags with the highest frequencies in the corresponding
database images. Note that Makadia et al. return tags
according to their global frequencies, while for our larger
Yunchao Gong et al.
and more diverse datasets, we have found that local frequency works better. Because our method for I2T is somewhat preliminary and because proper evaluation of this task
requires human annotators (see Section 6.7), our experiments
on this task will be smaller-scale and more limited than on
the other two.
The precise evaluation protocols and performance metrics used for each task are dataset-speciﬁc, and will be described in Sections 6-8.
5.3 Multi-view models
In the subsequent presentation, we will denote visual features as V, tag features as T, the keyword or ground truth annotations as K, and the automatically computed topics as C.
CCA (V+T) will refer to the two-view baseline model based
on visual and tag features; CCA (V+T+K) to the three-view
model based on visual features, tags, and supervised semantic information (ground truth labels or search keywords);
and CCA (V+T+C) to the three-view model with the unsupervised third view (automatically computed tag clusters).
All of these models will be evaluated for both I2I and T2I retrieval. For completeness, we will also evaluate the two-view
CCA (V+C) and CCA (V+K)1 models for I2I retrieval. However, because these models do not give an embedding for
the tags, they cannot be used for cross-modal retrieval (i.e.,
T2I). In addition, we will evaluate K2I and I2T on subsets
of models as appropriate (see Sections 6-8 for details).
5.4 Baselines
It is important to evaluate how CCA compares to alternative
methods for obtaining intermediate embeddings for visual
features supervised by tag or keyword information. For this,
we have implemented two embedding methods from the recent literature, as described below.
Structural learning. Our ﬁrst baseline is given by the structural or multi-task learning method of Ando and Zhang ;
Quattoni et al. . In their formulation, the tag matrix T
is treated as supervisory information for the visual features
V and a matrix of image-to-tag predictors W is obtained by
ridge regression: ∥T −V W∥2 + ρ∥W∥2. Next, since the
tasks of predicting multiple tags are assumed to be correlated, we look for low-rank structure in W by computing its
SVD. If W = U1SU ⊤
2 , then we use U1 (or more precisely,
its top d columns) as the embedding matrix for the visual
features: E = V U1. We select d by validation just as with
our CCA-based methods. Note that the structural learning
method does not produce an embedding for tags, so unlike
1 It can be shown that CCA with labels as one of the views is equivalent to Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) .
CCA (V+T) and our three-view models, it is not suitable for
cross-modal retrieval.
Wsabie. As a second baseline, we use Wsabie . This method learns a discriminative model of the
form f(x) = xUW where U is the embedding and W is
the matrix of weights for a set of classiﬁers, which in our
case correspond to keywords (the K view). Once we obtain
the embedding matrix U for the visual features, we evaluate
the accuracy of I2I in the embedded space. Note that Wsabie, just as the structural learning method described above,
cannot be used for cross-modal retrieval.
We have implemented Wsabie as described in Weston
et al. , using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to optimize a ranking-based loss function. We use random initialization and a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.01. The only difference
from Weston et al. is that instead of explicit regularization, we use early stopping as suggested in Gordo et al.
 . Namely, we run the SGD training for 20n iterations,
where n is the number of training points, and validate the
performance on the I2I task after processing every 1,000
points. At the end, the parameters with the highest validation accuracy are picked. For the dimensionality of the embedding U, we use a value of 128, which is relatively efﬁcient and achieves good performance (it is also comparable
to the typical dimensionalities that get selected by validation for our CCA model). Overall, the training of Wsabie
is slower and more complicated than our approach, as it involves learning rate tuning and validation for early stopping.
By contrast, the only parameter in our approach is the regularization constant in the covariance matrix (see Section 3.1)
and it is set to a ﬁxed value in all our experiments.
6 In-depth Analysis on Flickr-CIFAR
In this section, we use the Flickr-CIFAR dataset to conduct
a detailed study of the various components of our proposed
multi-view models, including feature combination and compression, different methods for tag clustering, and the proposed similarity function. For this purpose, we use the I2I,
T2I, and K2I tasks. At the end, in Section 6.7 we perform a
smaller-scale evaluation of I2T or image tagging.
6.1 Experimental protocol
Remember from Section 5 that the Flickr-CIFAR dataset
consists of 230,173 Flickr images that are used to learn the
CCA embedding and 15,167 ImageNet images that are used
for quantitative evaluation. The ImageNet images are split
into 13,167 “database” images against which retrieval is performed, 1,000 validation images, and 1,000 test images. One
ﬁxed split is used for all experiments. The validation images
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
Image-to-image search
PCA (500D)
Tag-to-image search
PCA (500D)
Table 1 Precision@50 for full-dimensional vs. PCA-reduced data for image-to-image (top) and tag-to-image (bottom) retrieval for CCA (V+T).
We did not obtain the result for combined features without PCA due to excessive computational cost (see text).
are run as queries against the database in order to select the
dimensionality d of the embedding.
For I2I search, we use the test images as queries and report precision at top p retrieved images (Precision@p) – that
is, the fraction of the p returned images having the same ImageNet label as the query. For T2I search, we need a different set of queries as the ImageNet images are not tagged. For
this, we take the tag feature vectors of 1,000 randomly chosen Flickr images (which are excluded from the set used to
learn the embedding). The ground truth label of each query
is given by the search keyword used to download the corresponding image. We have manually examined 50 of these
queries and found that about 75% percent of the tags are
closely related to the ground-truth keyword – for example,
for the “car” keyword, the tags contain “car,” “cars,” and
most of the other tags are also loosely related to the groundtruth keyword (“auto”). Thus, we expect this evaluation scheme
to be reasonably accurate. Just as for image-to-image search,
the evaluation metric for tag-to-image search is Precision@p.
6.2 Evaluation of features and training set size
Recall from Section 4.1 that we apply nonlinear kernel maps
to nine different visual features, reduce each of them to 500
PCA dimensions, and concatenate them together. As for the
tag features (Section 4.2), we use sparse SVD to compress
them to 500 dimensions. In this section, we evaluate these
transformations. Since no dimensionality reduction is involved
in the third view (K or C), for simplicity, we perform the
evaluation with the standard two-view CCA (V+T) model.
Table 1 reports the effect of PCA on image-to-image
and tag-to-image search for individual and combined visual
features. For image-to-image retrieval, applying PCA to the
original feature vectors may slightly hurt performance, but
the decrease is less than 1%. More importantly, combined
features signiﬁcantly outperform each individual feature. On
the other hand, for tag-to-image retrieval, PCA consistently
helps to improve performance. This is possibly because Flickr
tags are noisy, and reducing the dimensionality smooths the
To motivate our use of dimensionality reduction, it is instructive to give some running times on our platform, a 4core Xeon 3.33GHz workstation with 48GB RAM. For a
number of training image/tag pairs
Precision@50 (%)
Fig. 5 Performance with increasing number of training images on the
Flickr-CIFAR dataset.
single feature, it takes 2.5 seconds to obtain the CCA solution for approximated data (500 V + 500 T dimensions), versus 20 minutes for the full-dimensional kernel-mapped data
(5,000 V + 2,494 T). For all nine combined visual features,
it took around ﬁve minutes to get the approximated solution
(4,500 V + 500 T); because the computation scales cubically with the number of dimensions, we have not tried to
obtain the full-dimensional solution for all features (38,512
V + 2,494 T). Likewise, while one would ideally want to
compare our results to an exact KCCA solution using kernel matrices, for hundreds of thousands of training points
this is completely infeasible on our platform (for n training
points, exact two-view KCCA involves solving a 2n × 2n
eigenvalue problem).
We conclude that combining multiple visual cues is indeed necessary to get the highest absolute levels of accuracy,
and that dimensionality reduction of kernel-mapped features
can satisfactorily address memory and computational issues
with negligible loss of accuracy.
Finally, Figure 5 reports the retrieval accuracy of the
two-view CCA (V+T) as a function of training dataset size.
We can see that a fairly large amount of data, above 100K,
is needed to converge to good performance.
Yunchao Gong et al.
Image-to-image search
Tag-to-image search
# clusters
visual k-means
Table 2 Precision@50 for different clustering methods for image-to-image and tag-to-image retrieval with the CCA (V+T+C) model. The second
row shows results for visual clusters and the remaining rows for semantic (tag-based) clusters. The results are averaged over ﬁve different random
initializations of the clustering methods. The performance of the CCA (V+T) baseline is 54.90% for image-to-image search, and 64.02% for
tag-to-image search.
6.3 Comparison of tag clustering methods
In Section 4.3, we have presented a number of tag clustering methods that can be used to obtain the semantic topic
matrix C for the third view when the training images do
not come with ground-truth semantic information. Table 2
compares the performance of these methods. We use our
proposed CCA (V+T+C) model, where V and T are lowdimensional approximations to the visual and tag features as
discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, and C is generated by the
different clustering methods being compared. As a baseline,
we also include results for k-means clustering based solely
on visual features. It is clear that visual clusters have worse
performance than all of the tag-based clustering methods,
thus conﬁrming that the visual features are too ambiguous
for unsupervised extraction of high-level structure (this will
also be demonstrated qualitatively in Figure 8). In fact, the
performance of the three-view CCA (V+T+C) model with
visual clusters is even worse than that of the CCA (V+T)
Among the tag-based clustering methods, normalized cut
(NC) method achieves the best performance across a wide
range of cluster sizes, followed by NMF, k-means and pLSA
in decreasing order of accuracy. Thus, NC will be our method
of choice for computing the CCA (V+T+C) embedding. As
a function of the number of clusters, accuracy tends to increase up to a certain point, after which overﬁtting sets in.
The best number of clusters to use depends on the breadth of
coverage and the semantic structure of the dataset; we select
it using validation data.
Figure 6 visualizes a few tag clusters in the joint CCA
space for the NUS-WIDE dataset. For each example cluster,
it shows the most frequent tags associated with the images in
that cluster, as well as the sixteen images closest to the center of the cluster in the CCA (V+T+C) space. We can see that
the clusters have a good degree of both visual and semantic
coherence. For comparison, Figure 7 shows some clusters in
just the tag view, i.e., before the joint CCA projection. We
can see the images in each cluster correspond to the same
semantic concept, though they are not visually similar. Fimethod
CCA (V+T) (Eucl)
CCA (V+T) (scale+Eucl)
CCA (V+T) (scale+corr)
CCA (V+T+C) (Eucl)
CCA (V+T+C) (scale+Eucl)
CCA (V+T+C) (scale+corr)
CCA (V+T+K) (Eucl)
CCA (V+T+K) (scale+Eucl)
CCA (V+T+K) (scale+corr)
Table 3 Evaluation of different components of our proposed similarity function (eq. 2) on three multi-view setups. “Eucl” denotes Euclidean distance, “scale” denotes scaling of the feature dimensions by
the CCA eigenvalues, and “corr” denotes normalized correlation. CCA
(V+T+C) is computed using 20 NC clusters and CCA (V+T+K) is the
supervised three-view model with K given by search keywords of the
Flickr images.
nally, for completeness, Figure 8 shows k-means clusters on
just the visual features. Because our visual features are relatively powerful, the cluster images are still perceptually similar, but they are no longer semantically consistent (in particular, note the poor correspondence between the most frequent tags for the entire clusters and the top sixteen images
in the clusters). Figure 8 conﬁrms the difﬁculty of ﬁnding
good semantic themes by visual clustering alone, and helps
to explain why visual clusters decrease the retrieval performance when incorporated as a third view in the learned CCA
model (Table 2).
6.4 Comparison of similarity functions
Section 3.2 has presented our similarity function for nearest neighbor retrieval in the CCA space. Table 3 compares
this function (eq. 2) to plain Euclidean distance for three
different multi-view setups. We separately evaluate the effects of its two main components: eigenvalue scaling and
normalized correlation. From the table, we can ﬁnd that both
these components give signﬁcant improvements over the Euclidean distance. We have consistently observed similar pat-
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
cute rabbit bunny animal
baby adorable pet
funny animals
cheerleader football girls
basketball girls dance
university sports college
bird birds nature wildlife
animal booby eagle
hawk flight
nature macro flower
closeup green insect
bravo red yellow
music concert rock live
festival band scientists
dance drum
city urban manhattan new
building downtown night
architecture buildings
home design office house
interior kitchen fashion
portrait face self girl
woman eyes smile
child portraits
abandoned decay old
urban rust industrial
factory jail rusty
underwater fish diving
scuba coral sea
ocean reef dive
autumn trees tree
park fall leaves
forest fog mist
snow winter ice cold
nature trees mountains
white mountain
Fig. 6 Example semantic clusters on the NUS-WIDE dataset. For each cluster, we show the most frequent tags and the images closest to the cluster
center in the CCA (V+T+C) space.
tern on other datasets, so we adopt the proposed similarity
function in all subsequent experiments.
6.5 Comparison of multi-view models
Table 4 evaluates the performance of several multi-view models on three tasks: image-to-image (I2I), tag-to-image (T2I),
and keyword-to-image (K2I) retrieval. As explained in Section 6.1, our performance metric for all tasks is class label
(keyword) precision at top 50 images.
The most naive baselines for our approach are given by
the single-view representations consisting only of visual features – either raw 38,512-dimensional ones (V-full) or PCAcompressed 4,500-dimensional ones (V). Both of these representations can only be used directly for image-to-image
similarity search (I2I). As can be seen from Table 4, the
PCA-compressed feature gets higher precision for this task,
but in absolute terms, both perform poorly.
A stronger baseline for our three-view models is given
by the two-view CCA (V+T) representation, which can be
used for all three retrieval tasks we are interested in (it can
be used for K2I because the ten class labels or keywords in
this dataset are a subset of the tag vocabulary). For I2I, the
CCA (V+T) embedding improves the precision over nonembedded image features (V) from 41.65% to 54.9%. Thus,
projecting visual features into a space that maximizes correlation with Flickr tags greatly improves the semantic coherence of similarity-based image matches (i.e., in the CCA
Yunchao Gong et al.
cat animal cats
zoo tiger animals
pet feline kitty
ship boat sea
navy port harbor
ocean water boats
bravo landscape nature
clouds sky trees tree
sunset mountains
bird birds nature
wildlife animal booby
eagle hawk
Fig. 7 Example tag clusters produced by k-means clustering on top of normalized cuts (Section 4.3). For each cluster center, the sixteen images
with the closest tag vectors are shown. The most frequent tags in the cluster are shown above the central cluster images.
blue nature water sky
landscape clouds green
snow explore
water green nature
clouds landscape sky
carpet sea beach
portrait light black flower
macro white
bravo nature girl
fog nature water sunset
explore sepia
white red sky
Fig. 8 Example visual k-means clusters for the NUS-WIDE dataset.
CCA (V+T+K)
CCA (V+T+C)
Structural learning
Table 4 Results on Flickr-CIFAR for image-to-image (I2I), tag-toimage (T2I), and keyword-to-image(K2I) retrieval. The protocols for
I2I and T2I are described in Section 6.1. For K2I, each of the 10
ground truth classes is used as a query once. The evaluation metric
is average precision (%) at top 50 retrieved images. V-full refers to
the concatenated 38,512-dimensional visual features. In all the other
approaches, V refers to the 4,500-dimensional PCA-reduced features,
T to the 500-dimensional sparse SVD-reduced tag features, and C is
computed based on 20 NC clusters. Structural learning refers to the
method of Ando and Zhang ; Quattoni et al. and Wsabie
refers to the method of Weston et al. . We have obtained standard deviations from ﬁve random database/query splits, and they are
around 0.25% - 1%.
space, “truck” query images are much more likely to have
top matches that are also “truck” images).
Next, we consider our supervised three-view model, CCA
(V+T+K), where the third view is given by the search keywords used to retrieve the Flickr images. Even though this
supervisory information is noisy (not all images retrieved
by Flickr search for “truck” will actually contain trucks), we
can see that incorporating it as a third view improves the
precision of all three of our target retrieval tasks. The unsupervised version of our three-view model, CCA (V+T+C),
where the third view is given by 20 NC clusters, performs
almost identically to CCA (V+T+K) on I2I and K2I, and
has slightly lower precision for T2I. This is a very encouraging result, since it shows that semantic information that is
automatically recovered from noisy tags still provides a very
powerful form of supervision.
Table 4 also lists the performance of two-view models
CCA (V+K) and CCA (V+C) given by replacing the lowerlevel tag-based view T by the higher-level but lower-dimensional
semantic view (K or C). Compared to CCA (V+T), both
models have signiﬁcantly higher I2I precision (though it is
a bit lower than that of the respective three-view models).
Thus, replacing noisy tags with the cleaner semantic views
can help to improve performance. However, the two-view
V+K and V+C models are not suitable for tag-to-image search,
while the three-view models can be used for all the tasks we
care about.
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
Precision: 26.67%
Precision: 100%
Precision: 100%
Precision: 66.67%
(a) Original visual feature.
Precision: 46.67%
(b) CCA (V+T).
Precision: 100%
(c) CCA (V+T+C).
Fig. 9 Image-to-image retrieval results for two sample queries. The leftmost image is the query. Red border indicates a false positive.
(a) yellow
Fig. 10 Examples of tag-based image search on the Flickr-CIFAR dataset.
The last two lines of Table 4 report baseline comparisons to structural learning and Wsabie . Both
perform better than CCA (V+T) but worse than all our other
multi-view CCA models. One reason for this is because these
models were designed for discrimination, not retrieval. In
the case of Wsabie, it is possible that a batch learning approach (for example, second-order batch optimization) can
give better performance than ﬁrst-order SGD. However, a
batch implementation of Wsabie is beyond the scope of our
baseline comparisons (as described in the original paper,
Wsabie is a sampling method speciﬁcally designed for SGD).
Furthermore, neither structural learning nor Wsabie produces
an embedding for tags, so unlike CCA (V+T) and our threeview models, these baselines are not suitable for tag-to-image
retrieval.
6.6 Qualitative results
Figure 9 shows image-to-image search results for two example queries, and Figures 10 and 11 show examples of tag-toimage search results. As noted earlier, one advantage of our
system over traditional tag-based search approaches is that
once our multi-view embedding is learned, we can use it to
perform tag-to-image search on databases of images without any accompanying text. In fact, for the Flickr-CIFAR
dataset, recall that we are using an embedding trained on
tagged Flickr images to embed and search ImageNet images
that lack tags. Figure 10 shows top retrieved images for four
tags that do not correspond to the main ten keywords that
were used to download the dataset. In particular, we are able
to learn colors, common background classes like “ocean,”
and sub-classes of the main keywords like “sail.”
Figure 11 shows images retrieved for more complex queries
consisting of multiple tags such as “deer, snow.” Note that
“deer” is one of our ten main keywords, and “snow” is a
much less common tag. To get good retrieval results in such
cases, we have found that we need to give higher weights
to the more minor concepts when forming the query tag
vector. Intuitively, the tag projection matrix found by minimizing the CCA objective function (eq. 1) is much more
inﬂuenced by the distortion due to the common tags rather
Yunchao Gong et al.
(b) deer, snow×2
(c) deer, snow×6
(f) ship, sunset×2
(g) ship, sunset×6
(h) sunset
Fig. 11 Examples of tag-to-image search on Flickr-CIFAR with multiple query tags and adjustable weights (see text).
CCA (V+T+C)
CCA (V+T+K)
Fig. 12 Tagging results on the Flickr-CIFAR dataset: Average precision of retrieved tags vs. tag rank based on manual evaluation (see
than the rare ones. We have empirically observed that we
can counteract this effect and obtain more accurate results
for less frequent tags by increasing their weights in the tag
vector at query time. To date, we have not designed a way
to tune the weights automatically. However, in an interactive image search system, it would be very natural for users
to adjust the weights on the ﬂy to modulate the importance
of different concepts in their query. For example, in Figure
11 (a)-(c), when we increase the weight for “snow,” snow
becomes more and more prominent in the retrieved images.
6.7 Tagging results
This section presents a quantitative evaluation of our method
for image tagging or annotation. As described in Section 5,
we use the data-driven annotation scheme of Makadia et al.
 , where tags are transferred from top ﬁfty neighbors to
the query in the latent space. We randomly sample 200 query
images from our ImageNet test set and use CCA (V+T),
CCA (V+T+C), and CCA (V+T+K) spaces to transfer tags.
To evaluate the results, we ask four individuals (members
of the research group not directly involved with this project)
to verify the tags suggested by different methods, that is,
mark each tag as either relevant or irrelevant to the image.
To avoid bias, our evaluation interface does not tell the evaluators which set of tags was produced by which method, and
presents the sets of tags corresponding to different methods
in random order for each test image. Our reasons for using
human evaluation are twofold: ﬁrst, our test images do not
have any ground truth annotations; second, it is hard to provide ground truth consisting of a complete set of tags that
could be relevant to an image. We combine the results of the
human evaluators by voting: each tag that gets marked as
relevant by three or more evaluators is considered correct.
Figure 12 reports average precision as a function of tag
rank (which is determined by frequency of the tag in the top
ﬁfty closest images to the query in the CCA space). We can
ﬁnd that our proposed three-view models, CCA (V+T+K)
and CCA (V+T+C), lead to better accuracy than the baseline
CCA (V+T) method. Figure 13 shows the tagging results
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
CCA (V+T+C)
CCA (V+T+C)
automobiles
10millionphotos
Fig. 13 Example image tagging results on Flickr-CIFAR dataset for CCA (V+T) and CCA (V+T+C). Tags in red have been marked as irrelevant
by human annotators.
for CCA (V+T) vs. CCA (V+T+C) on a few example test
7 Results on the NUS-WIDE Dataset
In this section, we compare different multi-view embeddings
on the NUS-WIDE dataset. We randomly split the dataset
into 219,648 training and 50,000 test images. As before, we
learn the joint embedding using the training images, and test
retrieval accuracy on testing dataset. In the test set, we randomly sample and ﬁx 1,000 images as the queries, 1,000
images as the validation set, and retrieve the remaining images. The validation set is used to ﬁnd the number of clusters for NC. For this dataset, this number ends up being 100,
vs. 20 for Flickr-CIFAR. The larger number of clusters for
NUS-WIDE is not surprising, since this dataset has a much
larger number of underlying semantic concepts than Flickr-
CIFAR (81 vs. ten). Since there are relatively fewer images
per class, we report Precision@20 instead of Precision@50.
Also, since the images in this dataset may contain multiple
ground truth keywords, we compute average per-keyword
precision. That is, if q is the number of keywords for a given
query image and a is the number of relevant keywords retrieved in the top p images, we deﬁne Precision@p as a
Table 5 reports results for different multi-view models
on I2I, T2I, and K2I search. For the supervised K view, we
directly use the ground truth annotations (which may contain multiple nonzero entries per image). On this dataset,
the best performance is achieved by the supervised CCA
(V+T+K) and CCA (V+K) models. The unsupervised threeview model CCA (V+T+C) still improves over CCA (V+T)
for all three tasks, but not as much as CCA (V+T+K). By
CCA (V+T+K)
CCA (V+T+C)
Structural learning
Table 5 Comparison of multi-view models and baselines on the NUS-
WIDE dataset. For K2I, since images may have multiple ground truth
keywords, we do not generate the keyword queries directly but use the
keyword vectors of the 1,000 query images used for I2I. The performance metric is Precision@20 averaged over the number of keywords
per query, as described in the text. Structural learning refers to the
method of Ando and Zhang ; Quattoni et al. and Wsabie
refers to the method of Weston et al. . We have obtained standard deviations from ﬁve random database/query splits, and they are
around 0.66% - 1.06%.
contrast, on the Flickr-CIFAR dataset (Table 4), we found
that CCA (V+T+C) and CCA (V+T+K) were very close together. The weaker performance of the unsupervised threeview model on NUS-WIDE is not entirely surprising, however, since the tag clusters for NUS-WIDE are likely much
more mixed than for Flickr-CIFAR, whose concepts were
fewer and better separated. Intuitively, for richer and more
diverse datasets, ground truth annotations are likely to be the
strongest source of semantic information. Also, unlike in Table 4, the two-view supervised model CCA (V+K) appears
to have stronger results than the three-view CCA (V+T+K)
for I2I and especially K2I. This may be due to the T view
Yunchao Gong et al.
Precision: 46.67%
Precision: 86.67%
Precision: 100%
Precision: 66.7%
Precision: 66.7%
Precision: 86.7%
Precision: 73.33%
(a) Original visual feature.
Precision: 100%
(b) CCA (V+T).
Precision: 100%
(c) CCA (V+T+C).
Fig. 14 Image-to-image retrieval results on the NUS-WIDE dataset. The query image is shown on the left, together with its ground truth concepts.
Red borders indicate false positive retrieval results. We consider an image to be a false positive if its ground truth annotation does not share any
concepts with the query. Please note, however, that the ground truth is noisy, so some false (resp. true) positives are labeled inaccurately.
adding noise to the K view. Despite this, the two-view CCA
(V+K) model is not as useful or ﬂexible as the three-view
CCA (V+T+K) one – in particular, the former is not suitable
for T2I retrieval.
Figure 14 shows example image-to-image search results
and Figure 15 shows example tag-to-image search results for
the CCA (V+T+C) model. As can be seen from the latter ﬁgure, our system can return appropriate images for compound
queries consisting of combinations of as many as three tags,
e.g., “mountain, river, waterfalls” or “beach, people, red.”
Figure 16 compares tag-to-image retrieval results for the
two-view model, CCA (V+T), and the three-view one, CCA
(V+T+C). The three-view model tends to retrieve more relevant images, especially for compound queries.
Figure 17 compares image annotation results for CCA
(V+T), CCA (V+T+C), and CCA (V+T+K) using the same
human evaluation protocol as in Section 6.7. Unlike the Flickr-
CIFAR results in Figure 12, where the three-view models
produced higher precision than CCA (V+T), all three models work comparably for image tagging on NUS-WIDE. The
example results shown in Figure 18 conﬁrm that the subjective quality of the tags produced by two- and three-view
models is similar. We believe that the explanation for this
result has to do, at least in part, with the statistics of images
and tags in NUS-WIDE. Speciﬁcally, many images in this
dataset are either abstract or are natural landscape scenes
with no distinctive objects. For such images, all our embeddings tend to suggest generic tags. Also, suggesting tags
such as “landscape,” “night,” “light,” etc., appears to be somewhat easier than trying to suggest object-speciﬁc tags, which
are much more important for Flickr-CIFAR – indeed, in terms
of absolute performance, the precision curves for NUS-WIDE
(Figure 18) are higher than for Flickr-CIFAR (Figure 12).
Furthermore, as discussed in Section 5, our embedding does
not provide a complete solution to the image annotation problem, as it does not include a decoding step exploiting multilabel constraints. Developing such a solution is an important
subject for our future work.
8 Results on the INRIA-Websearch Dataset
Finally, we report results on the INRIA web search dataset.
As explained in Section 5, ground-truth semantic information for each image in this dataset is in the form of a binary label saying whether or not that image is relevant to
a particular query concept. This information directly gives
us our third view for the supervised CCA (V+T+K) model.
Since this dataset, just as NUS-WIDE, has relatively few
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
(a) mountain river grass
(b) mountain river tree
(c) mountain river sky
(d) mountain river waterfalls
(e) mountain river
(g) reﬂection city river
(h) reﬂection city
(j) night city
(k) city fog
(n) golden cloud
(p) storm beach
(r) beach people
(s) beach people red
Fig. 15 Examples of tag-to-image search on the NUS-WIDE dataset with CCA (V+T+C). Tags in italic are also part of the 81-member semantic
concept vocabulary. Notice that the three-view model can return appropriate images for combinations of up to three query tags.
Yunchao Gong et al.
(a) CCA (V+T).
(b) CCA (V+T+C).
(c) CCA (V+T).
(d) CCA (V+T+C).
(e) CCA (V+T).
(f) CCA (V+T+C).
mountain river grass
(g) CCA (V+T).
mountain river grass
(h) CCA (V+T+C).
Fig. 16 A qualitative comparison of tag-to-image search for CCA (V+T) and CCA (V+T+C) on the NUS-WIDE dataset. Qualitatively, CCA
(V+T+C) works better. For “city, fog,” the three-view model successfully ﬁnds city images with fog, while CCA (V+T) only ﬁnds city images.
For “mountain, river, grass,” almost all images found by the three-view model contain some river, while the images found by CCA (V+T) do not
contain river.
images per concept, we evaluate performance using Precision@20. We randomly split the dataset into 51,478 training
and 20,000 test images. In the test set, we use 18,000 images as the database, 1,000 images as validation queries, and
1,000 as test queries. Note that the database includes images
marked as “irrelevant,” but not the validation or test queries.
For CCA (V+T+C), we tune the number of NC clusters on
the validation dataset to obtain 450 clusters.
Table 6 reports image-to-image and tag-to-image search
results. As this dataset is extremely noisy and diverse, the
absolute accuracy for all the methods is low. Precision may
be further lowered by the fact that each database image is
annotated with its relevance to just a single query concept
– thus, if a retrieved image is relevant for more than one
query, this may not show up in the quantitative evaluation.
Nevertheless, CCA (V+T+C) still consistently works better than the CCA (V+T) baseline. As on the NUS-WIDE
dataset, the supervised CCA (V+T+K) model works better
than CCA (V+T+C). Also, as on NUS-WIDE, CCA (V+K)
works slightly better than CCA (V+T+K) for I2I. Once again,
this may be because the tag view (T) is adding noise to
the embedding. Figure 19 shows some qualitative image-toimage search results.
Finally, since the second view of this dataset consists not
of tags, but of text mined from webpages, we do not evaluate
image-to-tag search.
9 Discussion and Future Work
This paper has presented a multi-view embedding approach
for Internet images, tags, and their semantics. We have started
with the two-view visual-textual CCA model popular in several recent works and shown that its performance can be signiﬁcantly
improved by adding a third view based on semantic ground
truth labels, image search keywords, or even topics obtained
by unsupervised tag clustering. In terms of quantitative results, this is our most signiﬁcant ﬁnding – both the supervised and unsupervised three-view models, CCA (V+T+K)
and CCA (V+T+C), have consistently outperformed the twoview CCA (V+T) model on all three datasets, despite the
extremely diverse characteristics shown by these datasets.
For the unsupervised three-view model, CCA (V+T+C),
it may appear somewhat unintuitive that the third clusterbased view, which is completely derived from the second
textual one, can add any useful information to improve the
embedding. There are several ways to understand what the
unsupervised third view is doing. Especially in simpler datasets
with a few well-separated concepts, such as our Flickr-CIFAR
dataset, tag clustering is actually capable of “recovering”
the underlying class labels. Even in more diverse and ambiguous datasets with overlapping concepts, tag clustering
can still ﬁnd sensible concepts that impose useful high-level
A Multi-View Embedding Space for Modeling Internet Images, Tags, and their Semantics
CCA (V+T+C)
CCA (V+T+C)
cheerleader
architecture
architecture
illustration
illustration
Fig. 17 Example tagging results on the NUS-WIDE dataset (see text for discussion).
CCA (V+T+C)
CCA (V+T+K)
Fig. 18 Tagging results on the NUS-WIDE dataset: average precision
of retrieved tags vs. tag rank.
structure (Figure 6). In its attempt to discover this structure,
our embedding space may be likened to a non-generative
version of a model that connects visual features and noisy
tags to latent image-level semantics .
From another point of view, we can observe that the output of the clustering process, given by the cluster indicator
matrix C, is a highly nonlinear transformation of the second
view T that either regularizes the embedding or improves its
expressive power.
The quantitative and qualitative results presented in this
paper demonstrate that our proposed multi-view embedding
space, together with the similarity function specially designed
for it, successfully captures visual and semantic consistency
CCA (V+T+K)
CCA (V+T+C)
Structural learning
Table 6 Precision@20 for different multi-view models on the INRIA-
Websearch dataset. For K2I, the queries correspond to the 353 ground
truth concepts. Note that these concepts are no longer necessarily part
of the tag vocabulary, so we cannot report K2I results for any embedding that does not include the K view. We have obtained standard deviations from ﬁve random database/query splits, and they are around
0.6% - 1.1%.
in diverse, large-scale datasets. This space can form a good
basis for a scalable and ﬂexible retrieval system capable of
simultaneously accommodating multiple usage scenarios. The
visual and semantic clusters discovered by tag clustering and
subsequent CCA projection can be used to summarize and
browse the content of Internet photo collections . Figure 6 has
shown an example of what such a summary could look like.
Furthermore, users can search with images for similar im-
Yunchao Gong et al.
sponge bob
Precision: 6.67%
Precision: 20%
Precision: 40%
Buckingham Palace
Precision: 66.67%
(a) Original visual feature.
Precision: 100%
(b) CCA (V+T).
Precision: 100%
(c) CCA (V+T+C).
Fig. 19 Sample image-to-image retrieval results on the INRIA-Websearch dataset. The query is on the left. Red border means false positive.
ages, or retrieve images based on queries consisting of multiple tags or keywords. As illustrated in Figure 11, they can
also manually adjust weights corresponding to different keywords according to the importance of those keywords. Finally, our embedding space can also serve as a basis for an
automatic image annotation system. However, as discussed
in Section 7, in order to achieve satisfactory results on this
task, we need to develop more sophisticated decoding methods incorporating multi-label consistency constraints.
Besides the application scenarios named above, we are
also interested in using our learned latent space as an intermediate representation for recognition tasks. One of these
is nonparametric image parsing where, given a query image, a small number of similar training images is retrieved and labels are
transferred from these images to the query. With a better
embedding for images and tags, this retrieval step may be
able to return training images more consistent with the query
and lead to improved accuracy for image parsing. Another
problem of interest to us is describing images with sentences
 . Once again, with a good intermediate embedding space
linking images and tags, the subsequent step of sentence
generation may become easier.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments; Jason Weston for advice on implementing the Wsabie method; Albert Gordo and Florent Perronnin for
useful discussions; and Joseph Tighe, Hongtao Huang, Juan Caicedo,
and Mariyam Khalid for helping with manual evaluation of the autotagging experiments. Gong and Lazebnik were supported by NSF grant
IIS 1228082, DARPA Computer Science Study Group (D12AP00305),
and Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship.