Using Social Psychology to Motivate Contributions
to Online Communities
Gerard Beenen1, Kimberly Ling1, Xiaoqing Wang4, Klarissa Chang1, Dan Frankowski3,
Paul Resnick2, Robert E. Kraut1
CommunityLab*
Under-contribution is a problem for many online communities.
Social psychology theories of social loafing and goal-setting can
provide mid-level design principles to address this problem. We
tested the design principles in two field experiments. In one,
members of an online movie recommender community were
reminded of the uniqueness of their contributions and the benefits
that follow from them. In the second, they were given a range of
individual or group goals for contribution. As predicted by theory,
individuals contributed when they were reminded of their
uniqueness and when they were given specific and challenging
goals, but other predictions were not borne out. The paper ends
with suggestions and challenges for mining social science theories
as well as implications for design.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 Social and behavioral sciences, H.4.3 Communications
Applications.
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors
Virtual Community / Community Computing, Social Computing
and Social Navigation, Empirical Methods-Quantitative, Usability
Testing and Evaluation, Social and Legal Issues, User Studies
1. MOTIVATING CONTRIBUTIONS IN
ONLINE COMMUNITIES
Since at least 1979, when the first Usenet news sharing programs
were created, online communities have co-evolved with the
growth in computer networking. Today, 25 years later, people
share news, information, jokes, music, discussion, pictures, and
social support in hundreds of thousands of online communities.
People benefit from the presence and activity of others in online
communities—from the information and other resources they
provide and the conversations they participate in.
Despite the vibrancy of online communities, large numbers of
them fail. Participation is often sub-optimal, with only a small
minority contributing. In many online groups, participation drops
to zero. For example, Butler found that 50% of social, hobby, and
work mailing lists had no traffic over a 4-month period .
Under-contribution is a problem even in communities that do
survive. In a majority of active mailing lists, fewer then 50% of
subscribers posted even a single message in a 4-month period .
Similarly, on the popular peer-to-peer music sharing service,
Gnutella, two-thirds of users share no music files and ten percent
provide 87% of all the music . In open source development
communities, four percent of members account for 50 percent of
answers on a user-to-user help site , and four percent of
developers contribute 88% of new code and 66% of code fixes
 . Although not everyone needs to contribute for a group to be
successful , groups with a large proportion of non-contributors
have difficulty providing needed services to members. For
example, in open source development environments, bugs are not
fixed and enhancements are not delivered. In movie rating
groups, obscure movies might not be evaluated. In medical
support groups, important problems and treatments might not be
discussed. We believe it is an important and difficult challenge to
design technical features of online communities and seed their
social practices in a way that generates ongoing contributions
from a larger fraction of the participants.
In this paper, we attempt to tackle the problem of undercontribution in an online community called MovieLens .
MovieLens is a web-based movie recommender community
where members can rate movies, write movie reviews, and receive
recommendations for movies. More than 20% of the movies listed
in the system have so few ratings that the recommender
algorithms cannot make accurate predictions about whether
subscribers will like them. Here, the contributions we hope to
motivate are ratings of movies, especially rarely-rated movies.
Social science theories have helped CSCW designers and
developers make sense of failures and focus attention on difficulties that
will need to be overcome in system design. For example, the ideas of
1Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh PA 15221
(gbeenen, kling, changtt, kraut)
@andrew.cmu.edu
2University of Michigan
3210 SI North
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
 
3University of Minnesota
200 Union Street SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455
 
4University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
CSCW’04, November 6-10, 2004, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-810-5/04/0011...$5.00.
* CommunityLab is a collaborative project of the University of
Minnesota, University of Michigan, and Carnegie Mellon
University. 
critical mass and network externalities help explain the difficulty
in getting systems adopted , and individual utility analysis
based on the distribution of costs and benefits helped designers
understand why electronic calendaring systems went unused in
many organizations .
Many CSCW researchers have also drawn design inspiration and
design guidelines from social science findings (e.g., ). For
example, research on the importance of unplanned conversation in
the workplace inspired the design of awareness systems to give
people information about the availability and context of potential
conversational partners (e.g., ).
Our aim is to build an even stronger link between social science
theories and CSCW design. First, we aim to draw on behavioral
theories that explain why people do things rather than just on
empirical regularities (or stylized facts). By drawing upon theory,
designers can craft mechanisms to engage the causal mechanisms
even in settings that on the surface appear quite different from
settings where the stylized facts were observed. Second, we seek
to implement alternative designs for which the theories predict
different outcomes, so that results from field experiments can test
the underlying theories or resolve questions on which the theories
were silent.
Motivating
contributions,
especially
contributions
communal good, is a topic that has received substantial attention
in many branches of the social sciences. Social psychologists have
documented a robust phenomenon across many settings that they
call social loafing. People exert less effort on a collective task
than they do on a comparable individual task (see for a
review). Economists and political scientists have come to similar
conclusions. Across a wide range of settings, people contribute
less than the optimal amount of public goods and consume more
than their fair share of common pool resources, though the antisocial behavior is considerably less than theories based on pure
short-term self-interest would predict (see for a review).
Ostrom provides a theory of the conditions that allow groups
to effectively govern common pool resources. Kollock and Smith
 treat these as design principles in an analysis of the successes
and failures of Usenet, but they do not test the impacts of
alternative designs.
In this paper, we describe two attempts to mine theories from
social psychology on the motivators of individual effort in
collective effort situations and on the motivating impacts of
specific, challenging goals. We apply these principles to the
design of appeals for soliciting contributions to MovieLens.
In each of two experiments, we first identified the abstract mental
states that the theories propose should lead to contribution, such
as believing that one’s contributions are unique in a group or that
they will benefit the group. We then translated them into specific
mental states that a participant in the MovieLens community
might have, such as believing that he or she rates movies that few
other users rate or that the ratings help others. Next, we designed
persuasive messages that we hoped would induce these mental
states. We conducted controlled experiments by delivering
different versions of an email message inviting existing
MovieLens subscribers to rate movies. We relied on email
primarily because of ease of implementation. Much as lowfidelity prototypes provide a low-cost way to test interface
designs, these email interventions provide a low-cost way to test
the impacts of manipulating relevant mental states. These email
messages probably have only a fleeting influence on the mental
states. Once experiments reveal the appropriate manipulations,
more costly changes could be made to the MovieLens interface.
We expect that permanent changes to the interface would have
longer-lived influences on subscribers’ mental states.
2. Study 1: Motivating contributions through
framing uniqueness and benefit
Social loafing or free riding is the robust phenomenon that
occurs when people work less hard to achieve some goal when
they think they are working jointly with others than when they are
working by themselves. Karau and Williams developed a
collective effort model, a theory to explain why people often work
harder individually than in groups . According to this theory,
people work hard when they think their effort will help them
achieve outcomes that they value. Working in a group can
influence how hard people work because it can change their
perception of the importance of their contribution to achieving a
specified level of performance, their likelihood of reaching the
goal, and the value they place on the outcomes they gain by their
efforts. (See Karau and Williams and Figure 1 for a fuller
description of the collective effort model.)
The collective effort model identifies conditions under which
people will socially loaf less. These include (a) believing that their
effort is important to the group’s performance, (b) believing that
their contributions to the group are identifiable, and (c) liking the
group they are working with, among others. Social psychologists
have tested the collective effort model by manipulating
individuals’ perceptions of the elements in Figure 1, both in
laboratory settings (e.g., ) and online .
We attempted to apply the insights from the collective effort
model to the problem of under-contribution in MovieLens. As
described earlier, over 20% of the movies in MovieLens are rated
by so few subscribers that the recommender system has
insufficient data to provide recommendations for any user. We
call these rarely-rated movies (RRM). This experiment sought to
improve the quality of the MovieLens system by increasing
subscribers’ motivation to rate movies, both rarely-rated ones and
other movies in the system.
Salience of uniqueness. The collective effort model posits that
people will socially loaf less when they perceive that their
contribution is important to the group . If they believe that
their contributions are redundant with what others in the group
can offer, then their contribution is unlikely to influence the
group’s outcome. Conversely, if they think they are unique, they
should be more motivated to contribute, because their
contributions have a larger chance of influencing the outcome that
they value.
Figure 1: The collective effort model (adapted from )
Individual
Individual
Individual
performance
Contribution to
group performance
performance
group outcome
Value of individual
Individual
motivation
In the case of MovieLens, individuals who rate rarely-rated
movies make this type of important unique contribution. To
motivate these members to action, one can make them aware of
their uniqueness.
Hypothesis 1: MovieLens users will rate more movies when the
uniqueness of their contributions is made salient.
Salience of benefit and the beneficiary. The collective effort
model also posits that people are more motivated to contribute
when they see the value that their contribution makes to an
individual or group outcome . MovieLens is a collaborative
filtering system that uses other people’s ratings to predict how
much a subscriber will like a movie. In MovieLens, rating movies
leads to useful movie predictions for both the rater and others.
Raters personally gain benefit because predictions for them
become more accurate, although with decreasing marginal returns
as they rate more movies. Essentially, rating more movies allows
the system to learn something about their preferences. Reminding
subscribers of this individual benefit should increase their
motivation to rate more movies.
Hypothesis 2a: MovieLens users will rate more
movies when the personal benefit they receive
from doing so is made salient.
When individuals rate movies, they benefit the community as a
whole by increasing the accuracy of recommendations that others
receive. However, this benefit to the community may not be
visible to members, because they do not have the data to see the
correlation
recommendations for others. Therefore, making explicit the
benefit that the community receives from their ratings should
increase their ratings. For example, Sheppard and Taylor found
that participants increased their performance when they perceived
a contingent tie between their individual performance and group
outcomes .
Hypothesis 2b: MovieLens users will rate
more movies when the benefit they provide to
the community is made salient.
Combining uniqueness and benefit. The collective effort model
emphasizes that uniqueness leads to greater effort because the
person believes that their effort has a positive impact on the group
outcome . Some MovieLens users, when informed of their
uniqueness, will infer that they are uniquely helpful to the group,
but others may not. Thus, emphasizing benefit to others should
increase the power of the uniqueness manipulation.
Hypothesis 3: MovieLens users will rate more
movies when the perception of both unique
contribution and benefits to the community are
made salient than when only unique contribution
or benefits are made salient.
2.1 Methods
Overview. We conducted our experiment on MovieLens.org, an
online community administered by the University of Minnesota.
MovieLens members rate movies and receive personalized
recommendations provided by a collaborative recommender
system. MovieLens has about 80,000 registered users, of whom
about 7,000 were active in the six-month period before this
research was conducted1. We recruited active MovieLens
1 This research was approved by the Institutional Review Boards
at both the University of Minnesota and Carnegie Mellon
University.
members who had rated rare movies by sending them an
electronic mail message inviting them to participate in a movie
rating campaign. We used different messages in this invitation
email to vary their perceptions of their uniqueness and who would
benefit from their contributions. We then tracked their
contribution behavior following the invitation.
Subjects. The subject population consisted of 904 active
MovieLens subscribers who had rated rarely-rated movies.
Members who logged on to the MovieLens website at least one
time in 2003 were considered active. We sampled members who
had rated at least 3 rarely-rated movies (i.e., those in the bottom
30% of all movies) or for whom rarely-rated movies comprised at
least 15% of all movies they had rated. Of the 904 members that
we contacted, 74 of the emails bounced, leaving us with 830
participants.
All subjects received an email message inviting them to
participate in a campaign to rate more movies. The text of these
email manipulated two variables, which we will call uniqueness
and benefit.
Uniqueness.
Participants
uniqueness
manipulation were sent a personalized email that told them they
were selected for the campaign because they tended to rate movies
that few other MovieLens users had rated. The message said, “We
are contacting you because as someone with fairly unusual tastes,
you have been an especially valuable user of MovieLens. In the
past, you have rated movies that few others have rated, such as
…” followed by titles of three rarely-rated movies they had
previously rated. Participants who received the non-unique
manipulation were told they were recruited because they had
previously rated movies that many other MovieLens subscribers
had rated. The message said, “We are contacting you because as
someone with fairly typical tastes you have been an especially
valuable user of MovieLens. In the past, you have rated movies
that many others also rated, such as…” followed by titles of
frequently rated movies.
Benefit. The benefit manipulation contained 4 conditions: no
benefit, only benefit to self, only benefit to others, and benefit to
both self and others. Participants who received the self-benefit
manipulation received a message that said, “Rating more movies
helps you! The more ratings you provide, the easier it is for
MovieLens to identify people with similar taste to yours, and thus
make accurate recommendations for you.” Participants who
received the other-benefit manipulation received a message that
said, “Rating more movies helps the MovieLens community! The
more ratings you provide, the more information we have about
each movie and the easier it is to make accurate recommendations
for other people. “ Participants in the both self and other benefit
condition received a combination of these messages, and those in
the no-benefit condition received neither.
Measuring contribution. Figure 2 shows the number of ratings
made by experimental participants surrounding the email
invitation. Because ratings surged during the week of the
invitation, and then rapidly fell to their pre-invitation level, we
treated the week following the email invitation as the period when
the experimental manipulation was active. We logged data from
the participants, including their ID, movies rated, rating scores
given, and time of rating, for one week following the invitation.
Following data collection we sent a second personalized email
reporting on each participant’s individual rating behavior,
summarizing the rating behavior of participants as a whole, and
thanking them for their participation in the campaign.
The dependent variable is the number of ratings that participants
made during the week following their invitation. Because the
number of ratings is skewed, with many respondents not logging
in to the MovieLens site during the week of data collection and a
small number generating many ratings, we used the log transform
of the number of ratings as the dependent variable. We conducted
the analysis in two ways. In the first, we used data from everyone
who received an email invitation and therefore was presumably
exposed to the experimental manipulations. In this analysis,
because the logarithm of 0 is not defined, we consider those who
did not log in as contributing one rating. We conducted some
supplementary analyses only among those who logged in.
2.1.1 Data Analysis and Results
Of the 830 participants who received email, 397 (47.8%)
members logged in and rated at least one movie. Descriptive
analysis including all participants showed that they rated an
average of 19.26 movies during the week, far higher than the 5.4
movies per week they had rated in the 6 months before the
invitation. During the experiment, they rated an average of 1.56
rarely-rated movies. As Figure 2 illustrated, merely sending the
email led to a dramatic increase in ratings. In contrast, only 3.2%
of a matched control group logged in during the week of the
experiment. They rated 9.1 movies per member logging in,
compared to 39.7 movies per participant who received the email
reminder and logged in.
We analyzed the data using a 2 (uniqueness) x 2 (self-benefit) x 2
(other benefit) analysis of variance. Binary logistic regression
testing the likelihood of logging in at least once during the week
showed that there was no difference between the experimental
groups on this measure. Therefore we used all participants in our
analyses, using the number of ratings (log transformed) and the
number of ratings of rarely-rated movies (log transformed) as
dependent variables. The results are qualitatively the same if we
restrict analysis only to those who logged in at least once.
Uniqueness
Hypothesis 1 stated that making unique rating behavior salient
would increase people’s motivation to rate more movies in
general and more rarely-rated movies in particular. The results
confirmed this. As seen in Table 1, participants in the unique
group rated 18% more movies than those who got the non-unique
message (means = 20.92 vs. 17.65, p=.045). Moreover, the
differential was even higher when we consider only rarely-rated
movies, where the participants in the unique group rated 40%
more movies than those who got the non-unique message (means
= 1.82 vs. 1.30, p=.019). Supplementary analyses using robust
regression analysis to guard against outliers and the non-normal
distribution yielded similar results.
Hypothesis 2 stated that making salient personal and group
benefits would increase people’s motivation to rate more movies.
The results were more complex. Mention of benefit depressed
ratings rather than increased them. As Table 2 shows, participants
receiving email mentioning benefits rated an average of 16.36
movies during the experiment, while on average the combined nobenefit groups rated 28.28 (p=.006). This finding disconfirms the
prediction from the collective effort model.
The average difference in ratings between the benefit and nobenefit groups is qualified by the highly significant self-benefit by
other benefit interaction (See Figure 3). People who received no
benefit information and those who received both the self-benefit
and the other-benefit information rated more movies than those
who received only the self-benefit or the other-benefit
information. Neither the main effect of the benefit manipulation
nor the self-benefit by other-benefit interaction was significant for
the ratings of rarely-rated movies.
Combining Uniqueness and Benefit
Hypothesis 3 stated that participants will rate more movies when
the perception of both uniqueness of their contribution and
benefits of increased rating are made salient than when just one of
them is made salient, so that a combination of these two
manipulations would have an effect beyond the sum of the
individual effects. The results did not support our hypothesis.
There was no interaction effect between uniqueness and benefit
Figure 2: Number of ratings surrounding an invitation to
contribute
movies rated per day
Rating data
collection
Thank you email
and survey
Table 1: Study 1. Mean Number of Movie Ratings
No Benefit
Benefit to
Benefit to
Benefit to
P(logged in)
P(logged in)
P(logged in)
Note. N is the number of subjects to whom email was successfully
delivered. P(logged in) is the percentage of participants who
logged into MovieLens during the week of the experiment. # Rating
is the mean number of ratings for the N subjects.
Figure 3: Effects of benefit manipulation on
Self-benefit
Ratings/participant
Other-benefit No
Other-benefit Yes
on either overall ratings or rarely-rated movies ratings.
A summary of the hypotheses testing results is shown in Table 2.
2.2 Discussion
The results of this experiment confirm what telemarketers know:
email messages can motivate people in an online community
simply by reminding them of an opportunity to contribute. More
interestingly, the content of the message made a difference,
partially in line with the collective effort model. Making members
of the community feel unique encouraged them to contribute more
in general and especially to contribute in the domain where they
were unique. In the case of MovieLens, reminding some members
of their rarely-rated-movie history increased their willingness to
rate these types of movies (and all movies) compared to members
who did not receive this reminder.
Highlighting the benefits that participants or other members of
MovieLens receive from ratings had a more complicated
relationship to contributions. According to the collective effort
model, uniqueness should have its effects on contributions by
making people feel that their contributions were more valuable.
Based on this model, we expected that the effects of uniqueness
on increasing contributions would be greater for participants
reminded of the utility of their contributions, but this prediction
was not supported by the data.
The collective effort model also led us to expect that reminding
people of the utility of their contributions would increase their
motivation to contribute; however, the results were inconsistent
with this expectation. They show that reminding participants of
the benefits that either they or others receive from contributions
depressed the number of ratings they made compared to
participants who received no reminders of benefit. On the other
hand, telling participants simultaneously about both benefits that
they and others receive led to more effort than telling them about
either one alone.
Surveys of the MovieLens membership suggest that they rate
movies primarily to improve the accuracy of recommendations
that they receive from the system, because the acts of
remembering movies and rating them is intrinsically fun, and, to a
lesser extent, to help other subscribers to the system. It is possible
that reminding participants of the instrumental reasons for
rating—more accurate predictions for themselves and others—
may undermine their intrinsic motivation to rate . In a similar
vein, it is also possible that in choosing a population of users who
had rated rarely-rated movies, we may have contacted a segment
of the population that was already highly committed to
MovieLens and well aware of the various benefits of their
contributions. Sending these people a message highlighting only
a single benefit of contribution might have paradoxically
undermined their prior beliefs that contributions had broad utility.
That is, the reminder of a single kind of benefit might have caused
them to narrow their focus from many benefits of participation to
only the one mentioned. This may have actually demotivated the
members by not validating the other beliefs about benefit that the
rare raters already held. In contrast, the groups receiving a
reminder of both benefits may not have narrowed their focus as
It is also possible that the content of our emails did not
sufficiently convey the types of benefit we were attempting to
make salient. Users may already have had strong models of how
MovieLens works and so were not be swayed by the short
explanations in the emails. Moreover, the effort required to
understand the messages about benefits may have drawn attention
away from the main message of requesting users to rate movies.
According to this interpretation, merely including an extra
paragraph in the message was a demotivator, but once that
paragraph was included, it was better to make it more complete.
Overall, it is clear that calling users’ attention to their uniqueness
and to the benefits they provide through their action has an impact
on their rating effort. More research is needed to understand the
puzzle of why subjects rated more movies when no mention was
made of the benefits their ratings create for themselves or other
3. Study 2: Motivating contributions through
goal-setting
The designers of online communities rarely provide participants
specific descriptions of the type and amount of contribution that is
development
communities are an exception, posting lists of bugs to be fixed,
but even there, goals are rarely set for specific individuals.
Although MovieLens provides users feedback information about
the number of ratings they have made, it does not give an
indication of the number of ratings they should make or which
movies would be most helpful to rate. Our purpose here is to test
both the benefits and limits of specific, high-challenge goals in
online community.
Benefits of High-challenge Goals. Abundant research since the
1960s shows that providing people with specific, high-challenge
goals stimulates higher task performance than easy or “do your
best” goals (see for a review). This phenomenon is among the
most robust psychological findings on human motivation. The
straightforward design recommendation from the goal-setting
literature for online communities is that these communities should
set specific and challenging contribution goals for their members.
We know of only one study that has investigated goal-setting in
an online environment . This study used an Internet search
task to show that subjects with goals worked longer and produced
more search results than those without goals, though with lower
search accuracy. These findings however, do not necessarily
generalize to contribution in online communities where task
outputs are in the form of individual contributions useful to other
Table 2: Study 1 Results Summary
Hypothesis
All movies
Rarely-rated
H1:Unique group rates
more than non-unique
H2a: Benefit-to-self
group rates more than
no-benefit groups
Disconfirmed
(significant in
the opposite
direction)
Not supported
H2b: Benefit-to-others
group rates more than
no-benefit group
Disconfirmed
(significant in
the opposite
direction)
Not supported
H3: Interaction
between Uniqueness
and Benefit
Not supported
Not supported
community members. We know of no research to examine the
impact of goals on contributions to online communities.
High-challenge goals energize higher performance in at least three
ways . First, self-efficacy , or a person’s belief in his
or her own abilities to successfully perform a task, positively
moderates commitment to a goal. Persons high in self-efficacy are
more likely to set or accept specific high-challenge goals,
provided such goals are perceived as achievable and reasonable.
Second, goals provide “normative information to the individual by
suggesting what level of performance the individual could be
expected to attain” . This normative information operates in a
feedback loop in which individuals regulate their task effort so
that their performance does not deviate too much from the
expected level. Third, achieving the goal leads to task
satisfaction. This satisfaction enhances self-efficacy and future
goal commitment, which in turn boost future task performance.
This upward performance spiral leads Locke and Latham to refer
to their goal-setting theory as the High Performance Cycle .
The goal-setting theory specifies the setting that stimulates high
performance . Goals must be relatively difficult, specific,
context-appropriate, and immediate rather than long-term.
Mediating variables include individual commitment, importance
assigned to the goal, and self-efficacy. The goal effects are
stronger when people have specific feedback concerning
performance against the goal and weaker with more complex
Contributing rating of movies to MovieLens satisfies these
conditions. Contributions are voluntary (implying high task
commitment), low in task complexity, and available with
immediate feedback (e.g., the user interface shows ratings
immediately after they are entered).
Hypothesis 4: In an online community, specific,
numeric goals will motivate greater contributions
than non-specific goals.
Group Goals. Most goal-setting research has focused on
individual level goals. Generally, the same motivating effects of
high-challenge goals have been shown at the group level (see 
for a review). In some small group settings where individual and
group interests are aligned, group goals have been associated with
higher performance than individual goals . However,
consistent with the social loafing effect, the performance benefits
of group goals tend to disappear and even reverse as the size of
the group increases beyond 6-8 members . Given that group
size in our experiment was set at 10 members, we should expect
that members assigned group goals in general will contribute less
than members with comparable individual goals.
Hypothesis 5: Members assigned individual goals
will provide more contributions than members
assigned group goals.
Limits of high-challenge goals. Despite the robust findings of
goal-setting theory, little research has looked at the limits of highchallenge goals. Locke and Latham assert that performance will
increase monotonically with goal difficulty, until “subjects reach
the limits of their ability at high goal difficulty levels; in such
cases the function levels off” . If this is true, then no goal can
be too high, since performance will plateau but not drop as goals
become increasingly difficult. If this is not true, goals that are too
high may result in a performance drop, not just a plateau. There
has been insufficient previous research to definitively resolve this
question, although White et. al. found high-challenge goals above
the 93rd percentile in performance resulted in lower performance
than “do your best” goals when subjects did not believe they
would be evaluated by the experimenter .
In online communities where performance (in terms of individual
contribution level) varies greatly, it is important to know if
difficult goals boost contribution and if overly difficult goals suboptimize contribution. If online community members view
difficult goals as unattainable, member contribution could decline
for several reasons. First, overly difficult goals could undermine a
member’s commitment to the goal, diminishing or eliminating
engagement with the task of contributing to the online
community. Second, overly difficult goals could undermine selfefficacy by providing a performance standard viewed as beyond
reach. Third, overly difficult goals could reduce the attractiveness
of community membership if that community is perceived as
making unreasonable demands. These factors lead to our third
hypothesis.
Hypothesis
community,
contribution will drop off when goals exceed
some difficulty threshold.
3.1 Methods
Overview. We again conducted our experiment in MovieLens.org.
Members were recruited by sending them an email message
inviting them to participate in a movie rating campaign to enhance
the ratings prediction in MovieLens. As in study 1, we used
different messages in this invitation email to vary participants’
perceptions of their group assignment and goal challenge. We
then tracked the rating behavior of participants who were sent
invitations.
Subjects. The subject population consisted of MovieLens
members who had logged in at least once in the five month period
between July and December 2003. On average, these subjects had
rated 147 total movies (standard deviation=124). In the five
months prior to the experiment, members had rated an average of
8 movies per week (standard deviation=2). Of the 900 members
that we contacted, 66 emails bounced, leaving us with 834
Experimental manipulations. We manipulated two variables:
group assignment (2 conditions: group or individual), and
specificity of goals (2 conditions: “do your best” or a specific
numeric goal). Within the specificity of goal condition, we varied
the difficulty of the goal (4-levels) as displayed in Table 3.
All subjects received an invitation email saying, “The quality of
recommendations MovieLens makes depends on the number of
ratings that members contribute. Currently, many of the movies
in MovieLens have too few ratings to make accurate
recommendations about them. That’s why we’re conducting a
seven day campaign to increase movie ratings on MovieLens.”
Group assignment. For the group assignment manipulation, some
participants were told they belonged to a group of 10 active
MovieLens members called the “Explorers.” Group size was set
at 10 members for two reasons. First, a group size of 10
minimized the amount of cognitive effort required for group
condition subjects to comprehend their fair share of the group
goal, since most people can mentally divide by 10. We did not
want to explicitly state that “a group goal of ‘x’ ratings translates
into ‘y’ ratings per member,” because doing so would confound
the group goal with the individual goal. Second, because past
research suggested that group goals are less effective than
individual goals above group sizes of 8, we wanted to determine if
these findings would be replicated by setting group size above 8.
Subjects in the individual task condition were not told about
group membership.
Goal specificity. For the goal specificity manipulation, subjects in
the non-specific goals condition were told to “do your best” to
rate the movies. Specifically, they were told, “[Together, the ten
Explorers]/[You] have a goal of doing [their]/[your] best to rate
additional movies over the next seven days. You can begin rating
now by clicking Subjects in the
specific goals condition were given a specific number of movies
to rate in a week. Group goals, for the 10-person groups, were set
at ten times the individual goals. We asked participants in the
individual conditions to either rate 8, 16, 32 or 64 movies in the
next week. In the group condition, we told them that the
explorer’s task was to rate either 80, 160, 320 or 640 movies
during the week.
We chose 8 ratings per week as the baseline “low challenge” goal,
because it was approximately the mean weekly contribution in the
past. We selected a one-week period to collect data because goalsetting theory specifies that goals are more effective if they are of
shorter duration than longer duration.
Measuring contributions. For the week following the invitation
email, we tracked user rating activities. After one week, we
tabulated total ratings and then sent a thank-you email reporting
the rating behavior of all participants and summarizing their
individual and group (if applicable) rating behavior.
3.2 Analysis and Results
We excluded one outlier in the individual, do-your-best condition,
who rated 601 movies (>7 standard deviations above mean
ratings). This left 833 subjects, of whom 30% (249) logged in at
least once. Table 3 summarizes the rating contributions for these
833 subjects.
As the distribution of ratings was skewed, the dependent variable
in our analyses was the log of the number of ratings. Because the
log of zero is undefined, we treated participants who rated no
movies as if they had rated one. Hypothesis 4 tested whether
people contribute more when given specific numeric goals versus
non-specific do-your-best ones. This was confirmed. A multiple
regression analysis comparing ratings of participants who
received the do-your-best email to those who received a specific
numeric goal (all specific goal conditions combined) showed that
those with specific goals made more contributions than those with
do-your-best
do-your-best
specific=13.9 F(1,832) =5.95, p<.02).
Hypothesis 5, that participants assigned individual goals would
contribute more than those with group goals, was disconfirmed.
Participants with group goals rated more movies than those with
comparable individual goals. (group mean=17.2, individual
mean=10.4, F(1,831)=2.99, p=.08).
Hypothesis 6 was that the relationship between goal specificity
and performance is curvilinear, with the highest challenge goals
leading to declines in ratings. As shown in Figure 4, ratings
appeared to drop with the highest goals, especially in the
individual goal condition. To test for statistical significance, we
excluded the do-your-best subjects. We created orthogonal linear
and quadratic contrasts for the 4-levels of assigned goals (linear
contrasts = -1.5, -.5, .5, 1.5; quadratic contrasts = 2.25, .25, .25.
2.25). We then ran regression models with the contrasts
(representing the goals and goals squared) as predictors. Although
a curvilinear model fit the data better than a linear one, neither the
linear nor the quadratic coefficient was significant. We also reran
the model including only participants who rated movies. Here the
quadratic coefficient were significant (F(1,95))=4.16, p=.05). This
is weak support for the hypothesis that extremely difficult goals
would reduce contributions. A summary of the hypothesis testing
results is shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Study 2. Results Summary
Hypothesis
H4: Specific goals more
effective than non-specific goals
H5: Individual goals more
effective than group goals
Disconfirmed (reverse of
hypothesis at p<.10 level)
H6: Difficulty of goal has
convex effect on contributions
Weak support (only for
participants in the
individual goals condition
who rated)
3.3 Discussion
The most robust result from this experiment was that
specific goals led to higher contribution rates than non-specific
ones. This is the first study to document that this finding from
goal-setting theory applies to contributions to an online
community and should encourage designers to be more specific
about assigning goals or providing opportunities for individuals to
declare contribution goals for themselves.
Figure 4: Effects of goals on number of ratings
Ratings/person
Individual
Table 3: Study 2. Mean Number of Movie Ratings
Individual
P(logged in) 26.7
35.3 35.7 30.1 29.4 31.4
Individual
P(logged in) 23.1
27.1 30.1 32.5 28.4 28.3
P(logged in) 25.0
31.2 32.9 31.3 28.9 29.9
Goal Level
Note. N is the number of subjects to whom email was successfully
delivered. P(logged in) is the percentage of participants who logged into
MovieLens during the week of the experiment. # Rating is the mean
number of ratings for the N subjects.
A finding inconsistent with social loafing and the collective effort
model was that subjects in the group conditions contributed more
than those in the individual conditions, although this difference
was only marginally significant. There are several possible
explanations for this reversal. First, some in the group condition
may have misinterpreted group goals as an individual goal,
despite careful wording to reduce this risk. For example, they may
have believed that they individually rather than their group were
being asked to rate 320 movies. However, the high contribution
even in the group do-your-best condition makes this an unlikely
explanation. Second, social loafing is more difficult to replicate
among people committed to their groups than to among those less
committed or in field than in lab research , and our study was
a field experiment among volunteers. Although commitment and
field conditions often diminish the social loafing effect, they
should not reverse it, with individuals in a group setting working
harder than those in an individual setting. Finally, it is possible
that the invitation email, which identified subscribers by their
email address, and the feedback they were promised, may have
reversed the effects of social loafing. Overall, it appears that being
assigned to a group provided greater impetus to contribute to the
community than being a solo contributor, a puzzle that we will
return to in the conclusion of the paper. This result is consistent
with some research contrasting individual and group goals [26,
This study also is among the first to suggest high performance
goals have upper limits, and beyond those limits, performance
may drop, not just plateau as previously supposed . The
experiment here was a weak test of the limits of goals, since even
the highest level of individual challenge (64 movies in a week)
was probably perceived as attainable, since 45% of the subjects
had rated more than 64 movies in a single day at least once
previously. We suspect that a less attainable goal might have more
clearly demonstrated a reduced motivational effect.
This study provides a number of insights that contribute to solving
the problem of under-contribution in online community. First,
specific, challenging goals have been shown to be powerful
motivators of online contributions, particularly when contributors
are not part of a group. The fact that this was shown using a
simple email manipulation, without interface modifications,
suggests specific challenging goals can have a strong effect on
increasing individual contribution in an online community.
Second, assignment to a group condition in the context of a large,
anonymous online community seemed to raise contribution levels,
even though it was a group in name only, with members neither
knowing the identities of other members nor interacting with
them. Integrating both these findings with usability design
principles should provide an even greater performance boost. For
example, providing an interface that facilitates elements of the
Collective Effort Model and Goal-setting Theory such as real time
feedback, member identifiability, group cohesion, and so forth,
could enhance the effects observed in this field experiment. Some
of these elements may already be included in interfaces;
integrating them in the broader context of these findings should
serve to increase their effectiveness. Finally, this study suggests
that goals that are overly difficult may result in reduced
contributions. This is more relevant for online community
managers than designers, but future research could focus on
algorithms that provide individuals and groups with goals that
optimize contribution.
4. Conclusion
This paper attempted to use principles from social psychology
theory to redesign an online community to increase contributions.
We now reflect on the larger lessons about the theories available
to mine in social psychology, why they are an under-utilized
resource for design, and some of the difficulties we had in
applying them.
4.1 The success in applying social science
theory to design
Our attempt to drive design from theory was successful in the
sense that the theories led to design innovations that are rarely
seen in existing online communities. One key insight from the
collective effort model is that people will be more likely to
contribute to a group task if they think their contribution does not
duplicate what others can provide and is thus needed for
accomplishing the group’s goal. Many online communities
provide feedback on the number or assessed quality of their
contributions, like the “top reviewer” designations given to some
contributors on the www.epinions.com website. However, we
know of no online community that provides feedback to
contributors about the uniqueness of their contributions. Similarly,
the key insight from Locke’s theory of goal-setting is that people
work hard to achieve specific, challenging goals, but online
communities rarely provide potential contributors with specific,
challenging goals to reach. On-air fundraising drives for public
television and radio do (“We need $500 in the next hour to meet a
donor’s matching grant”), but this technique is rarely used in
online communities, whether they are soliciting conversation or
more quantifiable contributions.
Our attempt to drive design from theory was also successful in
that applying some of these design principles led to increased
contributions. A simple email message making salient the
uniqueness of potential contributions caused recipients to rate
more movies than a comparable message that emphasized
commonality. Without the collective effort model, it would not be
obvious whether emphasizing uniqueness or commonality would
be more effective. A simple email message assigning recipients
specific ratings goals led recipients to rate more movies than a
comparable message just urging them to rate more. Without the
prior research on goal-setting, it would not be obvious whether a
specific goal would be helpful, since it might even discourage
contributions above the goal.
4.2 Failures of implementation and theory
However, not all the design ideas derived from the theories led to
increased contributions. Results from Experiment 2 were
inconsistent with a fundamental prediction from the collective
effort model, that people would exert less effort when they
believed their output would be pooled rather than being
individually identified. Although the collective effort model
stresses that people are more motivated to contribute when they
believe their contributions will have benefit, in Experiment 1
making salient either the benefit that the contributors themselves
would receive from their ratings or the benefit that others would
receive depressed their contributions. On the other hand,
reminding them of both their own and other benefits together was
better than mentioning either one alone.
Why did the design choices inspired by social psychology theories
sometime fail to increase contribution? Here we consider three
classes of explanation.
Failures of implementation. At one extreme, we may have started
with correct and applicable theory, but our implementation failed
to capture the design principles appropriately. In the present
experiments, the design principles extracted from theory were
implemented as short, single electronic mail messages. They may
have been poorly worded. For example, in Experiment the email
manipulations combined a rationale along with the assertion that
ratings have benefit. One possible follow-on experiment would
test the impact of pure assertions (“Rating more movies helps the
MovieLens community!”) versus explanations (“The more ratings
you provide, the more information we have about each movie and
the easier it is to make accurate recommendations for other
people.”) Alternately, the email manipulations may simply have
been too weak. In MovieLens it would be possible to build a
reminder of uniqueness or benefit directly into the system, for
example by calculating the number of people who would be
influenced by a potential rating whenever a particular movie is
presented. By presenting an index of benefit simultaneously with
the opportunity to make a contribution and tailoring the index to a
particular contribution, this implementation may more powerfully
influence contribution. By testing
with a lower-fidelity
intervention (i.e., email messages), we may have underestimated
the effects that would come with stronger manipulations.
Mismatches between engineering and scientific disciplines. The
failures, however, may reflect a deeper mismatch of goals and
values of HCI and CSCW research with those of social
psychology. HCI and CSCW are primarily engineering
disciplines, where the primary goal is problem-solving. In
contrast, social psychology views itself as a behavioral science,
whose goal is to uniquely determine the causes for social
phenomena.
We treat only one consequence of this difference in orientation
here. The collective effort model asserts that people will
contribute less when they think their contributions are pooled with
those of a group, but that the nature of the group and the
individual’s relationship to it make a difference. A behavior
scientist would want to distinguish the effects of commitment to a
group from the effects of pooling contribution. To do so, the
behavioral scientist would carefully contrast groups that differ on
only a single factor. In contrast, a designer would be more
interested in constructing the groups to maximize contribution. To
do so, the designer would typically incorporate many factors to
shape the group. For example, in the second experiment, when
assigning subjects to the group condition, wearing our designers’
hat, we gave the group a name with a positive valence
(“Explorers”) rather than a neutral name “Group A” or no name at
all. But the name may have induced some sense of group
commitment that overpowered the social loafing effect and thus
made it difficult to test the hypotheses involving main effects or
interaction effects predicted by social loafing theory.
Incomplete theories. In some cases, social science theories may
simply not be up to the task when multiple features vary
simultaneously, as they do in tests of real designs. Although
designers know that the importance of design elements depends
upon context, e.g., whether a system is used by young or older
adults, the norm in much social psychological research is to
abstract these contextual details away. The goal is to have a theory
that is as general as possible.
Social psychology theories may therefore be incomplete because
they identify isolated main effects but not interaction effects or the
effects of context. Similarly, they typically do not provide any
way to say which effect will predominate when two main effects
have opposite predictions. For example, assigning people to the
“Explorers” group may generate a sense of group identity, which
makes people care more about the collective outcome and thus
contribute more. But it also reduces the importance of any
individual’s contribution, reducing motivation. The theory is
silent about what the net effect will be in a particular situation.
This lack of detail forces the designer to improvise when
attempting to apply social psychological knowledge to solve
design problems. While social science theory can inspire design,
by suggesting options, it does not eliminate the need for it.
4.3 The Way Forward
Despite the problems identified above, we believe that mining
social science theory as a source of principles for design
innovation is a useful general strategy for the design of CSCW
systems (see for a fuller discussion). Although we focused
our effects in this paper on applying two social psychological
theories to the problems of under-contribution to online
communities, the approach is far more general. Since the turn of
the 20th century and especially since World War II, the field
of social psychology has developed a rich theoretical base for
understanding and predicting group behavior. However, unlike
theories in cognitive psychology, this theoretical base has been
inadequately mined in the HCI and CSCW literatures.
psychological
encouraging
contributions to groups include, for example, those on group
cohesion, group identity, interpersonal attraction, and altruism,
among others. Recent handbooks (e.g., ) and graduatelevel textbooks provide useful resources.
The approach we advocate here will not always be easy to follow.
But if we hope to create scientifically informed processes and
guidelines for CSCW designers to follow, more work is needed
that maps behavioral theories to hypotheses that can be tested in
lab and field experiments.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 0325837. Anupriya
Ankolekar, John Graham, Janice Golenbock, Xin Li and Steve
Karau provided technical assistance or advice in implementing
this research.
6. REFERENCES
 Butler, B., When is a group not a group: An empirical
examination of metaphors for online social structure, in Social
and Decision Sciences. 1999, Carnegie Mellon University:
Pittsburgh, PA.
 Adar, E. and B.A. Huberman, Free riding on Gnutella. First
Monday, 2000. 5(10): p. NP.
 Lakhani, K.R. and E.V. Hippel, How open source software
works: “Free” user to user assistance. Research Policy, 2003.
32: p. 923-943.
 Mockus, A., R.T. Fielding, and H. Andersen, Two case studies
of open source software development: Apache and Mozilla.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology, 2002. 11(3): p. 309-346.
 Nonnecke, B. and J. Preece, Lurker demographics: Counting
the silent, in Proceedings of CHI’2000: Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 2000: Hague, The Netherlands. p. 73-80.
 Cosley, D., et al., Is Seeing Believing? How Recommender
Systems Influence Users’ Opinions, in Proceedings of CHI
2003: Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2003: Fort
Lauderdale, FL. p. 585-592.
 Markus, L., Towards a “critical mass” theory of interactive
media: Universal access, interdependence, and diffusion.
Communication Research, 1987. 14: p. 491-511.
 Grudin, J., Why groupware applications fail: Problems in
design and evaluation. Office: Technology and People, 1989.
4(3): p. 245-264.
 Dourish, P. and S. Bly, Portholes: Supporting awareness in a
distributed work group, in Proceedings of CHI92: Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1992, ACM: New York. p.
 Erickson, T. and W. Kellog, Social translucence: An
approach to designing systems that support social processes.
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 2000. 7(1): p.
 Preece, J., Online Communities. 2000, New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons.
 Viegas, F.B. and J.S.Donath, Chat circles, in Proceedings of
CHI’99: Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1999, ACM Press: New York. p. 9-16.
 Karau, S. and K. Williams, Social loafing: A meta-analytic
review and theoretical integration. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1993. 65(4): p. 681-706.
 Ledyard, J., Public goods: A survey of experimental research,
in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, J.H. Kagel and
A. Roth, Editors. 1995, Princeton University Press: Princeton,
NJ. p. pp. 111-194.
 Ostrom, E., Governing the Commons: The Evolution of
Institutions for Collective Action. 1990, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 Kollock, P. and M. Smith, Managing the virtual commons:
Cooperation and conflict in computer communities, in
Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and
Cross-Cultural Perspectives, S.C. Herring, Editor. 1996, John
Benjamin: Amsterdam. p. pp. 109-128.
 Harkins, S.G. and R.E. Petty, Effects of task difficulty and
task uniqueness on social loafing. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1982. 43: p. 1214-1229.
 Kerr, N.L., Motivation losses in small groups: A social
dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1983. 45: p. 819-828.
 Kerr, N.L. and S. Bruun, The dispensability of member effort
and group motivation losses: Free rider effects. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1983. 44: p. 78-94.
 Markey, P.M., Bystander intervention in computer mediated
communication. Computers in Human Behavior, 2000. 16(2):
p. 183-188.
 Shepperd, J.A. and K.M. Taylor, Social loafing and
expectancy-value theory. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 1999. 25(9): p. 1147-1158.
 Locke, E.A. and G.P. Latham, Building a practically useful
theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35 year odyssey.
American Psychologist, 2002. 57(9): p. 705-717.
 Thompson, L.F., J.P. Meriac, and J. Cope, Motivating online
performance: the influences of goal setting and Internet selfefficacy. Social Science Computer Review, 2002. 20(2): p.
 Locke, E.A. and G.P. Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting and
Task Performance. 1990, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
 Bandura, A., Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive
development and functioning. Educational Psychologist, 1993.
28(2): p. 117-148.
 Weldon, E. and L.R. Weingard, Group goals and group
performance. British Journal of Social Psychology, 1993. 32:
p. 307-334.
 Matsui, T., T. Kakuyama, and M. Onglatco, Effects of goals
and feedback on performance in groups. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 1987. 72(3): p. 407-415.
 Streit, M.C., The effects of group size on goal-setting
behavior, task performance, goal commitment, and evaluation
potential, in Department of Psychology. 1996, Hofstra
University: Long Island, NY.
 White, P.H., M.M. Kjelgaard, and G. Harkins, Testing the
contribution of self-evaluation to goal setting effects. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1995. 69(1): p. 69-79.
 Kraut, R., Applying social psychological theory to the
problems of group work, in HCI Models, Theories and
Frameworks: Toward A Multidisciplinary Science, J.M.
Carroll, Editor. 2003, Morgan Kaufman: New York. p. 325-
 Ross, E.A., Social Psychology: An Outline and Source Book.
1908, New York: The Macmillan Company.
 Brown, R. and S.L. Gaertner, Blackwell Handbook of Social
Psychology: Intergroup Processes. 2001, Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.
 Gilbert, D.T., S.T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey, The Handbook of
Social Psychology. 1998, Boston: McGraw-Hill.
 Higgins, E.T. and A.W. Kruglanski, Social psychology:
Handbook of Basic Principles. 1996, New York: Guilford.
 Deci, E.L., R. Koestner, and R.M. Ryan, A meta-analytic
review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic
rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 1999.
125(6): p. 627-66