FaceNet: A Uniﬁed Embedding for Face Recognition and Clustering
Florian Schroff
 
Google Inc.
Dmitry Kalenichenko
 
Google Inc.
James Philbin
 
Google Inc.
Despite signiﬁcant recent advances in the ﬁeld of face
recognition , implementing face veriﬁcation
and recognition efﬁciently at scale presents serious challenges to current approaches. In this paper we present a
system, called FaceNet, that directly learns a mapping from
face images to a compact Euclidean space where distances
directly correspond to a measure of face similarity. Once
this space has been produced, tasks such as face recognition, veriﬁcation and clustering can be easily implemented
using standard techniques with FaceNet embeddings as feature vectors.
Our method uses a deep convolutional network trained
to directly optimize the embedding itself, rather than an intermediate bottleneck layer as in previous deep learning
approaches. To train, we use triplets of roughly aligned
matching / non-matching face patches generated using a
novel online triplet mining method.
The beneﬁt of our
approach is much greater representational efﬁciency: we
achieve state-of-the-art face recognition performance using
only 128-bytes per face.
On the widely used Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
dataset, our system achieves a new record accuracy of
99.63%. On YouTube Faces DB it achieves 95.12%. Our
system cuts the error rate in comparison to the best published result by 30% on both datasets.
We also introduce the concept of harmonic embeddings,
and a harmonic triplet loss, which describe different versions of face embeddings (produced by different networks)
that are compatible to each other and allow for direct comparison between each other.
1. Introduction
In this paper we present a uniﬁed system for face veri-
ﬁcation (is this the same person), recognition (who is this
person) and clustering (ﬁnd common people among these
faces). Our method is based on learning a Euclidean embedding per image using a deep convolutional network. The
network is trained such that the squared L2 distances in
the embedding space directly correspond to face similarity:
Figure 1. Illumination and Pose invariance. Pose and illumination have been a long standing problem in face recognition. This
ﬁgure shows the output distances of FaceNet between pairs of
faces of the same and a different person in different pose and illumination combinations. A distance of 0.0 means the faces are
identical, 4.0 corresponds to the opposite spectrum, two different
identities. You can see that a threshold of 1.1 would classify every
pair correctly.
faces of the same person have small distances and faces of
distinct people have large distances.
Once this embedding has been produced, then the aforementioned tasks become straight-forward: face veriﬁcation simply involves thresholding the distance between the
two embeddings; recognition becomes a k-NN classiﬁcation problem; and clustering can be achieved using off-theshelf techniques such as k-means or agglomerative clustering.
Previous face recognition approaches based on deep networks use a classiﬁcation layer trained over a set of
known face identities and then take an intermediate bottle-
 
neck layer as a representation used to generalize recognition
beyond the set of identities used in training. The downsides
of this approach are its indirectness and its inefﬁciency: one
has to hope that the bottleneck representation generalizes
well to new faces; and by using a bottleneck layer the representation size per face is usually very large (1000s of dimensions). Some recent work has reduced this dimensionality using PCA, but this is a linear transformation that
can be easily learnt in one layer of the network.
In contrast to these approaches, FaceNet directly trains
its output to be a compact 128-D embedding using a tripletbased loss function based on LMNN . Our triplets consist of two matching face thumbnails and a non-matching
face thumbnail and the loss aims to separate the positive pair
from the negative by a distance margin. The thumbnails are
tight crops of the face area, no 2D or 3D alignment, other
than scale and translation is performed.
Choosing which triplets to use turns out to be very important for achieving good performance and, inspired by
curriculum learning , we present a novel online negative exemplar mining strategy which ensures consistently
increasing difﬁculty of triplets as the network trains. To
improve clustering accuracy, we also explore hard-positive
mining techniques which encourage spherical clusters for
the embeddings of a single person.
As an illustration of the incredible variability that our
method can handle see Figure 1. Shown are image pairs
from PIE that previously were considered to be very
difﬁcult for face veriﬁcation systems.
An overview of the rest of the paper is as follows: in
section 2 we review the literature in this area; section 3.1
deﬁnes the triplet loss and section 3.2 describes our novel
triplet selection and training procedure; in section 3.3 we
describe the model architecture used. Finally in section 4
and 5 we present some quantitative results of our embeddings and also qualitatively explore some clustering results.
2. Related Work
Similarly to other recent works which employ deep networks , our approach is a purely data driven method
which learns its representation directly from the pixels of
the face. Rather than using engineered features, we use a
large dataset of labelled faces to attain the appropriate invariances to pose, illumination, and other variational conditions.
In this paper we explore two different deep network architectures that have been recently used to great success in
the computer vision community. Both are deep convolutional networks . The ﬁrst architecture is based on the
Zeiler&Fergus model which consists of multiple interleaved layers of convolutions, non-linear activations, local
response normalizations, and max pooling layers. We additionally add several 1×1×d convolution layers inspired by
the work of . The second architecture is based on the
Inception model of Szegedy et al. which was recently used
as the winning approach for ImageNet 2014 . These
networks use mixed layers that run several different convolutional and pooling layers in parallel and concatenate their
responses. We have found that these models can reduce the
number of parameters by up to 20 times and have the potential to reduce the number of FLOPS required for comparable
performance.
There is a vast corpus of face veriﬁcation and recognition
works. Reviewing it is out of the scope of this paper so we
will only brieﬂy discuss the most relevant recent work.
The works of all employ a complex system
of multiple stages, that combines the output of a deep convolutional network with PCA for dimensionality reduction
and an SVM for classiﬁcation.
Zhenyao et al. employ a deep network to “warp”
faces into a canonical frontal view and then learn CNN that
classiﬁes each face as belonging to a known identity. For
face veriﬁcation, PCA on the network output in conjunction
with an ensemble of SVMs is used.
Taigman et al. propose a multi-stage approach that
aligns faces to a general 3D shape model. A multi-class network is trained to perform the face recognition task on over
four thousand identities.
The authors also experimented
with a so called Siamese network where they directly optimize the L1-distance between two face features. Their best
performance on LFW (97.35%) stems from an ensemble of
three networks using different alignments and color channels. The predicted distances (non-linear SVM predictions
based on the χ2 kernel) of those networks are combined using a non-linear SVM.
Sun et al. propose a compact and therefore relatively cheap to compute network. They use an ensemble
of 25 of these network, each operating on a different face
patch. For their ﬁnal performance on LFW (99.47% )
the authors combine 50 responses (regular and ﬂipped).
Both PCA and a Joint Bayesian model that effectively
correspond to a linear transform in the embedding space are
employed. Their method does not require explicit 2D/3D
alignment. The networks are trained by using a combination of classiﬁcation and veriﬁcation loss. The veriﬁcation
loss is similar to the triplet loss we employ , in that it
minimizes the L2-distance between faces of the same identity and enforces a margin between the distance of faces of
different identities. The main difference is that only pairs of
images are compared, whereas the triplet loss encourages a
relative distance constraint.
A similar loss to the one used here was explored in
Wang et al. for ranking images by semantic and visual
similarity.
DEEP ARCHITECTURE
Figure 2. Model structure. Our network consists of a batch input layer and a deep CNN followed by L2 normalization, which
results in the face embedding. This is followed by the triplet loss
during training.
Figure 3. The Triplet Loss minimizes the distance between an anchor and a positive, both of which have the same identity, and
maximizes the distance between the anchor and a negative of a
different identity.
FaceNet uses a deep convolutional network. We discuss
two different core architectures: The Zeiler&Fergus 
style networks and the recent Inception type networks.
The details of these networks are described in section 3.3.
Given the model details, and treating it as a black box
(see Figure 2), the most important part of our approach lies
in the end-to-end learning of the whole system. To this end
we employ the triplet loss that directly reﬂects what we want
to achieve in face veriﬁcation, recognition and clustering.
Namely, we strive for an embedding f(x), from an image
x into a feature space Rd, such that the squared distance
between all faces, independent of imaging conditions, of
the same identity is small, whereas the squared distance between a pair of face images from different identities is large.
Although we did not directly compare to other losses,
e.g. the one using pairs of positives and negatives, as used
in Eq. (2), we believe that the triplet loss is more suitable for face veriﬁcation. The motivation is that the loss
from encourages all faces of one identity to be projected onto a single point in the embedding space.
triplet loss, however, tries to enforce a margin between each
pair of faces from one person to all other faces. This allows the faces for one identity to live on a manifold, while
still enforcing the distance and thus discriminability to other
identities.
The following section describes this triplet loss and how
it can be learned efﬁciently at scale.
3.1. Triplet Loss
The embedding is represented by f(x) ∈Rd. It embeds an image x into a d-dimensional Euclidean space.
Additionally, we constrain this embedding to live on the
d-dimensional hypersphere, i.e. ∥f(x)∥2 = 1. This loss is
motivated in in the context of nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation. Here we want to ensure that an image xa
i (anchor) of
a speciﬁc person is closer to all other images xp
i (positive)
of the same person than it is to any image xn
i (negative) of
any other person. This is visualized in Figure 3.
Thus we want,
2 + α < ∥f(xa
where α is a margin that is enforced between positive and
negative pairs. T is the set of all possible triplets in the
training set and has cardinality N.
The loss that is being minimized is then L =
Generating all possible triplets would result in many
triplets that are easily satisﬁed (i.e. fulﬁll the constraint
in Eq. (1)). These triplets would not contribute to the training and result in slower convergence, as they would still
be passed through the network. It is crucial to select hard
triplets, that are active and can therefore contribute to improving the model. The following section talks about the
different approaches we use for the triplet selection.
3.2. Triplet Selection
In order to ensure fast convergence it is crucial to select
triplets that violate the triplet constraint in Eq. (1). This
means that, given xa
i , we want to select an xp
i (hard positive) such that argmaxxp
2 and similarly
i (hard negative) such that argminxn
It is infeasible to compute the argmin and argmax
across the whole training set. Additionally, it might lead
to poor training, as mislabelled and poorly imaged faces
would dominate the hard positives and negatives. There are
two obvious choices that avoid this issue:
• Generate triplets ofﬂine every n steps, using the most
recent network checkpoint and computing the argmin
and argmax on a subset of the data.
• Generate triplets online. This can be done by selecting the hard positive/negative exemplars from within a
mini-batch.
Here, we focus on the online generation and use large
mini-batches in the order of a few thousand exemplars and
only compute the argmin and argmax within a mini-batch.
To have a meaningful representation of the anchorpositive distances, it needs to be ensured that a minimal
number of exemplars of any one identity is present in each
mini-batch. In our experiments we sample the training data
such that around 40 faces are selected per identity per minibatch. Additionally, randomly sampled negative faces are
added to each mini-batch.
Instead of picking the hardest positive, we use all anchorpositive pairs in a mini-batch while still selecting the hard
negatives. We don’t have a side-by-side comparison of hard
anchor-positive pairs versus all anchor-positive pairs within
a mini-batch, but we found in practice that the all anchorpositive method was more stable and converged slightly
faster at the beginning of training.
We also explored the ofﬂine generation of triplets in conjunction with the online generation and it may allow the use
of smaller batch sizes, but the experiments were inconclusive.
Selecting the hardest negatives can in practice lead to bad
local minima early on in training, speciﬁcally it can result
in a collapsed model (i.e. f(x) = 0). In order to mitigate
this, it helps to select xn
i such that
We call these negative exemplars semi-hard, as they are further away from the anchor than the positive exemplar, but
still hard because the squared distance is close to the anchorpositive distance. Those negatives lie inside the margin α.
As mentioned before, correct triplet selection is crucial
for fast convergence. On the one hand we would like to use
small mini-batches as these tend to improve convergence
during Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) . On the
other hand, implementation details make batches of tens to
hundreds of exemplars more efﬁcient. The main constraint
with regards to the batch size, however, is the way we select
hard relevant triplets from within the mini-batches. In most
experiments we use a batch size of around 1,800 exemplars.
3.3. Deep Convolutional Networks
In all our experiments we train the CNN using Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) with standard backprop and
AdaGrad . In most experiments we start with a learning
rate of 0.05 which we lower to ﬁnalize the model. The models are initialized from random, similar to , and trained
on a CPU cluster for 1,000 to 2,000 hours. The decrease in
the loss (and increase in accuracy) slows down drastically
after 500h of training, but additional training can still signiﬁcantly improve performance. The margin α is set to 0.2.
We used two types of architectures and explore their
trade-offs in more detail in the experimental section. Their
practical differences lie in the difference of parameters and
FLOPS. The best model may be different depending on the
application. E.g. a model running in a datacenter can have
many parameters and require a large number of FLOPS,
whereas a model running on a mobile phone needs to have
few parameters, so that it can ﬁt into memory.
param FLPS
220×220×3 110×110×64
110×110×64
rnorm2 55×55×192
28×28×192 3×3×192, 2
conv3a 28×28×192
28×28×192 1×1×192, 1
28×28×384 3×3×192, 1 664K 521M
14×14×384 3×3×384, 2
conv4a 14×14×384
14×14×384 1×1×384, 1 148K
14×14×256 3×3×384, 1 885K 173M
conv5a 14×14×256
14×14×256 1×1×256, 1
14×14×256 3×3×256, 1 590K 116M
conv6a 14×14×256
14×14×256 1×1×256, 1
14×14×256 3×3×256, 1 590K 116M
3×3×256, 2
maxout p=2 103M 103M
maxout p=2
Zeiler&Fergus based model with 1×1 convolutions inspired by .
The input and output sizes are described
in rows × cols × #filters.
The kernel is speciﬁed as
rows × cols, stride and the maxout pooling size as p = 2.
models use rectiﬁed linear units as the non-linear activation
The ﬁrst category, shown in Table 1, adds 1×1×d convolutional layers, as suggested in , between the standard
convolutional layers of the Zeiler&Fergus architecture
and results in a model 22 layers deep. It has a total of 140
million parameters and requires around 1.6 billion FLOPS
per image.
The second category we use is based on GoogLeNet
style Inception models . These models have 20× fewer
parameters (around 6.6M-7.5M) and up to 5× fewer FLOPS
(between 500M-1.6B). Some of these models are dramatically reduced in size (both depth and number of ﬁlters), so
that they can be run on a mobile phone. One, NNS1, has
26M parameters and only requires 220M FLOPS per image.
The other, NNS2, has 4.3M parameters and 20M FLOPS.
Table 2 describes NN2 our largest network in detail. NN3
is identical in architecture but has a reduced input size of
160x160. NN4 has an input size of only 96x96, thereby
drastically reducing the CPU requirements (285M FLOPS
vs 1.6B for NN2). In addition to the reduced input size it
does not use 5x5 convolutions in the higher layers as the
receptive ﬁeld is already too small by then. Generally we
found that the 5x5 convolutions can be removed throughout
with only a minor drop in accuracy. Figure 4 compares all
our models.
4. Datasets and Evaluation
We evaluate our method on four datasets and with the exception of Labelled Faces in the Wild and YouTube Faces
we evaluate our method on the face veriﬁcation task. I.e.
given a pair of two face images a squared L2 distance
threshold D(xi, xj) is used to determine the classiﬁcation
of same and different. All faces pairs (i, j) of the same identity are denoted with Psame, whereas all pairs of different
identities are denoted with Pdiff.
We deﬁne the set of all true accepts as
TA(d) = {(i, j) ∈Psame, with D(xi, xj) ≤d} .
These are the face pairs (i, j) that were correctly classiﬁed
as same at threshold d. Similarly
FA(d) = {(i, j) ∈Pdiff, with D(xi, xj) ≤d}
is the set of all pairs that was incorrectly classiﬁed as same
(false accept).
The validation rate VAL(d) and the false accept rate
FAR(d) for a given face distance d are then deﬁned as
VAL(d) = |TA(d)|
FAR(d) = |FA(d)|
4.1. Hold-out Test Set
We keep a hold out set of around one million images,
that has the same distribution as our training set, but disjoint identities. For evaluation we split it into ﬁve disjoint
sets of 200k images each. The FAR and VAL rate are then
computed on 100k × 100k image pairs. Standard error is
reported across the ﬁve splits.
4.2. Personal Photos
This is a test set with similar distribution to our training
set, but has been manually veriﬁed to have very clean labels.
It consists of three personal photo collections with a total of
around 12k images. We compute the FAR and VAL rate
across all 12k squared pairs of images.
4.3. Academic Datasets
Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) is the de-facto academic test set for face veriﬁcation . We follow the standard protocol for unrestricted, labeled outside data and report the mean classiﬁcation accuracy as well as the standard
error of the mean.
Youtube Faces DB is a new dataset that has gained
popularity in the face recognition community . The
setup is similar to LFW, but instead of verifying pairs of
images, pairs of videos are used.
10,000,000
100,000,000
1,000,000,000
Multi­Add (FLOPS)
VAL @10­3 FAR
Figure 4. FLOPS vs. Accuracy trade-off. Shown is the trade-off
between FLOPS and accuracy for a wide range of different model
sizes and architectures. Highlighted are the four models that we
focus on in our experiments.
5. Experiments
If not mentioned otherwise we use between 100M-200M
training face thumbnails consisting of about 8M different
identities. A face detector is run on each image and a tight
bounding box around each face is generated. These face
thumbnails are resized to the input size of the respective
network. Input sizes range from 96x96 pixels to 224x224
pixels in our experiments.
5.1. Computation Accuracy Trade-off
Before diving into the details of more speciﬁc experiments we will discuss the trade-off of accuracy versus number of FLOPS that a particular model requires. Figure 4
shows the FLOPS on the x-axis and the accuracy at 0.001
false accept rate (FAR) on our user labelled test-data set
from section 4.2. It is interesting to see the strong correlation between the computation a model requires and the
accuracy it achieves. The ﬁgure highlights the ﬁve models
(NN1, NN2, NN3, NNS1, NNS2) that we discuss in more
detail in our experiments.
We also looked into the accuracy trade-off with regards
to the number of model parameters. However, the picture
is not as clear in that case.
For example, the Inception
based model NN2 achieves a comparable performance to
NN1, but only has a 20th of the parameters. The number
of FLOPS is comparable, though. Obviously at some point
the performance is expected to decrease, if the number of
parameters is reduced further. Other model architectures
may allow further reductions without loss of accuracy, just
like Inception did in this case.
conv1 (7×7×3, 2)
112×112×64
max pool + norm
inception (2)
norm + max pool
inception (3a)
inception (3b)
inception (3c)
inception (4a)
inception (4b)
inception (4c)
inception (4d)
inception (4e)
inception (5a)
inception (5b)
fully conn
L2 normalization
Table 2. NN2. Details of the NN2 Inception incarnation. This model is almost identical to the one described in . The two major
differences are the use of L2 pooling instead of max pooling (m), where speciﬁed. I.e. instead of taking the spatial max the L2 norm
is computed. The pooling is always 3×3 (aside from the ﬁnal average pooling) and in parallel to the convolutional modules inside each
Inception module. If there is a dimensionality reduction after the pooling it is denoted with p. 1×1, 3×3, and 5×5 pooling are then
concatenated to get the ﬁnal output.
Figure 5. Network Architectures.
This plot shows the complete ROC for the four different models on our personal photos test set from section 4.2.
The sharp drop at 10E-4 FAR
can be explained by noise in the groundtruth labels. The models in order of performance are: NN2: 224×224 input Inception
based model; NN1: Zeiler&Fergus based network with 1×1 convolutions; NNS1: small Inception style model with only 220M
FLOPS; NNS2: tiny Inception model with only 20M FLOPS.
architecture
NN1 (Zeiler&Fergus 220×220)
87.9% ± 1.9
NN2 (Inception 224×224)
89.4% ± 1.6
NN3 (Inception 160×160)
88.3% ± 1.7
NN4 (Inception 96×96)
82.0% ± 2.3
NNS1 (mini Inception 165×165)
82.4% ± 2.4
NNS2 (tiny Inception 140×116)
51.9% ± 2.9
Table 3. Network Architectures. This table compares the performance of our model architectures on the hold out test set (see
section 4.1). Reported is the mean validation rate VAL at 10E-3
false accept rate. Also shown is the standard error of the mean
across the ﬁve test splits.
5.2. Effect of CNN Model
We now discuss the performance of our four selected
models in more detail. On the one hand we have our traditional Zeiler&Fergus based architecture with 1×1 convolutions (see Table 1). On the other hand we have Inception based models that dramatically reduce the model
size. Overall, in the ﬁnal performance the top models of
both architectures perform comparably. However, some of
our Inception based models, such as NN3, still achieve good
performance while signiﬁcantly reducing both the FLOPS
and the model size.
The detailed evaluation on our personal photos test set is
Table 4. Image Quality. The table on the left shows the effect on
the validation rate at 10E-3 precision with varying JPEG quality.
The one on the right shows how the image size in pixels effects the
validation rate at 10E-3 precision. This experiment was done with
NN1 on the ﬁrst split of our test hold-out dataset.
86.8% ± 1.7
87.9% ± 1.9
87.7% ± 1.9
85.6% ± 2.0
Table 5. Embedding Dimensionality. This Table compares the
effect of the embedding dimensionality of our model NN1 on our
hold-out set from section 4.1. In addition to the VAL at 10E-3
we also show the standard error of the mean computed across ﬁve
shown in Figure 5. While the largest model achieves a dramatic improvement in accuracy compared to the tiny NNS2,
the latter can be run 30ms / image on a mobile phone and
is still accurate enough to be used in face clustering. The
sharp drop in the ROC for FAR < 10−4 indicates noisy
labels in the test data groundtruth. At extremely low false
accept rates a single mislabeled image can have a signiﬁcant
impact on the curve.
5.3. Sensitivity to Image Quality
Table 4 shows the robustness of our model across a wide
range of image sizes. The network is surprisingly robust
with respect to JPEG compression and performs very well
down to a JPEG quality of 20. The performance drop is
very small for face thumbnails down to a size of 120x120
pixels and even at 80x80 pixels it shows acceptable performance. This is notable, because the network was trained on
220x220 input images. Training with lower resolution faces
could improve this range further.
5.4. Embedding Dimensionality
We explored various embedding dimensionalities and selected 128 for all experiments other than the comparison reported in Table 5. One would expect the larger embeddings
to perform at least as good as the smaller ones, however, it is
possible that they require more training to achieve the same
accuracy. That said, the differences in the performance re-
#training images
26,000,000
52,000,000
260,000,000
Table 6. Training Data Size. This table compares the performance
after 700h of training for a smaller model with 96x96 pixel inputs.
The model architecture is similar to NN2, but without the 5x5 convolutions in the Inception modules.
ported in Table 5 are statistically insigniﬁcant.
It should be noted, that during training a 128 dimensional
ﬂoat vector is used, but it can be quantized to 128-bytes
without loss of accuracy. Thus each face is compactly represented by a 128 dimensional byte vector, which is ideal
for large scale clustering and recognition. Smaller embeddings are possible at a minor loss of accuracy and could be
employed on mobile devices.
5.5. Amount of Training Data
Table 6 shows the impact of large amounts of training
data. Due to time constraints this evaluation was run on a
smaller model; the effect may be even larger on larger models. It is clear that using tens of millions of exemplars results
in a clear boost of accuracy on our personal photo test set
from section 4.2. Compared to only millions of images the
relative reduction in error is 60%. Using another order of
magnitude more images (hundreds of millions) still gives a
small boost, but the improvement tapers off.
5.6. Performance on LFW
We evaluate our model on LFW using the standard protocol for unrestricted, labeled outside data. Nine training
splits are used to select the L2-distance threshold. Classi-
ﬁcation (same or different) is then performed on the tenth
test split. The selected optimal threshold is 1.242 for all test
splits except split eighth (1.256).
Our model is evaluated in two modes:
1. Fixed center crop of the LFW provided thumbnail.
2. A proprietary face detector (similar to Picasa ) is run
on the provided LFW thumbnails. If it fails to align the
face (this happens for two images), the LFW alignment
Figure 6 gives an overview of all failure cases. It shows
false accepts on the top as well as false rejects at the bottom. We achieve a classiﬁcation accuracy of 98.87%±0.15
when using the ﬁxed center crop described in (1) and the
record breaking 99.63%±0.09 standard error of the mean
when using the extra face alignment (2). This reduces the
error reported for DeepFace in by more than a factor
False accept
False reject
Figure 6. LFW errors. This shows all pairs of images that were
incorrectly classiﬁed on LFW. Only eight of the 13 false rejects
shown here are actual errors the other ﬁve are mislabeled in LFW.
of 7 and the previous state-of-the-art reported for DeepId2+
in by 30%. This is the performance of model NN1, but
even the much smaller NN3 achieves performance that is
not statistically signiﬁcantly different.
5.7. Performance on Youtube Faces DB
We use the average similarity of all pairs of the ﬁrst one
hundred frames that our face detector detects in each video.
This gives us a classiﬁcation accuracy of 95.12%±0.39.
Using the ﬁrst one thousand frames results in 95.18%.
Compared to 91.4% who also evaluate one hundred
frames per video we reduce the error rate by almost half.
DeepId2+ achieved 93.2% and our method reduces this
error by 30%, comparable to our improvement on LFW.
5.8. Face Clustering
Our compact embedding lends itself to be used in order
to cluster a users personal photos into groups of people with
the same identity. The constraints in assignment imposed
by clustering faces, compared to the pure veriﬁcation task,
Figure 7. Face Clustering. Shown is an exemplar cluster for one
user. All these images in the users personal photo collection were
clustered together.
lead to truly amazing results. Figure 7 shows one cluster in
a users personal photo collection, generated using agglomerative clustering. It is a clear showcase of the incredible
invariance to occlusion, lighting, pose and even age.
6. Summary
We provide a method to directly learn an embedding into
an Euclidean space for face veriﬁcation. This sets it apart
from other methods who use the CNN bottleneck
layer, or require additional post-processing such as concate-
NN2 compared to NN1
Figure 8. Harmonic Embedding Compatibility. These ROCs
show the compatibility of the harmonic embeddings of NN2 to
the embeddings of NN1. NN2 is an improved model that performs
much better than NN1. When comparing embeddings generated
by NN1 to the harmonic ones generated by NN2 we can see the
compatibility between the two. In fact, the mixed mode performance is still better than NN1 by itself.
nation of multiple models and PCA, as well as SVM classiﬁcation. Our end-to-end training both simpliﬁes the setup
and shows that directly optimizing a loss relevant to the task
at hand improves performance.
Another strength of our model is that it only requires
minimal alignment (tight crop around the face area). ,
for example, performs a complex 3D alignment. We also
experimented with a similarity transform alignment and notice that this can actually improve performance slightly. It
is not clear if it is worth the extra complexity.
Future work will focus on better understanding of the
error cases, further improving the model, and also reducing model size and reducing CPU requirements. We will
also look into ways of improving the currently extremely
long training times, e.g. variations of our curriculum learning with smaller batch sizes and ofﬂine as well as online
positive and negative mining.
7. Appendix: Harmonic Embedding
In this section we introduce the concept of harmonic embeddings. By this we denote a set of embeddings that are
generated by different models v1 and v2 but are compatible
in the sense that they can be compared to each other.
This compatibility greatly simpliﬁes upgrade paths.
E.g. in an scenario where embedding v1 was computed
across a large set of images and a new embedding model
v2 is being rolled out, this compatibility ensures a smooth
transition without the need to worry about version incompatibilities. Figure 8 shows results on our 3G dataset. It can
be seen that the improved model NN2 signiﬁcantly outper-
v7 template
v8 template
Figure 9. Learning the Harmonic Embedding. In order to learn
a harmonic embedding, we generate triplets that mix the v1 embeddings with the v2 embeddings that are being trained. The semihard negatives are selected from the whole set of both v1 and v2
embeddings.
forms NN1, while the comparison of NN2 embeddings to
NN1 embeddings performs at an intermediate level.
7.1. Harmonic Triplet Loss
In order to learn the harmonic embedding we mix embeddings of v1 together with the embeddings v2, that are
being learned. This is done inside the triplet loss and results
in additionally generated triplets that encourage the compatibility between the different embedding versions. Figure 9 visualizes the different combinations of triplets that
contribute to the triplet loss.
We initialized the v2 embedding from an independently
trained NN2 and retrained the last layer (embedding layer)
from random initialization with the compatibility encouraging triplet loss. First only the last layer is retrained, then we
continue training the whole v2 network with the harmonic
Figure 10 shows a possible interpretation of how this
compatibility may work in practice. The vast majority of
v2 embeddings may be embedded near the corresponding
v1 embedding, however, incorrectly placed v1 embeddings
can be perturbed slightly such that their new location in embedding space improves veriﬁcation accuracy.
7.2. Summary
These are very interesting ﬁndings and it is somewhat
surprising that it works so well. Future work can explore
how far this idea can be extended. Presumably there is a
limit as to how much the v2 embedding can improve over
v1, while still being compatible. Additionally it would be
interesting to train small networks that can run on a mobile
phone and are compatible to a larger server side model.
embeddings
v7 template
v8 template
Figure 10. Harmonic Embedding Space.
This visualisation
sketches a possible interpretation of how harmonic embeddings
are able to improve veriﬁcation accuracy while maintaining compatibility to less accurate embeddings. In this scenario there is one
misclassiﬁed face, whose embedding is perturbed to the “correct”
location in v2.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Johannes Steffens for his discussions and great insights on face recognition and Christian
Szegedy for providing new network architectures like 
and discussing network design choices. Also we are indebted to the DistBelief team for their support especially to Rajat Monga for help in setting up efﬁcient training
Also our work would not have been possible without the
support of Chuck Rosenberg, Hartwig Adam, and Simon