density multi-channel electro- and magneto- encephalographic
recordings (EEG and MEG) have allowed for unprecedented
advances in our understanding of the physiology of human selective attention. This report specifically addresses evidence for the
role of oscillatory brain mechanisms in selective attention .
Two basic varieties of attentionally mediated, selective modulation of the neural circuitry involved in processing a particular
stimulus array can be envisioned. The first, and by far the most
often reported, involves the selective enhancement of neural
responsiveness or efficacy in those cells responsible for processing
the particular stimulus upon which a subject’s attention is focused,
whether that stimulus is already present or merely anticipated . The second variety of attentional
modulation involves selective inhibition or disengagement of those
neurons responsible for processing stimuli outside of the focus of
attention, so that competing or distracting information is not or
will not be processed fully . This would involve placing the neural circuitry normally responsible for processing such distracters in some
“Sit in reverie, and watch the changing color of the waves that break
upon the idle seashore of the mind.”
-Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
The ability to selectively attend to a specific subset of one’s sensory realm is at the root of human cognition and negotiation
of one’s environment. The alternative, whereby all information
in one’s sensory domain is processed to the level of consciousness, does not allow for normal function and may be partially
involved in certain neural disorders such as Autism spectrum
disorders and attention deficit
disorder . By necessity, successful task
completion in daily life employs selective attention to one extent
or another. By inference, the ability to attend is assumed to be
a “capacity-limited” system and to some degree, humans have
executive or conscious control over what aspects of their environment are tapping this limited system from moment-to-moment
 . This endogenous form of attention is distinct from
attention that is captured by salient stimuli in the environment
in an involuntary fashion (exogenous attention). How the brain
achieves endogenous attentional selectivity has been a matter of
vigorous research for some decades now. Advances in neuroimaging technologies such as the hemodynamic functional imaging
methodologies (fMRI and PET) and the ability to conduct high-
The role of alpha-band brain oscillations as a sensory
suppression mechanism during selective attention
John J. Foxe1,2* and Adam C. Snyder1,2
1 The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Children's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center, Department of Pediatrics and Dominick P. Purpura Department of
Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
2 The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, Departments of Psychology and Biology, City College of the City University of
New York, New York, NY, USA
Evidence has amassed from both animal intracranial recordings and human electrophysiology
that neural oscillatory mechanisms play a critical role in a number of cognitive functions such
as learning, memory, feature binding and sensory gating. The wide availability of high-density
electrical and magnetic recordings (64–256 channels) over the past two decades has allowed for
renewed efforts in the characterization and localization of these rhythms. A variety of cognitive
effects that are associated with specific brain oscillations have been reported, which range
in spectral, temporal, and spatial characteristics depending on the context. Our laboratory
has focused on investigating the role of alpha-band oscillatory activity (8–14 Hz) as a potential
attentional suppression mechanism, and this particular oscillatory attention mechanism will be
the focus of the current review. We discuss findings in the context of intersensory selective
attention as well as intrasensory spatial and feature-based attention in the visual, auditory, and
tactile domains. The weight of evidence suggests that alpha-band oscillations can be actively
invoked within cortical regions across multiple sensory systems, particularly when these regions
are involved in processing irrelevant or distracting information. That is, a central role for alpha
seems to be as an attentional suppression mechanism when objects or features need to be
specifically ignored or selected against.
Keywords: alpha, brain, oscillations, selection, attention, biasing, suppression, EEG
Edited by:
Gregor Thut, University of Glasgow, UK
Reviewed by:
Gregor Thut, University of Glasgow, UK
*Correspondence:
John J. Foxe, Cognitive
Neurophysiology Laboratory, Children's
Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center,
Departments of Pediatrics and
Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, 1225 Morris Park Avenue,
Suite 1-C Bronx, NY 10461 USA.
e-mail: 
www.frontiersin.org
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  1
Review Article
published: 05 July 2011
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00154
mechanisms, anticipatory suppression, in a number of contexts:
anticipatory suppression of one modality in favor of another , suppression of portions of space that
are likely to contain distractor information , as well as suppression of visual features such as
color or motion .
The Cuing Paradigm
In order to study the preparatory mechanisms of attentional biasing, we have employed the “cuing paradigm” to invoke endogenous
biasing of the attentional system. This is an effective experimental
means of ensuring invocation of a high level of endogenous control
by the use of symbolic cues that actively instruct the subject in
an unpredictable manner to switch attention between tasks. That
is, a centrally presented cue such as an arrow, word, or sound is
employed (stimulus 1 – S1), which informs of an upcoming task
or indicates a specific location, modality, or feature for subsequent
analysis (stimulus 2 – S2). This manipulation is a nice experimental
version of what is a fairly natural way of apportioning attention
in our environment. That is, humans spend a large part of their
existence assigning attentive resources to their environment based
on both external and internal instructional sets.
Such endogenous cuing paradigms can be classified into two
basic categories: “probabilistic” and “instructional.” In a probabilistic cuing paradigm, participants are instructed to respond to all
target S2’s, including those that may occur at an uncued location.
Critically, the cue indicates the correct location of the target on
a high proportion of trials, which encourages the participants to
utilize the information provided by the cue. The uncued location
in this case cannot be considered a source of distracters, however,
since participants still need to respond to targets there. In contrast, an instructional cuing paradigm requires the participants to
respond to targets occurring at the cued location only, and to ignore
the uncued location completely. In this way, the uncued location
becomes simply a source of potentially distracting information,
since stimuli occurring there will never warrant a response. On the
other hand, since no response is ever made to such distracters, a
physiological measure is needed to evaluate the processing thereof.
Alpha-band Effects in Intersensory Attention
Using an instructional endogenous cueing paradigm, we originally found differential modulation of parieto-occipital alphaband (8–14 Hz) oscillatory activity in the period preceding an
imperative stimulus (S2) when visually presented word-cues (S1)
instructed subjects in an intersensory attention paradigm . In that experiment, subjects were cued to
attend either the visual or auditory portion of a subsequent compound audio–visual stimulus, which occurred predictably 1.1 s
after the cue. We showed that the cue instruction to attend the
auditory modality (the word “BEEP”) resulted in significantly
larger 8–14 Hz activity over parieto-occipital cortex in the anticipatory period preceding the S2 than when subjects were cued to
attend the visual modality (the word “FLASH”). This effect was not
due to eye closing or gaze issues as eye movements were carefully
monitored and subjects were instructed to maintain fixation during both attend-auditory and attend-visual anticipatory periods.
We hypothesized that this ­oscillatory ­enhancement in the case of
form of inhibited or decreased receptivity state. Evidence from
behavioral studies supports such a mechanism, as reaction times
to stimuli presented at non-attended locations are slower relative
to those at attended locations , and precuing visual targets when they are presented with accompanying
distracters improves performance to levels seen when no distracters
were presented .
Some evidence suggests that one correlate of the first variety of
attention, enhancement of neural processing for stimuli at the focus
of attention, is the selective modulation of evoked gamma-band
oscillatory activity . The evoked gamma-band
response has been implicated as a neural mechanism for feature
binding , and these studies have suggested
that this binding function can be selectively invoked during attention tasks. Attention effects in the gamma-band have typically been
observed subsequent to stimulus onset. A key aspect of endogenous
attention, however, is the ability to prepare attentional resources in
preparation for an expected stimulus prior to its onset.
One mechanism that has been suggested for the complementary,
suppressive form of attention in the visual domain is the selective
invocation of cortico-cortical and cortico-thalamic oscillations
 . Since alpha oscillations (8–14 Hz) are known
to be related to general alerting and ongoing visual processing
 and are seen
in the EEG, even when subjects are involved in highly demanding
tasks, we proposed that such oscillations may also be involved in
selective attention mechanisms . In support, the
amplitudes of both the auditory and visual N1-P2 ERP components
are modulated based on stimulus-preceding alpha amplitude with the caveat that in these studies, the
reported effects could be mainly due to arousal issues. More compellingly, Vanni et al. demonstrated a parieto-occipital alpha
effect such that alpha level became higher in the period following
presentation of a “non-object” stimulus as opposed to meaningful objects. They suggested that this represented a disengagement
of attention by parietal attention gating structures in the inferior
parietal region. We predicted that such attentional disengagement
might also be a facet of anticipatory attentional biasing mechanisms. Our results regarding this prediction from a series of studies
are discussed below.
Alpha and anticipatory gating of attention
Anticipatory Biasing
In our laboratory, we have been particularly interested in detailing the top-down mechanisms by which the brain establishes
biased attentional states – that is, anticipatory sets. Until the past
decade or so the vast majority of attention research had concentrated on the effects of attention on the processing of attended
versus unattended stimuli that occurs subsequently, as a result of
attentional biasing . When the brain is involved in attentionally demanding tasks, it is advantageous to direct attention to the
relevant stimulus, location, or action that is to be engaged in,
prior to the arrival of the stimulus or execution of the action. We
have reported a neural correlate of the second form of biasing
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
Frontiers in Psychology  |  Perception Science
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  2
 . In such models, the posterior parietal areas of the fast dorsal
visual stream mediate the extent of processing of a particular stimulus through parietal inputs to the thalamic relay nuclei, nucleus
reticularis, and the putamen, and also through modulatory inputs
to the ventral visual stream, which is specialized for the high level
extraction of featural information from stimuli. That is, the spatially specialized dorsal stream areas control the gateways to ventral
visual processing. How exactly this is achieved is currently a matter
of debate. We suggested that the enhanced parieto-occipital alphaband activity seen in our intersensory selective attention paradigm
the attend-auditory instruction might reflect anticipatory gating of
visual processing by parieto-occipital structures, which are known
to be involved in attentional switching and disengagement within
the visual modality .
Alpha-band Effects in Visual Spatial Attention
We interpreted the results of Foxe et al. in terms of visual
spatial attention theories that posit parietal control of visual selective attention such as those of Van der Heijden , LaBerge
Figure 1 | Adapted from Foxe et al. . (A) Task schematic. Participants
viewed a cue word (BEEP or FLASH) on a computer screen to start each trial.
The cue indicated whether audition (BEEP) or vision (FLASH) was relevant for
the trial. After a 1085-ms cue-target interval of no stimulation, the participants
were presented with a pair of red disks on the screen and a concurrent pair of
tones via headphones. For the visual target, one of the red disks was displaced
slightly with respect to the reflection of the other disk across the vertical
meridian (on standard trials, the two disks were symmetric about the vertical
meridian). For the auditory target, the two tones had slightly different pitches
(the two tones had the same pitch on standard trials). Participants were
instructed to press a button upon detection of a target in the cued sensory
modality, and to withhold response otherwise. Participants maintained central
fixation throughout the trial. (B) Scalp current-density (SCD) waveforms from
one subject (BH) at a right parieto-occipital scalp site to the beep (black trace)
and flash (red trace) cues. (C) The same waveforms, band-pass filtered (8–14 Hz)
reveal greater stimulus-locked alpha activity in the 300-ms (yellow box) before
onset of the compound S2 (1085 ms, dashed blue line) when attention has been
cued to the auditory modality. (D) Temporal–spectral evolution (TSE) waveforms
for the alpha band, derived for the cue-target interval by full-wave rectifying the
individual band-pass filtered trials prior to averaging, show a difference in the
total alpha amplitude (i.e., both stimulus-locked and non-stimulus-locked). (E)
Posterior view of the topographical distribution of current-density 975 ms
following presentation of beep (top) and flash (bottom) cues for one subject
(KH). Greater parietal field power is evident for the auditory cue compared to the
visual cue. Red iso-contour lines (0.1 μV/cm2 increments) indicate positive values
and blue, negative.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
www.frontiersin.org
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  3
should be selectively deployed to regions of space that need to be
ignored. That is, alpha-gating should occur in cortices that are likely
to receive distracter information. We then examined this prediction
in a visuo-spatial cueing study .
represented a selective inhibition of “all” of visual space and was
one mechanism by which visual space could be selectively inhibited.
The prediction from these results would be that during visual spatial selective attention paradigms, such alpha-gating mechanisms
Figure 2 | Adapted from Worden et al. . (A) Task schematic. At the start of
each trial, participants were presented with a central arrow cue that instructed
them to attend to the left or right hemifield. Following a 1-s cue-target interval, a
stimulus was presented at either the left or right location. Participants were
charged with making a difficult orientation or motion discrimination of stimuli
occurring at the cued location, while ignoring all events at the uncued location.
Participants maintained central fixation throughout the trial. (B) Dorsal view (nose at
top) of the electrode layout. Electrodes used for statistical analysis are plotted in
red, circled electrodes were used to generate the accompanying waveforms. (C,D)
ERPs to the lower left and right cues (collapsed across motion and orientation trials)
for two occipital electrode sites, averaged over 10 subjects. Data for attend lower
left are plotted in green, and data for attend lower right are plotted in red. (E,F)
Corresponding alpha-band (8–14 Hz) TSE waveforms for the same electrodes. A
sustained divergence in TSE amplitude is seen starting at ∼500 ms, which depends
on both the cued direction of attention and the side of recording. TSE amplitudes
are larger over occipital cortex ipsilateral to the direction of attention.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
Frontiers in Psychology  |  Perception Science
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  4
Visual Feature-based Attention
We also asked if this gating function of alpha-band activity was
specific to spatial and intersensory attention, or rather if alpha
could play a role in the biasing of attention between other stimulus parameters within a given modality, such as visual features
 . It was well established from
prior research that attention can be deployed to non-spatial
visual features, such as color or motion parameters, facilitating
the processing of subsequent stimuli incorporating the attended
feature, independently of spatial location . We again utilized an
instructional cuing paradigm, although in this case the cues
directed participants to attend to either the color or motion of
an upcoming stimulus consisting of many small moving and
colored dots. Participants were tasked with making a difficult
discrimination with respect to the cued feature. We chose the
features of color and motion because they have well-described,
spatially separated cortical processing centers in the dorsal and
ventral visual streams, respectively . Using independent components analysis (ICA), we were
able to isolate cortical sources that were highly dynamic in the
alpha band during the preparatory cue-S2 interval, and some of
these sources differentiated between attention to color and attention to motion. Such sources located in putative dorsal stream
regions showed increased power in the alpha band when motion
was irrelevant, whereas sources located in ventral regions showed
increased alpha power when color was irrelevant. This pattern of
results is analogous to the suppression effect observed with spatial attention, in which cortical areas responsible for processing
irrelevant or distracting information show anticipatory increases
in alpha band power.
Auditory and Somatosensory Spatial Attention
Alpha-mediated suppression has thus been shown to be robustly
involved in anticipatory attention in the visual domain. It is natural
to ask if alpha-band activity also plays a role in the anticipatory suppression of information in other sensory domains. Several studies
have investigated this possibility.
A role for alpha-mediated biasing of spatial attention has been
reported when attention is directed to S2’s presented in the auditory
domain . Kerlin et al.
 directed participants to selectively attend to one of two competing speech streams in an auditory spatial attention task while
the researchers recorded EEG. They found alpha-band increases
over parietal cortex ipsilateral to the cued direction, consistent with
the findings of Worden et al. . It should be mentioned, however, that the researchers examined only the interval during which
the stimulus was actually presented, rather than the preparatory
interval. Additionally, a visual arrow cue was used, which has been
shown to have strong exogenous effects on the allocation of visual
attention , admitting a potentially
confounding factor. In Banerjee et al. (in press), we used centrally
presented symbolic auditory cues to direct attention to auditory S2’s
appearing to the left and right of the participant. Participants’ only
visual concern was to maintain fixation on a small dot on a computer screen. No visual information was available concerning the
In this visuo-spatial experiment, centrally presented arrow cues
were used to direct attention to the left or right visual fields and
alternately to the upper and lower quadrants within the visual hemifields. Subjects were required to make orientation and motiondirection judgments upon the subsequent S2 stimuli. It should be
emphasized that only stimuli occurring at the cued location were
relevant to the task, such that stimuli occurring opposite to the cued
location could be deemed distracters. Compellingly, we found that
deployment of visual attention to one hemifield resulted in anticipatory sustained focal increases in alpha-band activity over occipital
cortex ipsilateral to the cued direction of attention. Further, these
foci also moved retinotopically depending on whether attention was
deployed to the upper or lower quadrants. Thus, in a spatial selective
attention condition, enhanced alpha-band activity was seen over
the retinotopic area that was likely to contain distracter stimuli,
consistent with a role for these oscillatory processes in inhibition
of non-cued spatial locations and consistent with the predictions
of Foxe et al. . This basic finding of retinotopically specific
alpha-band mediated suppression of potentially distracting locations has subsequently been replicated and expanded several times
 .
Cross-Sensory Cuing of Attention
In Foxe et al. , we used visually presented word-cues to direct
the deployment of attention to either the visual (FLASH) or auditory
(BEEP) modalities. A central question in intersensory attention and
more particularly in multisensory integration is the extent to which
there are cross-sensory links in attention mechanisms. A number of
papers have addressed this issue . One question is whether cues presented in a modality
other than vision could invoke the alpha-gating mechanism reported
by Foxe et al. and Worden et al. . We investigated crosssensory cuing effects upon the alpha-gating effect by
using auditory cues to inform subjects in an intersensory attention
experiment similar to the one used in Foxe et al. . We found
that the use of auditory cues can indeed invoke the alpha-gating
mechanism. In this experiment, subjects received an auditory cue
(1 click = attend-auditory; 2 clicks = attend-visual) which was followed 1.2 s later by a compound auditory/visual imperative stimulus. As with our previous study, subjects were required to perform
a difficult sensory discrimination task within the cued modality
and to ignore the uncued/distracter modality, while maintaining
fixation nonetheless. We inspected the alpha-band activity in the
period following the cue-stimulus but preceding arrival of the tobe-attended imperative stimulus. The fundamental finding of Foxe
et al. – increases in parieto-occipital alpha power in preparation for the auditory task – was replicated. This result indicates that
alpha-mediated visual gating can be cross-sensorily cued. Similarly,
Jones et al. used a visual cue to direct spatial attention in
anticipation of a tactile S2 and observed spatially specific shifts in
alpha band power over somatosensory cortices. Successful crosssensory cuing of alpha-mediated gating mechanisms is significant
because it underscores the endogenous origin of the effects. That is,
mere low-level processing of the sensory aspects of the cue cannot
account for the attentional effects.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
www.frontiersin.org
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  5
Can alpha be considered an active mechanism for
attentional suppression?
One alternative interpretation of alpha-band modulations in
selective attention paradigms could be that alpha-band power
is not increased in areas processing distracter information, but
rather that such “increases” in fact reflect a return to baseline levels
for areas processing distracters, whereas maintenance of relative
desynchronization in the alpha band in areas processing potential
target information reflects preparatory enhancement and leads
to the observed topographical asymmetries. This argument has
its historical roots in the notion that alpha activity represents a
cortical “idling” state, whereas the relative absence of alpha reflects
cortical activity , and is of particular relevance when visual cues are used, as visual stimulus onset itself
leads to substantial decreases in the amplitude of ongoing alpha
oscillations , complicating the picture of spectro-temporal dynamics.
We investigated this possibility in an experiment that used rapid
serial visual presentation to maintain a consistent level of stimulusrelated desynchronization in the alpha band . In this experiment, participants were presented with
potential location of the S2’s, which were obscured behind curtains
in the dimly lit recording chamber. It was observed that parietooccipital alpha power increased ipsilateral to the cued direction
during the cue-target interval. This suggests that alpha-mediated
biasing operates within sensory modalities other than vision, since
the participants in this case never had a need to bias visual processing to perform the task. Similar biasing effects in the alpha
band have been observed for spatial attention in anticipation of a
tactile event . In these
tactile attention experiments, alpha band increases are typically
observed over somatosensory cortex ipsilateral to the cued direction,
suggesting some degree of sensory specificity to the mechanism.
Such diverse observations of alpha-mediated suppression suggest
that it might be a general mechanism for the suppression of parts
of sensory space.
Alpha-mediated attentional gating has thus been robustly
observed across a variety of attention tasks, in multiple sensory modalities and with respect to several different stimulus
parameters. This prevalence of alpha-mediated gating suggests
that it may be a general mechanism for attentional gating of
cortical processing.
Figure 3 | Adapted from Snyder and Foxe . (A) Task schematic.
Participants were presented with a word cue (e.g., COLOR or MOTION) at the
start of each trial that indicated the relevant feature of the upcoming S2.
Following a 1.7 to 2.3-s cue-target interval, a random dot stimulus (S2) was
presented for 200 ms. Dots comprising the S2 were all colored and moving. For
color targets, two different colors of dots were present in the stimulus (on
standard trials, all dots were uniformly colored). For motion trials, some dots
moved in a different direction from the rest (on standard trials, all dots moved in
the same direction). Participants were instructed to respond with a button press
if they detected a target in the cued feature, and to withhold response
otherwise. (B) Examples of “feature-sensitive, alpha-reactive” components for
two representative subjects. Scalp-recorded data were first separated into
independent components using ICA. TSE waveforms were derived for each
component by Hilbert-transforming band-pass filtered (8–15 Hz) single-trials and
averaging the instantaneous amplitudes across trials. For each participant, a few
components were highly dynamic in the alpha range during the preparatory
period (“alpha-reactive” components), and some of these alpha-reactive
components moreover showed power differences based on which feature was
cued (“feature-sensitive”). TSE waveforms illustrating this effect are depicted in
violet for two representative subjects. The solid lines represent attention to
motion and the dashed/dotted lines represent attention to color. Below the TSE
waveforms, running p-values for the alpha power difference between the two
attention conditions is plotted in orange. To the right of the TSE waveforms,
point-equivalent dipole source estimates for the corresponding components are
depicted in a standard MNI brain volume. (C) Localization of all feature-sensitive
alpha-reactive components across participants. Components are color-coded
according to the direction of feature-sensitivity: components with greater alpha
power for attention to color than for attention to motion are plotted in red, and
components with greater alpha power for attention to motion than for attention
to color are plotted in blue. The distributions of the estimated sources for two
types of components are significantly different. Components with higher alpha
power for attention to color are generally localized to putative dorsal visual
stream regions, whereas components with higher alpha power for attention to
motion are generally localized to putative ventral visual stream regions. This
pattern of results is consistent with a suppressive role of anticipatory alpha-band
power increases.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
Frontiers in Psychology  |  Perception Science
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  6
cues were used and so stimulus-related alpha desynchronization
was not observed, we also found that anticipatory alpha was statistically greater than pre-cue baseline levels.
Alpha-band measures of selective attention have also now
been shown to predict task performance. For example, detection
 and discrimination of centrally presented near-threshold
visual stimuli have been shown to be inversely related to the amplitude of alpha preceding stimulus onset. In other words, processing
is less effective when alpha amplitude is greater. Mathewson et al.
 moreover reported that phase of ongoing alpha predicted
detection ability, a very interesting finding in need of further investigation in our view.
a stream of letter stimuli to both visual hemifields. Presentation
rates varied from 9.45 to 17.01 Hz, and each stimulus had an 11-ms
duration. A centrally presented arrow cue instructed participants
to attend to one of the two streams, and the participants were
instructed to count the occurrences of a target letter in the attended
stream. The key result was that, following the cue, alpha power
ipsilateral to the cued direction increased above pre-cue baseline
levels, and no decreases in alpha power contralateral to the cued
direction were observed. Because bilateral stimulation continued
throughout each trial, we concluded that such increases in alpha
power reflect active suppression of the to-be-ignored stimulus
stream, rather than a mere return to baseline “idling.” It should also
be noted that in our earlier study where ­auditory
Figure 4 | Adapted from Kelly et al. . (A) Task schematic. Participants
maintained fixation on the central cross while a rapid sequence of letters was
presented to each hemifield. For each trial, a transiently presented arrowhead on
the fixation cross directed attention to one of the two letter streams, and
participants were instructed to count the occurrences of the letter “X” in the
attended stream for 8 s. (B) Time–frequency surface plot for all time points within
the attended period and for frequencies between 2 and 45 Hz, showing attentional
modulation {measured as log [Power(attend-Left)/Power(attend-Right)]} for the left
hemisphere parieto-occipital electrodes. Modulation is localized to the alpha band
with additional modulations seen at stimulation frequencies and harmonics. (C)
TSE waveforms time-locked to cue-onset (0 ms), averaged over three parietooccipital electrodes from each hemiscalp. A marked increase relative to pre-cue
baseline can be seen over each hemisphere when ignoring the contralateral
hemifield. (D) Scalp topography of alpha-band power for attention deployments
toward the left (top) and right (bottom) stimuli. The focus of increased alpha can be
seen over parieto-occipital scalp contralateral to the ignored hemifield.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
www.frontiersin.org
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  7
In the most direct test of the potentially causal role of alpha
band activity in attentional suppression, Romei et al. again
used TMS, although in this case they sought to externally drive
rhythmic neural activity and observe the effects that such externally driven oscillations would have on perception. Rhythmic TMS
pulses were applied either within the alpha range (10 Hz), or at a
frequency above (20 Hz), or below (5 Hz) this range. The participants were asked to report when they perceived a near-threshold
visual stimulus that was presented occasionally following the TMS
stimulation. TMS was applied to occipital and parietal regions,
and to left and right hemispheres. Additionally, so-called “sham”
TMS conditions were included, which mimic the sound of true
TMS without the stimulatory effects. The researchers found that
TMS at 10 Hz impaired visual detection contralateral to the site
of stimulation for both occipital and parietal stimulation sites,
consistent with a spatially specific suppressive role of alpha-band
activity with a cortical origin. Furthermore, visual detection was
improved ipsilateral to the site of 10 Hz stimulation, suggesting
a freeing of cognitive resources à la biased competition models.
These effects had a short duration; subsiding within 3 s of TMS.
Critically, no effects on visual detection were seen for stimulation
at either 5 or 20 Hz.
The situation may be more complex than simple gating of lowlevel stimulus processing, however. Another study by our group
 used a visual sustained attention task to
examine the EEG correlates of attentional lapses, as indexed by
performance errors. The imperative stimulus in this experiment
constantly flickered at 25 Hz, leading to a steady-state visual-evoked
potential (SSVEP) that served as the measure of low-level visual
processing. We found that power in the alpha band was much higher
preceding errors, and that such alpha increases could predict errors
up to 20 s before they occurred. However, no differences in SSVEP
amplitude were observed between periods preceding erroneous
performance and those preceding correct performance. Thus,
while we concluded that alpha-band power was a reliable index of
attentional lapses, the results also suggested that its effect was not
to diminish the efficacy of basic visual processing.
Neural basis of the alpha rhythm
Given the compelling accumulation of evidence across multiple
laboratories pointing to an active role for alpha-band oscillations in
selective attentional suppression, it is of extreme interest to examine
the putative underlying neural mechanisms that give rise to this
brain rhythm. The earliest description of the alpha brain rhythm
is generally credited to Hans Berger from his groundbreaking 1929
paper, “On the electroencephalogram in man”:
The electroencephalogram represents a continuous curve with
continuous oscillations in which… one can distinguish larger first
order waves with an average duration of 90 milliseconds [Alpha
waves] and smaller second order waves of an average duration of
35 milliseconds [Beta waves]. 
Despite the fact that alpha was one of the first signatures of the
EEG noted and is perhaps the best known brain rhythm outside of
the neurosciences, and given that no specialized training whatsoever would be necessary to pick out this most prominent of brain
rhythms from an ongoing EEG signal, it is perhaps rather surprising
One study from our group examined the relationship between
inter-individual differences in resting alpha band power and performance on a sustained attention to response task . In this paradigm, participants viewed the digits “1”
through “9” presented sequentially on a computer screen. The
participants were instructed to press a button to the onset of each
digit, except for digit “3,” to which response was to be withheld.
Prior work had established a component of the ERP in response to
the preceding digit (i.e., “2”) that predicted whether participants
would commit an error of commission when the digit “3” was
presented. This so-called “late positive 1” (LP1) component was
lower-amplitude before errors of commission than before correctly
withheld responses. For this study, we compared the tonic levels
of alpha in each participant to the amplitude of that participant’s
LP1 component and task performance. It was found that participants with greater tonic alpha levels had larger LP1 components,
and that this relationship predicted performance on the sustained
attention task.
With respect to spatial selective attention, the strength of attentional biasing as reflected by the degree of asymmetry of alpha
power over visual areas has been shown to be an effective predictor of task performance .
Furthermore, the degree of such alpha asymmetry has been shown
to scale with the probability of a valid cue in a probabilistically cued
visual spatial attention paradigm , suggesting
implicit optimization of the mechanism.
Does alpha shape perception? Toward studying its
causal role
A series of powerful experiments by Romei et al. 
used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to demonstrate
strong associations between ongoing alpha-band power over
visual cortex and perceptual experience. In the first such study
 , the researchers applied magnetic pulses
to visual cortex of human participants, which resulted in some
of the participants experiencing visual percepts (phosphenes).
For each participant, the researchers determined the minimum
strength of the magnetic pulse required to elicit phosphenes (the
“phosphene threshold”). Additionally, the researchers recorded
resting EEG from each participant. They found that phosphene
threshold was positively correlated with resting power in the
alpha band across individuals. That is, more intense stimulation was required to evoke visual percepts in individuals with
greater alpha levels, consistent with a role for alpha activity as
an active gating mechanism. Those individuals with the very
greatest levels of resting alpha did not perceive phosphenes with
even the highest-intensity TMS tested. It is worth noting that
no relationship was found between phosphene threshold and
activity in other canonical frequency bands tested (i.e., delta,
theta, beta, or gamma). A follow-up study using concurrent TMS
and EEG revealed that spontaneous fluctuations of alpha-band
power reflect the excitability of cortex on a single-trial basis
within single subjects and in a spatially specific manner , providing another compelling demonstration of
the intimate links between moment-to-moment alpha-band fluctuations within visual cortex and the ongoing susceptibility of
those regions to be activated.
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
Frontiers in Psychology  |  Perception Science
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  8
It should be mentioned, however, that a failure to observe effects
of attention in the initial sensory response to the S2 might reflect
type II error. The ability to detect effects at the scalp using EEG is
intimately tied to the position and orientation of the cortical areas
involved. When such areas are small and discrete, as in early stages of
sensory processing, the likelihood of stimulating an appropriately
oriented patch of cortex is relatively small when compared to the
larger areas of coordinated activity characteristic of higher-order
processes. In one experiment , we presented visual
stimuli systematically across different locations in the visual field for
each participant and determined which stimulus position resulted
in the largest C1 component (the first cortically evoked component
of the visual-evoked potential, which reflects early V1 activation)
separately for each individual. This “ideal” stimulus location was
then used for a spatial selective attention task, highly similar to
that used by Worden et al. . Thus, each participant received
a “customized” stimulus set designed to maximize the ability to
detect effects in the initial afferent activity in V1. Using this design,
which takes into account individual anatomical differences, we were
able to detect modulation of the initial C1 component by spatial
attention, consistent with modulation of the initial afferent volley
in V1. Thus, absence of an observed effect during the initial sensory
response cannot rule out a gating effect at the level of the thalamus.
It has been shown, but again in anesthetized animals, that the
receptive field properties of V1 vary significantly in conjunction
with changes in the level of synchronous activity in the corticothalamic visual system . These authors proposed that the high level of inhibition
of lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) cells by cells of the PGN that
occurs during synchronous EEG states leads to bursting activity
in LGN which results in larger and less specific V1 receptive fields.
Alternately, when inhibition is relieved during asynchronous EEG
activity, the LGN neurons are placed in a “tonic transmission mode”
which sharpens the receptive fields. The authors go on to suggest behavioral significance for this process in that the animal’s
behavioral state could result in an adaptation of the spatial resolution of primary sensory transmission by means of such oscillatory mechanisms. This speculation is in keeping with the models
proposed by Foxe et al. and Worden et al. with the
renewed caveat that the alpha modulations that we have reported
and the oscillations that Wörgötter records in a sleeping animal may
not rely on the same inhibitory mechanisms. Another possibility
raised by this finding is that the alpha effects reported in the Foxe
and Worden studies did indeed have an effect at the level of the
thalamus, causing a change in the receptive field characteristics in a
similar fashion to those reported by Wörgötter. This might explain
why it is notoriously difficult to establish effects upon the initial
processing of the S2’s in such designs using ERPs, since it would
be unlikely that surface ERPs would be sensitive to changes in the
size of receptive fields.
Cortico-cortical contributions
Capotosto et al. used concurrent EEG and TMS to demonstrate the involvement of frontal eye field (FEF) and intraparietal
sulcus (IPS) structures in the attentional effects of alpha-band
activity. Human participants performed a demanding visuo-spatial
cued attention task similar to that of Worden et al. , with
how incomplete our knowledge of the neural basis of the alpha
remains. In what follows, we will attempt to synthesize some of the
basic knowledge that does exist across species and methodologies,
with the caveat that this will be a necessarily incomplete survey.
Thalamo-cortical contributions
A key combined PET and EEG study in humans showed an inverse
correlation between thalamic metabolism and alpha power in the
EEG during a relaxed state . That is, increased
thalamic activity was correlated with less alpha EEG power while
less thalamic metabolic activity was correlated with higher alpha
power, supporting the notion that at least the non-specific alpha
seen in the ongoing EEG of humans has a thalamic component.
These findings are consistent with attention models such as those
of LaBerge in that activity in the relay nuclei of thalamus
might be suppressed by increased alpha oscillatory power in parietal
cortex. Nevertheless, there may also be an important distinction
between the alpha that is seen in the generally unaroused or eyesclosed state, as in the Lindgren study, and the alpha seen when subjects are involved in selective attention tasks such as those reviewed
above, for which arousal is specifically controlled (see below for
further discussion of variants of alpha waves).
Additional evidence for a thalamic contribution to alpha-band
oscillations comes from investigations of ∼10 Hz sleep-spindles. As
Steriade et al. point out; there has been an “unwritten consensus that alpha waves are congeners or embryos of spindle waves,”
although this assumption has been becoming increasingly doubtful,
as will be discussed below. Contreras et al. have shown that
spindle oscillations are largely under the control of cortico-thalamic
feedback. That is, by removing one cortical hemisphere in anesthetized cats, they showed that spindle sequences in thalamus did not
retain their normal synchrony but became desynchronous. In addition, disrupting intracortical connectivity by making deep coronal
cuts through the suprasylvian gyrus did not affect the synchronization of unaffected cortex. Destexhe et al. proposed a model
based on these results and the extensive experimental findings at the
Steriade laboratory whereby cortico-thalamic projections operate
on the thalamus through excitatory inputs to GABAergic neurons
in the nucleus reticularis, recruiting relay cells through a process of
inhibition and rebound .
Importantly, reticular neurons of the visual perigeniculate nucleus
(PGN) are known to inhibit thalamic relay neurons . Their model predicts the occurrence of the experimentally
observed oscillatory activity and also predicts a relative refractoriness for the network involved in such oscillations. This would
appear to be consistent with the prediction of an inhibitory role
for similar oscillations in our attention paradigms. However, if the
alpha mechanisms that we reported in Foxe et al. were having their effect at the level of the thalamus, one would expect that
such effects would be evident in the initial sensory response to the
S2 stimulus. This was not the case though, suggesting that at least
in that paradigm, putative oscillatory-inhibitory mechanisms may
have been operating at the cortico-cortical level. The level of the
hierarchy at which putative alpha inhibitory mechanisms will have
their effect is likely to be task specific. This contention is supported
by our findings of retinotopically specific alpha modulations in a
visuo-spatial paradigm .
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
www.frontiersin.org
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  9
that this could suggest a differential role of alpha in high- versus
low-order processing areas. One thing that seems clear is that alpha
activity is far from a unitary phenomenon, and discussions of alpha
must take into account the anatomical and behavioral context.
Variants of alpha waves
As alluded to above, much of what we suppose to know about the
cellular physiology and indeed the visual areas that might underlie
the alpha rhythm comes from investigations conducted in sleeping
and often anesthetized animals on the alpha-like ∼10 Hz sleepspindle . The extent to which sleep-spindles in an animal are generated by the same processes that generate the alpha rhythm in an
awake human is really a matter of speculation but many authors
have been willing to accept correspondence . Steriade et al. go on to point out that although the
frequencies are essentially the same, the timecourse of the wave
groupings are quite distinct with alpha manifesting in long trains,
in contrast to the short bursts that constitute the sleep-spindle.
Further, the topographies of each differ extensively. Nonetheless,
since some correspondence has been assumed, we will describe
below some of the currently available knowledge regarding the
neural mechanisms of the sleep-spindle. However, in the absence of
any direct evidence for a correspondence between the mechanisms
of sleep-spindles ∼10 Hz oscillations and waking human alpha, we
believe that we must treat of these putative correspondences with
the appropriate level of caution until such time as direct evidence
is available.
The sleep-spindles themselves have been extensively studied
and well characterized. For example, it has been shown that spindle oscillations are strongly controlled by intracortical inhibitory
mechanisms and that shifts in this cortical inhibition can shift the
oscillations to spike-wave desynchronous patterns . These results were derived from computational modeling
procedures, as the alternative of applying anti-inhibitory agents
(GABAA-antagonists) to cortex results in epileptiform discharges.
The authors stress the large-scale recruitment of inhibitory neurons in cortex by the ascending thalamo-cortical fibers. Thus the
activity of cortical pyramidal neurons is dominated by inhibitory
inputs and leads to a low-level of pyramidal cell discharge during
the oscillatory mode, a putative gating mechanism. Spindle oscillations have also been shown to be governed by inhibitory inputs
from nucleus reticularis .
Separating thalamic relay nuclei from their reticular inputs caused a
loss of the spindle oscillations in these nuclei .
In contrast, the separated reticular nucleus maintains its rhythmic
activity and is implicated as a pacemaker for oscillatory activity in
the thalamic relay nuclei.
Some evidence specific to alpha rhythms in awake animals
does exist, the earliest of which was seen in the dog. Evidence
that cortico-cortical alpha oscillatory activity is at least partially
independent of the thalamo-cortical alpha process was shown
 . The statistical technique of partialization was used to estimate the portion
of measured intracortical coherence that could be predicted by
concurrent thalamo-cortical coherence. Measuring alpha from
one thalamic and two cortical sites in a dog, these authors first
the notable difference that participants were required to respond
to all targets, including the relatively infrequent cases when targets were presented opposite to the cued location (i.e., invalidly
cued). That is, all S2’s were potentially relevant, and there were no
distracters in the paradigm. At the onset of the cue for each trial
the researchers applied TMS in one of four ways: (1) to the right
IPS, (2) to the right FEF, (3) to the right Pre-central gyrus, and
(4) sham TMS near the scalp vertex. It should be emphasized that
the researchers did not stimulate visual cortex directly, but rather
targeted association areas implicated in theoretical attention networks . Following sham TMS,
a bilateral decrease in alpha power over posterior scalp was typically observed. This decrease was greater contralateral to the cued
direction. Anticipatory increases ipsilateral to the cue direction
were not observed as in Worden et al. , which is likely due
to the potential relevance of both hemifields and lack of potential
distracters as described above. That is, no region of visual space
would be deserving of attentional suppression in this context. When
TMS was applied to IPS or FEF (but not pre-central gyrus) such
anticipatory decreases in alpha activity were reduced. In the case of
IPS stimulation, in fact, anticipatory increases were seen. Critically,
the researchers found that the degree of disruption by TMS of the
typical anticipatory alpha decreases was related to the participants’
speed of responding to targets. These results strongly implicate the
involvement of a fronto-parietal attention control network in the
deployment of alpha-mediated gating mechanisms in visual cortex.
Bollimunta et al. examined the laminar profiles of alpha
activity in cortex of alert monkeys performing an auditory discrimination task. By using a linear array of 14 electrodes, the researchers
were able to record differential voltages across the approximately
2  mm laminar structure of the cortical mantle. These voltages
could then be used to infer the locations of current sources and
sinks within a cortical column. Such recordings were made from
areas V2, V4, and IT. Supported by Granger causality analysis, the
researchers concluded that in areas V2 and V4, infragranular layers
serve as the local pacemakers for the alpha rhythm, with a small
mediating influence from the granular layer. This laminar pattern
suggests a primary influence of cortico-cortical feedback projections in the initiation of the rhythm with a modulatory input from
thalamus, as descending cortico-cortical pathways typically terminate in extragranular layers ,
whereas thalamic projections to posterior cortex typically terminate
in the granular layer . In contrast, alpha generation in area IT seemed confined to
extragranular layers, with supergranular layers serving as the local
pacemaker –a pattern that again implicates a primarily corticocortical influence.
Bollimunta et al. also examined the relationship between
the amplitude of the alpha-band activity under investigation in
each of the observed areas and the animals’ performance on the
auditory task. Areas V2 and V4 showed strong negative correlations
between alpha-band power and task performance, consistent with
the hypothesis that alpha reflects suppression of competing visual
information in these areas and consistent with the findings of the
intersensory attention studies of Foxe et al. and Fu et al.
 . Interestingly, area IT revealed a strong positive correlation
between alpha power and task performance. The authors discussed
Foxe and Snyder
Alpha and attention
Frontiers in Psychology  |  Perception Science
July 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 154  |  10