WHOLE SLIDE IMAGES BASED CANCER SURVIVAL PREDICTION
USING ATTENTION GUIDED DEEP MULTIPLE INSTANCE
LEARNING NETWORKS∗
A PREPRINT
Jiawen Yao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, Texas, USA
 
Xinliang Zhu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, Texas, USA
Jitendra Jonnagaddala
School of Public Health and Community Medicine
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW, Australia
Nicholas Hawkins
School of Medical Sciences
UNSW Sydney
Sydney, NSW, Australia
Junzhou Huang†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, Texas, USA
 
September 24, 2020
Traditional image-based survival prediction models rely on discriminative patch labeling which
make those methods not scalable to extend to large datasets. Recent studies have shown Multiple
Instance Learning (MIL) framework is useful for histopathological images when no annotations
are available in classiﬁcation task. Different to the current image-based survival models that limit
to key patches or clusters derived from Whole Slide Images (WSIs), we propose Deep Attention
Multiple Instance Survival Learning (DeepAttnMISL) by introducing both siamese MI-FCN and
attention-based MIL pooling to efﬁciently learn imaging features from the WSI and then aggregate
WSI-level information to patient-level. Attention-based aggregation is more ﬂexible and adaptive
than aggregation techniques in recent survival models. We evaluated our methods on two large cancer
whole slide images datasets and our results suggest that the proposed approach is more effective and
suitable for large datasets and has better interpretability in locating important patterns and features
that contribute to accurate cancer survival predictions. The proposed framework can also be used
to assess individual patient’s risk and thus assisting in delivering personalized medicine. Codes are
available at 
Keywords Survival Prediction · Multiple Instance Learning · Deep Learning · Whole Slide Images
∗Preprint, to appear in Medical Image Analysis 65, 101789, 2020 
†Corresponding author
 
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Introduction
Survival analysis aims to analyze the expected duration of time until events happen. It tries to ﬁnd the answer of
questions like: how does the proportion of a population survive past a certain time (e.g. 5 years)? What rate will they die
or fail? It is a very important clinical application and many efforts have been made to search for biomarkers from omics
data that are signiﬁcantly related to patient death . Recent technological innovations are enabling scientists to
capture big whole slide images (WSIs) at increasing speed and resolution for diagnosis. The learning model is required
to correctly predict the survival risk of each patient from his/her tumor tissue whole slide images. The more precise is
risk assessment for a cancer patient, the better the patient can be treated. Compare with genomics data, pathological
images can present tumor growth and morphology in extremely detailed, gigapixel resolution which is extremely useful
for cancer study .
The diagnosis is extremely laborious and highly dependent on expertise which requires pathologists to carefully examine
the biopsies under the microscope . To reduce the risk of misdiagnosis, pathologists have to conduct a thorough
inspection of the whole slide which make the diagnosis quite cumbersome. Automatic analysis of histology has become
one of the most rapidly expanding ﬁelds in medical imaging. Computer aided diagnostics in digital pathology can not
only alleviate pathologists’ workloads, but also help to reduce the chance of diagnosis mistakes. However, using WSIs
for survival prediction is very challenging due to several reasons: 1) pathological images in real cancer dataset might be
in terabytes (1012 pixels) level which makes most models computationally impossible. 2) the large variations of textures
and biological structures from tumor heterogeneity, As the solid tumor may have a mixture of tissue architectures and
structures, multiple WSIs from different parts of the patient’s tissue are collected for diagnosis; 3) label on patient-level
while each patient might have multiple WSIs for diagnosis. Those terabyte-size large WSIs from one patient will share
the survival label which will make the problem more challenging.
Related Work
During recent years, many methods have been proposed for survival prediction using pathological slides. They can be
categorized into two categories: ROI-based and WSI-based methods.
Region of Interest Analysis. Pathological images usually come with a very high resolution which makes most of
exiting models and algorithms computationally infeasible even though the high resolution of image data greatly beneﬁts
survival analysis with more precise information. Previously due to the lack of computational power, most of the
literature focused on regions of interest (ROI) patches which are selected by pathologists from WSIs .
Instead of handling original WSIs, ROI-based methods extracted hand-crafted features from ROIs for predictions . Wang et al. proposed a novel framework to ﬁrst segment cells in annotated patches and then perform
cellular morphological properties from those cells which result in 166 imaging features. Yu et al. extract 9,879
quantitative image features from annotated regions of interest and results suggest that automatically derived image
features can predict the prognosis of lung cancer patients and thereby contribute to precision oncology. Beyond classical
cell detection, Yao et al. used a deep subtype cell detection ﬁrst to classify different cell subtypes and then extracted
features from cellular subtype information. Cheng et al. used a deep auto-encoder to cluster cell patches into
different types and then extracted topological features to characterize cell type distributions from ROIs for prediction.
These methods extracted hand-crafted features based on nuclei detection and segmentation and those features were
considered to represent prior knowledge of boundary, region or shape. However, hand-crafted features are limited in
representation power and capability.
Recently, with the advance of deep neural networks, deep learning-based survival models are proposed for seeking
more powerful deep representation . Katzman et al. ﬁrst proposed a deep fully connected network (DeepSurv)
to represent the nonlinear risk function . They demonstrated that DeepSurv outperformed the standard linear Cox
proportional hazard model. Another improvement is deep convolutional survival learning (DeepConvSurv) which
is the ﬁrst attempt to use pathological images in deep survival model . Later, Yao et al. integrated genome
modality with DeepConvSurv for survival prediction using multi-modality data. However, DeepConvSurv is designed
to use pre-selected ROI patches by pathologists from WSIs for convolution operations. A small set of image tiles might
not completely and properly reﬂect the patients’ tumor morphology. Also, those methods perform average pooling to
achieve patient-wise predictions from patch-based results. Such combination cannot effectively aggregate predictions
from patch-level and needs further attention. Thus, it would be much helpful if we can facilitate knowledge discovery
from big whole slide images.
Whole-slide Image Analysis. With detailed and densely annotations on WSIs, nowadays a series of approaches in
whole-slide image analysis have been proposed for a variety of applications including classiﬁcation, detection or
segmentation . Applying deep learning for supervised learning on computational pathology has achieved
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
promising results. However, the applicability of these models in clinical practice remains in questions because of
the wide variance of clinical samples. Extensive and time-consuming human manual annotations in clinical practice
is impossible. Moreover, the success of those applications is built on integrating detailed patch contents and using
labor-extensive annotations which might not be applicable for survival prediction.
To properly address the shortcomings of current models, one possible direction is to consider weakly supervised
manner. Recently, researchers have developed many weakly supervised algorithms to medical images including
weakly-supervised X-rays screening and WSI classiﬁcation . WSI classiﬁcation models are designed
to ﬁnd the most differentiated regions correspond to different tumor types. A two-step approach is usually used and
the ﬁrst step is a classiﬁer at the tile level and then predicted scores for each tile within a WSI are aggregated with
various strategies. However, learning survival from histology and developing prognosis model is considerably more
difﬁcult as risk is often reﬂected from a range of histology patterns that correspond to varying degrees of disease
progression. Tumor heterogeneity plays an important role in cancer study which includes inter-tumor and intra-tumor
heterogeneity . Inter-tumor heterogeneity refers to the differences found between tumors in different patients.
Intra-tumor heterogeneity refers to distinct tumor cell populations within the same tumor specimen. Most recent
weakly-supervised WSI classiﬁcation focused on localizing most differentiated regions correspond to tumor types
across patients. Therefore, they are more likely to capture inter-tumor heterogeneity between tumors or subtype tumors.
Understanding how to label one person’s tumor type may not be enough to study the degree of tumor progression.
The pathophysiology of tumor progression and proliferation is complex and thus a new image-based prognosis model
which can integrate information from heterogeneous tissue regions is a better approach. Additionally, existing weaklysupervised WSI classiﬁcation task is at slide-level, while survival prediction is at patient-level analysis (one patient
might have multiple whole slide images). Devising patient-level decisions from slide-level results is not the objective
of those studies. To achieve survival prediction from whole slide images without using annotations, Zhu et al. 
proposed a patch-based two-stage framework to predict patients’ survival outcomes. Patches are extracted from the
WSIs and clustered to different patterns deﬁned as "phenotypes" according to their visual appearances in the ﬁrst stage.
Then WSISA adopted DeepConvSurv to select important patch clusters and then aggregated those clusters
for ﬁnal prediction. Although this framework has practical merits to consider important patch clusters, it is hard to
incorporate it into state-of-the-art deep learning paradigm as the whole approach has separate steps. In addition, it is
not a scalable solution because the ﬁrst stage will be signiﬁcantly inefﬁcient if more patches are sampled. One recent
work proposed CapSurv by introducing Capsule network . However, CapSurv still has similar issues with
WSISA as the main framework is following the WSISA pipeline. The relationship of tissue patterns on WSI is the great
importance on survival analysis. Li et al. proposed a graph convolutional network (GCN) based method to consider
such relationship of patches in the WSI and then learn effective representation for survival prediction. However, this
method requires detailed graph structure knowledge to construct a complete graph representation for effective GCN
training which is not ﬂexible and needs prior knowledge.
Contributions
Though many works can be found on WSI analysis for segmentation, classiﬁcation and detection, there were limited
works on weakly-supervised learning for survival prediction. Based on the literature review, a method that can adaptively
learn patient-level representations with limited prior knowledge is needed. In this study, we propose a novel framework,
referred to as Deep Attention Multiple-Instance Survival Learning (DeepAttnMISL) for whole slide images. In contrast
to the standard supervised learning, multiple instance learning (MIL) considers a set of bags, each containing multiple
feature vectors referred to as instances. The available label is only assigned to bag-level and labels of individual
instances in the bag are not known. In MIL, not all the instances are necessarily relevant and some of them in the bag
might not be relevant to certain labels. In observation, if the slide is from a low risk patient, most of its tiles might be
benign and or contain low-grade tumor. In contrast, if the slide is from the high risk patient, it must be true that at least
one of all of the possible tiles contains malignant tumor. This formalization of the WSI survival learning problem is an
example of the general standard multiple instance assumption and thus MIL is a good to ﬁt to solve such problem.
Our preliminary work that only using deep multiple instance learning can help achieve better prognosis performance was
 
We introduced attention mechanism into deep multiple instance survival learning. The proposed DeepAttnMISL not
only uses the siamese MI-FCN network to learn features from different phenotype clusters, but also largely improves
performance with Attention-based MIL pooling layer to perform a trainable weighted aggregation. More importantly,
the proposed framework can effectively highlight the prognosis-related clusters and has better interpretability as well as
performance than our preliminary work . The contributions can be summarized as follows.
• Phenotype clusters provide morphology-speciﬁc representation, the proposed DeepAttnMISL ﬁrst extracts
phenotype-level information through a Siamese MIL-based network from patch-level features. The attention
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
mechanism is then used to aggregate these phenotype features into patient-level information with a trainable
weighted average where weights can be fully parameterized by neural networks. Such attention-based
aggregation is much ﬂexible than ﬁxed pooling operators in recent work .
• With the advantage of MIL and attention mechanism, the proposed model has a good interpretability to
ﬁnd important patterns of patients. Those identiﬁed important regions and patches are more likely to be
associated with prognosis and overall the proposed model can achieve better patient-level predictions and
improve prediction performance than our previous work .
• To evaluate the performance of the proposed DeepAttnMISL model, two large WSI datasets on lung and
colorectal cancer are used and extensive experimental results verify the effectiveness.
Our method can efﬁciently exploit and utilize all discriminative patterns in whole slide pathological images to perform
accurate patients’ survival predictions. Additionally, we present results representing a patient’s treatment group to
illustrate how to view the proposed model as a treatment recommender system. Results validate that the proposed model
can accurately model the risk functions of the population and thus guide treatment decisions for improving patient
Sampling on WSIs
Clustering
Attention MIL
Siamese MI-FCN
Aggregation
Figure 1: An overview of the proposed DeepAttnMISL model.
Methodology
Considering a set of N patients, {Xi}, i = 1 . . . N, each patient has the follow-up label (ti, δi) indicating the overall
survival. The observation time ti is either a survival time or a censored time for each patient. δi is the indicator which is
1 for an uncensored instance (death occurs during the study) and 0 for a censored instance. Survival model predicts a
value of a target variable O for a given patient. As we discussed above, patient Xi will have multiple WSIs and our goal
is to predict the corresponding target oi from those imaging data. As we don’t have pixel-level annotations but only
know patient-level information, this weakly-supervised learning can be solved by Multiple Instance Learning (MIL).
In the case of MIL problem, patient X is a bag of instances, X = {x1, ..., xC} and the number of instances C could
vary for different bags. Furthermore, we assume that individual true labels exist for the instances within a bag, i.e.,
y1, ..., yC but those values remain unknown during training. One very important assumption is that neither ordering nor
dependency of instances within a bag and a MIL model must be permutation-invariant. Instances within the bag can be
deﬁned as sampling patches from WSIs and several studies developed MIL-based deep learning approaches
for automated cancer diagnosis and prognosis. In our case, we introduce phenotype cluster as the instance of the bag
instead of individual patch. Cancer histology contains rich phenotypic information that reﬂects underlying molecular
processes and disease progression. Phenotype of the pathological slides is a combination of tissue’s various observable
characteristics. This provides a convenient visual representation of disease aggressiveness. Recent studies have shown
phenotypic information could be useful for prediction of prognosis . The purpose of the proposed framework is
to predict patient outcomes from whole slides images. The study involves partitioning the original slides into a number
of phenotype patterns. Each phenotype describes a type of histology pattern and includes a number of smaller patches
DeepAttnMISL
Fig.1 shows the overview of the proposed Deep Attention Multiple Instance Survival Learning (DeepAttnMISL). In
Multiple Instance Learning, each data sample is a bag of instances and the bag can be seen as one patient in our problem.
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Each patient Xi may contain multiple whole slides and it is not practical to use whole slides as instances due to the
extreme large size. We choose phenotypes instead of raw sampling patches as instances within the bag because it will
considerably reduce the complexity of the problem as the number of heterogeneous patches is actually very huge. By
using phenotype patterns which are constructed by clustering, we can build the model for different types of tissues to
extract morphology-speciﬁc features. To learn patient-level information from phenotype clusters, we design a Multiple
Instance Fully Convolutional Network (MI-FCN) running inside our deep learning architecture with weights being
shared among them as in the siamese architecture. To detect important phenotypes associated with patients’ clinical
outcomes, attention-based MIL pooling layer is used to aggregate phenotype-level representation. The output is the
hazard risk to represent how well for the patient behaves in the population of certain type of diseases.
Sampling and Clustering
At the ﬁrst step, we extract patches from all WSIs belong to the same patient and then cluster them into different
phenotypes. To capture detailed information of the images, those patches are extracted from 20X (0.5 microns per
pixel) objective magniﬁcations and then ﬁxed to 500 × 500 × 3 size. In one whole slide image, usually about 50%
of areas are background and it is easy to select regions to contain tissues rather than background or irregular regions
according to pixel values. Even we only extract tissue patches and ignore background regions, it can still get tens of
thousands of patches per WSI which will result in a huge number of images from the whole dataset. Different from
recent segmentation and detection task in whole slide image analysis, our task is for patient-level decision aggregated
from patch-level results. As pointed out in , training patch-based CNNs for weakly supervised learning is very
time costly (several weeks) and we propose to use features from pre-trained models instead of using CNNs to learn
features from the scratch. We use the pre-trained model (e.g. VGG) from ImageNet to extract features for each
image patch which have more representation power than smaller size (50 × 50) thumbnail images to represent their
phenotypes . Then we adopt K-means clustering to cluster patches based on their deep learning features. Notice
that one patient might have multiple WSIs and we actually perform clustering on patient-level instead of the whole
database. Fig.2 shows one patient’s example and this patient has three WSIs that were sampled from different locations
of the biopsy tissue. The corresponding phenotype clustering are shown in the right and each color means one type of
phenotype clusters. In this example, we chose to cluster 10 phenotype patterns. The results show the effectiveness of
this strategy as we can see similar patches are grouped into the same cluster. This could demonstrate that features from
pre-trained model are capable of identifying patterns of whole slide images and we would expect them to be distinctive
and informative for later survival learning task.
Figure 2: Phenotype patterns visualization after clustering on three WSIs belong to the same patient.
By clustering different patches from all WSIs of the patient into several distinguished phenotype groups, we will
have different phenotype groups with various prediction powers on this patient’s clinical outcome. The proposed
DeepAttnMISL takes phenotypes as multiple inputs and consider their connections for predicting survival outcomes.
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Siamese MI-FCN
After clustering, the patient is a set of phenotype clusters and we design a siamese Multiple Instance Fully Convolutional
Networks (MI-FCN) to learn features from those patterns, similar to the work in . Most existing well-known
pre-trained models were trained based on single-instance bases, and the labels are associated with each image which
is not the case of our problem. We embed multiple sub-networks running inside our deep learning architecture with
weights being shared among them as in the siamese architecture. Each sub-network is based on fully convolutional
neural networks (FCN) that can learn informative representation for individual phenotype of the patient.
The architecture of each Multiple Instance Fully Convolutional Networks (MI-FCN) is shown in Fig.3. The combination
of multiple layers of fully convolutional layers and non-linear activation functions has proven to be a powerful non-linear
feature mapping in multiple instance problem . The reason to use the fully convolutional networks (FCN) without
including any fully connected layers is that FCN is more ﬂexible and can handle any spatial resolution, which is needed
for the considered problem since the number of patch samples in each phenotype varies. For each phenotype, the input
is a set of features from mi patches, can be organized as 1 × mi × d (d is the feature dimension or channel). The
network consists of several layer-pairs of 1 × 1 conv layer and ReLU layer (we show 2 pairs in Fig.3). The global
pooling layer (e.g. average pooling) will be added at the end. For j-th phenotype, its representation is denoted as
rj. The network receives one kind of phenotypes (tensor) as input and it can focus on local information and generate
representation for the phenotype. Since the number of patches in each phenotype varies, the fully convolutional network
is more ﬂexible to handle this scenario.
Instance (Phenotype)
Convolution
Convolution
Local Representation
Figure 3: The network architecture in each MI-FCN.
Aggregation via Attention-based MIL pooling layer
Local representations from MI-FCN encode information of the corresponding phenotype clusters and how to aggregate
them into patient-level representation is one necessary step. Let R = {r1, r2, ..., rC} be one patient with C phenotype
local representations and the goal is to get patient-level representation z. The very straightforward choice is to use
maximum or the mean operator, but drawbacks are very clear that they are pre-deﬁned and non-trainable which might
not be ﬂexible and adjustable to the speciﬁc task. Previous work used weighted average of features from clusters to
get the patient feature but they performed such patient-level aggregation in a separate stage and the whole approach
cannot be trained end-to-end from instance-level to patient-level. A better way to integrate phenotype-level information
is to leverage an attention mechanism that considers the importance of each phenotype. In this paper, we propose to use
the attention-based MIL pooling for aggregation which is ﬂexible and adaptive. By using such pooling operator,
the patient-level representation can be calculated as
exp{w⊤tanh(Vr⊤
j=1 exp{w⊤tanh(Vr⊤
In the weight ak calculation, w ∈RL×1 and V ∈RL×M are trainable parameters. Tangent tanh(.) element-wise
non-linearity is introduced both negative and positive values for proper gradient ﬂow. The attention-based MIL pooling
allows to assign different weights to phenotype clusters within one patient and hence the ﬁnal patient-level representation
could be highly informative for survival prediction. In other words, it should be able to locate key clusters and provide
potential ROIs. Different from traditional attention mechanism that all instances are sequentially dependent ,
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
multiple instance learning assumes all instances are independent. As phenotype in our problem is more natural to be
independent to each other, attention mechanism used in MIL pooling will be beneﬁcial to achieve good results.
Loss Function
After attention-based MIL pooling, we will generate the patient-level aggregation from all local representations. For
i-th patient sample passing through the proposed model, the output of this patient’s hazard risk is denoted as oi. Table
1 presents architecture details of the proposed DeepAttnMISL. Input of our model is the set of patients’ phenotype
features, organized as [(1 × m1 × d), (1 × m2 × d), ..., (1 × mc × d)] where C is the number of phenotypes and mi
means the number of patches in i-th phenotype.
Table 1: The architecture of DeepAttnMISL.
Output size
1 × mi × d
Attention MIL pooling
Fully-Con.
Fully-Con.
Denote the label of the i-th patient as (ti, δi) where ti is the observed time, We assume that censoring data (δ = 0, death
not observed) is non-informative in that, given xi, the event and censoring time for the j-th patient are independent. Let
t1 < t2 < · · · < tN denote the ordered event times. The risk set R(ti) is the set of all individuals who are still under
study. For example, the patient j in risk set has the survival time is equal or larger than ti (tj ≥ti). Conditioned upon
the existence of a unique event at some particular time t the probability that the death event occurs in the patient i is
Σj∈R(ti) exp(oj),
Assuming the patients’ events were statistically independent, the joint probability of all death events conditioned upon
the existence of events at those times is the partial likelihood:
Σj∈R(ti) exp(oj),
The corresponding log partial likelihood is
l = log(L) =
exp(oj)) =
δi(oi −log
The function can be maximized over the network parameters to produce maximum partial likelihood estimates. It is
equivalent to minimize the negative log partial likelihood. We then use the negative log partial likelihood as the loss
function in our model as shown in below
δi(−oi + log
In a simpliﬁed view, the loss function contributes to overall concordance by penalizing any discordance in any values
of higher risk patients if they are greater than lower those of lower risk. Different with other deep models used the
same loss function , the proposed model can better ﬁt realistic patients’ whole slide imaging data and learn
complex interactions using deep multiple instance representation that cover both holistic and local information. Since
patient’s risk is correlated with phenotypes from WSIs, the proposed framework can efﬁciently exploit phenotypes by
deep multiple instance learning and attention mechanism for clinical outcome prediction at patient-level.
Experiments
Dataset Description
To validate the performance of the proposed DeepAttnMISL, we used two very large datasets on lung and colorectal
cancers with high-resolution WSIs. They are the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) and the Molecular and
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Cellular Oncology (MCO) study . NLST is a very large lung cancer dataset collected by the National Cancer
Institute’s Division of Cancer Prevention (DCP) and Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD). The MCO
study is a collection of imaging, specimen, clinical and genetic data from over 1,500 Australian individuals who
underwent curative resection for colorectal cancer from 1994 to 2010. Clinical and pathological data were collected
on all those cases, including follow-up data. The WSIs collection in MCO study consists of more than 1,500 WSIs
representing at least one typical section from each tumour case, stained with Hematoxylin and eosin, and scanned using
a 40x objective. We have different experiment comparison settings on two datasets because we only have annotations
that locate tumor regions in NLST. Both datasets are good for WSI-based models as those models without requiring
ROI labelling but more extensive experiments with ROI-based comparisons can only be made on NLST dataset.
The numbers of WSIs and patients in each dataset are shown in Table 2. State-of-the-art WSI models need to
control the scale of data as they will have signiﬁcant computational issues on the very large number of patches. They
sampled hundreds of patches per WSI and collected around 20K-200K patches in total. One advantage of the proposed
model is the computational efﬁciency because it uses MIL with attention to aggregate 1D deep features from pre-trained
models instead of training patch-based CNNs which is very time costly . For the purpose of training baseline WSI
survival model, we ﬁrst extract in total of 130K and 275K patches for MCO and NLST, respectively. We then sample
more patches on MCO dataset and collect 915K patches and each WSI will have more than 500 patches. MCO study
has more than 1000 patients which is much larger than data used in recent work .
Table 2: The numbers of WSIs, patients, patches, and the average number of patches per WSI extracted in each dataset.
#patches/WSI
Implementation details
For training, we use Adam optimization with weight decay 5 × 10−4. The learning rate is set to 10−4 and the
training monitors the loss on validation dataset and it will early stop if the loss goes increased much. To evaluate the
performances in survival prediction, we take the concordance index (C-index) and area under curve (AUC) as our
evaluation metrics . The C-index quantiﬁes the ranking quality of rankings and is calculated as follows
i∈{1...N|δi=1}
I[fi > fj]
where n is the number of comparable pairs and I[.] is the indicator function. t. is the actual time observation. f. denotes
the corresponding risk. The value of C-index ranges from 0 to 1. The larger the value is, the better the model predicts.
MCO results
Settings and Parameters
To see effects from phenotype patterns, we tested different cluster numbers changing from 6 to 12. We split the data into
80% training and 20% testing. 10% of training data will be used as validation data for achieving early stop training. We
would like to note that the number of phenotype clusters is the maximum number that allows each patient sample can
have. The proposed model is ﬂexible to handle patients with fewer patterns (e.g. smaller biopsy tissue). We implement
this by setting the corresponding weight ak to zero if there are no patches in this cluster. To evaluate the use of different
pooling ways, we built two baselines by replacing attention MIL pooling layer in DeepAttnMISL with commonly used
Max and Mean pooling layer, and we indicate them as "DeepMIL+ Max/Mean" below. Table 3 presents results of each
model. We ﬁrst notice DeepAttnMISL can achieve best results in all cases which demonstrate attention MIL pooling is
more ﬂexible and better than ﬁxed pooling operators. Second, when the phenotype is set to large values, results get
worse which show more clusters actually cannot guarantee prediction beneﬁts.
The basic MI-FCN network of our DeepAttnMISL consists of one convlolutional layer, one ReLU layer, one pooling
layer. We study the effects of different number of convolution and ReLu layer-pairs and report results in Table 4.
For the 1 layer, we used 64 ﬁlters in the convlolutional layer. We used {2048, 64} number of ﬁlters in 2 layers and
{2048, 1024, 64} for 3 layers setting, respectively. From the table, we decide to choose one convolutional-ReLU layer
pair with Global Average Pooling in MI-FCN network.
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Table 3: Performances with different number of phenotypes.
DeepAttnMISL
DeepMIL + Max
DeepMIL + Mean
Table 4: Results under different network conﬁgurations on testing data. The cluster number is set to 6.
Global Average Pooling
Global Max Pooling
To validate the effectiveness of Siamese, we then remove the Siamese network and only use attention pooling layer on
input features. In this case, no phenotype clusters are considered. This scenario will be the direct application of attention
aggregation without using phenotype clusters . 5 fold cross-validation is performed with the cluster number 6 on
MCO-130K. Results can be found in Table 5. We can see the overall performance is not good as the DeepAttnMISL
which means the importance of Siamese network. This validates the effectiveness of phenotype clusters in Siamese
network. The ﬁnal c-index across 5 folds is 0.542 ± 0.022 for model without Siamese and 0.595 ± 0.036 for model
with Siamese, respectively. Results suggest the usefulness of phenotype patterns and the Siamese architecture.
Table 5: Validation of Siamese on MCO-130K dataset.
No Siamese
To validate effects of different components, we add more evaluations by changing encoder/clustering part, and results
can be found in the Table 6. The more advanced InceptionV3 model is tested and we also introduce spectral
clustering as the alternative method for Kmeans. All other settings and architectures are kept the same. Details about
each fold can be seen in the Table 6. For model with InceptionV3 and Kmeans clustering, C-index result is 0.598±0.054
on 5-fold cross validation. When changing Kmeans clustering to spectral clustering, the performance is 0.593 ± 0.032.
Compared with the model using VGG-16 and Kmeans clustering (0.595 ± 0.036), performances from different variants
of models are quite similar. Therefore, we decide to use VGG-16 and Kmeans clustering for comparisons.
Table 6: Results with different feature extractor and clustering on MCO-130K dataset.
InceptionV3+k
InceptionV3+sp
We also try with the more advanced gating mechanism together with tanh(.) non-linearity in eq (2). Results on
MCO-130K are reported in Table 7. We can ﬁnd gated-attention and plain attention mechanism behave similarly in
different phenotype cluster settings but the plain attention is slightly better.
Table 7: Results of different attention mechanisms on MCO-130K dataset.
Gated-Attention
0.596 (0.029)
0.595 (0.036)
0.586 (0.043)
0.599 (0.049)
0.561 (0.048)
0.585 (0.036)
0.579 (0.031)
0.591 (0.026)
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Comparisons
WSISA is one representative WSI-based survival learning but it only extracts features from WSIs and needs
a separate survival learning to get ﬁnal predictions. We choose three top survival models according to settings in
WSISA , they are Lasso-Cox , En-Cox and MTLSA . As WSISA has the computational issue when
there are too many patches in the whole dataset and thus the scale of 100K-200K patches is acceptable for experiments.
We have a another collection of patches with around 1 million patches to see effects from the patch scale but only
perform our model on this scale because training with WSISA is not endurable.
Our preliminary work DeepMISL has shown the effectiveness of using both global and local representation from
Multiple Instance Learning can beneﬁt survival prediction. However, the model still treats phenotype clusters equally
and cannot recognize clusters that contribute more on patients’ survival. We perform 5 fold cross-validation and
report the average values of C-index and AUC on Table 8 and 9, respectively. From both tables, one can see that the
proposed method achieves best results than models using WSISA features in all cluster number settings on MCO-130k.
Improvements can be related to the following differences. First, clustering is performed on patient-wise while recent
WSI-based approaches need to cluster on all patches from patients of the database. Because WSISA 
needs independent DeepConvSurv to select important clusters and it has to divide the whole dataset into different types
by clustering on all patches. DeepMISL can combine both local and bag representation with MIL but it is still
unable to treat phenotype clusters differently which will limit its use on larger datasets. With the advantage of MIL and
attention mechanism, the proposed DeepAttnMISL can easily ﬁnd important instances (clusters) within the bag are
more likely to achieve better patient-level predictions. There is no need to perform clustering on the whole dataset. A
trainable and adaptive attention-based MIL pooling in DeepAttnMISL can adjust to a task and data which could help
succeed in calculating the better patient representation. Increases with 1%-3% are observed when we use more patches
from MCO-1M data and this reminds us more patches can beneﬁt predictions but actually cannot offer signiﬁcant
improvements. This demonstrates the robustness of the proposed DeepAttnMISL that is not rely on the number of
sampling patches.
Table 8: C-index values of the proposed model and WSISA with different settings.
DeepAttnMISL
W-LassoCox
Table 9: AUC values of the proposed model and WSISA with different settings.
DeepAttnMISL
W-LassoCox
Fig.4 and Fig.5 present boxplots of C-index and AUC values from each model with different phenotype cluster numbers.
We only show captions in the top left ﬁgure and others will also share this description. We can see that results of our
method on MCO-1M and MCO-130K don’t have signiﬁcant differences. This shows sampling strategies will not affect
ﬁnal results of the proposed method in cross-validation settings. One can observe that our models consistently perform
better than WSISA models across different phenotype cluster numbers.
Fig.6 visualizes clustered phenotype patterns and selected patches from DeepAttnMISL and WSISA on MCO-130K
when cluster number is set as 6. The ﬁrst row shows results from DeepAttnMISL while the second one presents results
from WSISA. In MCO-130K, around 100 patches per WSI are sampled and it clearly can see that clustering based on
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
MCO_130K 1M
DeepAttnMISL
Figure 4: Boxplots of C-index values with different numbers of phenotype patterns.
MCO_130K 1M
DeepAttnMISL
Figure 5: Boxplots of AUC values with different numbers of phenotype patterns.
VGG-16 features is capable of identifying patches from different layers of WSI and grouping similar patches into the
same category. The most important advantage of DeepAttnMISL is its good interpretability and we create a heatmap
by showing the corresponding attention weight of each phenotype cluster. We rescaled the attention weights using
k = (ak −min(a))/(max(a) −min(a)). Red color indicates the highest attention weight while blue means the
lowest values. From the obtained heatmap, we can see the proposed approach can identify higher risk regions properly
because most of patches with high attention weights are from tumor regions. When we look at selected patches from
WSISA, we can observe that many patches from non-tumor regions are also selected. That is because WSISA selects
clusters based on patches from the whole database and thus it cannot guarantee reliable selection on the speciﬁc patient
due to the heterogeneity across patients.
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
DeepAttnMISL
Heatmaps from DeepAttnMISL
Selected Patches from WSISA
Phenotype patterns
Figure 6: Comparison of phenotype patterns distribution in the ﬁrst column. The second column shows heatmap and
selected patches from the proposed model and WSISA on MCO-130K, respectively.
More clear visualizations can be found in Fig.7 on MCO-1M set and more patches (about 1000) are sampled per WSI.
The ﬁrst column shows phenotype patterns from the proposed model with different numbers. The second column shows
the corresponding heatmaps. Attention mechanism in DeepAttnMISL allows to easily interpret the provided decision in
terms of instance-level labels. From heatmaps, we can see results from c = 6 and c = 8 look better as most patches
from cancerous regions are given by high attention weights.
To better visually validate the effect of attention mechanism, we collect and examine the attention weights as well as
their corresponding patch images on MCO-1M data in Fig.8. The bottom shows randomly selected patches from each
phenotype and the frame colors of patches correspond to pattern colors in Fig.8-(b). We use threshold as 0.8 to only
show patterns with higher attention weights in Fig.8-d. Each color represents each phenotype pattern of the whole
slide image and we can see the proposed model has higher interest on patches more related to tumor regions. Relative
low attention weights are given to normal tissue regions. More surprisingly, the model can also give low attentions on
background regions as they don’t provide any information and are noisy images. Fig.9 shows another example. From
the ﬁgure, we can see most patches from tumor regions are found and our model can successfully assign higher attention
weight for such pattern. For patches with relatively less complex structures and textures, our model can identify them as
not very important regions by giving lower attention weights.
Lung Cancer dataset results
Baseline models
As we have annotations on NLST dataset, we can conduct more extensive experiments with ROI-based survival models.
Following the recent framework , we extracted 10 dense image patches from ROIs and calculated hand-crafted
features using CellProﬁler which serves as a state-of-the-art medical image feature extracting and quantitative
analysis tool. A total of 1,795 quantitative features were obtained from each image tile. Then we averaged those
features across different patches for each patient. These types of image features include cell shape, size, texture of the
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Phenotype patterns
Figure 7: Phenotype patterns clustering visualizations and the corresponding heatmaps from the proposed model on
cells and nuclei, as well as the distribution of pixel intensity in the cells and nuclei. We can summarize the comparison
methods into ﬁve categories as follows:
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Figure 8: (a) Original WSI, (b) Phenotype patterns distribution, (c) Heatmaps from our model, (d) Selected patches
with highest attention weights. The bottom shows representative patches from each phenotype.
• Cox models: The Cox proportional hazards model is the most commonly used semi-parametric model in
survival analysis. Two regularized Cox models l1-norm (LASSO-Cox) and boosting cox model (Coxboost) are compared in experiments.
• Parametric censored regression models: PCR models formulates the joint probability of the uncensored and
censored instances as a product of death density function and survival functions, respectively . We choose
Weibull, Logistic distribution to approximate the survival data.
• MTLSA: Multi-Task Learning model for Survival Analysis (MTLSA) reformulates the survival model
into a multi-task learning problem.
• WSISA: WSISA can learn effective features from WSIs . We train LassoCox and MTLSA using WSISA
learned features as they are top models based on their report. To investigate performance from pre-trained
network, a ResNet34 model is used and then ﬁne-tuned as the backbone network in WSISA.
• DeepMISL: Deep Multiple Survival Learning combined both local and global representation to predict
outcomes .
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Figure 9: (a) Original WSI, (b) Phenotype patterns distribution, (c) Heatmaps from our model, (d) Selected patches
with highest attention weights. The bottom shows representative patches from each phenotype.
We reported results from a few possible numbers of phenotypes, such as {6, 8, 10, 12} on the testing dataset. From the
Table 10, we can see models using fewer clusters are unable to achieve good results. The reason might be patches of
lung cancer patients are very heterogeneous and it is relative difﬁcult to learn survival-related representations from fewer
phenotypes. Results suggest the number of 10 achieves slightly better predictions which is consistent with ﬁndings in
WSISA . Thus, we decide to choose to cluster 10 phenotypes in our model. Other parameters are kept the same
with settings in MCO experiments.
Table 10: Performances with different number of phenotypes.
Table 11 shows C-index and AUC values by various survival regression methods on 5-fold cross validation. It shows
the prediction power of the proposed method compared with different survival models. One can see that the proposed
method achieves both highest C-index and AUC values which present the best prediction performance among all
methods. From the table, baseline models using hand-crafted features perform not well due to following reasons: 1)
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
the limitation of local information provided by the patches extracted from the ROI using hand-crafted features; 2) the
non-effective aggregation way to represent the heterogeneity of tumor and patient from patch-based results. Instead of
using a small set of patches and human-designed features, the proposed method can effectively learn complex deep bag
representation from phenotype patterns to predict patient survival outcomes.
Table 11: Performance comparison of the proposed methods and other existing related methods using C-index values
on NLST dataset.
Deep Learning
DeepAttnMISL
0.6963 (0.0660)
0.7143 (0.0541)
DeepMISL 
0.6476 (0.0698)
0.6693 (0.0866)
Finetuned-WSISA-LassoCox 
0.6123 (0.0216)
0.6427 (0.0575)
Finetuned-WSISA-MTLSA 
0.6428 (0.0259)
0.6963 (0.0668)
WSISA-LassoCox 
0.5996 (0.0750)
0.5957 (0.0674)
WSISA-MTLSA 
0.6305 (0.0575)
0.6479 (0.0936)
Lasso-Cox 
0.4842 (0.0508)
0.4903 (0.1011)
Cox-boost 
0.5474 (0.0370)
0.5271 (0.0386)
Parametric models
Logistic 
0.4998 (0.0881)
0.5013 (0.1146)
Weibull 
0.5577 (0.0395)
0.5618 (0.0976)
Multi-task based
MTLSA 
0.5053 (0.0509)
0.5362 (0.0416)
Ranking based
BoostCI 
0.5595 (0.0610)
0.5487 (0.0532)
WSISA achieves better results than baseline models which shows the good representative ability of features from WSISA.
However, WSISA needs a separate stage to train several DeepConvSurv models independently and will discard some
phenotypes in the ﬁnal stage, the performance actually depends on how well to select important clusters and WSISA
still has the chance to lose in selecting survival-related clusters for a good ﬁnal survival prediction. To investigate results
from pre-trained model, we replaced the original 2DCNN network of WSISA by using a pre-trained ResNet34 . The
whole model will be ﬁne-tuned following the same process. It is clear to see improved C-index which can demonstrate
that ﬁne-tuned models can bring beneﬁts but our DeepAttnMISL is still better than ﬁnetuned-WSISA by a large margin.
When introducing MIL into survival learning, DeepMISL and the proposed model can improve predictions from WSISA
by C-index metric. Instead of selecting phenotypes, DeepMISL and the proposed model are designed to consider
all possible patterns. Performance is further improved when we use the more ﬂexible attention mechanism to learn
informative and discriminate patterns. This architecture makes the proposed method can better learn heterogeneous
information encoded in WSIs which will make it more practical and have better intepretability than DeepMISL in real
applications.
We pick one patient as the example to show visualization results. Fig.10 presents this patient’s all WSIs and the
corresponding tumor region annotations. Fig.11-12 show results from the proposed model and WSISA, respectively. In
Fig.11, the ﬁrst row shows attention weights heatmaps and the second row shows phenotype pattern distributions on
original WSIs. The bottom presents randomly selected patches with higher attention weights (patches with red colors in
heatmaps). It is clear to see that most patches from tumor regions are highlighted with high attentions while patches
from normal tissues are treated with lower attentions. Compared with results from WSISA shown in Fig.12, we can see
that WSISA will miss many tumor patches and select many normal patches as discriminative patterns. Patches from
cancerous regions can be grouped in similar clusters but not all of them will be selected by WSISA as the selection is
performed via DeepConvSurv on all patches of the database. Selected phenotypes are more likely discriminative for the
whole database with all patients and they are not well interpreted for the speciﬁc patient.
Figure 10: WSI Annotations of one example patient.
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
Phenotype patterns
Figure 11: Phenotype pattern distribution and the corresponding heatmaps from the proposed model on three WSIs of
the same patient. The bottom shows patches from phenotypes with high attention values.
Phenotype patterns
Selected patterns
Figure 12: Phenotype pattern distribution and selected patterns from WSISA. Missing tumor patches can be observed
from selected patterns by WSISA.
Given the trained survival models, we can use the estimated testing risk scores to classify patients into low or high-risk
group for personalized treatments. Two groups are classiﬁed by the median of predicted risk scores. We evaluate if
those models can correctly classify death patients (uncensored data) into two groups since uncensored data is more
informative. Patients with longer survival time should be classiﬁed into low risk group and vice versa. If the model
cannot correctly distinguish high and low risk death patients, two average death times should be very close. We plot
Kaplan-Meier survival curves on one testing fold in Fig.13. From the ﬁgure, one can see that the proposed model can
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
DeepAttnMISL
Finetuned-WSISA-MTLSA
Figure 13: Kaplan-Meier survival curves of different models for one testing fold. High risk (great than median) groups
are plotted as green lines, and low risk (less than or equal to median) groups are plotted as red lines. The x axis shows
the time in days and y axis presents the probability of overall survival. Log rank p value is shown on each ﬁgure. "+"
means the censored patient.
more successfully group testing death patients into two groups than other methods in all datasets. The log rank test is
conducted to test the difference of two curves. It is shown that the proposed method can achieve the most signiﬁcant log
rank test outcome (p-value = 4.527 × 10−3) while some of others do not reach statistical signiﬁcances. Kaplan-Meier
curves suggest that the proposed comprehensive prediction model can offer personalized risk scores which can better
group individuals into two groups. The proposed model has a signiﬁcant impact on population survival times. It can
be used as a recommendation system for offering personalized treatments by determining the relationship between a
patient’s whole slide pathological images and his or her risk of an event (death).
p value of log-rank test less than 0.05 is considered signiﬁcant and p < 0.1 is marginal signiﬁcant. For ﬁve testing folds,
our model can achieve four signiﬁcant results and one marginal signiﬁcant result with p = 0.09, DeepMISL achieves
two signiﬁcant results and one marginal signiﬁcant with p = 0.07, Finetuned-WSISA-MTLSA achieves one signiﬁcant
result and three marginal signiﬁcant results. Logistic model achieves only one signiﬁcant result (p = 0.049), shown
in Fig.13. BoostCI has one fold signiﬁcant result (p = 0.0123). All other baseline models cannot have signiﬁcant
results on all testing folds. Overall, deep learning models perform well to achieve signiﬁcant results than models with
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 24, 2020
hand-crafted features. The proposed model achieves the most number of signiﬁcant results which could validate that
the predictor from our model is an important prognostic factor which could be used for a good patient risk stratiﬁcation.
Ensemble Models
We investigated if ensemble models could beneﬁt ﬁnal results. During each fold, we train ﬁve models and then average
prediction score on the corresponding testing fold. The maximum cluster number is set to 6 and 10, respectively. Table
12 shows C-index values using single and ensemble models on MCO-1M and NLST dataset. The average c-index
across ﬁve folds is 0.606 for MCO single and 0.600 for MCO ensemble, respectively. On NLST dataset, the averaged
c-index of single model is 0.696 and the ensemble model is 0.695. From the table, it can be seen that ensemble models
cannot provide additional power for predictions.
Table 12: Results of single and ensemble models
MCO single
MCO ensemble
NLST single
NLST ensemble
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a deep multiple instance model to directly learn survival patterns from gigapixel images
without annotations which make it more easily applicable in large scale cancer dataset. Compared to existing imagebased survival models, the developed framework can handle various numbers and sizes whole slide images among
different patients. It can learn holistic information of the patient using bag representations and achieve much better
performance compared to the ROI patch based methods. Moreover, the ﬂexible and interpretable attention-based MIL
pooling can overcome drawbacks from ﬁxed aggregation techniques in state-of-the-art survival learning models. We
showed that our approach provides an interpretation of the clinical outcome prediction by presenting reasonable ROIs
which is very important in such practical application. Additionally, We illustrated the proposed method can provide
personalized treatment for patients and can be used by doctors to guide their treatment decisions for improving patient
lifespan. With future research and development, the proposed approach has the potential to be applied in other tumor
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by US National Science Foundation IIS-1718853, the CAREER grant IIS-1553687
and Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) award (RP190107).
The authors would like to thank the National Cancer Institute for access to NCI’s data collected by the National Lung
Screening Trial. The statements contained herein are solely of the authors and do not represent or imply concurrence or
endorsement by NCI.