AN EDUCATIONAL MODEL FOR ASYNCHRONOUS E-LEARNING. A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
An Educational Model for Asynchronous
E-Learning. A case study in Higher Technology
doi:10.3991/ijac.v3i1.987
D. Papachristos1, N. Alafodimos1, K. Arvanitis2, K. Vassilakis3, M. Kalogiannakis4, P. Kikilias1, E. Zafeiri1
1TEI of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece
2Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece
3Technological Educational Institute of Crete, Crete, Greece
4University of Crete, Crete, Greece
Abstract—Nowadays, the use of Web based Education
(WbE) in distance learning education is considered to be an
innovative method of learning. Supporters argue that WbE
renews educational practices through the use of computers
and their applied methodology, as well as the technologies
provided by the use of the internet. By consciously renewing
the educational material the creation of a flexible structure
is achieved, which promotes the individualization of
learning. In this article we study a WbE application and
propose a model that aims at delivering online technological
classes, offering a flexible use of means and tools.
Additionally, this model allows a synthesis of selected
bibliography that covers the issue cognitively, develops
cooperative spirit and individualise the learning procedure.
Education,
Asynchronous
Distance learning, Higher Technology Education.
INTRODUCTION – THEAORATICAL FRAMEWORK
The flexibility in distance education has been put forth
as an example of how citizens will be given larger
possibilities to study and educate themselves. Open and
Distant Learning (ODL), provides new opportunities for
teaching and learning and a sufficient variety of digitalbased means for both students and teachers. In ODL
platforms, students must be at the centre of their own
learning (student-based learning) and these systems must
be well designed to facilitate learning process.
ODL offers new educational environments, where
anyone can learn anytime anyplace and get quality
education. In ODL the instruction could be either
“synchronous”, meaning that the communication between
teacher and learner is simultaneous, or “asynchronous”
which means that the student is able to interact at any
time, without teacher's presence. The ODL instruction
could also be based on a mixture of the above two modes.
There are quite a few pedagogic models and learning -
instructive theories. The most popular of them are the
following , , , , :
The Behaviouristic model is based on the idea that the
learning procedure is a form of observed behavior and the
outcome of a response to some kind of stimulus (Stimulus
→Reaction).
The Cognitive approach model. This model focuses on
the internal cognitive processes performed within the
students’ mind during the learning procedure.
The model of Constructivism. Within this model the
students should have or acquire the ability of managing
the applied learning procedure. As a result, the learning
procedure is driven by and evolved through the social
interaction during lectures. The teacher creates and uses
this type of knowledge attained by actions adjusted to the
class delivery content.
established
communities. This model is based upon two principles:
firstly, the facts that knowledge can be found and acquired
within an authentic environment-framework, so students
attain knowledge through empirical circumstances. The
second principle lies on the presumption that new
knowledge and learning can be found within social
communities and therefore social interaction and
teamwork cooperation are considered to be of significant
importance.
By comparing the most recent pedagogical models, as
studied by Merrill , it appears that the most
effective learning environments are those focusing on
problem solving (problem-centered) and considering that
there are distinctive phases within the learning procedure.
Furthermore, Merrill suggests the following “Basic
Teaching Principles” (Figure 1), according to which, the
learning procedure is promoted when: (a) students focus
on solving substantial problems, (b) students’ previous
experience and knowledge are activated and used as the
basis for new knowledge, (c) new knowledge and skills
are presented to the students, (d) new knowledge and
skills are applied by the students, and (e) attained
knowledge and skills are incorporated to the students’
learning environment.
Figure 1. Merrill’s basic teaching principles
http:www.i-jac.org
AN EDUCATIONAL MODEL FOR ASYNCHRONOUS E-LEARNING. A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
It must be noted that according to Merrill’s analysis
learning is promoted when the instruction demonstrates
what is to be learned, rather than merely giving
information about what is to be learned, when learners (a)
are required to use their new knowledge or skill to solve
problems and (b) are encouraged to integrate the new
knowledge or skill into their everyday life. In other words,
students as individuals attain knowledge rather than
participating to an educational group . However, there
are several other pedagogical models explicitly focusing
on learning, practice and collaboration communities ,
 , . In addition, there is a new predisposition
towards more social–constructivism learning approaches
embraced by the educational community , .
According to Bransford, Brown and Cocking, 
the educational procedure must focus on students
assessment, the learning material and the learning
community . The information, data and facts provided
can be rather effected and interpreted, when the social
reconstructed
procedure . Nowadays, the non-linear model, mostly
based on the model of constructivism, is widely used in
designing educational systems , , , , ,
Based on the above theoretical framework we develop a
schema for asynchronous distance teaching technological
infrastructures
Technological courses have particular teaching demands
especially for the laboratorial practice. The proposed
educational
contemporary
educational and consists of two sectors: the theoretical and
the laboratorial.
EDUCATIONAL MODEL
The proposed model concerns the teaching of
technological cognitive modules. The technological class
or teaching material includes not only theory and servile
work, but also concretisation skills that presuppose the use
of all senses. In addition, the process of learning in such a
cognitive environment cannot involve simple activities,
such as memorization, rationalisation and rethinking. It
should also include more composite processes, such as
creation, experimentation and feedback. An educational
model consists of two components (a) the learning frame
and (b) the teaching frames. Therefore the stages of
creation of the WbE model are clearly illustrated in the
following diagram (Figure 2):
Figure 2. Stages of the creation of the educational model for WBE
To implement the WbE model, an infrastructure should
be developed according to model’s specifications in order
technological
(Asynchronous
Education of Technological Courses System - AETCS).
The proposed model has the following characteristics:
Educational Material. In cases of asynchronous
distance teaching as WbE, the material does not depend
only on a single textbook, but on many resources in
different content forms including: course material,
bibliographic sources and self-assessment material .
Tools. The model uses in digital form educational
software and tools as well, to develop, present and
distribute educational material on line in various types
(text, pictures, animation and video).
Educational
educational methods are applied according to the
requirements of asynchronous education, which comprise
the base of the instructive framework of the proposed
model. More specifically, depending on the subject of
each course, the following means are used: lecture (text,
forms, pictures and sound), demonstration (video,
animation), individual work (email), group work (email,
forums, chatting), discussion with the instructor (via email
or on the phone) and assessment.
Time of Education. At the beginning of each course an
overall course time load is suggested to the students. The
allocated time varies for each course depending on the
content that includes studies, practice, and assessment.
This time is not obligatory for the students and it can be
increased or decreased depending on the rhythm of
learning (asynchronous use of the proposed model).
However, it should not exceed a concrete time limit that is
set by the teacher for the overall assessment of the course.
Learning Theories. Each course is conditioned
according to the training frame of the proposed model.
More specifically, the model of cognitive approach and
the constructive process of teaching material based on
Blooms theory are applied in the content of the
educational
Furthermore,
cooperation via group or project work is promoted during
the instructive process.
MODEL STRUCTURE
For the design of the Asynchronous Education of
Technological Courses Model (AETCM) elements of
relevant published theoretical models for asynchronous
education were used , , . The offered courses
will function as completely autonomous parts in the
course’s web site (AETCS), so that each learner can take
up the course without attending the corresponding
conventional class.
The AETCM consists of two sectors: the theoretical
sector that includes the theory and the laboratorial sector
that includes the hands-on (practical) education of the
technological course. For the design of the course,
elements from relevant models of asynchronous education
were used including , , , , .
AETCM’s general structure is outlined in the following
diagram (Figure 3):
Learning Framework
Teaching Framework
Educational model
ASYNCHRONOUS EDUCATION
of TECHNOLOGICAL COURSES
MODEL (AETCM)
iJAC – Volume 3, Issue 1, February 2010
AN EDUCATIONAL MODEL FOR ASYNCHRONOUS E-LEARNING. A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
Figure 3. AETCM structure. TLS: Teaching Learning Section, VLS:
Virtual Lab Section, Pr: Practice, Fb: Feedback, Eval: Evaluation.
The Teaching Learning Section consists of three
educational levels:
Basic infrastructure level - BIL (obligatory, when
failing the diagnostic test). This level is obligatory for
those who lack adequate knowledge. Therefore, it
provides educational material properly organized in
progressive and linear structure, to cover the gaps of
knowledge.
Educational level - EL (obligatory). It consists of
courses in linear order. These courses are mandatory for
all students, since they provide the necessary educational
material of the technological course. Each course is
educational
sequentially. The student should complete the previous
unit in order to continue to the next one (typical
procedure). At the end of each course the students are
Specialisation level - SL (optional). This level is
addressed to students who wish to broaden their
knowledge, provided that their teachers advise them to do
so. Educational material structured in units with detailed
analysis and exercises is provided. Also, tutorial courses
are offered to enhance analysis and look into case studies.
The structure of Teaching Learning Section (TLS) is
illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4. TLS structure. BIL: Basic Infrastructure Level, EL:
Educational Level, SL: Specialisation Level
At the end of each level an obligatory final test is
conducted.
The Virtual Lab Section is suggested to have the
following structure (Figure 5):
Figure 5. Virtual Lab structure
Teaching-Learning Part (TLP) has the same structure
as the TLS in the theoretical sector. In Simulator part
laboratorial educational software for simulation is
provided for laboratorial practice in digital environment.
The Practice Section provides scripts of laboratorial
exercises for Simulator Use by the students.
The Evaluation Section has the same structure for both
Teaching-Leaning and Virtual Lab sections (TLS &VLS)
as it appears in the following figure (Figure 6):
Figure 6. Structure of Evaluation dept
The assessment of the students is conducted through
courses tests and level test. The former is based on the
courses material, whereas the latter assesses the material
of the level overall.
Feedback Section deals with the communication
between the instructor and the students. It has the form of
partial bidirectional communication and serves the
following: (a) transfer of assessment tests and results, (b)
transfer of questions, comments regarding the course, (c)
evaluation of the system from the students and (d)
depiction of educational directives in a forum by the
teacher. The data above is transferred by e-mail via
The structure of Feedback Section is illustrated in
Figure 7 and it is the same for both sectors:
Figure 7. Structure of feedback section
Theoretical
Laboratorial
Output from model
Output from section
Teaching Learning Part
Level test
Courses test
Output from section
Transfer part
e-mail/telephone
Output of section
Internet or telephone communication
Evaluation/feedback
Output for model
http:www.i-jac.org
AN EDUCATIONAL MODEL FOR ASYNCHRONOUS E-LEARNING. A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
Transfer part deals with the collection of evaluation
forms, texts with comments, indications, additional
educational material from the teacher (it can be done
electronically). The part of email/telephone deals with the
online communication between the instructor and
CASE STUDY
The proposed example of model materialization was
used in higher Technological Educational Level and
involves the teaching of a cognitive technological module.
Teaching can take place either in a real class assisted with
online supporting material, or exclusively remotely
through the internet.
More specifically, a course in Computer Numerical
Controls (CNC) is offered online by the department of
Automation of the Technological Educational Institute of
Piraeus. The course is offered in the 7th semester and has
both theoretical and laboratorial parts. The course includes
an introduction to machine-tools of numerical control
using a computer. The cognitive subject of the course is
very useful in industry in the area of flexible
manufacturing automated systems.
The theoretical sector of the course deals with
operational principles, design, control and applications of
machine-tools CNC. The laboratorial sector deals with the
planning of such machine-tools with the use of a
simulator. The simulator used is the SYBA-CNC for
asynchronous
infrastructures that usually offer predefined development
environments, technological teaching deals most with
fieldwork and rehearsal and it is based on specific tools
(e.g. simulator). The implementation of the model can be
done in any programming environment for the creation of
web pages (e.g. MS Frontpage). For the production of
educational material the various information technology
tools can be used such as MS-Office, OpenOffice,
Flashmedia, Video processing software, Photoshop,
Director, CoolEdit, 3D Max etc.
The technical resources used for the materialization of
the AETCS and the overall structure of the system are
given in the following diagram (Figure 8).
Figure 8. Technical resources of application
The architectural structure of the application is based on
the proposed model and the contents are presented
hierarchically according to model’s specifications. Each
course includes theoretical and laboratorial sectors and
practice, feedback and evaluation sections. Additionally
there are sections for instructions, system’s usage and
navigation demos. The architecture of the pilot application
is illustrated in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Architectural Structure of pilot course
The storyboard navigation in the pilot case study is both
ways interactive. It is very similar to an electronic book
enriched with advanced multimedia content such as:
pictures, sound, text and video.
The design of the interface takes into account easy
navigation and ergonomic usage. It can be implemented
using any web design software tool. More specifically it
 simplicity,
 clarity,
 proportional dimensions
 proper hierarchy and
 balance.
The text in the web pages:
 offers good readability,
 uses legends with different color and bold writing,
 has black color in main text,
 uses bold, italic and color in keywords,
 uses tables and
 includes multimedia content.
The design of the pilot interface is illustrated in the
following figure (Figure 10):
Figure 10. Structure’s interface of model.
Main Web site: CNC
Technologies course
Diagnostic test
theoretical
Web site Lab
Virtual Lab
Εvaluation
CNC Technologies
Text, photos, animation,
video, diagrams, etc.
(media material &
Options for each level
Educational material
(FrontPage)
Documents (Word
PowerPoint etc)
Multimedia
(FlashMedia,
Video, photos etc)
Interaction
iJAC – Volume 3, Issue 1, February 2010
AN EDUCATIONAL MODEL FOR ASYNCHRONOUS E-LEARNING. A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
CONCLUSION
The integration of information and telecommunication
technologies has promoted distance learning by providing
learning environments that are accessible to individuals at
any time and any place. The issue of facilitating people to
“learn how to learn” has been an active research area, and
now there is a growing acceptance of the fact that
understanding the way students learn is the key to improve
the educational process.
Within the last few years, e-learning has changed not
only the technology of the educational environment, but
also the educational paradigm itself. The advantages of elearning are twofold: (a) both teachers and students can
overcome time and space restrictions, and (b) the students
can study individually and cooperatively in parallel.
Consequently, e-learning systems have to be designed in a
way to cope with different learning styles and students’
goals and learning rhythm offering user profiles.
The proposed educational model and its concretisation
system will focus on a learning style trying to promote
flexibility,
cooperativeness
individualization.
Furthermore, a specialized environment of technological
cognitive subjects will be offered, which plays an
important role in distance and asynchronous learning. The
main objective of the designers is the completion of this
model, the further development of the concretisation
system and its evaluation in factual action.
Online collaborative learning extends teaching beyond
the classroom and provides individual learning. It creates
relationships between students, which promote their
learning through collaborative educational environments
and their own learning pace.