Dense-Captioning Events in Videos
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
{ranjaykrishna, kenjihata, fren, feifeili, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu
Most natural videos contain numerous events. For example, in a video of a “man playing a piano”, the video might
also contain “another man dancing” or “a crowd clapping”. We introduce the task of dense-captioning events,
which involves both detecting and describing events in a
video. We propose a new model that is able to identify all
events in a single pass of the video while simultaneously
describing the detected events with natural language. Our
model introduces a variant of an existing proposal module
that is designed to capture both short as well as long events
that span minutes. To capture the dependencies between
the events in a video, our model introduces a new captioning module that uses contextual information from past
and future events to jointly describe all events. We also
introduce ActivityNet Captions, a large-scale benchmark
for dense-captioning events. ActivityNet Captions contains
20k videos amounting to 849 video hours with 100k total descriptions, each with it’s unique start and end time. Finally,
we report performances of our model for dense-captioning
events, video retrieval and localization.
1. Introduction
With the introduction of large scale activity datasets , it has become possible to categorize videos into
a discrete set of action categories . For
example, in Figure 1, such models would output labels like
playing piano or dancing. While the success of these methods is encouraging, they all share one key limitation: detail.
To elevate the lack of detail from existing action detection
models, subsequent work has explored explaining video semantics using sentence descriptions . For
example, in Figure 1, such models would likely concentrate
on an elderly man playing the piano in front of a crowd.
While this caption provides us more details about who is
playing the piano and mentions an audience, it fails to recognize and articulate all the other events in the video. For
example, at some point in the video, a woman starts singing
along with the pianist and then later another man starts
An elderly man is playing the piano
in front of a crowd.
Another man starts dancing to the
music, gathering attention from the
Eventually the elderly man finishes
playing and hugs the woman, and
the crowd applaud.
A woman walks to the piano and
briefly talks to the the elderly man.
The woman starts singing along
with the pianist.
Figure 1: Dense-captioning events in a video involves detecting multiple events that occur in a video and describing
each event using natural language. These events are temporally localized in the video with independent start and end
times, resulting in some events that might also occur concurrently and overlap in time.
dancing to the music. In order to identify all the events
in a video and describe them in natural language, we introduce the task of dense-captioning events, which requires a
model to generate a set of descriptions for multiple events
occurring in the video and localize them in time.
Dense-captioning events is analogous to dense-imagecaptioning ; it describes videos and localize events in
time whereas dense-image-captioning describes and localizes regions in space.
However, we observe that densecaptioning events comes with its own set of challenges distinct from the image case. One observation is that events in
videos can range across multiple time scales and can even
overlap. While piano recitals might last for the entire duration of a long video, the applause takes place in a couple
of seconds. To capture all such events, we need to design
ways of encoding short as well as long sequences of video
frames to propose events. Past captioning works have circumvented this problem by encoding the entire video se-
 
quence by mean-pooling or by using a recurrent neural network (RNN) . While this works well for short
clips, encoding long video sequences that span minutes
leads to vanishing gradients, preventing successful training. To overcome this limitation, we extend recent work
on generating action proposals to multi-scale detection of events. Also, our proposal module processes each
video in a forward pass, allowing us to detect events as they
Another key observation is that the events in a given
video are usually related to one another. In Figure 1, the
crowd applauds because a a man was playing the piano.
Therefore, our model must be able to use context from surrounding events to caption each event. A recent paper has
attempted to describe videos with multiple sentences .
However, their model generates sentences for instructional
“cooking” videos where the events occur sequentially and
highly correlated to the objects in the video .
show that their model does not generalize to “open” domain
videos where events are action oriented and can even overlap. We introduce a captioning module that utilizes the
context from all the events from our proposal module to
generate each sentence. In addition, we show a variant of
our captioning module that can operate on streaming videos
by attending over only the past events. Our full model attends over both past as well as future events and demonstrates the importance of using context.
To evaluate our model and benchmark progress in
dense-captioning events, we introduce the ActivityNet Captions dataset1. ActivityNet Captions contains 20k videos
taken from ActivityNet , where each video is annotated
with a series of temporally localized descriptions (Figure 1).
To showcase long term event detection, our dataset contains
videos as long as 10 minutes, with each video annotated
with on average 3.65 sentences. The descriptions refer to
events that might be simultaneously occurring, causing the
video segments to overlap. We ensure that each description in a given video is unique and refers to only one segment. While our videos are centered around human activities, the descriptions may also refer to non-human events
such as: two hours later, the mixture becomes a delicious
cake to eat. We collect our descriptions using crowdsourcing ﬁnd that there is high agreement in the temporal event
segments, which is in line with research suggesting that
brain activity is naturally structured into semantically meaningful events .
With ActivityNet Captions, we are able to provide the
ﬁrst results for the task of dense-captioning events.
Together with our online proposal module and our online captioning module, we show that we can detect and describe
 
people/ranjaykrishna/densevid/. For a detailed analysis of
our dataset, please see our supplementary material.
events in long or even streaming videos. We demonstrate
that we are able to detect events found in short clips as well
as in long video sequences.
Furthermore, we show that
utilizing context from other events in the video improves
dense-captioning events. Finally, we demonstrate how ActivityNet Captions can be used to study video retrieval as
well as event localization.
2. Related work
Dense-captioning events bridges two separate bodies of
temporal action proposals and video captioning.
First, we review related work on action recognition, action detection and temporal proposals.
Next, we survey
how video captioning started from video retrieval and video
summarization, leading to single-sentence captioning work.
Finally, we contrast our work with recent work in captioning images and videos with multiple sentences.
Early work in activity recognition involved using hidden Markov models to learn latent action states , followed by discriminative SVM models that used key poses
and action grammars . Similar works have used
hand-crafted features or object-centric features to
recognize actions in ﬁxed camera settings.
More recent
works have used dense trajectories or deep learning
features to study actions. While our work is similar
to these methods, we focus on describing such events with
natural language instead of a ﬁxed label set.
To enable action localization, temporal action proposal methods started from traditional sliding window approaches and later started building models to propose a
handful of possible action segments . These proposal
methods have used dictionary learning or RNN architectures to ﬁnd possible segments of interest. However, such methods required each video frame to be processed once for every sliding window. DAPs introduced a
framework to allow proposing overlapping segments using
a sliding window. We modify this framework by removing
the sliding windows and outputting proposals at every time
step in a single pass of the video. We further extend this
model and enable it to detect long events by implementing
a multi-scale version of DAPs, where we sample frames at
longer strides.
Orthogonal to work studying proposals,
early approaches that connected video with language studied the
task of video retrieval with natural language.
worked on generating a common embedding space between
language and videos . Similar to these, we evaluate how well existing models perform on our dataset. Additionally, we introduce the task of localizing a given sentence given a video frame, allowing us to now also evaluate
whether our models are able to locate speciﬁed events.
In an effort to start describing videos, methods in video
summarization aimed to congregate segments of videos
that include important or interesting visual information . These methods attempted to use low level features such as color and motion or attempted to model objects and their relationships to select key segments. Meanwhile, others have utilized text inputs from
user studies to guide the selection process . While
these summaries provide a means of ﬁnding important segments, these methods are limited by small vocabularies and
do not evaluate how well we can explain visual events .
After these summarization works, early attempts at
video captioning simply mean-pooled video frame
features and used a pipeline inspired by the success of image captioning . However, this approach only works
for short video clips with only one major event. To avoid
this issue, others have proposed either a recurrent encoder or an attention mechanism . To capture more detail in videos, a new paper has recommended
describing videos with paragraphs (a list of sentences) using
a hierarchical RNN where the top level network generates a series of hidden vectors that are used to initialize
low level RNNs that generate each individual sentence .
While our paper is most similar to this work, we address
two important missing factors. First, the sentences that their
model generates refer to different events in the video but
are not localized in time. Second, they use the TACoS-
MultiLevel , which contains less than 200 videos and
is constrained to “cooking” videos and only contain nonoverlapping sequential events. We address these issues by
introducing the ActivityNet Captions dataset which contains overlapping events and by introducing our captioning
module that uses temporal context to capture the interdependency between all the events in a video.
Finally, we build upon the recent work on dense-imagecaptioning , which generates a set of localized descriptions for an image. Further work for this task has used spatial context to improve captioning . Inspired by this
work, and by recent literature on using spatial attention to
improve human tracking , we design our captioning module to incorporate temporal context (analogous to spatial
context except in time) by attending over the other events
in the video.
3. Dense-captioning events model
Our goal is to design an architecture that
jointly localizes temporal proposals of interest and then describes each with natural language. The two main challenges we face are to develop a method that can (1) detect
multiple events in short as well as long video sequences
and (2) utilize the context from past, concurrent and future events to generate descriptions of each one. Our proposed architecture (Figure 2) draws on architectural elements present in recent work on action proposal and
social human tracking to tackle both these challenges.
Formally, the input to our system is a sequence of video
frames v = {vt} where t ∈0, ..., T −1 indexes the frames
in temporal order. Our output is a set of sentences si ∈S
where si = (tstart, tend, {vj}) consists of the start and end
times for each sentence which is deﬁned by a set of words
vj ∈V with differing lengths for each sentence and V is
our vocabulary set.
Our model ﬁrst sends the video frames through a proposal module that generates a set of proposals:
P = {(tstart
, scorei, hi)}
All the proposals with a scorei higher than a threshold are
forwarded to our language model that uses context from the
other proposals while captioning each event. The hidden
representation hi of the event proposal module is used as
inputs to the captioning module, which then outputs descriptions for each event, while utilizing the context from
the other events.
3.1. Event proposal module
The proposal module in Figure 2 tackles the challenge of
detecting events in short as well as long video sequences,
while preventing the dense application of our language
model over sliding windows during inference. Prior work
usually pools video features globally into a ﬁxed sized vector , which is sufﬁcient for representing short
video clips but is unable to detect multiple events in long
videos. Additionally, we would like to detect events in a
single pass of the video so that the gains over a simple temporal sliding window are signiﬁcant. To tackle this challenge, we design an event proposal module to be a variant
of DAPs that can detect longer events.
Our proposal module receives a series of features capturing semantic information from the video frames.
Concretely, the input to our proposal module is a sequence
of features: {ft = F(vt : vt+δ)} where δ is the time resolution of each feature ft. In our paper, F extracts C3D
features where δ = 16 frames. The output of F is a
tensor of size N×D where D = 500 dimensional features
and N = T/δ discretizes the video frames.
Next, we feed these features into a variant of
DAPs where we sample the videos features at different strides (1, 2, 4 and 8 for our experiments) and feed
them into a proposal long short-term memory (LSTM) unit.
The longer strides are able to capture longer events. The
LSTM accumulates evidence across time as the video features progress. We do not modify the training of DAPs and
only change the model at inference time by outputting K
proposals at every time step, each proposing an event with
offsets. So, the LSTM is capable of generating proposals
at different overlapping time intervals and we only need to
iterate over the video once, since all the strides can be computed in parallel. Whenever the proposal LSTM detects an
Figure 2: Complete pipeline for dense-captioning events in videos with descriptions. We ﬁrst extract C3D features from the
input video. These features are fed into our proposal module at varying stride to predict both short as well as long events. Each
proposal, which consists of a unique start and end time and a hidden representation, is then used as input into the captioning
module. Finally, this captioning model leverages context from neighboring events to generate each event description.
event, we use the hidden state of the LSTM at that time step
as a feature representation of the visual event. Note that
the proposal model can output proposals for events that can
be overlapping. While traditional DAPs uses non-maximum
suppression to eliminate overlapping outputs, we keep them
separately and treat them as individual events.
3.2. Captioning module with context
Once we have the event proposals, the next stage of our
pipeline is responsible for describing each event. A naive
captioning approach could treat each description individually and use a captioning LSTM network to describe each
one. However, most events in a video are correlated and
can even cause one another. For example, we saw in Figure 1 that the man playing the piano caused the other person
to start dancing. We also saw that after the man ﬁnished
playing the piano, the audience applauded. To capture such
correlations, we design our captioning module to incorporate the “context” from its neighboring events. Inspired by
recent work on human tracking that utilizes spatial context between neighboring tracks, we develop an analogous
model that captures temporal context in videos by grouping
together events in time instead of tracks in space.
Incorporating context.
To capture the context from all
other neighboring events, we categorize all events into two
buckets relative to a reference event. These two context
buckets capture events that have already occurred (past),
and events that take place after this event has ﬁnished (future). Concurrent events are split into one of the two buckets: past if it end early and future otherwise. For a given
video event from the proposal module, with hidden representation hi and start and end times of [tstart
], we calculate the past and future context representations as follows:
where hj is the hidden representation of the other proposed
events in the video. wj is the weight used to determine how
relevant event j is to event i. Z is the normalization that is
calculated as Zpast = P
j̸=i 1[tend
]. We calculate
wj as follows:
ai = wahi + ba
where ai is the attention vector calculated from the learnt
weights wa and bias ba. We use the dot product of ai and hj
to calculate wj. The concatenation of (hpast
, hi, hfuture
then fed as the input to the captioning LSTM that describes
the event. With the help of the context, each LSTM also has
knowledge about events that have happened or will happen
and can tune its captions accordingly.
Language modeling. Each language LSTM is initialized to
have 2 layers with 512 dimensional hidden representation.
We randomly initialize all the word vector embeddings from
a Gaussian with standard deviation of 0.01. We sample predictions from the model using beam search of size 5.
3.3. Implementation details.
Loss function. We use two separate losses to train both our
proposal model (Lprop) and our captioning model (Lcap).
Our proposal models predicts conﬁdences ranging between
0 and 1 for varying proposal lengths. We use a weighted
cross-entropy term to evaluate each proposal conﬁdence.
We only pass to the language model proposals that have
a high IoU with ground truth proposals. Similar to previous
work on language modeling , we use a cross-entropy
loss across all words in every sentence. We normalize the
loss by the batch-size and sequence length in the language
model. We weight the contribution of the captioning loss
with λ1 = 1.0 and the proposal loss with λ2 = 0.1:
L = λ1Lcap + λ2Lprop
Training and optimization.
We train our full densecaptioning model by alternating between training the language model and the proposal module every 500 iterations.
We ﬁrst train the captioning module by masking all neighboring events for 10 epochs before adding in the context
features. We initialize all weights using a Gaussian with
standard deviation of 0.01. We use stochastic gradient descent with momentum 0.9 to train. We use an initial learning rate of 1×10−2 for the language model and 1×10−3 for
the proposal module. For efﬁciency, we do not ﬁnetune the
C3D feature extraction.
Our training batch-size is set to 1. We cap all sentences
to be a maximum sentence length of 30 words and implement all our code in PyTorch 0.1.10. One mini-batch runs
in approximately 15.84 ms on a Titan X GPU and it takes 2
days for the model to converge.
4. ActivityNet Captions dataset
The ActivityNet Captions dataset connects videos to a
series of temporally annotated sentences. Each sentence
covers an unique segment of the video, describing an event
that occurs. These events may occur over very long or short
periods of time and are not limited in any capacity, allowing
them to co-occur. We will now present an overview of the
dataset and also provide a detailed analysis and comparison
with other datasets in our supplementary material.
4.1. Dataset statistics
On average, each of the 20k videos in ActivityNet Captions contains 3.65 temporally localized sentences, resulting in a total of 100k sentences. We ﬁnd that the number of
Difference (%)
noun, singular or mass
preposition or subordinating conjunction
determiner
proper noun, singular
adjective, superlative
proper noun, plural
adverb, superlative
list item marker
interjection
possessive wh-pronoun
verb, past tense
predeterminer
adverb, comparative
wh-determiner
wh-pronoun
existential there
adjective, comparative
foreign word
cardinal number
verb, past participle
noun, plural
possessive pronoun
verb, gerund or present participle
verb, base form
verb, non-3rd person singular present
coordinating conjunction
personal pronoun
verb, 3rd person singular present
Part of Speech
Figure 3: The parts of speech distribution of ActivityNet
compared with Visual Genome, a dataset with
multiple sentence annotations per image. There are many
more verbs and pronouns represented in ActivityNet Captions, as the descriptions often focus on actions.
sentences per video follows a relatively normal distribution.
Furthermore, as the video duration increases, the number
of sentences also increases. Each sentence has an average
length of 13.48 words, which is also normally distributed.
On average, each sentence describes 36 seconds and
31% of their respective videos. However, the entire paragraph for each video on average describes 94.6% of the
entire video, demonstrating that each paragraph annotation
still covers all major actions within the video. Furthermore,
we found that 10% of the temporal descriptions overlap,
showing that the events cover simultaneous events.
Finally, our analysis on the sentences themselves indicate that ActivityNet Captions focuses on verbs and actions. In Figure 3, we compare against Visual Genome ,
the image dataset with most number of image descriptions
(˜4.5 million). With the percentage of verbs comprising ActivityNet Captionsbeing signiﬁcantly more, we ﬁnd that ActivityNet Captions shifts sentence descriptions from being
object-centric in images to action-centric in videos. Furthermore, as there exists a greater percentage of pronouns
in ActivityNet Captions, we ﬁnd that the sentence labels
will more often refer to entities found in prior sentences.
4.2. Temporal agreement amongst annotators
To verify that ActivityNet Captions ’s captions mark semantically meaningful events , we collected two distinct,
temporally annotated paragraphs from different workers for
each of the 4926 validation and 5044 test videos. Each pair
of annotations was then tested to see how well they temporally corresponded to each other. We found that, on aver-
with GT proposals
with learnt proposals
LSTM-YT 
H-RNN 
no context (ours)
online−attn (ours)
online (ours)
full−attn (ours)
full (ours)
Table 1: We report Bleu (B), METEOR (M) and CIDEr (C) captioning scores for the task of dense-captioning events. On the
left, we report performances of just our captioning module with ground truth proposals. On the right, we report the combined
performances of our complete model, with proposals predicted from our proposal module. Since prior work has focused only
on describing entire videos and not also detecting a series of events, we only compare existing video captioning models using
ground truth proposals.
age, each sentence description had an tIoU of 70.2% with
the maximal overlapping combination of sentences from
the other paragraph. Since these results agree with prior
work , we found that workers generally agree with each
other when annotating temporal boundaries of video events.
5. Experiments
We evaluate our model by detecting multiple events in
videos and describing them. We refer to this task as densecaptioning events (Section 5.1). We test our model on ActivityNet Captions, which was built speciﬁcally for this task.
Next, we provide baseline results on two additional tasks
that are possible with our model. The ﬁrst of these tasks is
localization (Section 5.2), which tests our proposal model’s
capability to adequately localize all the events for a given
video. The second task is retrieval (Section 5.3), which tests
a variant of our model’s ability to recover the correct set of
sentences given the video or vice versa. Both these tasks
are designed to test the event proposal module (localization)
and the captioning module (retrieval) individually.
5.1. Dense-captioning events
To dense-caption events, our model is given an input
video and is tasked with detecting individual events and describing each one with natural language.
Evaluation metrics.
Inspired by the dense-imagecaptioning metric, we use a similar metric to measure
the joint ability of our model to both localize and caption
events. This metric computes the average precision across
tIoU thresholds of 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 when captioning the top
1000 proposals. We measure precision of our captions using
traditional evaluation metrics: Bleu, METEOR and CIDEr.
To isolate the performance of language in the predicted
captions without localization, we also use ground truth locations across each test image and evaluate predicted captions.
no context
Table 2: We report the effects of context on captioning the
1st, 2nd and 3rd events in a video. We see that performance
increases with the addition of past context in the online
model and with future context in full model.
Baseline models. Since all the previous models proposed
so far have focused on the task of describing entire videos
and not detecting a series of events, we only compare existing video captioning models using ground truth proposals. Speciﬁcally, we compare our work with LSTM-YT ,
S2VT and H-RNN . LSTM-YT pools together video
features to describe videos while S2VT encodes a video
using an RNN. H-RNN generates paragraphs by using
one RNN to caption individual sentences while the second
RNN is used to sequentially initialize the hidden state for
the next sentence generation. Our model can be though of as
a generalization of the H-RNN model as it uses context, not
just from the previous sentence but from surrounding events
in the video. Additionally, our method treats context, not as
features from object detectors but encodes it from unique
parts of the proposal module.
Ground Truth
No Context
Full Context
Arabian music and wearing
Arabian skirts on a stage
holding cloths and a fan.
dance around one another
and end by holding a pose
and looking away.
A woman is performing a
belly dancing routine in a
other people watch on.
Woman is in a room in
front of a mirror doing the
belly dance.
A woman is seen speaking
She then shows how to do
it with her hair down and
Names of the performers
are on screen.
The credits of the video are
The credits of the clip are
(a) Adding context can generate consistent captions.
Ground Truth
Online Context
Full Context
A cesar salad is ready and
is served in a bowl.
The person puts a lemon
mixes together with a.
A woman is in a kitchen
talking about how to make
Croutons are in a bowl and
ingredients
separated.
The person then puts a
potato and in it and puts it
A person is seen cutting up
a pumpkin and laying them
up in a sink.
ingredients in a bowl to
plastic wrap as a lid.
The person then puts a
lemon over it and puts
dressing in it.
The person then cuts up
ingredients
them together in the end.
Man cuts the lettuce and in
a pan put oil with garlic
and stir fry the croutons.
The person then puts a
lemon over it and puts an
<unk> it in.
The person then cuts up
the fruit and puts them
into a bowl.
The man puts the dressing
on the lettuces and adds
the croutons in the bowl
The person then puts a
potato in it and puts it
The ingredients are mixed
into a bowl one at a time.
(b) Comparing online versus full model.
Ground Truth
No Context
Full Context
A male gymnast is on a
A gymnast is seen standing
ready and holding onto a
set of uneven bars and
begins performing.
He mounts the beam then
The boy then jumps on the
beam grabbing the bars
doing several spins
across the balance beam.
gymnastics
gymnastics
He then moves into a hand
stand and jumps off the bar
into the floor.
He dismounts and lands
on the mat.
gymnastics
(c) Context might add more noise to rare events.
Figure 4: Qualitative dense-captioning captions generated
using our model. We show captions with the highest overlap
with ground truth captions.
Variants of our model. Additionally, we compare different
variants of our model. Our no context model is our implementation of S2VT. The full model is our complete model
described in Section 3. The online model is a version of
our full model that uses context only from past events and
not from future events. This version of our model can be
used to caption long streams of video in a single pass. The
full−attn and online−attn models use mean pooling instead
of attention to concatenate features, i.e. it sets wj = 1 in
Equation 5.
Captioning results. Since all the previous work has focused on captioning complete videos, We ﬁnd that LSTM-
YT performs much worse than other models as it tries to encode long sequences of video by mean pooling their features
(Table 1). H-RNN performs slightly better but attends over
object level features to generate sentence, which causes it to
only slightly outperform LSTM-YT since we demonstrated
earlier that the captions in our dataset are not object centric
Recall @ 1000
Strides 1, 2
Strides 1, 2, 4
Strides 1, 2, 4, 8
Number of proposals
Recall @ tIoU=0.8
Strides 1, 2
Strides 1, 2, 4
Strides 1, 2, 4, 8
Figure 5: Evaluating our proposal module, we ﬁnd that sampling videos at varying strides does in fact improve the module’s ability to localize events, specially longer events.
but action centric instead. S2VT and our no context model
performs better than the previous baselines with a CIDEr
score of 20.97 as it uses an RNN to encode the video features. We see an improvement in performance to 22.19 and
22.94 when we incorporate context from past events into
our online−attn and online models. Finally, we also considering events that will happen in the future, we see further improvements to 24.24 and 24.56 for the full−attn and
full models. Note that while the improvements from using attention is not too large, we see greater improvements
amongst videos with more events, suggesting that attention
is useful for longer videos.
Sentence order. To further benchmark the improvements
calculated from utilizing past and future context, we report
results using ground truth proposals for the ﬁrst three sentences in each video (Table 2). While there are videos with
more than three sentences, we report results only for the ﬁrst
three because almost all the videos in the dataset contains
at least three sentences. We notice that the online and full
context models see most of their improvements from subsequent sentences, i.e. not the ﬁrst sentence. In fact, we notice
that after adding context, the CIDEr score for the online and
full models tend to decrease for the 1st sentence.
Results for dense-captioning events. When using proposals instead of ground truth events (Table 1), we see a similar trend where adding more context improves captioning.
However, we also see that the improvements from attention are more pronounced since there are many events that
the model has to caption. Attention allows the model to
adequately focus in on select other events that are relevant
to the current event. We show examples qualitative results
from the variants of our models in Figure 4. In (a), we see
that the last caption in the no context model drifts off topic
while the full model utilizes context to generate more reasonable context. In (c), we see that our full context model
is able to use the knowledge that the vegetables are later
mixed in the bowl to also mention the bowl in the third and
fourth sentences, propagating context back through to past
events. However, context is not always successful at generating better captions. In (c), when the proposed segments
Video retrieval
Paragraph retrieval
LSTM-YT 
no context 
online (ours)
full (ours)
Table 3: Results for video and paragraph retrieval. We see that the utilization of context to encode video events help us
improve retrieval. R@k measures the recall at varying thresholds k and med. rank measures the median rank the retrieval.
have a high overlap, our model fails to distinguish between
the two events, causing it to repeat captions.
5.2. Event localization
One of the main goals of this paper is to develop models that can locate any given event within a video. Therefore, we test how well our model can predict the temporal
location of events within the corresponding video, in isolation of the captioning module. Recall that our variant of the
proposal module uses proposes videos at different strides.
Speciﬁcally, we test with strides of 1, 2, 4 and 8. Each
stride can be computed in parallel, allowing the proposal to
run in a single pass.
Setup. We evaluate our proposal module using recall (like
previous work ) against (1) the number of proposals and
(2) the IoU with ground truth events. Speciﬁcally, we are
testing whether, the use of different strides does in fact improve event localization.
Results. Figure 5 shows the recall of predicted localizations
that overlap with ground truth over a range of IoU’s from
0.0 to 1.0 and number of proposals ranging till 1000. We
ﬁnd that using more strides improves recall across all values of IoU’s with diminishing returns . We also observe that
when proposing only a few proposals, the model with stride
1 performs better than any of the multi-stride versions. This
occurs because there are more training examples for smaller
strides as these models have more video frames to iterate
over, allowing them to be more accurate. So, when predicting only a few proposals, the model with stride 1 localizes
the most correct events. However, as we increase the number of proposals, we ﬁnd that the proposal network with
only a stride of 1 plateaus around a recall of 0.3, while our
multi-scale models perform better.
5.3. Video and paragraph retrieval
While we introduce dense-captioning events, a new task
to study video understanding, we also evaluate our intuition
to use context on a more traditional task: video retrieval.
Setup. In video retrieval, we are given a set of sentences
that describe different parts of a video and are asked to retrieve the correct video from the test set of all videos. Our
retrieval model is a slight variant on our dense-captioning
model where we encode all the sentences using our captioning module and then combine the context together for
each sentence and match each sentence to multiple proposals from a video. We assume that we have ground truth
proposals for each video and encode each proposal using
the LSTM from our proposal model. We train our model
using a max-margin loss that attempts to align the correct
sentence encoding to its corresponding video proposal encoding. We also report how this model performs if the task
is reversed, where we are given a video as input and are
asked to retrieve the correct paragraph from the complete
set of paragraphs in the test set.
Results. We report our results in Table 3. We evaluate
retrieval using recall at various thresholds and the median
rank. We use the same baseline models as our previous
tasks. We ﬁnd that models that use RNNs (no context) to
encode the video proposals perform better than max pooling video features (LSTM-YT). We also see a direct increase in performance when context is used. Unlike densecaptioning, we do not see a marked increase in performance
when we include context from future events as well. We
ﬁnd that our online models performs almost at par with our
full model.
6. Conclusion
We introduced the task of dense-captioning events and
identiﬁed two challenges: (1) events can occur within a second or last up to minutes, and (2) events in a video are related to one another. To tackle both these challenges, we
proposed a model that combines a new variant of an existing proposal module with a new captioning module. The
proposal module samples video frames at different strides
and gathers evidence to propose events at different time
scales in one pass of the video. The captioning module
attends over the neighboring events, utilizing their context
to improve the generation of captions. We compare variants of our model and demonstrate that context does indeed
improve captioning. We further show how the captioning
model uses context to improve video retrieval and how our
proposal model uses the different strides to improve event
localization. Finally, this paper also releases a new dataset
for dense-captioning events: ActivityNet Captions.
Number of sentences in paragraph
Number of paragraphs
Figure 6: The number of sentences within paragraphs is
normally distributed, with on average 3.65 sentences per
paragraph.
7. Supplementary material
In the supplementary material, we compare and contrast
our dataset with other datasets and provide additional details about our dataset. We include screenshots of our collection interface with detailed instructions. We also provide additional details about the workers who completed
our tasks.
7.1. Comparison to other datasets.
Curation and open distribution is closely correlated with
progress in the ﬁeld of video understanding (Table 4). The
KTH dataset pioneered the ﬁeld by studying human
actions with a black background. Since then, datasets like
UCF101 , Sports 1M , Thumos 15 have focused on studying actions in sports related internet videos
while HMDB 51 and Hollywood 2 introduced a
dataset of movie clips. Recently, ActivityNet and Charades broadened the domain of activities captured by
these datasets by including a large set of human activities.
In an effort to map video semantics with language, MPII
MD and M-VAD released short movie clips with
descriptions. In an effort to capture longer events, MSR-
VTT , MSVD and YouCook collected a dataset
with slightly longer length, at the cost of a few descriptions
than previous datasets. To further improve video annotations, KITTI and TACoS also temporally localized their video descriptions.
Orthogonally, in an effort
to increase the complexity of descriptions, TACos multilevel expanded the TACoS dataset to include paragraph descriptions to instructional cooking videos. However, their dataset is constrained in the “cooking” domain
and contains in the order of a 100 videos, making it un-
Number of words in sentence
Number of sentences
Figure 7: The number of words per sentence within paragraphs is normally distributed, with on average 13.48 words
per sentence.
suitable for dense-captioning of events as the models easily
overﬁt to the training data.
Our dataset, ActivityNet Captions, aims to bridge these
three orthogonal approaches by temporally annotating long
videos while also building upon the complexity of descriptions. ActivityNet Captions contains videos that an average
of 180s long with the longest video running to over 10 minutes. It contains a total of 100k sentences, where each sentence is temporally localized. Unlike TACoS multi-level,
we have two orders of magnitude more videos and provide
annotations for an open domain. Finally, we are also the
ﬁrst dataset to enable the study of concurrent events, by allowing our events to overlap.
7.2. Detailed dataset statistics
As noted in the main paper, the number of sentences accompanying each video is normally distributed, as seen in
Figure 6. On average, each video contains 3.65 ± 1.79 sentences. Similarly, the number of words in each sentence is
normally distributed, as seen in Figure 7. On average, each
sentence contains 13.48 ± 6.33 words, and each video contains 40 ± 26 words.
There exists interaction between the video content and
the corresponding temporal annotations. In Figure 8, the
number of sentences accompanying a video is shown to
be positively correlated with the video’s length: each additional minute adds approximately 1 additional sentence
description. Furthermore, as seen in Figure 9, the sentence
descriptions focus on the middle parts of the video more
than the beginning or end.
When studying the distribution of words in Figures 10
and 11, we found that ActivityNet Captions generally focuses on people and the actions these people take. However,
Avg. length
# sentences
paragraphs
overlapping
UCF101 
Sports 1M 
Thumos 15 
HMDB 51 
Hollywood 2 
MPII cooking 
ActivityNet 
MPII MD 
M-VAD 
MSR-VTT 
YouCook 
Charades 
KITTI 
TACoS 
TACos multi-level 
ActivityNet Captions (ours)
Table 4: Compared to other video datasets, ActivityNet Captions contains long videos with a large number of sentences
that are all temporally localized and is the only dataset that contains overlapping events. (Loc. Des. shows which datasets
contain temporally localized language descriptions. Bold fonts are used to highlight the nearest comparison of our model
with existing models.)
Length of video (sec)
Number of sentences in video description
Figure 8: Distribution of number of sentences with respect
to video length. In general the longer the video the more
sentences there are, so far on average each additional minute
adds one more sentence to the paragraph.
we wanted to know whether ActivityNet Captions captured
the general semantics of the video. To do so, we compare
our sentence descriptions against the shorter labels of ActivityNet, since ActivityNet Captions annotates ActivityNet
videos. Figure 16 illustrates that the majority of videos in
ActivityNet Captions often contain ActivityNet’s labels in
Heatmap of annotations in normalized video length
Figure 9: Distribution of annotations in time in ActivityNet
Captions videos, most of the annotated time intervals are
closer to the middle of the videos than to the start and end.
at least one of their sentence descriptions. We ﬁnd that the
many entry-level categories such as brushing hair or playing violin are extremely well represented by our captions.
However, as the categories become more nuanced, such as
powerbocking or cumbia, they are not as commonly found
in our descriptions.
7.3. Dataset collection process
We used Amazon Mechanical Turk to annotate all our
videos. Each annotation task was divided into two steps: (1)
Writing a paragraph describing all major events happening
in the videos in a paragraph, with each sentence of the paragraph describing one event (Figure 12; and (2) Labeling the
start and end time in the video in which each sentence in the
paragraph event occurred (Figure 13. We ﬁnd complementary evidence that workers are more consistent with their
video segments and paragraph descriptions if they are asked
to annotate visual media (in this case, videos) using natural
language ﬁrst . Therefore, instead of asking workers to
Number of N-Grams
Figure 10: The most frequently used words in ActivityNet
Captions with stop words removed.
Number of N-Grams
people are
the camera
Figure 11: The most frequently used bigrams in ActivityNet
Captions .
segment the video ﬁrst and then write individual sentences,
we asked them to write paragraph descriptions ﬁrst.
Workers are instructed to ensure that their paragraphs
are at least 3 sentences long where each sentence describes
events in the video but also makes a grammatically and semantically coherent paragraph. They were allowed to use
co-referencing words (ex, he, she, etc.)
to refer to subjects introduced in previous sentences. We also asked workers to write sentences that were at least 5 words long. We
found that our workers were diligent and wrote an average
of 13.48 number of words per sentence. Each of the task
and examples (Figure 14) of good and bad annotations.
Workers were presented with examples of good and bad
annotations with explanations for what constituted a good
paragraph, ensuring that workers saw concrete evidence of
what kind of work was expected of them (Figure 14). We
Figure 12: Interface when a worker is writing a paragraph.
Workers are asked to write a paragraph in the text box and
press ”Done Writing Paragraph” before they can proceed
with grounding each of the sentences.
Figure 13: Interface when labeling sentences with start and
end timestamps. Workers select each sentence, adjust the
range slider indicating which segment of the video that particular sentence is referring to. They then click save and
proceed to the next sentence.
paid workers $3 for every 5 videos that were annotated.
This amounted to an average pay rate of $8 per hour, which
is in tune with fair crowd worker wage rate .
7.4. Annotation details
Following research from previous work that show that
crowd workers are able to perform at the same quality of
work when allowed to video media at a faster rate , we
show all videos to workers at 2X the speed, i.e. the videos
are shown at twice the frame rate. Workers do, however,
have the option to watching the videos at the original video
speed and even speed it up to 3X or 4X the speed. We found,
however, that the average viewing rate chosen by workers
Figure 14: We show examples of good and bad annotations
to workers. Each task contains one good and one bad example video with annotations. We also explain why the examples are considered to be good or bad.
was 1.91X while the median rate was 1X, indicating that
a majority of workers preferred watching the video at its
original speed. We also ﬁnd that workers tend to take an
average of 2.88 and a median of 1.46 times the length of the
video in seconds to annotate.
At any given time, workers have the ability to edit their
paragraph, go back to previous videos to make changes to
their annotations. They are only allowed to proceed to the
next video if this current video has been completely annotated with a paragraph with all its sentences timestamped.
Changes made to the paragraphs and timestamps are saved
when ”previous video or ”next video” are pressed, and re-
ﬂected on the page. Only when all videos are annotated can
the worker submit the task. In total, we had 112 workers
who annotated all our videos.
Acknowledgements. This research was sponsored in part
by grants from the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (N00014-15-
1-2813) and Panasonic, Inc. We thank JunYoung Gwak,
Timnit Gebru, Alvaro Soto, and Alexandre Alahi for their
helpful comments and discussion.