On the identiﬁcation of sales forecasting models in the
presence of promotions
Juan R. Traperoa,∗, N. Kourentzesb, R. Fildesb
aUniversidad de Castilla-La Mancha
Departamento de Administracion de Empresas, Ciudad Real 13071, Spain
bLancaster University Management School
Department of Management Science, Lancaster LA1 4YX, UK
Shorter product life cycles and aggressive marketing, among other factors,
have increased the complexity of sales forecasting. Forecasts are often produced using a Forecasting Support System that integrates univariate statistical forecasting with managerial judgment. Forecasting sales under promotional activity is one of the main reasons to use expert judgment. Alternatively, one can replace expert adjustments by regression models whose
exogenous inputs are promotion features (price, display, etc.). However, these
regression models may have large dimensionality as well as multicollinearity
issues. We propose a novel promotional model that overcomes these limitations. It combines Principal Component Analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the problem and automatically identiﬁes the demand dynamics.
For items with limited history, the proposed model is capable of providing
promotional forecasts by selectively pooling information across established
products. The performance of the model is compared against forecasts provided by experts and statistical benchmarks, on weekly data; outperforming
both substantially.
Promotional modeling, demand forecasting, judgmental
adjustments, principal components analysis
∗Corresponding author.
Email addresses: (Juan R. Trapero),
 (N. Kourentzes), demand forecasting is
of paramount importance to reduce inventory investment, enhance customer
satisfaction and improve distribution operations.
Demand forecasting at SKU level relies on a particular type of Decision Support System, known as a Forecasting Support System (FSS) . An FSS often integrates univariate statistical forecasting method with managerial judgment from forecasters in the
organization. The ﬁrst provides an automatic baseline statistical forecast,
while the later are responsible for manually adjusting the baseline in order
to include market forces, promotions and other inﬂuences.
Univariate forecasting methods are based on time series techniques that
analyze past history sales in order to extract a demand pattern that is projected into the future . An example of such techniques
is the exponential smoothing family of methods . This technique is very well suited to companies that handle numerous SKUs and must produce forecasts semi-automatically. However, when
a company has to face the impact of future promotions on sales, such univariate models cannot account for it. Therefore, experts have to modify the
forecasts and include the expected impact on sales due to promotions. Fildes
and Goodwin indicated promotional and advertising activity as one
of the main drivers behind judgmental adjustments of statistical forecasts.
In particular, Trapero et al. study the performance of judgmentally
adjusted forecasts in the presence of promotions. They found evidence that
experts might improve the baseline forecasts but not systematically. In addition, they suggest that past promotional information modeled adequately
may bring important forecast error reductions with respect to judgmental
forecasts.
An alternative approach to the problem of forecasting promotional sales
is to use regression models, which use past promotional information to formulate causal models, Fildes et al. . These models are usually based on
multiple regression models whose exogenous inputs correspond to promotion
features (price discounts, type of display, type of advertising, etc.), . Considering technology advances
in computing and data acquisition, most of the recent Promotional Support
Systems (PSS) have been based on forms of sophisticated regression, such
as SCAN*PRO by Leeﬂang et al. , PromoCastTM by Cooper et al.
 , and CHAN4CAST by Divakar et al. providing promising results. These PSS relate the sales of units with independent variables such
as regular prices, price cuts, feature advertising, special displays, and other
relevant inputs depending on the industry1 under study.
These are typically estimated at brand level and there is very limited work on SKU level
promotional modelling, which is the focus of this paper.
Such PSSs require a high number of explanatory variables; for instance,
Cooper et al. introduced 67 variables to their model. These demanding data requirements have important drawbacks: i) the cost of acquiring and
maintaining the necessary information, if it is feasible to collect all data; ii)
variable selection is required, due to the number of exogenous variables considered during model building; for example, CHAN4CAST utilizes a stepwise
selection method; iii) it is possible that variables may be multicollinear; iv)
some models require past promotions for each SKU and therefore are unable
to provide promotional forecasts when there is limited or no past promotions
in the SKU demand history; and v) such models do not deal with any potential serial correlation in the error term. Another critical feature is the
need for in-company expertise to handle complex econometric promotional
models. Hughes identiﬁed the lack of expertise and resources as two
key limitations in the implementation of complex forecasting techniques in
organizations, which may explain the lack of widespread diﬀusion of such
models. Fildes and Goodwin and Lawrence et al. suggested
that the reliance on expert interventions is more widespread.
The aim of this article is twofold: On the one hand, we propose a dynamic
regression model that overcomes the technical issues discussed above, which
limit the use of statistical models for forecasting promotional sales at SKU
level. On the other hand, we investigate the relative performance of quantitative and judgmental approaches for forecasting promotional sales. We
provide insight in this crucial question for business practice by comparing
the proposed model with forecasts provided by human experts. Better understanding of the beneﬁts achieved by quantitative modeling may encourage
1For instance, the temperature is a signiﬁcant independent variable in the soft-drink
industry as it is discussed by Divakar et al. 
the use of such models by practitioners.
The proposed dynamic regression model has the following innovations: i)
Principal Component Analysis is used to solve the problems of dimensionality reduction and multicollinearity, which are fairly common in practice due
to simultaneous promotional activities, and; ii) if for some SKUs there is no
prior promotional information, the model pools past information from other
SKUs to produce a forecast. Our approach diﬀers to previous implementations of pooled regression by Divakar et al. , in the sense that our
algorithm provides forecasts at SKU level and the pooling occurs only when
limited or no promotional history is available for a SKU. iii) the dynamics
of promotions are modeled through the inclusion of lagged explanatory variables; and ﬁnally iv) the noise term is automatically identiﬁed by minimizing
the Schwartz Information Criterion, improving the forecasting accuracy and
capturing demand dynamics that are not explained solely by promotional
activity. Thus a strong time series element is introduced in the proposed
model. The proposed model oﬀers an automatic forecasting framework, able
to produce both baseline and promotional forecasts.
The performance of the proposed model is illustrated using a case study
with weekly data from a manufacturing company. Baseline statistical forecasts and expert judgmental forecasts are available to us from the company
and are used as benchmarks. It should be noted that, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case study that investigates the beneﬁts of quantitative promotional models against judgmentally adjusted forecasts. While
Trapero et al. provide a comparison between judgmental promotional
forecasts and simple statistical forecasts, they do not explore promotional
models capable of capturing diﬀerent promotional activities that are needed
in practice. Furthermore, we employ well established statistical benchmarks,
such as the Na¨ıve and single exponential smoothing. We also use the last like
promotional model that is typically used as a benchmark in the marketing
literature . We ﬁnd that the proposed model can reduce the forecast error of promotional sales up to 30% when compared to the
experts’ accuracy. Substantial accuracy improvements are observed against
statistical benchmarks as well. In summary, this article makes two important contributions to the analysis of promotional forecasting behaviour at
SKU level: Firstly, a theoretical model is proposed for overcoming the data
complexity and capturing the dynamics inherent in promotions. Secondly,
from a practical point of view, this model can automatically enhance SKU
level forecasting, taking it beyond the current practice of relying on expert
adjustment of a univariate statistical model. We also rigorously demonstrate
the improvements that may be achieved.
This article is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the case study
and carries out an exploratory data analysis. Section 3 introduces the models
that will be used to forecast sales. Section 4 reports the experimental design
and the results of the evaluation. Finally, main conclusions are drawn in
Section 5.
2. Case study
Data from a manufacturing company specializing in household products
has been collected. The data comprises: i) shipments; ii) one-step-ahead
system forecasts; iii) one-step-ahead adjusted or ﬁnal forecasts provided by
experts in the company; and iv) promotional information. The latter includes
the following variables: i) Price discount; ii) Feature advertising; iii) Shelf
display; iv) Category, where 22 diﬀerent categories are available; v) Customer
(there are two main customers); and vi) Days promoted per week.
variable indicates how many days in a week are under promotion, for example,
some weeks only have 3 days promoted.
This case study is focused on continuous demand items, since most of the
intermittent demand SKUs are not subject to promotions. In particular, the
selected SKUs have a percentage of zeros less than 10%, the sample size is
greater than 20 observations and they have at least one week promoted. In
total, 60 SKUs have been sampled, with history lengths ranging from 53 to
148 observations, resulting in a total sample of 7,790 observations.
Figure 1 presents four randomly selected time series from our case study.
Promotional periods are highlighted with darker background. We can observe
that the impact of promotions is very diverse and not always apparent.
2.1. Exploratory analysis
Sales, System Forecast (SF) and Final Forecast (FF) are normalized with
respect to the sales standard deviation, since SKUs are very heterogeneous
in terms of variability. Table 1 provides the Median, as a robust metric of the
size, and the Median Absolute Deviation (MdAD) as a dispersion measure
of Sales, SF and FF. Each statistic has been split into Promo and No Promo
depending whether any promotion is active. The last column of the table
shows the Median and the Median Absolute Deviation of the percentage
Price Cut.
As expected, both sales Median and MdAD are higher when
Figure 1: Four example time series. Promotional periods are highlighted by darker background.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics
there are promotions. Given that the System Forecast cannot anticipate the
presence of promotions, its forecast is biased to lower values. To correct that
bias, experts modify the system forecasts providing the FF, whose median
is higher than that of sales.
According to this table, experts on average
overforecast, thus producing an optimistic bias.
In the dataset, the number of promoted weeks is 1187 representing 15.2%
of the whole dataset.
3.1. Na¨ıve and Single Exponential Smoothing
Since the 1950s the use of Exponential Smoothing for forecasting has been
the most popular forecasting method used in business and industry . Basically, the Single Exponential Smoothing
(SES) updates the previous forecast by weighting the last forecast error, i.e:
Ft+1 = Ft + α(yt −Ft),
where α is a constant between 0 and 1. This parameter may be set on a
priori grounds and usually is between 0.05 and 0.3, .
However, if an adequate ﬁtting sample is available, α should be estimated by
minimizing the sum of the one-step-ahead in-sample squared forecast errors
 . The Na¨ıve is also used in this paper, which is essentially
a SES with α = 1, making the forecast always equal to the last known data
point (yt); this is the well known Random Walk. Both SES and Na¨ıve are
univariate benchmarks that do not use any promotional information in their
forecasts. As such, these are used to provide a baseline forecast benchmark.
3.2. Last like promotion
To overcome the limitations of the previous benchmarks we introduce
a multivariate one. The forecasts change depending on whether there is a
promotion or not. A common model that is frequently used to forecast promotional sales is known as the last like promotion. This benchmark model is
implemented according to ¨Ozden G¨ur Ali et al. , where an exponential
smoothing is adjusted with the last observed promotional lift if there is a
promotion in the next observation, i.e:
promot = 0,
M(t+1) + L(t+1)
(1 −α)Mt + αyt
promot = 0,
otherwise,
where promot is a dummy variable indicating whether any kind of promotion
is occurring at time t. Mt+1 refers to the smoothed number of units sold up
to week t, based on non-promotion weeks. A constant smoothing value of 0.2
was used. The lift L(t+1) is calculated as the diﬀerence of the actual sales at
time t and the smoothed non-promotion sales at the time of the most recent
promotion, L(t+1) = yt −Mt.
Note that the only information that we used besides sales, is whether
there is a promotion or not. We do not specify any particular features of the
promotional campaign that is active.
3.3. Dynamic Regression with Principal Components as regressors
In our case, information about promotional variables is available.
particular, price cut, shelf display, feature advertising, customer (2 main
customers represented by a dummy variable), days promoted per week and
categories (21 dummy variables account for 22 diﬀerent product categories)
are the variables that experts handle when they judgmentally adjust forecasts. In total there are 26 variables. These will be used to predict future
promotional sales using quantitative models.
We will discuss the proposed dynamic regression model with principal
components ﬁrst for the promotional observations and then for the nonpromotional observations. Consequently both parts will be joined in a ﬁnal
3.3.1. Principal components as regressors
The ﬁrst option that we can try is to use a multiple linear regression
 . The aim is to predict sales using
the available promotional variables:
t stands for sales of SKU i in week t, Xj, j = 1, . . . , N are the set
of original promotional variables and ǫi
t is the error term. In our case study,
N = 26 and the set of observations per SKU is (t = 1, 2, . . . , 148). However,
most promotional variables are multicollinear. When there is a promotion
several promotional variables change at the same time, making it diﬃcult to
distinguish what is the inﬂuence of each causal variable on the sales level. In
order to solve this problem we use Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Principal component analysis generates a new set of variables ( ˆXj, j =
1, . . . , N), called principal components. Each principal component is a linear
combination of the original variables. All the principal components are orthogonal to each other, so there is no redundant information and the problem
of multicollinearity is lifted . Therefore, principal components
can be used as regressors instead of the original variables. Here, the problem
is how to select the components to be included in the regression. Essentially,
there are two extreme alternatives. One strategy is simply to delete all those
components whose variances are less than some cut-oﬀlevel. In contrast, the
opposite strategy is to base selection only on values of t-statistics measuring the contribution of each principal component to the regression equation
 . In our particular case, both alternatives were analyzed and
better forecasting results were obtained by selecting components with a high
correlation with the dependent variable through a stepwise procedure. In this
sense, only a few principal components were included as regressors, such as
ˆXk, k = 1, . . . , M with M < N, reducing the dimensionality of the problem.
2,t + . . . + ¯βi
PCA is intended to capture the inﬂuence of promotional activities on the
estimation sample and use that information to predict future promotional
sales. This solution assumes that the multicollinearity is structural. The
new estimated coeﬃcients may be diﬃcult to interpret. To overcome this,
we can transform the regression coeﬃcient estimates back to the original set
of variables.
Note that using either the original variables or principal component regressors requires some promotions to have been observed in the estimation
sample. If there are no historical promotions no such forecast can be produced, whereas if there is only a limited number of historical promotions the
model estimates will be unreliable.
3.3.2. Pooled regression
Some SKUs may not have enough samples of sales under promotions in
the estimation period. For those cases, an alternative approach is to estimate
the eﬀect of promotions on other SKUs by using a pooled regression , i.e:
t = α0 + α1 · Xi
1,t + α2 · Xi
2,t + . . . + αN · Xi
Here, the main diﬀerence with respect to (4) is that super indexes i in parameter estimates have been removed because they are estimated across all
SKUs. Since the mean and dispersion of diﬀerent SKUs might be diﬀerent,
the data must be ﬁrst normalised. Similarly to (5) a few Principal Components can be employed as independent variables in the pooled regression,
thus reducing the dimensionality of the problem.
Using pooled PCA regression allows us to forecast promotional eﬀects for
SKUs with no or limited history of promotions. This is a substantial improvement over the previous model that is unable to produce reliable promotional
forecasts when the SKU’s history does not provide enough promotional observations.
If there is enough past promotional data available for a single SKU, the
following question arises: should we use a regression for that SKU or a pooled
regression considering all other SKUs? To answer that question, a simulation
has been carried out to determine the number of past promotional observations required to choose only a single SKU information or the whole set of
SKUs. Empirically, it has been determined that when the number of promoted weeks in the estimation sample is less than 5 the pooled regression
yields better results. If there are more promotional weeks available for a certain SKU, then we should utilize the corresponding SKUs’ past information.
3.3.3. Dynamics of regressors
Promotions are often associated with carry-over eﬀects. For instance if a
company in week 1 launches a promotion of the kind buy one get one free it
might see eﬀects on the level of sales in weeks 2 and/or 3. That means that
the eﬀect of promotions usually has some dynamics. In order to model this
phenomenon, we include lagged variables of the previous 26 regressors up to
order 3, summing up to 104 independent variables in the PCA.
3.3.4. Error term
In previous equations (4)-(6), the error term (ei
t) may be serially correlated. Another feature of the modeling methodology proposed here is the
automatic identiﬁcation of the error structure by minimizing the Schwarz
Bayesian Criterion (SBC), . In that sense, the error can be
expressed in the backshift notation as:
(1 −B)dφi(B)ηi
t is white noise, B is the backshift operator (Bηi
t−1), θi(B) =
2B2−. . .−θi
qBq) is the Moving Average part of order q for the ith
SKU, φi(B) = (1 −φi
2B2 −. . . −φi
pBp) stands for the Autoregressive
term of order p and d is the diﬀerencing operator order. In order to obtain
a parsimonious model, the orders considered for p and q range from 0 to 3,
and only up to single diﬀerence (d = 1) has been analyzed.
3.3.5. Non promotional observations
The dynamic regression explained so far is used to forecast promotional
sales. Nonetheless, a SKU will have observations that are not promoted. In
this case, the dynamic regression is simpliﬁed to the following equation:
t = 1 + γi · B
The transfer function shown in (8) is equivalent to the well-known single
exponential smoothing, where γ = 1−α. Here α is the exponential smoothing
parameter deﬁned in (1). The noise term ηi
t is assumed normally distributed
with mean zero and variance σ2; both of them constant. It should be noted
that the estimation of the parameter γi has excluded the observations under
promotions.
3.3.6. Final model
In summary, the dynamic regression employed to forecasting sales that
can be subject to promotional campaigns can be expressed as:
(1−B)dφi(B)ηi
promot+1 = 1
PromoIn ≥5,
j=1 βj · Xi
(1−B)dφi(B)ηi
promot+1 = 1
PromoIn < 5,
promot+1 = 0
where PromoIn is the number of weeks under promotions in the estimation
It is important to explain why the third equation in (9) is required. We
are introducing a diﬀerent noise model for promotional and no promotional
observations. The reason behind this is that the error term identiﬁed for
promotional observations may not be adequate for non-promotional periods.
In fact, in simulations on our dataset we have obtained more accurate results
by including a separate error term for “normal” sales rather than keeping the
noise term identiﬁed during promotion periods. Additionally, note that the
inclusion of explanatory variable Xi
j,t+1 assumes that the future promotion
should be known in advance. This is a valid assumption, as the duration and
terms of promotions are most often part of an accepted promotional schedule.
4. Experimental results
In order to test the aforementioned models, a predictive empirical experiment is carried out. The last 30 weeks of each SKU time series (20% of the
whole dataset) are reserved as a hold-out sample and are used for evaluating
the diﬀerent forecasting models. In this hold-out sample, there are 249 weeks
under promotion, i.e., 21% of the promoted weeks in the dataset are in the
hold-out; thus, evaluating the forecasting performance on a representative
mix of promoted and non-promoted weeks.
A rolling origin evaluation experiment is designed as follows. Once the
forecast is made, the origin is moved one week ahead until the complete 30
weeks of the hold-out sample is exhausted. The forecasting horizon is one
week ahead, which is relevant to this case study. All models are estimated
using the ECOTOOL Matlab toolbox .
To compare the forecasting techniques we use the Mean Absolute Error
(MAE), which is deﬁned as MAE = mean(|Et|) and Et is the normalized
error given by:
Et = (yt −F t),
t = 1, . . . , T
Here, yt and F t stand for the normalized actual value and the forecast,
respectively, at time t. The sales standard deviation in the estimation sample
has been used as a normalization factor. The MAE is computed across time
and then across SKUs providing an overall summary error metric. This is
possible as we have ﬁrst normalized the values.
Before comparing the ﬁnal dynamic regression with other methods, it is
important to assess the performance improvements achieved by each of the
diﬀerent model components introduced in section 3.3. Table 2 shows the
MAE of promotional weeks obtained from the simple linear regression with
the original variables to the ﬁnal dynamic regression shown in (9). The ﬁrst
innovation introduced was the substitution of the original variables by the
principal components (section 3.3.1). The results of the regression based on
principal components is shown in the 5th. row of the table and its performance was better than the simple linear regression with the original variables
(4th. row) and the system and expert forecasts (FF). Note that those results only use a few Principal Components instead of the original variables.
The models in the sixth row carries out a pooled regression for SKUs without enough promotions in the estimation sample (section 3.3.2). It should
be noted that the pooled regression may utilize more Principal Components
than the regression per SKU, since variables such as Category and Customer
Table 2: MAE associated to the diﬀerent regression types in promotional periods
System Forecast (SF)
Final Forecast (FF)
Regression with original variables
Regression with Principal Components
Pooled Regression with PC
Dynamic Pooled Regression with PC
Dynamic Pooled Regression with PC and modeled error (DR)
play an important role.
These variables were found not to be signiﬁcant
when regression with principal components was computed for each single
SKU. Here, apart from the error improvement, the pooled regression allow
us to forecast some SKU weeks that the previous regression were not able
to. Dynamics of the promotional eﬀects (section 3.3.3) are incorporated in
the model (7th. row) decreasing again the forecasting error. Finally, the last
row reports the importance of modeling the error term (section 3.3.4) by the
considerable improvement reached by the ﬁnal Dynamic Regression model
described in (9), hereafter the DR model. Summarizing, Table 2 exhibits the
improvement achieved by each regression model reﬁnement.
An interesting fact shown in Table 2 is that FF accuracy is worse than SF.
This indicates that experts do not improve the baseline forecast accuracy in
promotional periods. Nevertheless, even when FF on average seems to perform worse, it can be the consequence of outliers. In order to have a broader
picture of the experts accuracy, we can plot the MAE vs the normalized adjustments sorted with respect to their size. In that sense, the evolution of
the error against the size and sign of adjustments can be analyzed. Figures
2-4 depicts the MAE versus normalized adjustments for diﬀerent situations.
Figure 2 shows the performance of the forecasting techniques when observations are under promotions. In this ﬁgure, there is an interval where
FF is more accurate than SF (between 1 and 3 scaled adjustments). Here,
FF performs better because experts knowing that there is a promotion look
back to previous promotions and modify system forecast to achieve similar
promotional sales patterns to the past. Those modiﬁcations up to certain
adjustments size are ﬁne, however, when adjustments are too big, experts
produce bigger errors than the SF.
In the same ﬁgure, we can see that the Dynamic Regression (DR) also
captures the past promotional sales pattern and projects it for future promotions yielding the best results. In fact, unlike the rest of the methods, it
provides a good performance for large adjustments. It should be noted that
most of the adjustments under promotions are positive as it can be seen in
the lower panel histogram in Figure 2. Furthermore, negative adjustments
are smaller and less frequent.
Normalized adjustments
Figure 2: MAE of considered models under promotions by normalized adjustment size.
The lower part of the ﬁgure provides a histogram of the adjustments. SF: System Forecast;
FF: Final Forecast, LL: Last like, DR: Dynamic Regression
Figure 3 only depicts non-promotional observations. Here, it is interesting to point out that all methods that somehow include information about
promotions (FF, LL, DR) performs similarly well for negative adjustments.
After a promotion has occurred, it is reasonable that sales would decrease.
However, the System Forecast does not handle additional information to indicate when a promotion has ended; hence, their forecast remains high. In
order to correct the higher forecasts given by the SF, experts modify them
by judgmentally reducing the value of forecasts, i.e., making negative adjustments. This eﬀect is also automatically identiﬁed by LL and DR. This
oﬀers an informative and good explanation of the good performance of negative adjustments on forecasting accuracy. Previous references found that
experts’ negative adjustments were more accurate ; here, we provide a feasible explanation why this is so, at
least regarding adjustments due to promotional activity.
Normalized adjustments
Figure 3: MAE of proposed models when there are no promotions. The lower part of the
ﬁgure provides a histogram of the adjustments. SF: System Forecast; FF: Final Forecast,
LL: Last like, DR: Dynamic Regression
Figure 4 depicts the overall results of the forecasting methods under study
considering all the observations irrespective of whether they were promoted
or not. Here, the forecasting technique DR provides very competitive results
for both positive and negative adjustments.
In summary, Table 3 shows the MAE achieved for each method. The
values highlighted in bold show the method with the most accurate results.
The last row in Table 3 shows the overall performance, where the best performance is obtained by the Dynamic Regression (DR). Second and ﬁrst rows
break down the Overall results for promotional or non-promotional periods.
Again, DR outperforms the rest of the models. Notice that DR achieves
substantial improvements on promotional periods, being 16% and 32% more
Normalized adjustments
Figure 4: Overall models performance. The lower part of the ﬁgure provides a histogram
of the adjustments. SF: System Forecast; FF: Final Forecast, LL: Last like, DR: Dynamic
Regression
accurate than SF and FF respectively, which is the current practice in our
case study company.
Table 3: Hold-out sample MAE of methods
Mean of Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) is an easy to communicate error measure and the most commonly used in practice . This is calculated as the mean of APEt = |yt −Ft|/yt. Absolute percentage errors have been criticized to provide biased results, and
can be misleading when extremely high percentages, arising from relatively
low actual demand values, are present. In order to mitigate these problems,
Table 4 summarizes our results using the median. DR considerably outper-
forms FF, SF and the statistical benchmarks in the presence of promotions.
These results indicate the validity of DR as a sales forecasting tool under
promotional activity.
Table 4: Hold out Median(MAPE) of methods
29.53 Promo
25.82 Overall
Although our case study company requires one-week ahead forecasts of
future demand, we evaluate the performance of the diﬀerent methods for
longer forecast horizons to explore whether the superior performance of DR
is consistent.
Table 5 provides the MAE for promotional periods for up
to four-weeks ahead forecasts. The results are consistent with the previous
ﬁndings. Note that in Table 5 we do not provide the performance of SF and
FF as these are only available from our case study company for one-week
ahead forecasts.
Table 5: Hold out MAE for diﬀerent forecasting horizons
Horizon (weeks)
5. Conclusions
Recent literature has proposed multivariate regression models in contrast
to judgmental forecasting to predict sales in the presence of promotions. This
paper investigates the strengths and weaknesses of this kind of models and
suggests several innovations in the context of promotional modeling at SKU
level: i) Principal Component Analysis is used to reduce the dimension of
the explanatory variables and avoid multicollinearity; ii) Pooled regression
is applied when the estimation sample does not contain enough promoted
weeks; iii) The error term is modeled as a transfer function, automatically
identiﬁed by minimizing the SBC; iv) These features can be expressed as a
dynamic regression that outperforms the experts forecasts of a case study
company, as well as other well-known benchmarks.
The results shows that the Dynamic Regression achieves the lowest forecast error. This outcome has several managerial implications. On the demand planners behalf, they can beneﬁt from reduced eﬀort to judgmentally
adjust forecast, while forecasting accuracy is improved. On the Forecasting Support System developers behalf, multivariate models with the innovations proposed in this paper should be considered in their software to help
their potential clients that usually works with promotional policies. Established commercial software does not oﬀer this facility, leaving the inclusion
of promotional factors to expert judgment. Last but not least, the increased
accuracy of the proposed model has direct implications for inventory management. The eﬀects of promotions are accurately captured and reﬂected in
the expected demand. Moreover, the forecast uncertainty is reduced, thus
enabling the calculation of more appropriate safety stock.
In addition, our modeling approach overcomes some of the limiting factors
of the existing literature on promotional modeling; in particular the need
for extensive data and secondly, the limited modeling experience in many
companies that makes the use of complex econometric promotional models
diﬃcult, if not impossible.
We evaluated the performance of the proposed model for a manufacturer
case study. Extending this study to other companies will allow us to better
understand the performance of such promotional models. Additionally, further research should include alternative error metrics. Particularly, recent
studies propose the Average Relative MAE and distribution based scores respectively, to enhance the
forecasting accuracy measure in supply chain forecasting applications.