Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data
Niels Væver Hartvig1* and Jens Ledet Jensen1,2
1Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark
2MaPhySto,† University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark
Abstract: Recently, Everitt and Bullmore proposed a mixture model for a test statistic for activation
in fMRI data. The distribution of the statistic was divided into two components; one for nonactivated
voxels and one for activated voxels. In this framework one can calculate a posterior probability for a voxel
being activated, which provides a more natural basis for thresholding the statistic image, than that based
on P-values. In this article, we extend the method of Everitt and Bullmore to account for spatial coherency
of activated regions. We achieve this by formulating a model for the activation in a small region of voxels
and using this spatial structure when calculating the posterior probability of a voxel being activated. We
have investigated several choices of spatial models but ﬁnd that they all work equally well for brain
imaging data. We applied the model to synthetic data from statistical image analysis, a synthetic fMRI
data set and to visual stimulation data. Our conclusion is that the method improves the estimation of the
activation pattern signiﬁcantly, compared to the nonspatial model and to smoothing the data with a kernel
of FWHM 3 voxels. The difference between FWHM 2 smoothing and our method were more modest.
Hum. Brain Mapping 11:233–248, 2000.
© 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: functional magnetic resonance imaging; spatial model; mixture model; image analysis
INTRODUCTION
In the literature on analysis of functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) data, the focus is primarily
on the temporal aspect. Perhaps the most common
analysis scheme is to treat voxel time series separately,
and estimate the activation level voxel by voxel. This
framework ranges from simple t-tests and correlation
methods to more detailed models for the haemodynamic response, and models that account for correlated noise. The latter encompasses generalized linear
models and time series models. A few articles that fall
in this category are Bandettini et al. , Bullmore et
al. , Worsley and Friston , and Lange and
Zeger , but we refer to an overview article such
as Lange et al. for the long list of references that
should be cited in this context.
The spatial properties of the data are rarely modeled
with the same care as is given the temporal ones:
Common approaches are either to assume spatial independence or to smooth data spatially with a Gaussian kernel. The latter approach has been studied primarily by Keith Worsley in a series of articles . Smoothing the data spatially is in
fact equivalent to using a nonparametric model for the
spatial activation pattern, assuming only smoothness
of the latter [Mu¨ller, 1988]. It should hence be viewed
as an estimation procedure that is optimal in this
model, but there is no general statistical reason for
smoothing. On the contrary, smoothing may produce
†Centre for Mathematical Physics and Stochastics, funded by a grant
from the Danish National Research Foundation.
*Correspondence to: Niels Væver Hartvig, Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Aarhus, Ny Munkegade, DK-8000
Aarhus C, Denmark. E-mail: 
Received for publication 3 April 2000; accepted 11 July 2000
Published online xx October 2000
r Human Brain Mapping 11:233–248 r
© 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
a biased estimate by displacing activation peaks and
underestimating the height of the latter [Descombes et
al., 1998; Hartvig, 1999].
Even if explicit spatial models are rare, the value of
including spatial information in the analysis has been
recognized
achieved by assessing signiﬁcance of activation by the
size of suprathreshold clusters. This was ﬁrst suggested by Poline and Mazoyer and later studied
from a theoretical point of view [Friston et al., 1994;
Poline et al., 1997] using Monte Carlo methods [Forman et al., 1995] and permutation methods [Bullmore
et al., 1999]. In our minds the important distinction
here is that of a spatial model and the inference made
in this. Even if cluster size is used as a measure of
signiﬁcance, the estimated pattern is still a product of
the underlying model used to produce the clusters.
Also in this context, the nonparametric smoothing
model seems to be the typical choice.
Recently, Descombes et al. proposed a
Markov random ﬁeld model for the spatio-temporal
activation pattern and used this for estimation of the
latter. Their assumption is that the activation pattern is
spatially coherent, yet may possess sharp boundaries
between different regions, and the model introduces
this explicitly in the estimation procedure. Assessment
of uncertainty and signiﬁcance is not straightforward
in this framework as it requires simulations of the
posterior distribution of the spatio-temporal activation pattern. In principle this may be done with
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques [Gilks
et al., 1996], but because the state space of the spatiotemporal activation pattern is enormous, it is a timeconsuming and far from trivial task. Instead the authors suggested to use the procedure only as a
preprocessing step, and did not use the model for
making explicit inference on the activation.
The dimensionality of the activation pattern is much
reduced in Hartvig where stronger assumptions are made. Speciﬁcally, the activation is modeled
as a collection of centres with Gaussian shape but with
unknown extent and height. This enables inclusion of
prior information directly in the model, and simulation of the posterior distribution is possible by MCMC.
However, also in this context the need to perform
lengthy simulations is a limitation of the method.
The problems of the two last approaches perhaps
explain the lack of spatial models: 1) It is somewhat
difﬁcult to formulate the general idea of coherency of
activated regions in a speciﬁc model, which is still
general enough to model the range of patterns observed in brain data. 2) Most spatial models are analytically intractable, and statistical inference must rely
on simulation methods, which are time consuming
and often require a lot of user interaction. The latter
makes them less suitable for routine use. In this article
we try to bridge the gap between formulating a spatial
model, which has some realistic properties, and the
computational feasibility, which makes it applicable in
a routine analysis. The idea is to formulate the model
through the marginal distribution on a small grid of
voxels, for instance a 3 3 3 region in the slice.
Though the model may be used as the spatial part of
a spatio-temporal model, we will only consider the
problem of estimating the activation pattern based on
a single summary image (or volume) of voxel-wise
activation estimates, also known as a statistical parametric map (SPM). Let {xi} denote the latter, where i
indexes the voxels. Recently, Everitt and Bullmore
 (henceforth denoted EB) suggested a marginal
analysis of such an image. Let Ai be the indicator for
voxel i being activated. The approach of EB is to
calculate the conditional probability P(Ai 5 1uxi) for
each voxel, and use the latter to estimate the activated
areas. In order to calculate this, they specify the distribution of activated and nonactivated voxels, i.e. the
conditional distributions p(xiuAi 5 1) and p(xiuAi 5 0),
as well as the probability P(Ai 5 1). The method does
not use any spatial properties of the data.
What we propose in this article is to keep the simplicity of the approach in EB, but to extend it in such
a way that spatial interaction is partly taken into account. Instead of using P(Ai 5 1uxi) we suggest to use
P(Ai 5 1uxCi), where Ci is voxel i together with the
neighbouring voxels. The idea is that activated areas
tend to constitute a group of at least a few voxels,
hence voxel i has a higher chance of being activated if
both voxel i and some of its neighbours have high
values. Conversely, the activation probability is small
if xi is high, but all the neighbours have small values.
The main problem in this approach becomes the speciﬁcation of the marginal probabilities of the activation
ACi in the region Ci. We propose three different models
for these probabilities, ranging from a very simple one
to a more realistic one. Common to all is that the
probability of a voxel being activated has a simple
expression, which can be easily calculated.
In the two ﬁrst subsections we present an overview
of the method and the spatial models for the activation
pattern. The third subsection is on estimation of parameters in the model and is more technical than the
two ﬁrst. The reader who is most interested in the
general concept and examples of application of the
r Hartvig and Jensen r
model may skip this third subsection on a ﬁrst reading.
Overview of the mixture model
As mentioned in the introduction, we assume that a
statistical parametric map {xi} is given, and we wish to
derive a posterior probability that a voxel is activated
using this map. In the following we will describe how
a local model for the activation pattern around a voxel
i can be used to incorporate spatial information in the
posterior probability. In order to simplify notation we
will drop the voxel index i from the notation.
Suppose we consider k neighbours around voxel i.
Typically these would be the 8 neighbours in a 3 3 3
square in the slice or the 26 neighbours in a 3 3 3 3 3
cube in a volume of slices with voxel i in the centre.
We will let C denote the set of k 1 1 voxels given by
voxel i together with the k neighbours.
We will let A be an indicator for the event that voxel
i is activated, in the sense that A 5 0 means that there
is no activation in voxel i and A 5 1 means that the
voxel is activated. Likewise, we will let A1, . . . , Ak be
a vector of indicators for activation in the k neighbours. We index the As by a superscript to avoid
confusion with the usual voxel subscript. Finally AC 5
(A, A1, . . . , Ak) is the vector of all activation indicators
in C. We will consider this as a vector of unobserved
stochastic variables and formulate a model for its distribution. Thus for each vector aC 5 {0, 1}k11 we specify the prior probability P(AC 5 aC) that the activation
conﬁguration
particular
choices of models, which reﬂect the idea that activated
areas tend to constitute a cluster of voxels, are proposed in the next section.
Rather than observing AC, we observe xC 5 (x,
x1, . . . , xk), the values of the test statistic for activation
in the different voxels. Like before x is the value for
voxel i, and x1, . . . , xk are the values for the neighbours. The usual hypothesis testing approach assumes
a speciﬁc model for x given that the voxel is not
activated, for instance that this is a normal variable
with zero mean and unit variance. In our setup, we
require that one can also specify the alternative distribution, i.e., the distribution of x given A 5 1. In EB the
statistics are fundamental power quotients (FPQ),
which have respectively a central and a noncentral
x2-distribution under the two activation states. In our
Example 3, the test statistics are the estimated activity
level from a regression analysis, and it is natural to
take (xuA 5 0) ; N(0, s2). When the voxel is activated,
A 5 1, it is not so clear what the proper distribution is.
We ﬁnd that the range of different activation levels are
described well by a Gamma distribution, (xuA 5 1) ;
G(l, b). Denote the distribution of xC given AC 5 aC by
the density f(xCuaC).
When these two parts of the model are speciﬁed it is
straightforward to calculate the posterior probability
of an activation conﬁguration aC given the data xC,
since, by Bayes rule, this is given by
P~AC 5 aCuxC! } f~xCuaC!P~AC 5 aC!.
Thus the posterior probability that the activation pattern AC equals aC is simply proportional to the likelihood of observing xC given AC 5 aC times the prior
probability of AC 5 aC. In particular, one may calculate
the probability that voxel i is active or not, irrespectively of the neighbours, by summing over the neighbouring states,
P~A 5 auxC! } O
f~xCuaC!P~AC 5 aC!,
where aC 5 (a, a1, . . . , ak). The constant of proportionality can be determined from the fact that the probabilities P(A 5 0uxC) and P(A 5 1uxC) must sum to one.
The problem with using this approach in practice is
the calculation of the sum in (1), which has 2k terms. In
the situation with a 3 3 3 3 3 neighbourhood cube, the
sum thus has 226 or about 67 million terms, and since
we must calculate this for each voxel in the volume,
we are facing an order of 1013 iterations. Even though
the computations may be performed in parallel, this is
of course hopelessly too many in practice. The main
contribution of our method is that we propose models
for P(AC 5 aC), which are able to model clustered
activation, but where the sum may be calculated analytically. Thus we obtain a simple, closed form expression for the posterior probability that a voxel is activated, which may be calculated almost instantly.
These are given for each of the three models in the
following sections, see equations (4), (16), and (19).
We will assume in the following that the statistics xC
are independent given the true activation pattern AC.
Thus the density of xC given AC can be written as,
f~xCuAC 5 aC! 5 f~xua! P
where f(xua) is the density of x given A 5 a.
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
Models for the marginal probabilities
In this section we give three choices for the marginal
probabilities P(AC 5 aC), aC 5 (a, a1, . . . , ak) [ {0, 1}k11.
For an activation conﬁguration aC, we will let s 5 a 1
a1 1 . . . ak, that is the number of ones in aC.
Perhaps the most simple choice is to take
P~AC 5 aC! 5H
Since there are 2k11 values of aC we must have q0 5
1 2 (2k11 2 1)q1 in order that the probabilities sum to
one. Thus this distribution has only one parameter
and a natural way of interpreting this parameter is
through the probability p of a voxel being activated.
This gives p 5 q12k or
q1 5 p2 2 k
q0 5 1 2 ~2 2 2 2 k!p.
Notice that in the model there is equal probability of
observing a conﬁguration with all ones and one with
only ones in a corner of the region C, for instance. If
we expected the activated areas to be large coherent
regions, the former probability should be larger than
the second, whereas if we expected the areas to be of
moderate size but with long boundaries, the second
probability should be larger than the ﬁrst. The above
model hence represents the situation that we neither
believe that activated regions consist of single voxels
nor that they are very large.
We will illustrate in this simple situation how the
posterior probability in (1) may be calculated. We shall
be using the equality
f~xjuaj!D 5P
$ f~xju0! 1 f~xju1!%.
Let h denote the above product. When a 5 0 the
expression in (1) is
P~A 5 0uxC!
} f~xu0! O
f~xjuaj!D P~AC 5 aC!
5 f~xu0!Sq1h 1 ~q0 2 q1! P
and when a 5 1 we simply get
P~A 5 1uxC! } f~xu1!q1h.
Since the two probabilities must sum to one, we ﬁnd,
P~A 5 1uxC!
f~xu1!q1h 1 f~xu0!Sq1h 1 ~q0 2 q1! P
~1 1 v j!D
j 5 1, . . . , k.
Notice that v is the likelihood ratio for the voxel being
active vs. not active. The formula (4) thus effectively
combine the likelihood ratios from voxel i together
with those of its neighbours to calculate the posterior
probability of activation. The formula shows in a direct way the difference to the approach in EB. If all the
neighbours are nonactivated then (4) will typically be
of the order
whereas if at least one neighbour is activated the order
is typically
For illustration let us consider the case where p 5 0.02
and k 5 8. Then q0/q1 5 12289, and if f(xu0)/f(xu1) '
exp(28) then the ﬁrst term is 0.20 whereas the second
expression is 0.9997.
Another simple choice of P(AC 5 aC) is
r Hartvig and Jensen r
P~AC 5 aC! 5H
Here g 5 1 gives back the model 1 in (2), whereas the
restriction a 5 g/(1 1 g)k11 corresponds to the model
where the voxels are independent and the probability
of a voxel being activated is g/(1 1 g). The latter is
equivalent to the model in EB.
The model may be parametrized by the probability
p of a voxel being active, which is given as p 5 a(1 1
g)k, and by g. The latter is a measure of correlation of
neighbouring activation sites. The last parameter q0 is
given by the constraint that the probabilities must sum
to one. The posterior probability of activation may be
derived in the same way as in model 1, the expression
is given in (16) in the appendix.
Finally, we will consider a model of the form (6), but
being more symmetric with respect to activated and
nonactivated voxels. We will consider the model
P~AC 5 aC! 5H
s 2 1 1 a2g2
if 1 # s # k,
if s 5 k 1 1.
The model may be parametrized by the probability p
of a voxel being active, and 4 other parameters describing the correlation between voxels. The relation
between parameters may be found in the appendix, as
may the expression for the probability that a voxel is
active (18).
Estimation of parameters
For estimation purposes, we will now study the
whole volume of voxels, v, rather than just a single
voxel. For this reason, we will let the notation depend
explicitly on the voxel index. Rather than just using xC,
we will let xCi denote the vector of observations in the
region Ci around voxel i. The elements of the vector
are denoted by xCi 5 (xi
1, . . . , xi
k), thus xi
0 refers to
the statistic xi in voxel i, and xi
1, . . . , xi
k to the statistic
in the k neighbours of i. Similarly AC is changed to ACi
1, . . . , Ai
k) and the likelihood ratios (5) are
denoted vi
j 5 0, 1, . . . , k, i [ V.
Within the model we can calculate the marginal
density of xCi. We denote this by f(xCi; f, c), where f
parametrizes the conditional distribution of xCi given
ACi, and c parametrizes the marginal distribution of
f~xCi; f, c!
aC [ $0,1%k 1 1
f~xCiuACi 5 aC; f!P~ACi 5 aC; c!.
A possibility for estimating the parameters (f, c) is to
maximize the contrast function
g~f, c! 5 O
log f~xCi; f, c!.
This is related to maximum likelihood estimation, in
particular the estimators will be asymptotically normal distributed under conditions where the maximum
likelihood estimators are. For model 2, and hence also
for model 1 by setting g 5 1, we get
f~xCi; f, g, a! 5P
j~f!! 1 1 2
a~1 1 g!k11
The formula for model 3 is given in (19) in the appendix.
Usually, though, we will take a more simple approach instead of using (8). We propose to use only
the marginal distribution of xi to estimate f and the
fraction of activated voxels p. The marginal density of
xi is a mixture density
f~x; f, p! 5 ~1 2 p!f~xu0; f! 1 pf~xu1; f!.
We thus maximize the contrast function
gm~f, p! 5 O
log f~xi; f, p!
to estimate f and p. Under model 1 all parameters
have been estimated this way.
When P(ACi 5 aCi) is given by model 2 we still
estimate p 5 a(1 1 g)k from (11). The remaining parameter g may then be estimated from the empirical
covariance of {xi}: Suppose, for example, that (xuA 5
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
0) ; N(0, s2), and (xuA 5 1) ; N(1, s2). Then the
covariance of xi and xj is given by
Cov~xi, xj! 5 P~Ai 5 Aj 5 1! 2 P~Ai 5 1!P~Aj 5 1!
5 P~Ai 5 Aj 5 1! 2 p2.
If j is a neighbour to i, say neighbour number 1, we
may derive the ﬁrst probability as
P~Ai 5 Aj 5 1! 5
aj [ $0,1%,j52,. . .,k
P~ACi 5 aC!
aj [ $0,1%,j52,. . .,k
ga2 1 · · · 1 ak
5 ag~1 1 g!k21 5 p
Notice that the two expressions above do not depend
on the position of the neighbour j. Suppose an estimate Cˆ of the covariance Cov(xi, xj) is given. This may
be combined with the estimate pˆ of p to form an
estimate of g by the equations above,
b 5 Cˆ pˆ 211pˆ.
Since the covariance is the same for all neighbours, we
may combine estimates of the covariance at different
spatial lags within the neighbourhood, to form the
estimate Cˆ . In practice in our examples (where we
consider respectively 3 3 3 and 5 3 5 neighbourhoods) we have used the eight nearest neighbours to estimate the covariance,
4 ~Cˆ ~1,0! 1 Cˆ ~1,1! 1 Cˆ ~0,1! 1 Cˆ ~ 2 1,1!!.
Here Cˆ l is the correlogram for the spatial lag l [Cressie,
j[V, j1l[V
~xj 2 x#.!~xj 1 l 2 x#.!,
where V denotes the set of brain voxels, Nl is the
number of terms in the sum, and x#. is the average of
Notice that the probability in (13) only depends on
the model for AC, and hence applies whenever model
2 is considered. This is not true for the covariance in
(12), which depends on the distribution of x given A.
In the setup above we have considered a statistic
which is distributed as (xuA 5 0) ; N(0, s2) and (xuA 5
1) ; N(1, s2). When more generally (xuA 5 1) ; N(m,
s2) where m . 0, we obtain the setup above by scaling
x by m21. When the distribution of x is not normal, we
need to calculate the covariance in (12) for the distribution considered. A general formula, which applies
whenever xi and xj are conditionally independent
given Ai and Aj, is given by
Cov~xi, xj! 5 Cov~E~xiuAi!, E~xjuAj!!.
Usually it is straightforward to calculate the righthand side above. This is the approach used in Example
3, where xi has a Gamma distribution when Ai 5 1.
As for the model 3, this has 4 free parameters when
p is given. Moment estimators may be derived for
these as above, but we will refrain from this since the
equations get more complicated. Instead we will estimate the remaining parameters from (8).
In our examples below we have used the simplex
method to maximize the contrast functions [Press et
al., 1992]. The standard errors of the maximum contrast estimators may be obtained by general asymptotic theory, see for instance Heyde . Cressie
 provides formulas for the standard error of Cˆ l.
Presently we have no formal way of including the
uncertainty of the parameters in the analysis; it is,
however, our experience that the posterior probability
maps were quite robust to the observed variations in
the parameters. In fact, as we will show in Examples 2
and 3, they are quite robust to the choice of model.
SIMULATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
We will illustrate the method by applying it to two
synthetic data sets (where the truth is known) and a
visual stimulation data set. For the synthetic data, we
may quantify results by classiﬁcation error, statistical
power or true positive rate (TPR), and level of signi-
ﬁcance or false positive rate (FPR). For a given threshold, the classiﬁcation error is estimated as the number
of misclassiﬁed voxels (either type I or type II errors),
divided by the total number of voxels. The TPR is
estimated as the number of active voxels classiﬁed as
active, divided by the total number of active voxels.
The FPR is estimated as the number of nonactive
voxels that are classiﬁed as active, divided by the total
number of nonactive voxels.
r Hartvig and Jensen r
Example 1: Image restoration data
We will apply the models to a classical problem in
statistical image analysis, namely the restoration of
an unknown true image based on a degraded version of it. Techniques for achieving this are applied
in many areas where images are recorded or transmitted with noise, including remote sensing images,
satellite images, and medical images. In functional
brain imaging the problem is more complex than in
the setting above: It is not as evident what the “true
scene” is or which geometric characteristics it has,
and the noise sources are far more complex than in
image restoration problems. It still serves a purpose,
however, to study how the models perform in this
more simple problem, in order to understand the
characteristics of the models, before moving on to
more complex data.
We will consider two images. The ﬁrst (denoted
Image I) is the 64 3 64 binary image of an ‘A’ by Greig
et al. , see Figure 1. The image is corrupted with
binary noise, where a pixel Ai with probability q is
replaced by 1 2 Ai. The probability densities of the
degraded pixel Xi given the true value Ai are then
f~xuA 5 0! 5 qx~1 2 q!12x,
x [ $0, 1%,
f~xuA 5 1! 5 ~1 2 q!xq12x,
x [ $0, 1%.
The error rate q was set to 25%. Five independently
corrupted images were produced, in order to assess
the variability of the estimates. The results are summarized in Table I and some of the image estimates
are displayed in Figure 1.
The second image (Image II) is the binary image
displayed in Figure 4a of Besag . The image was
corrupted by adding white Gaussian noise with standard deviation 0.9105. In this setting the densities of a
pixel Xi given Ai are
f~xuA 5 0! 5
Î2pt e2x2/2t2,
f~xuA 5 1! 5
Î2pt e2(x21)2/2t2,
where t 5 0.9105. We produced ﬁve independent
noisy images to assess the variability of estimates. The
results are given in Table I.
For each model, the parameters were estimated both
by maximizing the contrast function (8) and, for model
1 and 2, by the simple estimators described earlier. As
the results were almost similar, we give only the ﬁgures for the maximum-constrast estimates. In practice
we recommend that the simple estimators should be
used when possible, since they are much easier to
obtain, and give almost as good results.
TABLE I. Estimated classiﬁcation errors for the three
models and the ICM and MAP estimates*
Classiﬁcation error
10.0 (0.3)
14.6 (0.3)
12.2 (0.2)
* Based on 5 independent simulations of the degraded image. Image
I refers to the true image in Figure 1, degraded with binary noise.
Image II refers to the image in Figure 4a in Besag , degraded
with Gaussian noise. All ﬁgures are in percent; standard errors of
estimates are given in parentheses.
Comparison of spatial mixture models. Top row: Image I and
degraded version. Middle row: Estimates of the true image based
on model 1, 2, and 3 applied to a 3 3 3 pixel region. Bottom row:
Same as above, but with the models deﬁned on a 5 3 5 region.
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
We calculated the posterior probability of A 5 1
given XC in each pixel, and the estimate of the true
image was obtained by thresholding the probability
image at 0.5. The estimates for one of the noisy versions of image I can be seen in Figure 1.
The estimated classiﬁcation error and its standard
error are listed in the second and third column of
Table I. The ﬁrst column lists the models used in this
example. The models 1, 2, and 3 were applied, respectively, deﬁned on a 3 3 3 pixel region and on a 5 3 5
region. For comparison, we have reproduced the classiﬁcation errors of the maximum a posteriori (MAP)
estimate and the iterated conditional modes (ICM)
estimate, which can be found in Greig et al. .
These two estimates are based on the same global
model for the true image, but only the local properties
of the model are used with ICM.
The table shows that model 1 performs worse than
model 2 and 3, which is also clear from Figure 1. It is
also clear that the 5 3 5 region models are superior in
this setting, which is not surprising as the true images
are quite regular with large patches of either black or
white. We might suspect that the 3 3 3 models will be
more appropriate in brain imaging, where the true
scene is not as regular. Model 2 and 3 perform almost
equally well, hence we prefer model 2, since this only
has two parameters.
Model 2 performs well compared to the ICM and
MAP methods also. There are several practical differences between these and our model: First, it is more
computationally intensive to obtain the ICM and MAP
estimates than our posterior probability images. The
latter are calculated in closed form while the ICM and
MAP procedures require iterative algorithms. Second,
the MAP and ICM procedures depend on a smoothing
parameter that, especially for the MAP estimate, is
crucial for the reconstructed image. In this case, the
value of the smoothing parameter was based on the
true image, which is of course not possible in practice.
On the contrary, the parameters of model 2 are estimated directly from the observed image. Seen in this
light, our model seems to be an attractive alternative
to the traditional methods. It is however not as ﬂexible
as the ICM approach, which can be generalized for
instance to multicolour settings.
Example 2: Simulated fMRI data
In order to study the performance on data, which
are closer related to brain imaging problems than the
ones in Example 1, we have applied the methods to a
synthetic fMRI data set. We used the data set of Lange
et al. , which was generated from 72 baseline EPI
scans that were temporally resampled to 384 scans.1
We refer to the article for a full description of the data,
but will repeat the basic properties here. A region of
24 3 12 voxels is considered, and in each voxel the
time series is linearly detrended. Denote the residual
time series by Yit, where i indexes voxels i 5 1, . . . , V
and t indexes scan t 5 1, . . . , T. Here V 5 288 and T 5
384. Artiﬁcial activation was added to obtain the actual data Zit, say, by the model
Zit 5 bixt 1 Yit,
where the magnitude of activation bi is given by
bi 5 msY,i.
2 is an estimate of si
2, the variance of Yit, given
~Yit 2 Y# i.!2,
The temporal activation pattern xt is a simple binary
function, where xt 5 0 when off and xt 5 1 when on,
for t 5 1, . . . , T. The function is periodic with 8 runs,
each of length 48 scans with 12 scans off, 24 on and 12
off. The ratio m of the activation magnitude to standard deviation was chosen to be positive and constant
in the two connected regions of size 25 and 37 voxels
depicted in Figure 2, and zero elsewhere. According to
Lange et al. , a value of m 5 0.15 was chosen in
the activated areas, however when estimating m directly from the data by a regression analysis (when the
true activation pattern is known), we obtain mˆ 5 0.43
with a standard error of 0.015. The value of m is not
important for the present study, however.
In order to make the estimation problem a bit
harder than in the article, we divided the data into 4
subsets, each of length 96 scans. We estimated the
spatial activation pattern from a single subset at a time
and used the empirical variation over the four subsets
to evaluate the uncertainty of our results.
Consider a voxel time series at voxel i, Zit, for t 5
1, . . . , T0, T0 5 96. We tested for activation by a t-test.
More speciﬁcally, the estimate of the activation level is
1The data may be obtained from the address 
8080/plurality.
r Hartvig and Jensen r
Zit~xt 2 x#.!,
~xt 2 x#.!2,
and the variance of Zit is estimated by
~Zit 2 Z# i. 2 bˆ ixt!2
2x2~T0 2 2!/~T0 2 2!.
Here x2(f) denotes the x2-distribution with f degrees of
freedom. Then the statistic
i 5 1, . . . , V,
has a t-distribution with T0 2 2 5 94 degrees of
freedom, if the voxel is not activated. Since the degrees
of freedom are quite large, it is reasonable to make
the approximation that the variance estimates are
exact, sY,i
2, whence we get a normal distribution for Xi,
if i is activated,
if i is not activated,
where m 5 m=SSDx. The image of test statistics {Xi}
hence follows a mixture distribution, where the mean
is positive when the voxel is activated and zero when
not, and the setup is as in the Overview of the Mixture
Model section with
p~xuA 5 0! 5
Î2p e2x2/2,
p~xuA 5 1! 5
Î2p e2(x2m)2/2,
We have assumed here that the temporal correlation is
zero, which is necessarily an optimistic assumption.
Temporal correlation will affect the variance of bˆi, but not
the mean, and will lead to a higher variance of the
statistic Xi, than stated above.
Figure 2 displays the image of t-statistics for the ﬁrst
of the four subdata sets. The posterior probability that
a voxel is activated was calculated using the simple
mixture model without spatial interaction, i.e., the
setup of EB, and the models 1, 2, and 3. The image of
posterior probabilities was thresholded at 0.5, which is
a natural level when specifying a neutral balance between type I and II errors. The thresholded activation
images are displayed in Figure 2. Clearly the spatial
models (1, 2, 3) represent the true activation pattern
much more closely than the simple mixture model.
When using the latter, we effectively threshold the
raw t-statistic image at a certain level, while at the
spatial models we use information in neighbouring
voxels, when classifying a voxel.
In Table II the models are compared quantitatively
by their ability to classify voxels correctly, and by the
TPR at a given level of signiﬁcance (FPR). The threshold was adjusted to yield an empirical FPR of 5% and
1%, respectively, in each image, and the TPR of this
level was calculated. While the TPR estimates provide
TABLE II. Comparison of models for the synthetic fMRI
data in Figure 2*
Class. error
TPR (level 5%)
TPR (level 1%)
11.0 (0.7)
66.1 (2.3)
46.8 (5.0)
88.3 (0.8)
65.7 (4.0)
85.1 (2.0)
57.7 (6.3)
90.7 (1.4)
72.5 (2.4)
84.3 (2.9)
74.6 (3.5)
87.5 (2.3)
66.5 (3.5)
82.7 (3.0)
51.6 (7.6)
* From left to right are estimates of classiﬁcation error for the
thresholded images and TPR for images thresholded at a FPR of 5%
and at 1% respectively. All ﬁgures are in percent. Standard errors of
estimates, expressing the variability over the four sub-datasets, are
given in parentheses.
Activation images for the ﬁrst of four subsets of the synthetic
dataset. Top left and middle: True binary activation image and
observed t-statistics image. The remaining are thresholded posterior probability images for the different models. EB: Everitt and
Bullmore’s mixture model. 1, 2, and 3: Models 1, 2, and 3 deﬁned
on a 3 3 3 region or a 5 3 5 region. The images were thresholded
at posterior probability 0.5.
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
an idea of the strength of the classiﬁcation test, they
are mainly of theoretical interest, since the threshold
used was calculated given the true activation pattern.
On the contrary to this, the classiﬁcation error measures reproducibility of the true pattern, when a practical and objective threshold is applied.
The table conﬁrms the impression from Figure 2:
The simple mixture model has the worst classiﬁcation
error and the lowest power. The three spatial models
perform almost equally well, and a grid of 3 3 3
voxels gives the best result for this data. If the activated areas were larger than these, the 5 3 5 model
might be more suitable; however, this activation pattern seems reasonably representative for real data, and
hence we recommend the 3 3 3 model to be used in
practice. When considering the power, model 2 is
slightly superior to the models 1 and 3, though this is
not signiﬁcant. Models 1 and 2 are furthermore preferable to model 3, since they have only 1 and 2 parameters, respectively.
We may conclude that model 2 applied to a 3 3 3
neighbourhood is preferable in this situation: The
statistical power is more than 90% at a signiﬁcance
level of 5%, and the misclassiﬁcation is reduced by
more than 40% compared to the simple mixture
We will compare the performance of model 2 with a
nonparametric model, where the activation is estimated by smoothing the data spatially with a Gaussian kernel of full width at half maximum (FWHM) 2
and 3 voxels, respectively, before calculating the tstatistic image. This is perhaps the most common way
of including spatial information in the analysis of
fMRI data, and usually the smooth t-image is thresholded using the random ﬁelds theory [Worsley et al.,
1996]. Voxels may then be classiﬁed either on the basis
of peak height or on cluster size. However, our aim
here is not to compare results from thresholding based
on random ﬁelds theory with that based on posterior
probabilities. We think this is difﬁcult as the underlying principles and assumptions are fundamentally different. Rather we wish to compare the estimates of
spatial activation pattern obtained by the two models.
For this reason, we have thresholded the activation
images in a comparable way, namely at the level
which yields an actual FPR of 5% and 1%, respectively, based on the true activation pattern. Figure 3
displays the estimated activation patterns.
From the ﬁrst row, we see that the distinction
between noise and activation is dramatically different on the posterior probability scale compared to
the t-image scale. EB made similar observations
when comparing p-values and posterior probabilities. The two last rows show that the nonparametric
model yields estimates which are smoother than the
true regions, while the regions of model 2 are more
irregular and have more holes. The estimated TPR
for the nonparametric model are given in Table III.
By comparing this with Table II, we see that model
2 reproduces the true activation best, as it has the
highest TPR for each level of FPR. The difference is
only signiﬁcant for FWHM 3.
Example 3: Visual stimulation fMRI data
We ﬁnally considered a visual stimulation data set
acquired with T*2-weighted EPI on a 1.5 T scanner at
the MR Research Centre, Aarhus University Hospital
in Denmark. The data consist of 90 128 3 128 scans
(5 3 1.875 3 1.875 mm voxels) for each slice, with a TR
of 2 sec. Five oblique slices were acquired in axialcoronal direction through the visual cortex. The stimulus was a 7 Hz ﬂashing light, which was presented in
a blocked paradigm of 10 scans off, 10 scans on, etc.,
starting an ending with an off period. The ﬁrst 5 scans
were discarded, and we selected one of the slices for
this analysis.
Activation images for the ﬁrst of four subsets of the synthetic
dataset. From left to right: Model 2 deﬁned on a 3 3 3 region and
the nonparametric model with FWHM 2 and 3 voxels, respectively. Top row: Original activation images. Below: Images thresholded at empirical FPR 5% (middle) and 1% (bottom).
TABLE III. Estimates of TPR for nonparametric
activation images in Figure 3*
TPR (level 5%)
TPR (level 1%)
NP, FWHM 2
89.5 (2.0)
66.9 (2.8)
NP, FWHM 3
78.6 (3.4)
46.0 (6.7)
* Thresholded at a FPR of 5% and at 1%, respectively. All ﬁgures are
in percent. Standard errors of estimates are given in parentheses.
r Hartvig and Jensen r
minimizing
squared distance of each scan to a reference scan under rotations and translations. Next we log-transformed the data and masked 4389 brain-voxels out. A
linear model was ﬁtted individually to each voxel time
series. The mean value space was spanned by a linear
trend and a model for the haemodynamic response
function given by a convolution of the paradigm with
a Gaussian function with mean 6 sec. and variance 9
sec2. The estimated activation amplitude was divided
by its standard error to yield an image of t-statistics.
The latter is displayed in the ﬁrst panel in Figure 4.
We did not account for correlation in the time series,
whence we expect the variance of the statistics to be
larger than the theoretical variance of the t-distribution. We investigated the empirical distribution of the
set {xi} of 4,389 statistics and found that a mixture of
three components ﬁtted well to this. Two of these were
Gamma distributions, modeling respectively positive
and negative BOLD effects, and one was a Normal
distribution modeling the noise. The ﬁtted density
f~x! 5 p0fN~x; 0, s2! 1 p 2 fG~2x; l 2 , b 2 !
1 p 1 fG~x; l 1 , b 1 !,
where fN( z ; m, s2) denotes the density of a normal
distribution with mean m and variance s2 . 0, and
fG( z ; l, b) is the density of a Gamma distribution with
mean l/b and variance l/b2,
fG~x; l, b! 5
G~l! xl 2 1e 2 bx,
x . 0, l . 0, b . 0.
With the requirement that p0 1 p1 1 p2 5 1, there are
7 free parameters, which were estimated by maximizing the likelihood function under the restriction that
Comparison of estimated activation
patterns for the different mixture models of the visual stimulation data. Top
left and middle: Raw image of t-statistics
and an enlarged section of this. The
remaining panels are posterior probability images thresholded at 0.5. Top
right: nonspatial mixture model. Middle
and last row: Models 1, 2, and 3 deﬁned
on respectively a 3 3 3 voxel region
(middle row) and 5 3 5 voxel region
(last row).
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
E~XuX . 0! 5
xi1~xi . 0!
i.e., the mean of X given that it is positive, must equal
the empirical mean of the positive xi’s. It is well
known that the likelihood function may be unbounded in mixture models, and the latter restriction
was imposed to reduce the parameter space to ﬁnite
likelihood values. The estimates are given in Table IV.
We are only interested in detecting positive activation in this example. Therefore we write f(x) as
f~x! 5 ~1 2 p1!f~xuA 5 0! 1 p1f~xuA 5 1!,
f~xuA 5 0! 5
p0 1 p2 fN~x; 0, s2!
p0 1 p2 fG~2x; l 2 , b2!
is the null distribution and
f~xuA 5 1! 5 fG~x; l1, b1!
is the distribution of x, given that the voxel is positively activated.
The setup is hence as given previously, only here
the null distribution represents both no activation and
negative BOLD effects. As an alternative to the
Gamma distribution for positive activation, one could
consider the sum of a Gamma and a Normal distribution, to account for the fact that the activation level is
observed with noise. The density of the latter is, however, not available in closed form, and because the
distributions are very similar at the present noise
level, we have chosen a single Gamma.
Figure 4 shows the image of statistics {xi} and enlarged sections of thresholded posterior probability
maps for the nonspatial mixture model (EB), and for
models 1, 2, and 3. The images were thresholded at
0.5. Like in the previous section, there is hardly any
difference between the different spatial models, but
there is a striking difference between the EB model
and the others. In general the activated areas are larger
with the spatial models and small (i.e., single voxel)
areas are suppressed. Clearly we can only speculate
whether these estimates are more accurate. However,
the simulated data of the previous section suggest that
for activated areas of a certain size, the spatial model
gives a signiﬁcantly improved estimate. The idea that
activation should have a certain spatial extent is the
rationale behind spatial smoothing and other ﬁltering
techniques, and hence also this methodology.
In Figure 5 we have displayed the estimate one gets
by smoothing the original data before calculating the
statistical image. We have no directly comparable way
of thresholding this image, instead we have thresholded the image at three different levels. The mixture
model estimates have some similarities with these
activation patterns, but clearly the latter are much
smoother. Again we can only speculate what is most
accurate. It is, however, well known [Mu¨ller, 1988]
that a kernel smoothing estimate will be biased, in the
sense that the estimate will be smoother than the
underlying signal. This is a likely explanation for the
difference in smoothness.
DISCUSSION
Conceptual summary
We have proposed a spatial mixture model for a
statistical parametric map {xi}. The idea is to model the
distribution of xi both when the voxel is not active and
when it is. Typically the nonactivated distribution is
known, this is the usual null distribution of the SPM.
The activation distribution might either be a simple
noncentral version of the null distribution, as in Example 2, or a completely different distribution, which
models the range of different activation strengths observed in the data, as in Example 3. The activation
pattern is described by an unobserved volume of binary indicators, {Ai}. We suggest three different prior
models for this pattern, which reﬂect the property that
activation tends to occur in clusters rather than individual pixels. By formulating the models locally on a
small region of pixels, it is possible to obtain a closed
form expression for the posterior probability that a
voxel is activated, given the values of the SPM in a
region around the voxel.
To use the method in practice all one needs to
specify are the two distributions of the test statistic. As
TABLE IV. Parameter estimates for the distribution
(15) of {xi}
sˆ 5 1.5160
pˆ1 5 0.0502
pˆ2 5 0.0081
lˆ 1 5 6.2349
lˆ 2 5 56.923
bˆ 1 5 0.9433
bˆ 2 5 10.253
r Hartvig and Jensen r
in an ordinary analysis, the choice of test statistic
inﬂuences the sensitivity, but there are no restrictions
on the class of statistics that may be employed: the
only requirement is that one can specify parametric
distributions for the two activation states.
The proposed models account to some extent for the
spatial structure of the underlying activation pattern.
We found that the three different models worked almost equally well on synthetic and real fMRI data. In
fact we tested two more advanced models also, but
they gave similar results. (The models are described in
a research report by the authors.) We recommend
model 2 to be used in practice: It has only two parameters, with natural interpretations: One is p, the probability of a voxel being activated. An estimate of p is a
global measure of the fraction of activated voxels,
which is of interest in itself. The other is g, which is a
measure of the correlation of the true activation ﬁeld.
The parameters may be estimated directly from the
When modeling only a single slice with 1.9 mm voxels, we found that a 3 3 3 neighbourhood worked well.
When a volume of slices is considered, the neighbourhood could be extended with the two voxels directly below and above the centre or to a 3 3 3 3 3 cube.
This should of course depend on the interslice distance.
Comparison with existing methods
The methodology extends that of EB, who proposed
a nonspatial mixture model. In fact, the EB model is a
special case of our analysis scheme, as it is contained
in model 2. We found signiﬁcant improvements in
sensitivity on synthetic fMRI data compared to the
non-spatial mixture model: The sensitivity increased
from 66% to 91% at a FPR of 5%, and the misclassiﬁcation rate of the 0.5-thresholded images was reduced
from 11% to 6%. The analysis of visual stimulation
data indicated similar improvements.
When applied to synthetic fMRI data, our method
was more sensitive than smoothing the data with a
kernel of FWHM 3 voxels, but the sensitivity of the
FWHM 2 smoothing was similar to ours. However the
nonparametric smoothing model seems to produce
estimates which are more smooth, than the ones obtained with our method. As mentioned in Example 3,
this could be explained by the bias in the kernel
smoothing estimate. One argument used for smoothing data is the Matched Filter Theorem [Rosenfeld and
Kak, 1982]. This states that in order to maximize signal-to-noise ratio at a speciﬁc point in an image, one
should convolve the image with a kernel that has the
same shape as the signal at that point. This is a statement about detecting a signal. When one wants to
estimate the signal or some features of it, this is not
necessarily an optimal strategy because of the bias
introduced. On the contrary, a parametric model, if
correct, yields estimates that are less biased and more
efﬁcient. Clearly, our model is not “correct,” but we
would like to emphasize the difference between parametric and nonparametric modeling. Furthermore, the
choice of the smoothing parameter, i.e., the FWHM of
the kernel, is always a critical point in nonparametric
estimation. It seems that for fMRI data, this parameter
Images of t-statistics based on
stimulation
smoothed spatially with a Gaussian kernel of FHWM 2 voxels
(top row) and 3 voxels (bottom
row). The images are thresholded at 5.0 (left), 6.0 (middle),
and 7.0 (right).
r Spatial Mixture Modeling of fMRI Data r
is often chosen in an ad hoc manner. With our method,
the “smoothing parameter” (such as the parameter g
of model 2) is estimated directly from the data itself.
The assumptions underlying mixture modeling
seem more natural and transparent to us than those
underlying the random ﬁelds theory. We expect a
priori to ﬁnd basically two different types of voxels,
activated and nonactivated, and a model for the data
should reﬂect this. The inference in the model is fundamentally different from the usual hypothesis testing
framework. In the latter, what is really an estimation
problem, is answered by a hypothesis test [Worsley,
1997]. The main problem is then the protection against
false positives, with the large number of tests performed. In our approach we estimate the proportion of
active voxels p, and use this to determine the posterior
probability that a voxel is activated. As may be seen
from (3) and (4) the probability that A 5 1 tends to 0
as p tends to 0. This may be regarded as our way of
handling multiple comparisons: If the size of the volume is increased, but the number of active voxels is
ﬁxed, p will decrease, and hence so will the posterior
probability that a voxel is activated. For a ﬁxed
amount of activation, a larger search volume hence
yields a more conservative analysis than a small.
Another advantage compared to the random ﬁelds
framework is the robustness to misspeciﬁcation of the
model. To illustrate this, we replaced the normal distribution in Example 3 with a t-distribution with 20
degrees of freedom. The thresholded activation images were almost identical, with only a few voxels
changing state. This is not surprising, as the two distributions are almost equivalent for our purposes. On
the contrary, the random ﬁeld theory relies on the
extreme tail of the distribution, whence there is nonnegligible difference between a t(20) distribution and
the normal distribution in this framework.
The method may be particularly relevant in applications where signal estimation is more important
than signal detection. This is the case for instance
when fMRI is used for presurgical planning, where the
protection against false negatives is more important
than false positives. Another example is when the
results of an fMRI study are combined with data from
other modalities, such as to regularize the inverse
problem of MEG/EEG [Liu et al., 1998].
During the review process of this article, we realized that the idea of using local models for the true
image in restoration problems is not new. Meloche
and Zamar used an approach similar to ours,
and they also derived moment estimators for parameters of the true image model. Meloche and Zamar
considered a more general framework, where they
estimated the probabilities P(AC 5 aC) nonparametrically in a very elegant way. We restrict our attention to
parametric models, which are realistic from a brain
imaging point of view, and this gives us the big advantage of being able to calculate the posterior probability in closed form. As mentioned earlier, this point
is crucial for the applicability of the method in practice. Furthermore Meloche and Zamar only consider
models of the form (xuA 5 0) ; N(0, s2) and (xuA 5
1) ; N(1, s2), where our setup is completely general.
We have assumed throughout the article that the
observations are uncorrelated given the true activation pattern. Some spatial correlation can be detected
in the noise in fMRI data, and hence this assumption
will often be violated. The correlation of the signal is,
however, much larger than that of the noise, and we
have accounted for most of the correlation in the data
by the model for the activation pattern. In some models, one may extend the methodology to correlated
noise by estimating the spatial correlation ﬁrst, and
incorporating this in the expression for f(xCuaC). Assuming stationarity of the correlation, this may be
estimated from the residual time series, see for instance Hartvig . Clearly the computations get
more complicated then, as the closed form expression
for the posterior probability is lost.
From a mathematical point of view, a natural question is whether there exist global models for the whole
set of voxels, which have marginal distributions given
by the models in this article. This is in fact the case,
since all three models have the property, that the
structure of the model is maintained when reducing to
marginal distributions. Considering model 2, for instance, this means that if we formulate the model on
the whole set of voxels, the marginal distribution of a
3 3 3 region will be the same as that obtained by
formulating the model on this region only. This also
means that edge effects may be handled in a rigorous
way by simply reducing the number of neighbours k
when calculating the probability of activation in
boundary voxels.
CONCLUSION
We have formulated a simple mixture model for fMRI
data that captures most of the spatial structure of the
underlying activation pattern. The spatial model has two
parameters, which are directly interpretable and may be
estimated from the data. The expression for the posterior
probability that a voxel is activated is given in closed
form. Rather than the usual hypothesis testing, the focus
of the method is estimation of the activation, which
seems more natural in many applications.
r Hartvig and Jensen r
In order to use this method, one needs only specify
the null distribution and the distribution of activated
voxels. These can be any distributions. The resulting
activation image is a posterior probability image,
which may be thresholded in an intuitive way without
the need for correcting for multiple comparisons. Alternatively, one may display the unthresholded probability map, which shows a clear distinction between
estimated activation and baseline.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Hans Stødkilde-Jørgensen at the MR Research Centre, Aarhus University Hospital, for sharing
data and insight. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for valuable suggestions.