The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)
EvolveGCN: Evolving Graph Convolutional Networks for Dynamic Graphs
Aldo Pareja,1,2∗Giacomo Domeniconi,1,2∗Jie Chen,1,2† Tengfei Ma,1,2 Toyotaro Suzumura,1,2
Hiroki Kanezashi,1,2 Tim Kaler,1,3 Tao B. Schardl,1,3 Charles E. Leiserson1,3
1MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2IBM Research, 3MIT CSAIL
{Aldo.Pareja, Giacomo.Domeniconi1, Tengfei.Ma1}@ibm.com, {chenjie, tsuzumura, hirokik}@us.ibm.com,
{tfk, neboat, cel}@mit.edu
Graph representation learning resurges as a trending research
subject owing to the widespread use of deep learning for Euclidean data, which inspire various creative designs of neural
networks in the non-Euclidean domain, particularly graphs.
With the success of these graph neural networks (GNN) in the
static setting, we approach further practical scenarios where
the graph dynamically evolves. Existing approaches typically
resort to node embeddings and use a recurrent neural network (RNN, broadly speaking) to regulate the embeddings
and learn the temporal dynamics. These methods require the
knowledge of a node in the full time span (including both
training and testing) and are less applicable to the frequent
change of the node set. In some extreme scenarios, the node
sets at different time steps may completely differ. To resolve
this challenge, we propose EvolveGCN, which adapts the
graph convolutional network (GCN) model along the temporal dimension without resorting to node embeddings. The
proposed approach captures the dynamism of the graph sequence through using an RNN to evolve the GCN parameters.
Two architectures are considered for the parameter evolution.
We evaluate the proposed approach on tasks including link
prediction, edge classiﬁcation, and node classiﬁcation. The
experimental results indicate a generally higher performance
of EvolveGCN compared with related approaches. The code
is available at 
Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures that model the pairwise interactions between entities. Learning with graphs encounters unique challenges, including their combinatorial
nature and the scalability bottleneck, compared with Euclidean data (e.g., images, videos, speech signals, and natural languages). With the remarkable success of deep learning for the latter data types, there exist renewed interests
in the learning of graph representations on both the
node and the graph level, now parameterized by deep neural networks . All rights reserved.
Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Gilmer et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Jin et al. 2017; Chen, Ma, and Xiao
2018; Veli˘ckovi´c et al. 2018; Gao and Ji 2019).
These neural network models generally focus on a given,
static graph. In real-life applications, however, often one encounters a dynamically evolving graph. For example, users
of a social network develop friendship over time; hence,
the vectorial representation of the users should be updated
accordingly to reﬂect the temporal evolution of their social relationship. Similarly, a citation network of scientiﬁc
articles is constantly enriched due to frequent publications
of new work citing prior art. Thus, the inﬂuence, and even
sometimes the categorization, of an article varies along time.
Update of the node embeddings to reﬂect this variation is
desired. In ﬁnancial networks, transactions naturally come
with time stamps. The nature of a user account may change
owing to the characteristics of the involved transactions
(e.g., an account participates money laundering or a user becomes a victim of credit card fraud). Early detection of the
change is crucial to the effectiveness of law enforcement and
the minimization of loss to a ﬁnancial institute. These examples urge the development of dynamic graph methods that
encode the temporal evolution of relational data.
Built on the recent success of graph neural networks
(GNN) for static graphs, in this work we extend them to
the dynamic setting through introducing a recurrent mechanism to update the network parameters, for capturing the
dynamism of the graphs. A plethora of GNNs perform information fusion through aggregating node embeddings from
one-hop neighborhoods recursively. A majority of the parameters of the networks is the linear transformation of the
node embeddings in each layer. We speciﬁcally focus on
the graph convolutional network (GCN) because of its simplicity and effectiveness. Then, we
propose to use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to inject
the dynamism into the parameters of the GCN, which forms
an evolving sequence.
Work along a similar direction includes ,
among others, which are based on a combination of GNNs
(typically GCN) and RNNs (typically LSTM). These meth-
ods use GNNs as a feature extractor and RNNs for sequence
learning from the extracted features (node embeddings). As
a result, one single GNN model is learned for all graphs on
the temporal axis. A limitation of these methods is that they
require the knowledge of the nodes over the whole time span
and can hardly promise the performance on new nodes in the
In practice, in addition to the likelihood that new nodes
may emerge after training, nodes may also frequently appear and disappear, which renders the node embedding approaches questionable, because it is challenging for RNNs to
learn these irregular behaviors. To resolve these challenges,
we propose instead to use the RNN to regulate the GCN
model (i.e., network parameters) at every time step. This
approach effectively performs model adaptation, which focuses on the model itself rather than the node embeddings.
Hence, change of nodes poses no restriction. Further, for future graphs with new nodes without historical information,
the evolved GCN is still sensible for them.
Note that in the proposed method, the GCN parameters
are not trained anymore. They are computed from the RNN
and hence only the RNN parameters are trained. In this manner, the number of parameters (model size) does not grow
with the number of time steps and the model is as manageable as a typical RNN.
Related Work
Methods for dynamic graphs are often extensions of those
for a static one, with an additional focus on the temporal dimension and update schemes. For example, in matrix factorization-based approaches , node embeddings come from the
(generalized) eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix.
Hence, DANE updates the eigenvectors efﬁciently based on the prior ones, rather than computing them
from scratch for each new graph. The dominant advantage
of such methods is the computational efﬁciency.
For random walk-based approaches , transition
probabilities conditioned on history are modeled as the normalized inner products of the corresponding node embeddings. These approaches maximize the probabilities of the
sampled random walks. CTDANE extends this idea by requiring the walks to obey the temporal
order. Another work, NetWalk , does not use
the probability as the objective function; rather, it observes
that if the graph does not undergo substantial changes, one
only needs to resample a few walks in the successive time
step. Hence, this approach incrementally retrains the model
with warm starts, substantially reducing the computational
The wave of deep learning introduces a ﬂourish of unsupervised and supervised approaches for parameterizing the
quantities of interest with neural networks. DynGEM is an autoencoding approach that minimizes the
reconstruction loss, together with the distance between connected nodes in the embedding space. A feature of DynGEM
is that the depth of the architecture is adaptive to the size of
the graph; and the autoencoder learned from the past time
step is used to initialize the training of the one in the following time.
A popular category of approaches for dynamic graphs
is point processes that are continuous in time. Know-
Evolve and DyRep model the occurrence of an edge as a point process
and parameterize the intensity function by using a neural
network, taking node embeddings as the input. Dynamic-
Triad uses a point process to model a
more complex phenomenon—triadic closure—where a triad
with three nodes is developed from an open one (a pair of
nodes are not connected) to a closed one (all three pairs are
connected). HTNE similarly models the
dynamism by using the Hawkes process, with additionally
an attention mechanism to determine the inﬂuence of historical neighbors on the current neighbors of a node. These
methods are advantageous for event time prediction because
of the continuous nature of the process.
A set of approaches most relevant to this work is combinations of GNNs and recurrent architectures (e.g., LSTM),
whereby the former digest graph information and the latter
handle dynamism. The most explored GNNs in this context
are of the convolutional style and we call them graph convolutional networks (GCN), following the terminology of the
related work, although in other settings GCN speciﬁcally
refers to the architecture proposed by . GCRN offers two combinations.
The ﬁrst one uses a GCN to obtain node embeddings, which
are then fed into the LSTM that learns the dynamism. The
second one is a modiﬁed LSTM that takes node features
as input but replaces the fully connected layers therein by
graph convolutions. The ﬁrst idea is similarly explored in
WD-GCN/CD-GCN 
and RgCNN . WD-GCN/CD-GCN
modiﬁes the graph convolution layers, most notably by
adding a skip connection. In addition to such simple combinations, STGCN proposes a complex architecture that consists of so-called ST-Conv blocks.
In this model, the node features must be evolving over time,
since inside each ST-Conv block, a 1D convolution of the
node features is ﬁrst performed along the temporal dimension, followed by a graph convolution and another 1D convolution. This architecture was demonstrated for spatiotemporal trafﬁc data (hence the names STGCN and ST-Conv),
where the spatial information is handled by using graph convolutions.
In this section we present a novel method, coined evolving
graph convolutional network (EvolveGCN), that captures
the dynamism underlying a graph sequence by using a recurrent model to evolve the GCN parameters. Throughout
we will use subscript t to denote the time index and superscript l to denote the GCN layer index. To avoid notational
cluttering, we assume that all graphs have n nodes; although
we reiterate that the node sets, as well as the cardinality, may
change over time. Then, at time step t, the input data consists
of the pair (At ∈Rn×n, Xt ∈Rn×d), where the former is
the graph (weighted) adjacency matrix and the latter is the
Node embedding
 
 
Node embedding
 
 
Node embedding
 
 
Figure 1: Schematic illustration of EvolveGCN. The RNN means a recurrent architecture in general (e.g., GRU, LSTM). We
suggest two options to evolve the GCN weights, treating them with different roles in the RNN. See the EvolveGCN-H version
and EvolveGCN-O version in Figure 2.
matrix of input node features. Speciﬁcally, each row of Xt
is a d-dimensional feature vector of the corresponding node.
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
A GCN consists of multiple layers
of graph convolution, which is similar to a perceptron but
additionally has a neighborhood aggregation step motivated
by spectral convolution. At time t, the l-th layer takes the
adjacency matrix At and the node embedding matrix H(l)
as input, and uses a weight matrix W (l)
to update the node
embedding matrix to H(l+1)
as output. Mathematically, we
= GCONV(At, H(l)
:= σ( AtH(l)
where At is a normalization of At deﬁned as (omitting time
index for clarity):
A = A + I,
and σ is the activation function (typically ReLU) for all but
the output layer. The initial embedding matrix comes from
the node features; i.e., H(0)
= Xt. Let there be L layers
of graph convolutions. For the output layer, the function σ
may be considered the identity, in which case H(L)
contains high-level representations of the graph nodes transformed from the initial features; or it may be the softmax
for node classiﬁcation, in which case H(L)
consists of prediction probabilities.
Figure 1 is a schematic illustration of the proposed
EvolveGCN, wherein each time step contains one GCN indexed by time. The parameters of the GCN are the weight
matrices W (l)
t , for different time steps t and layers l. Graph
convolutions occur for a particular time but generate new
information along the layers. Figure 2 illustrates the computation at each layer. The relationship between H(l)
and H(l+1)
is depicted in the middle part of the ﬁgure.
Weight Evolution
At the heart of the proposed method is the update of the
weight matrix W (l)
at time t based on current, as well as historical, information. This requirement can be naturally ful-
ﬁlled by using a recurrent architecture, with two options.
The ﬁrst option is to treat W (l)
as the hidden state of the
dynamical system. We use a gated recurrent unit (GRU) to
update the hidden state upon time-t input to the system. The
input information naturally is the node embeddings H(l)
Abstractly, we write
GCN weights
hidden state
node embeddings
GCN weights
hidden state
with details deferred to a later subsection. The GRU may be
replaced by other recurrent architectures, as long as the roles
t , and W (l)
t−1 are clear. We use “-H” to denote
this version; see the left part of Figure 2(a).
The second option is to treat W (l)
as the output of the dynamical system (which becomes the input at the subsequent
time step). We use a long short-term memory (LSTM) cell to
model this input-output relationship. The LSTM itself maintains the system information by using a cell context, which
acts like the hidden state of a GRU. In this version, node
embeddings are not used at all. Abstractly, we write
GCN weights
GCN weights
(a) EvolveGCN-H, where the GCN parameters are hidden states of a recurrent architecture that takes node embeddings as input.
(b) EvolveGCN-O, where the GCN parameters are input/outputs of a recurrent architecture.
Figure 2: Two versions of EvolveGCN. In each version, the left is a recurrent architecture; the middle is the graph convolution
unit; and the right is the evolving graph convolution unit. Red region denotes information input to the unit and blue region
denotes output information. The mathematical notation W means GCN parameters and H means node embeddings. Time t
progresses from left to right, whereas neural network layers l are built up from bottom to top.
with details deferred to a later subsection. The LSTM may
be replaced by other recurrent architectures, as long as the
roles of W (l)
t−1 are clear. We use “-O” to denote this
version; see the left part of Figure 2(b).
Evolving Graph Convolution Unit (EGCU)
Combining the graph convolution unit GCONV presented
in Section 3.1 and a recurrent architecture presented in
Section 3.2, we reach the evolving graph convolution unit
(EGCU). Depending on the way that GCN weights are
evolved, we have two versions:
1: function [H(l+1)
t ] = EGCU-H(At, H(l)
= GRU(H(l)
= GCONV(At, H(l)
4: end function
1: function [H(l+1)
t ] = EGCU-O(At, H(l)
= LSTM(W (l)
= GCONV(At, H(l)
4: end function
In the -H version, the GCN weights are treated as hidden
states of the recurrent architecture; whereas in the -O version, these weights are treated as input/outputs. In both versions, the EGCU performs graph convolutions along layers
and meanwhile evolves the weight matrices over time.
Chaining the units bottom-up, we obtain a GCN with multiple layers for one time step. Then, unrolling over time horizontally, the units form a lattice on which information (H(l)
t ) ﬂows. We call the overall model evolving graph
convolutional network (EvolveGCN).
Implementation of the -H Version
The -H version can be implemented by using a standard
GRU, with two extensions: (a) extending the inputs and hidden states from vectors to matrices (because the hidden state
is now the GCN weight matrices); and (b) matching the column dimension of the input with that of the hidden state.
The matrix extension is straightforward: One simply
places the column vectors side by side to form a matrix.
In other words, one uses the same GRU to process each
column of the GCN weight matrix. For completeness, we
write the matrix version of GRU in the following, by noting
that all named variables (such as Xt and Ht) are only local
variables; they are not to be confused with the mathematical notations we have been using so far. We use these local
variable names so that the reader easily recognizes the GRU
functionality.
1: function Ht = g(Xt, Ht−1)
Zt = sigmoid(WZXt + UZHt−1 + BZ)
Rt = sigmoid(WRXt + URHt−1 + BR)
Ht = tanh(WHXt + UH(Rt ◦Ht−1) + BH)
Ht = (1 −Zt) ◦Ht−1 + Zt ◦Ht
6: end function
The second requirement is that the number of columns of
the GRU input must match that of the hidden state. Let the
latter number be k. Our strategy is to summarize all the node
embedding vectors into k representative ones (each used as a
column vector). The following pseudocode gives one popular approach for this summarization. By convention, it takes
a matrix Xt with many rows as input and produces a matrix Zt with only k rows ). The summarization requires a parameter
vector p that is independent of the time index t (but may vary
for different graph convolution layers). This vector is used to
compute weights for the rows, among which the ones corresponding to the top k weights are selected and are weighted
for output.
1: function Zt = summarize(Xt, k)
yt = Xtp/∥p∥
it = top-indices(yt, k)
Zt = [Xt ◦tanh(yt)]it
5: end function
With the above functions g and summarize, we now
completely specify the recurrent architecture:
= GRU(H(l)
:= g(summarize(H(l)
t , #col(W (l)
t−1))T , W (l)
where #col denotes the number of columns of a matrix and
the superscript T denotes matrix transpose. Effectively, it
summarizes the node embedding matrix H(l)
into one with
appropriate dimensions and then evolves the weight matrix
t−1 in the past time step to W (l)
for the current time.
Note again that the recurrent hidden state may be realized
by not only GRU, but also other RNN architectures as well.
Implementation of the -O Version
Implementing the -O version requires only a straightforward
extension of the standard LSTM from the vector version to
the matrix version. The following is the pseudocode, where
note again that all named variables are only local variables
and they are not to be confused with the mathematical notations we have been using so far. We use these local variable
names so that the reader easily recognizes the LSTM functionality.
1: function Ht = f(Xt)
Current input Xt is the same as the past output Ht−1
Ft = sigmoid(WF Xt + UF Ht−1 + BF )
It = sigmoid(WIXt + UIHt−1 + BI)
Ot = sigmoid(WOXt + UOHt−1 + BO)
Ct = tanh(WCXt + UCHt−1 + BC)
Ct = Ft ◦Ct−1 + It ◦Ct
Ht = Ot ◦tanh(Ct)
9: end function
With the above function f, we now completely specify the
recurrent architecture:
= LSTM(W (l)
t−1) := f(W (l)
Note again that the recurrent input-output relationship may
be realized by not only LSTM, but also other RNN architectures as well.
Which Version to Use
Choosing the right version is data set dependent. When node
features are informative, the -H version may be more effective, because it incorporates additionally node embedding in
the recurrent network. On the other hand, if the node features are not much informative but the graph structure plays
a more vital role, the -O version focuses on the change of
the structure and may be more effective.
Experiments
In this section, we present a comprehensive set of experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of EvolveGCN. The
setting includes a variety of data sets, tasks, compared methods, and evaluation metrics. Hyperparameters are tuned by
using the validation set and test results are reported at the
best validation epoch.
We use a combination of synthetic and publicly available
benchmark data sets for experiments.
Stochastic Block Model. (SBM for short) SBM is a popularly used random graph model for simulating community
structures and evolutions. We follow to
generate synthetic data from the model.
Bitcoin OTC.1 (BC-OTC for short) BC-OTC is a whotrusts-whom network of bitcoin users trading on the platform The data set may be used
for predicting the polarity of each rating and forecasting
whether a user will rate another one in the next time step.
Bitcoin Alpha.2 (BC-Alpha for short) BC-Alpha is created
in the same manner as is BC-OTC, except that the users and
ratings come from a different trading platform, 
btc-alpha.com.
UC Irvine messages.3 (UCI for short) UCI is an online community of students from the University of California, Irvine,
1 
2 
3 
wherein the links of this social network indicate sent messages between users. Link prediction is a standard task for
this data set.
Autonomous systems.4 (AS for short) AS is a communication network of routers that exchange trafﬁc ﬂows with
peers. This data set may be used to forecast message exchanges in the future.
Reddit Hyperlink Network.5 (Reddit for short) Reddit is
a subreddit-to-subreddit hyperlink network, where each hyperlink originates from a post in the source community and
links to a post in the target community. The hyperlinks are
annotated with sentiment. The data set may be used for sentiment classiﬁcation.
Elliptic.6 Elliptic is a network of bitcoin transactions,
wherein each node represents one transaction and the edges
indicate payment ﬂows. Approximately 20% of the transactions have been mapped to real entities belonging to licit
categories versus illicit ones. The aim is to categorize the
unlabeled transactions.
These data sets are summarized in Table 1. Training/validation/test splits are done along the temporal dimension. The temporal granularity is case dependent but we
use all available information of the data sets, except AS for
which we use only the ﬁrst 100 days following (Goyal et al.
Table 1: Data sets.
# Time Steps
(Train / Val / Test)
35 / 5 / 10
95 / 14 / 28
95 / 13 / 28
62 / 9 / 17
70 / 10 / 20
122 / 18 / 34
31 / 5 / 13
The proposed EvolveGCN supports three predictive tasks
elaborated below. The model for producing the embeddings
and the predictive model are trained end to end. The output
embedding of a node u by GCN at time t is denoted by hu
Link Prediction. The task of link prediction is to leverage
information up to time t and predict the existence of an edge
(u, v) at time t + 1. Since historical information has been
encoded in the GCN parameters, we base the prediction on
t . To achieve so, we concatenate these two vectors
and apply an MLP to obtain the link probability. As a standard practice, we perform negative sampling and optimize
the cross-entropy loss function.
Five data sets are used for experimentation for this task.
See the header of Table 2. Evaluation metrics include mean
average precision (MAP) and mean reciprocal rank (MRR).
4 
5 
6 
Edge Classiﬁcation. Predicting the label of an edge (u, v) at
time t is done in almost the same manner as link prediction:
We concatenate hu
t and apply an MLP to obtain the
class probability.
Three data sets are used for experimentation for this task:
BC-OTC, BC-Alpha, and Reddit. Evaluation metrics are
precision, recall, and F1.
Node Classiﬁcation. Predicting the label of a node u at time
t follows the same practice of a standard GCN: The activation function of the last graph convolution layer is the softmax, so that hu
t is a probability vector.
Publicly available data sets for node classiﬁcation in the
dynamic setting are rare. We use only one data set (Elliptic)
for demonstration. This data set is the largest one in node
count in Table 1. The evaluation metrics are the same as
those for edge classiﬁcation.
Compared Methods
We compare the two versions of the proposed method,
EvolveGCN-H and EvolveGCN-O, with the following four
baselines (two supervised and two unsupervised).
GCN. The ﬁrst one is GCN without any temporal modeling.
We use one single GCN model for all time steps and the loss
is accumulated along the time axis.
GCN-GRU. The second one is also a single GCN model, but
it is co-trained with a recurrent model (GRU) on node embeddings. We call this approach GCN-GRU, which is conceptually the same as Method 1 of , except that their GNN is the ChebNet and their recurrent model is the
DynGEM. The third one is an unsupervised node embedding approach, based on the use of graph
autoencoders. The autoencoder parameters learned at the
past time step is used to initialize the ones of the current
time for faster learning.
dyngraph2vec.
This method is also unsupervised. It has several variants:
dyngraph2vecAE,
dyngraph2vecRNN,
dyngraph2vecAERNN. The ﬁrst one is similar to DynGEM,
but additionally incorporates the past node information for
autoencoding. The others use RNN to maintain the past
node information.
Additional Details
The data set Elliptic is equipped with handcrafted node features; and Reddit contains computed feature vectors. For all
other data sets, we use one-hot node-degree as the input feature. Following convention, GCN has two layers and MLP
has one layer. The embedding size of both GCN layers is set
the same, to reduce the effort of hyperparameter tuning. The
time window for sequence learning is 10 time steps, except
for SBM and Elliptic, where it is 5.
Results for Link Prediction
The MAP and MRR are reported in Table 2. At least one
version of EvolveGCN achieves the best result for each of
the data sets SBM, UCI, and AS. For BC-OTC and BC-
Alpha, EvolveGCN also outperforms the two GCN related
Table 2: Performance of link prediction. Each column is one data set.
mean average precision
mean reciprocal rank
dyngraph2vecAE
dyngraph2vecAERNN
EvolveGCN-H
EvolveGCN-O
baselines, but it is inferior to DynGEM and dyngraph2vec.
These latter methods differ from others in that node embeddings are obtained in an unsupervised manner. It is surprising that unsupervised approaches are particularly good
on certain data sets, given that the link prediction model is
trained separately from graph autoencoding. In such a case,
graph convolution does not seem to be sufﬁciently powerful
in capturing the intrinsic similarity of the nodes, rendering a
much inferior starting point for dynamic models to catch up.
Although EvolveGCN improves over GCN substantially, it
still does not reach the bar set by graph autoencoding.
Results for Edge Classiﬁcation
The F1 scores across different methods are compared in Figure 3, for the data sets BC-OTC, BC-Alpha, and Reddit. In
all cases, the two EvolveGCN versions outperform GCN and
GCN-GRU. Moreover, similar observations are made for the
precision and the recall, which are omitted due to space limitation. These appealing results corroborate the effectiveness
of the proposed method.
Figure 3: Performance of edge classiﬁcation and node classiﬁcation. For edge classiﬁcation (BC-OTC, BC-Alpha, and
Reddit), the F1 score is the micro average. For node classiﬁcation (Elliptic), because of the exceedingly high class
imbalance and strong interest in the minority class (illicit
transactions), the minority F1 is plotted instead.
Results for Node Classiﬁcation
The F1 scores for the data set Elliptic are plotted also in
Figure 3. In this data set, the classes correspond to licit and
illicit transactions respectively and they are highly skewed.
For ﬁnancial crime forensic, the illicit class (minority) is the
main interest. Hence, we plot the minority F1. The micro
averages are all higher than 0.95 and not as informative.
One sees that EvolveGCN-O performs better than the static
GCN, but not so much as GCN-GRU. Indeed, dynamic models are more effective.
For an interesting phenomenon, we plot the history of
the F1 scores along time in Figure 4. All methods perform
poorly starting at step 43. This time is when the dark market
shutdown occurred. Such an emerging event causes performance degrade for all methods, with non-dynamic models
suffering the most. Even dynamic models are not able to
perform reliably, because the emerging event has not been
Figure 4: Performance of node classiﬁcation over time. The
F1 score is for the minority (illicit) class.
Conclusions
A plethora of neural network architectures were proposed
recently for graph structured data and their effectiveness
have been widely conﬁrmed. In practical scenarios, however,
we are often faced with graphs that are constantly evolving,
rather than being conveniently static for a once-for-all investigation. The question is how neural networks handle such a
dynamism. Combining GNN with RNN is a natural idea.
Typical approaches use the GNN as a feature extractor and
use an RNN to learn the dynamics from the extracted node
features. We instead use the RNN to evolve the GNN, so
that the dynamism is captured in the evolving network pa-
rameters. One advantage is that it handles more ﬂexibly dynamic data, because a node does not need to be present all
time around. Experimental results conﬁrm that the proposed
approach generally outperforms related ones for a variety
of tasks, including link prediction, edge classiﬁcation, and
node classiﬁcation.