Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Unsupervised Pre-training of
a Deep LSTM-based Stacked
Autoencoder for Multivariate Time
Series Forecasting Problems
Alaa Sagheer
1,2,3* & Mostafa Kotb2,3
Currently, most real-world time series datasets are multivariate and are rich in dynamical information
of the underlying system. Such datasets are attracting much attention; therefore, the need for accurate
modelling of such high-dimensional datasets is increasing. Recently, the deep architecture of the
recurrent neural network (RNN) and its variant long short-term memory (LSTM) have been proven to be
more accurate than traditional statistical methods in modelling time series data. Despite the reported
advantages of the deep LSTM model, its performance in modelling multivariate time series (MTS) data
has not been satisfactory, particularly when attempting to process highly non-linear and long-interval
MTS datasets. The reason is that the supervised learning approach initializes the neurons randomly in
such recurrent networks, disabling the neurons that ultimately must properly learn the latent features
of the correlated variables included in the MTS dataset. In this paper, we propose a pre-trained LSTMbased stacked autoencoder (LSTM-SAE) approach in an unsupervised learning fashion to replace
the random weight initialization strategy adopted in deep LSTM recurrent networks. For evaluation
purposes, two different case studies that include real-world datasets are investigated, where the
performance of the proposed approach compares favourably with the deep LSTM approach. In addition,
the proposed approach outperforms several reference models investigating the same case studies.
Overall, the experimental results clearly show that the unsupervised pre-training approach improves
the performance of deep LSTM and leads to better and faster convergence than other models.
Recent advances in sensors and measurement technology have led to the collection of high-dimensional datasets from multiple sources recorded over time. Such complex datasets may include several correlated variables;
therefore, they are denoted as multivariate time series (MTS) datasets1. They are continuously produced in a wide
spectrum of industrial, environmental, social, and healthcare applications, such as health monitoring, volatility
analysis in financial markets, control systems in automobiles and avionics, and monitoring in data centres, to
mention just a few. In such complex applications, one of the key requirements is to maintain the integrity of the
sensory data so that it can be monitored and analysed in a trusted manner. In related research, sensor integrity has
been analysed by non-parametric methods, such as Bayesian methods2. However, it is demonstrated that regression models based on non-parametric methods are highly sensitive to the model parameters3. Thus, exploring the
optimum parameters of a regression model with multivariate sequential data is still in demand.
The artificial neural network (ANN) is a widely used model employed for the time series forecasting problem
in the context of its universal approximation capabilities4. conventional ANNs that have shallow architectures
are difficult to train if they become too complex, e.g., when the network includes many layers and, consequently,
many parameters. In contrast to shallow ANN architectures, it is widely demonstrated that the deep ANN architecture, which is called a deep neural network (DNN), outperforms the conventional shallow ANN architecture
in several applications5. Recently, deep learning has gained substantial popularity in the machine learning community since it is considered a general framework that facilitates the training of deep neural networks with many
hidden layers6. The most important advantage of deep learning is that it does not need any hand-crafted features
to learn and can easily learn a hierarchical feature representation from the raw data directly7.
1College of Computer Science and Information Technology, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, 31982, Saudi Arabia.
2Center for Artificial Intelligence and RObotics (CAIRO), Faculty of Science, Aswan University, Aswan, 81528, Egypt.
3These authors contributed equally: Alaa Sagheer and Mostafa Kotb. *email: 
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
There are many neural network models that are widely used to solve several types of time series forecasting
problems. Among these models, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have received much attention4,5. The reason
for such attention is that RNNs are a class of ANN models that possess an internal state or short-term memory
due to the recurrent feedback connections, which makes RNNs suitable for modelling sequential or time series
data. In such modelling, the RNN maintains a vector of activation parameters for each time step, especially when
short-term dependencies are included in the input data. However, if they are trained with stochastic gradient
descent, they will have difficulty in learning long-term dependencies that are encoded in the input sequences
due to the vanishing gradient problem8,9. This problem has been addressed by using a specialized neuron or cell
structure in the long short-term memory (LSTM) network that maintains constant backward flow in the error
signal that enables the LSTM to learn long-term dependencies10,11.
Despite the advantages cited for the LSTM, its performance for time series problems is not always satisfactory12. Similar to the shallow RNN, the shallow LSTM architecture cannot represent the complex features
of sequential data efficiently, particularly if they are utilized to learn long-interval time series data with high
non-linearity. As a recent remedy, the authors of this paper recently presented a deep LSTM model, called
DLSTM5, capable of circumventing the limitations of the conventional shallow LSTM model. DLSTM includes
stacked LSTM layers, one above another, such that each layer contains multiple cells.
Here, it is worth mentioning that our DLSTM model is different from the hierarchical connectionist temporal
classification (HCTC) model that was presented a decade ago as the first attempt to stack LSTM layers13. HCTC
consists of two levels of connectionist temporal classification (CTC) network, where each CTC network uses
the bi-directional LSTM and every network has its own softmax layer. To learn the model, every network needs
a label, makes its own prediction, and computes an error signal. The model runs when the first CTC network
takes as the input the external signal, and every network forwards its predicted label to the next network. In
contrast, our DLSTM model5 consists of stacked layers (or blocks) of LSTM and only one output layer comprises
the final layer. Thus, only the output layer takes a label and makes a prediction. The DLSTM runs when the first
LSTM layer takes the input sequence, and every LSTM layer feeds its hidden state to the next LSTM in the stack.
The second difference between both models concerns the calculation of the error signal propagated through the
stack. The DLSTM calculates only one error signal at the final output layer, and then backpropagates it through
all previous layers. However, in the HCTC model, every network in the hierarchy computes an error signal, and
then backpropagates it to every lower level. Thus, the final error signal calculated at each network is the sum of
its own error signal and the backpropagated signal from the upper networks. The third difference between both
models is the design purpose, where HCTC is designed for assigning a sequence of labels to unsegmented data,
such as speech or hand-writing14, whereas DLSTM is designed for analysing time series data for forecasting or
classification applications.
Empirically, the DLSTM model showed better performance compared with RNN, LSTM, deep RNN, and
other statistical and ANN modules in performing forecasting, but using univariate time series (UTS) data5.
Unlike UTS problems, when DLSTM is used to perform forecasting using MTS data, we found that its performance was not satisfactory to some extent. For this reason, using LSTM, either shallow or deep architectures,
in modelling MTS problems is not common in the literature. The reason for this is due to the way that the neurons in the DLSTM model are initialized. It is widely demonstrated that the neurons’ weights in most standard
ANN approaches are initialized randomly in the context of learning using stochastic gradient descent15. In such
cases, the backpropagation algorithm may be trapped within multiple local minima, particularly when several
non-linear variables are modelled16. Accordingly, sincere efforts are exerted to investigate new methods for weight
initialization in standard ANN approaches15–17.
Therefore, there is little doubt that DLSTM performs well in UTS classification problems5 where only one
variable or feature is modelled. In contrast, the features in MTS classification problems, with several variables,
are highly correlated. The random initialization of a large numbers of neurons in such situations will lead the
learning algorithm to converge to different local minima, depending on the values of the parameter initialization.
Furthermore, and as a general practice, previous studies have demonstrated that training deep networks with
several layers using random weights initialization and supervised training provide worse results than training
shallow architectures8,18,19.
Several treatments have been introduced in order to facilitate either the architecture or the training of deep
learning models that suffer from all the aforementioned limitations. One of the earlier treatments that facilitated supervised learning by unsupervised pre-training of a hierarchical RNN architecture is known as the
chunker-automatizer module20. This module uses a gradient descent optimizer to compress the learned behaviour
of the chunker RNN layer into the automatizer RNN layer. This procedure learns to imitate the chunker network
and repeats training to avoid forgetting of previous skills. At that early time, this learning fashion was known as
collapsing (or compressing) the behaviour of one learner into another20, similar to the recent learning approach
of the teacher-student learner, known as knowledge distillation21. Certainly, this enables data compression and,
thereby, the vanishing gradient problem of RNN becomes less relevant.
More than a decade later, another approach applied an unsupervised greedy layer-wise pre-training algorithm
to the deep belief network (DBN)22,23. The proposed DBN shows a successful performance in computer vision
applications. The rectified linear units24 and the Maxout networks25 are two other treatments, as well. When they
are applied to the convolutional neural network (CNN), they were shown to be useful to reduce the impact of
vanishing gradient in deep models. Stacking many convolutional layers26 instead of fully connected layers is an
effective treatment to overcome this problem in deep neural networks19.
Motivated by the success of unsupervised pre-training in data compression20, dimensionality reduction20,27,
classification20,28, and UTS forecasting20 problems, we extend it to the regression problem via deep recurrent
neural networks solving the MTS forecasting problem. In this paper, we introduce our previous model DLSTM in
an unsupervised pre-training fashion based on a stacked autoencoder training architecture to avoid the random
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
initialization of LSTMs’ units. We tested the proposed model to solve the MTS forecasting problem using two
real-world datasets. We conduct a comparison between the proposed approach and our previous model DLSTM,
where the impact of replacing the randomized supervised method in DLSTM with the unsupervised pre-training
method is promising. Furthermore, we conduct a comparison with other reported regression baselines and reference models that solve the same problems using the same datasets, indicating a clear superiority of the proposed
approach using three different performance metrics. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. Develop an unsupervised pre-training framework for our previous model DLSTM5.
2. Present a new LSTM-based autoencoder learning approach to solve the random weight initialization problem of DLSTM.
3. Propose a robust forecasting module based on unlabelled time series data, which could be used to convert
the time series observations into representative features that can be utilized easily for further use and
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly summarizes the related work to this paper.
The MTS problem and the proposed methodology are presented in section 3. Section 4 shows the experimental
settings and datasets used in this paper. The experimental results of two case studies are provided in section 5.
Discussion and analysis of the results are given in section 6 and, finally, the paper is concluded in section 7.
Related Work
It is demonstrated that analysing UTS data is easy and common; however, analysing MTS data is complex due to
the correlated signals involved29. The key challenge in MTS problems is to model such complex real-world data,
as well as to learn the latent features automatically from the input correlated data3. For this reason, the machine
learning community has afforded scant attention to the MTS forecasting problem versus much attention to forecasting problems using UTS data. This section shows an overview of state-of-the-art methods that adopt the
unsupervised pre-training procedure to facilitate the overall learning process. Then, the section shows the recent
achievements of state-of-the-art techniques that are implemented to solve the MTS forecasting application using
same datasets utilized in this paper to assess the proposed model.
State-of-the-art models.
It is widely known that the conventional ANN does not provide a very good
result when the function to be approximated is very complex, especially in regression problems30. There are various reasons for this, such as the neurons’ initialization or the overfitting or the function becoming stuck in local
minima15. As such, different training approaches along with different network architectures for the conventional
ANNs are introduced4,31,32. One of these approaches, as a trial towards a fine analysis for complex real-world data,
is to develop robust features that are capable of capturing the relevant information from data. However, developing such domain-specific features for each task is expensive, time-consuming, and requires expertise in working
with the data12. The alternative approach is to use an unsupervised feature learning strategy to learn the feature
representation layers from unlabelled data, which was early presented by Schmidhuber14,20. In fact, the latter
approach has many advantages, such as conducting learning based on unlabeled data, and having the availability
and abundance of unlabelled data, in contrast to labelled data. In addition, learning the features from unlabelled
data in advance, which is called pre-training, is much better than learning them from hand-crafted features33,34.
Beside these advantages, the most important advantage is the ability to stack several feature representations
layers to create deep architectures20, which are more capable of modelling complex structures and correlated features that are included in MTS problems12,30. These unsupervised pre-training approaches alleviate the underfitting and overfitting problems that had restrained the modelling of complex neural systems for a period of time35.
Most of the current unsupervised pre-training models are developed in a layer-wise fashion, which is enough to
train simple models, and then stack them layer-by-layer to form a deep structure.
Hinton et al. developed a greedy layer-wise unsupervised learning algorithm for deep belief networks (DBNs),
a generative model with many layers of hidden variables22. Hinton’s approach consists of a stack of restricted
boltzmann machines (RBMs), where two consecutive learning steps are conducted: a pre-training step, which is a
kind of unsupervised learning using the gradient of the network energy of the RBM, and a fine-tuning step, which
is a kind of supervised learning step to calculate the backpropagation errors. Then, the learned feature activations
of an RBM layer are used as the input layer to train the following RBM in the stack22.
Next, Bengio et al. presented a theoretical and experimental analysis for Hinton’s approach, asserting that the
greedy layer-wise pre-training approach will help to optimize the modelling of the deep networks23. In addition,
Bengio concluded that this approach can yield a good generalization because it initializes the upper layers with
better representations of relevant high level abstractions. Moreover, Ehran et al. tried specifically to answer the
following question: how does unsupervised pre-training work? They empirically showed the effectiveness of the
pre-training step and how it guides the learning model towards basins of attraction of minima that support a good
generalization from the training dataset33. Furthermore, they showed evidence that the layer-wise pre-training
procedure performs the function of regularization perfectly. Sarikaya et al. applied Hinton’s DBN model to the
natural language understanding problem and compared it with three text classification algorithms, namely, support vector machines (SVM), boosting, and maximum entropy36. Using the additional unlabelled data for DBN
pre-training and combining DBN-based learned features with the original features provides significant gains to
DBN over the other models.
Le Paine et al. empirically investigated the impact of unsupervised pre-training in contrast to a number of
recent advances, such as rectified linear units (ReLUs), data augmentation, dropout, and large labelled datasets34. Using CNNs, they tried to answer the question: When is unsupervised pre-training useful given recent
advances? Their investigation, in an image recognition application, was based on three axes: first developing
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
an unsupervised method that incorporates ReLUs and recent unsupervised regularization techniques. Second,
analysing the benefits of unsupervised pre-training compared to data augmentation and dropout on a benchmark dataset, while varying the ratio of unsupervised to supervised samples. Third, verifying their findings using
benchmark datasets. They found that unsupervised pre-training is a perfect way to improve the performance,
especially when the ratio of unsupervised to supervised samples is high34. Tang et al. presented a new pre-training
approach based on knowledge transfer learning35. In contrast to the layer-wise approach, which trains the model
components layer-by-layer, their approach trains the entire model as a whole. In their experiments on speech
recognition, they could learn complex RNNs as a student model by a weaker deep neural network (DNN) as a
teacher model. Furthermore, their approach can be combined with a layer-wise pre-training of CNN to deliver
additional gains.
Recently, Saikia et al. empirically analysed the effect of different unsupervised pre-training approaches in
modelling regression problems using four different datasets30. They considered two methods separately, namely,
DBN and stacked autoencoder (SA), and compared their performance with a standard ANN algorithm without
pre-training. Liu et al. applied Hinton’s model on stacked autoencoders (SAEs) to solve gearbox fault diagnosis37. The proposed method can directly extract salient features from frequency-domain signals and eliminate
the exhaustive use of hand-crafted features. Meng et al. used it also in order to train the stacked denoising sparse
autoencoder layer-by-layer38.
As we mentioned in this section, most of the previous work in unsupervised pre-training NN (or deep NNs)
has focused on data compression20, dimensionality reduction20,27, classification20,28, and UTS forecasting20 problems. Importantly, time series forecasting with deep learning techniques is an interesting research area that needs
to be studied as well19,26. Moreover, even the recent time series forecasting research in the literature has focused
on UTS problems. Very few works in the literature are devoted to forecasting via MTS data. For example, Romeu
et al. used a pre-trained autoencoder-based DNN for UTS forecasting of indoor temperature26. Kuremoto et al.
used the earlier Hinton model for unsupervised pre-training step and backpropagation for the fine-tuning step
using an artificial UTS dataset39. Malhotra et al. extended an approach that uses a CNN with data from audio
and image domains to be used in the time series domain and trained a multilayer RNN that can then be used as a
pre-trained model to obtain representations for time series40. Their method overcomes the need for large amounts
of training data for the problem domain. Wang et al. used Hinton’s DBN model in a cyclic architecture instead of
the single DBN model that was earlier presented by Hinton41. However, while they used MTS data in their experiments, their target was a classification problem and not a forecasting problem, such as our target in this paper. In
addition, their model architecture is completely different from ours as presented here.
Overview of the reference models.
Furthermore, given the complexity of MTS data that are described
in the previous section, few works have been introduced to solve forecasting applications using MTS datasets. Indeed, specific methodologies are required for treatment rather than traditional parametric methods,
auto-regressive methods, and Gaussian models2,42. In the following, we briefly review previous contributions in
the literature that are used to solve the same forecasting problems that are studied in this paper.
Wu et al. presented a hybrid prediction model that combines a natural computation algorithm, namely, the
artificial immune system (AIS) with regression trees (RT)43. The cells in AIS represent the basic constituent elements of the model and the RT forecasting sub-models are embedded in the AIS model to form the cells’ pool.
They applied their hybrid model to solve the bike sharing system problem, which we also solve in this paper.
Huang et al. developed a deep neural network model that integrates the CNN and LSTM architectures to solve
the PM2.5 mass concentrations forecasting problem44. In this simple combination, the CNN is used for feature
extraction and the LSTM is used to analyse the features extracted by the CNN, and then predict the PM2.5
concentration of the next observation. The authors added a batch normalization step to improve the forecasting
accuracy. The proposed hybrid approach outperformed the single CNN and LSTM models.
Qi et al. proposed a hybrid model that integrates graph convolutional networks (GCN) and long short-term
memory (LSTM) networks to model and forecast the spatio-temporal variation of the PM2.5 mass concentrations forecasting problem45. The role of the GCN is to extract the spatial dependency between different stations,
whereas the role of the LSTM is to capture the temporal dependency among observations at different times. In a
subsequent section of our paper, we also treat the PM2.5 concentrations problem. Cheng et al. developed three
hybrid models combine statistical learning approaches with machine learning approaches to forecast the PM2.5
mass concentrations problem46. These models are: wavelet-ANN, wavelet-ARIMA, and wavelet-SVM. Their
experimental results showed that the proposed hybrid models can significantly improve the prediction accuracy
better than their single counterpart models. In addition, the wavelet-ARIMA model has the highest accuracy
compared to the other two hybrid models.
Last, Zhao et al. proposed a hybrid method that combines five modules to solve the PM2.5 mass concentrations forecasting problem47. These five modules are the data preprocessing module, feature selection module,
optimization module, forecasting module and evaluation module. They used the complete ensemble empirical
mode decomposition with adaptive noise and variational mode decomposition (CEEMDAN-VMD) to decompose, reconstruct, identify and select the main features of PM2.5 observations through the data preprocessing
module. Then, they used the auto-correlation function (ACF) to extract the variables that have relatively large
correlation with the predictor, thereby selecting the input variables according to the order of correlation coefficients. Next, the least squares support vector machine (LSSVM) is used to predict the future points of concentrations. Finally, the parameters of the LSSVM are optimized using the whale optimization algorithm (WOA).
It is clear that most of the aforementioned state-of-the-art methods in the literature that are used to solve
the same MTS forecasting problems are hybrid methods that combine more than a model, in contrast to the
model proposed in this paper, which is a standalone model. In summary, undoubtedly, the layer-wise architecture
that was earlier presented by Hinton has a concrete theoretical foundation as well as an empirical assessment.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
However, it is not easy to employ such a layer-wise structure to pre-train models without a clear multilayer structure35. In the following section, we propose a novel layer-wise structure for the LSTM-based autoencoder in a
deep architecture fashion. We will show that the proposed approach outperforms our previous deep LSTM model
as well as other reported baseline approaches.
Problem and Methodology
The multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting problem.
Time series data comprise a sequence of
observations recorded in uniform intervals over a period of time. A time series forecasting problem is the task of
predicting future values of time series data either using previous data of the same signal (UTS forecasting) or
using previous data of several correlated signals (MTS forecasting)29. Mathematically, the UTS problem can be
formalized as a sequence of n real-valued numbers
} and n represents the length
of the series that is recorded for the corresponding pattern. In UTS forecasting problems, the forecast model
usually predicts the variable of interest x using past values that precede x. In this manner, the forecasting model
perceives the structure and learns the trend of the underlying pattern and extrapolates the interested process into
the future.
The MTS forecasting problem is very common in real life applications. Intuitively, it is more complex since it
has two or more variables. It is defined as a finite sequence of UTS problems, such that each UTS problem represents a pattern. In a formal way,
represents an MTS that includes m variables, where the corresponding component of the jth variable xj is a UTS
problem of length n and can be given as:
In MTS forecasting problems, as in this paper, the forecast model will predict the interested variable xk not
only using its past values but also using values of other variables
The long short-term memory (LSTM).
LSTM is the elegant variation of the RNN architecture11, which
is a recursive neural network approach that can be applied for the modelling of sequential data. The key feature
of an RNN is the network delay recursion, which enables it to describe the dynamic performance of systems48. In
addition, RNNs maintain a vector of activations for each time step, which makes the RNN an extremely deep neural network49. However, it is often difficult to train RNNs to learn the long-term dependencies in time series data
due to the exploding and the vanishing gradient problems8,9,50. Both problems are caused by the iterative property
of the RNN, whose gradient is essentially equal to the recurrent weight matrix but raised to a high power. These
matrix powers cause the gradient to grow or to shrink at a rate that is proportional to the number of time-steps
in the dataset49.
Nevertheless, it is demonstrated that the exploding gradients problem is relatively simple to cope with using
a technique known as gradient clipping, which simply shrinks the gradients whose norms exceed a threshold50.
One of the advantages of the gradient clipping technique is keeping the gradient small to some extent for most
of the learning time, whereas the learning or convergence will suffer if the gradient is reduced too much49. In
contrast, the problem of the vanishing gradient is extremely difficult because it causes the gradient’s component
in the trends that correspond to long-term dependencies to be minor, whereas it causes the gradientâ€™s component in the trends that correspond to short-term dependencies to be large. For this reason, the RNN can learn
the short-term dependencies easily, but it suffers with long-term dependencies8,9,51.
The design of the LSTM makes it an effective solution to combat the vanishing gradient problem of the
RNN8,9. It uses a memory cell capable of representing the long-term dependencies in sequential data. As depicted
in Fig. 1, the LSTM memory cell is composed of four gates (or units); namely, the input gate, the output gate, the
forget gate, and the self-recurrent neuron. These gates are responsible for controlling the interactions among
different memory units. Specifically, the input gate controls whether the input signal can modify the state of the
memory cell or not. In contrast, the output gate controls whether it can modify the state of other memory cells or
not. Whilst the forget gate can choose to forget (or remember) its previous status. The gates, hidden outputs, and
cell states can be represented as follows11:
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
c are input weights, recurrent weights and biases,
respectively. Xt, St and Ct are input, hidden and cell state at time step t, respectively.
1 are the hidden
and cell state at time step −
1, respectively. ⊗, ⊕ and σ are pointwise multiplication, pointwise addition and
sigmoid activation, respectively.
It is demonstrated that there are other attempts to overcome the vanishing gradient problem of RNN; however,
the LSTM is the most efficient attempt. The LSTM solves this problem by truncating the gradients in the network
where it is innocuous to do so by enforcing the constant error flows through the constant error carousels within
special multiplicative units. These special non-linear units learn whether to open or close the gates of the network
in order to adjust such a constant error flow. Briefly, we can say that the LSTM approximates the long-term information with a significant delay by speeding up the conventional RNN algorithm52.
The autoencoder (AE).
The AE is an ANN that consists of a sequentially connected three-layer arrangement: the input layer, the hidden layer, and the output (or reconstruction) layer, where all layers are working in an
unsupervised learning paradigm, as shown in Fig. 2. The AE is often used for data generation, or as a generative
model, where its training procedure consists of two phases: encoding, in which the input data are mapped into
the hidden layer, and decoding, in which the input data are reconstructed from the hidden layer representation. In
the encoding phase, the model learns a compressed representation (or latent variables) of the input. In contrast, in
Figure 1.  The LSTM block, where f
t are forget, input, and output gates respectively.
Figure 2.  The autoencoder architecture.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the decoding phase, the model reconstructs the target from the compressed representation during the encoding
Given an unlabelled input dataset Xn, where n = 1, 2, …, N and
m, the two phases can be formulated as
( ) represents the hidden encoder vector calculated from input vector x, and ˆx is the decoder (or reconstruction) vector of the output layer. Additionally, f is the encoding function and g is the decoding function, W1
and W2 are the weight matrix of the encoder and decoder, respectively, and b1 and b2 are the bias vectors in each
phase, respectively37.
The difference between the input and the reconstructed input (or output) is usually called the reconstruction
error. This reconstruction error is represented in the form of an objective function, where during training, the
model tries to reduce it, e.g. to minimize ||
2. Stacking multiple AE layers is possible such that useful high
level features are obtained, with some qualities such as abstraction and invariance. In such a case, a lower error
reconstruction will be obtained, and thereby, better generalization is expected53.
LSTM-based stacked autoencoder (LSTM-SAE).
This section shows the proposed architecture and
learning algorithm of the proposed model LSTM-SAE.
Architecture.  Here, we propose a new architecture as a variation of the original architecture of the autoencoder
to enable it to extract features from MTS, or generally, time series problems. In particular, we changed the original
AE architecture from the feed forward neural network base, as depicted in Fig. 2, into the LSTM recurrent network base, as depicted in Fig. 3, and we denote it as the LSTM-based autoencoder (LSTM-AE). LSTM-AE relies
on the concept that the recurrent network is more suitable for modelling time series data. As shown in Fig. 3, the
LSTM-AE architecture consists of two LSTM layers; one runs as an encoder and the other runs as a decoder. The
encoder layer takes the input sequence (
) and encodes it into a learned representation vector. Then,
the decoder layer takes that vector as input and tries to reconstruct the input sequence into (
cost function of the LSTM-AE is the mean squared error of the difference between the original input sequence
and the reconstructed sequence. Motivated by the first pre-training hierarchical RNN approach early presented
by Schmidhuber14,20 as well as the greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training DBN approach presented by
Hinton et al.22, we are stack more than an LSTM-AE layer in a deep fashion and call it as LSTM-based stacked
autoencoder (LSTM-SAE).
It is worth mentioning that the proposed LSTM-AE is different from the sequence-to-sequence model that
was presented recently by Sutskever et al.54. Indeed, both models use two LSTM layers: one LSTM as an encoder
and the other LSTM as a decoder in a seq-to-seq fashion. Sutskever’s model is designed essentially for language
modelling, so that the decoder layer is an LSTM-based language model (LSTM-LM), and it computes the conditional probability of the outputs given the input sequence from the learned representation vector by applying a
softmax output layer. In contrast, the decoder layer in the proposed LSTM-AE reconstructs the input sequence
from the learned representation without using any softmax or output layers. Another difference is that, the initial
hidden state of the decoder in the LSTM-LM is set to the learned representation (see Fig. 1 in Sutskever’s paper54),
whereas the initial hidden state in our LSTM-AE model is randomly initialized(S0 in Fig. 3). The most important
difference is related to the architecture of both networks, where the seq-to-seq model54 uses a multilayered LSTM,
Figure 3.  LSTM-based autoencoder architecture.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
namely, four layers for both the encoder and decoder layers. In contrast, the proposed LSTM-AE model uses a
shallow LSTM, namely, one LSTM layer for the encoder and decoder layers. Certainly, this distinguishes the proposed LSTM-AE from a computational complexity point of view.
Learning.  The learning algorithm of the LSTM-SAE model consists of two phases: a pre-training phase and a
fine-tuning phase.
Greedy Layer-wise Pre-training Phase:
In the pre-training phase, we construct a greedy layer-wise structure to train three LSTM-SAE blocks, as
shown inFig. 4. The pre-training procedure can be summarized in the following four steps:
1. Train the first LSTM-AE block in the stack; then, save its LSTM encoder layer to be used as input for the
second LSTM-AE block in the stack.
2. Load the saved encoder layer and use it to encode the inputs; then, train the second LSTM-AE block in the
stack with the encoded version of inputs, and train it to reconstruct the original inputs, not the encoded
inputs, in order to enforce the encoder to learn the features of the original inputs. Then, save its LSTM
encoder layer to use it as input for the third LSTM-AE block in the stack.
3. Load the two saved encoder layers and use them to encode the inputs twice; then, train the third LSTM-
AE block with the encoded version of inputs to reconstruct the original inputs, and save its LSTM encoder
4. Use the three saved LSTM encoders to initialize a three-layer DLSTM model5; in the same way described in
the training phase of that model.
Obviously, this phase can be generalized for more than three layers, if needed.
Fine-tuning Phase:
At the end of the pre-training phase, we manage to initialize three hidden layers the DLSTM model. The
fine-tuning phase starts by adding an output layer on top of the three hidden layers of the DLSTM model,
where the output layer consists of just one neuron, as long as the problem at hand is a regression problem.
Then, we start to fine-tune the model in a supervised learning fashion, where the input is a sequence of MTS
data in time step t and the label is the value of the corresponding variable (the variable that we need to predict
its future values) from the MTS data in the next time step t + 1. In this phase, we evaluate the prediction of
DLSTM using out-of-sample testing data. The results that are recorded and compared in the experiments
section in this paper are the results of this phase using the testing data.
It is worth noting here that the proposed model LSTM-SAE is an extension to our previously presented
model DLSTM5 that is shown in Fig. 5. The difference here is that the LSTM-SAE uses unsupervised pre-trained
LSTMs in an autoencoder fashion, rather than the random initialization fashion that was adopted in the DLSTM
model. In the experiments section of this paper, we will compare the performance of the original DLSTM5, without the pre-training phase, with the pre-trained DLSTM proposed in this paper to precisely ascertain how the
pre-training phase enhances the overall DLSTM’s performance.
It is worth mention that, there are some differences between the proposed LSTM-SAE model and the hierarchical RNN model that early presented by Schmidhuber20, particularly in the unsupervised pre-training phase.
The first difference concerns the objective of the prediction task of Schmidhuber’s model, which is predicting
the next input from the previous inputs. In contrast, the LSTM-SAE model tries to reconstruct the inputs by
establishing the LSTM autoencoder. Nevertheless, the major difference lies in the way of pre-training scenario;
Schmidhuber’s model starts when the first (lowest-level) RNN takes the external input and tries to predict the
next input. The second (higher-level) RNN can’t be established unless the first RNN stops improving its predictions. At a given time step, if the first RNN fails to predict the next input, the updating of the first RNN’s weights is
stopped. Then, the second RNN takes, as input, the concatenation of this next input plus a unique representation
of the corresponding time step. Following this procedure, higher levels are adding to the hierarchy. In contrast,
the LSTM-SAE model starts by training the first LSTM-AE to reconstruct the original inputs, then training the
Figure 4.  The greedy layer-wise pre-training of LSTM-SAE model.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
second LSTM-AE by the encoded version of the inputs to reconstruct the original inputs, and so on, in the same
way as described in the pre-training phase.
Experimental Settings
This section shows the experimental settings, the datasets, and the parameters selection of the proposed model.
In addition, the section gives a brief overview for the performance metrics that will be used in the validation and
comparisons in this paper.
For validation purposes, two different case studies, where each case study uses a benchmark dataset, are used to validate the proposed and reference models. For the step of data preprocessing, we adopted the
same data preprocessing scheme that we described in our previous paper5. The two datasets are as follows.
The capital bike sharing dataset.  This dataset is a public dataset available in UCI Machine Learning Repository55
provided by Fanaee-T et al.56. They provide a two-year usage log of a bike sharing system, called capital bike sharing (CBS) in Washington D.C., USA. They calculated the number of rental bikes, weather states, and the hourly
calendar during the time period between Jan 1st, 2011 to Dec 31st, 201256. It is a multivariate dataset that consists
of ten variables, as follows: Season, Holiday, Weekday, Working day, Weather sit, Temperature in Celsius, Feeling
temperature in Celsius, Humidity, Wind speed, and Count of total rental bikes. The total number of data samples is
17,379 observations, which we split into three sets of 10,512 for training, 2628 for validation, and 4238 for testing.
In the experiments with this dataset, the requirement is to predict the future hourly total number of rented bikes
given the scope of the other variables.
The PM2.5 concentration in the air of CHINA dataset.  This dataset is another benchmark public dataset that is
widely used in many disciplines in the literature. Its importance stems from its inclusion of the hourly concentration observations in the air of several cities in China; therefore, it is a massive dataset. In this paper, we will
consider only the data samples of the city of Beijing, where the observations were collected in the time period
between Jan 1st, 2010 to Dec 31st, 201457. This dataset is a multivariate dataset that consists of eight variables,
as follows: PM2.5 concentration, Dew Point, Temperature, Pressure, Combined Wind Direction, Cumulated Wind
Figure 5.  The architecture of DLSTM recurrent network5.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Speed, Cumulated hours of snow, and Cumulated hours of rain, and we integer-encoded Wind Direction. The
dataset includes a total number of 43,800 observations, which we split into sets of 30,660 for training, 4380 for
validation, and 8760 for testing. In the experiments with this dataset, the requirement is to predict the future
hourly concentration given the scope of the observations of the other variables.
Performance measures.
In the time series forecasting problem, two kinds of errors are usually measured, in
order to estimate the forecasting precision and performance evaluation of the forecasts, namely, scale-dependent
error and percentage error. Due to their importance for our subject, we will devote this section to describe both
(1) The scale-dependent error measure
The scale-dependent errors are on the same scale as the data themselves. Therefore, as a limitation, the accuracy measures that are based directly on this error cannot be used to make comparisons between series that are
on different scales. In this paper, two known scale-dependent error measures have used, namely, the root mean
square error RMSE and the mean absolute error MAE58.
RMSE measures the average magnitude of the errors. Specifically, it is the square root of the average of squared
differences between theprediction and actual observations. Therefore, the RMSE will be more useful when large
errors are particularly undesirable. RMSE can be represented mathematically as follows
obs and yi
pred are the actual and predicted observations, respectively.
MAE measures the average magnitude of the errors in a set of predictions, regardless of their direction.
Therefore, it is the average over the test sample of the absolute differences between the prediction and actual
observation where all individual differences have equal weight.
Based on the definition of both measures, we can note that both RMSE and MAE are negatively oriented scores
and they express average prediction errors. However, it is widely demonstrated in the literature that the MAE
error measure is more preferred than the RMSE error measure, for the following reasons59:
1. The MAE measure is steadier than RMSE, whereas the latter increases as the variance that is associated
with the frequency distribution of error magnitudes increases.
2. The RMSE measure is related to the sample size, where it has a tendency to be increasingly larger than MAE
as the test sample size increases. This can be a problem when using RMSE with different-sized test samples,
which is frequently the case in real-world situations.
3. The RMSE gives a relatively high weight to large errors (in bad prediction situations), since the errors are
squared before they are averaged. This may skew the metric towards overestimating the modelâ€™s badness. This is particularly problematic behaviour if we have noisy data samples. In contrast, MAE penalizes
huge errors but not as badly as RMSE does. Thus, it is not that sensitive to outliers as RMSE is, as long as it
does not make use of a square.
4. The MAE measure is easier to interpret and justify than RMSE.
(2) The percentage error measure
The percentage error measures are more accurate and efficient in tracking the forecasting precision and performance evaluation of the forecasts, since they have the advantage of being scale-independent. Therefore, these
kinds of error measures are frequently used to make comparison among forecast models, especially when different scaled datasets are used58. One of the most common percentage errors is the symmetric mean absolute
percentage error (SMAPE)60.
Parameters selection.
During the validation experiments of this paper, there are a few hyper-parameters
that need to be selected. Specifically, these parameters are:
1. Sequence length (lag)
2. Batch size
3. Number of units in the encoder layer
4. Number of epochs for training the LSTM-SAE in the pre-training phase
5. Number of epochs for training the pre-trained model in the fine-tuning phase
6. Dropout rate (we use a dropout layer after each LSTM layer in the fine-tuning phase).
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
For these hyper-parameters selection, we used the Hyperopt: Distributed Asynchronous Hyper-parameter
Optimization library61, along with using the RMSE on the validation data as a criterion for selecting the
hyper-parameters. For both phases of pre-training and fine-tuning, we used the ADAM optimizer62 and the mean
squared error (MSE) as a cost function. For the implementation phase of our model, we used the Keras library63.
Experimental Results
This section shows the empirical results of our experiments that assess the proposed model. In this evaluation
phase, we assess the performance of the LSTM-SAE model and compare its performance with the reference
model DLSTM5 to solve the same problems using the same datasets that are described in the previous section.
More comparisons with other baseline and reference models using the same datasets are given in the following
section. To provide a fair evaluation and comparison, the aforementioned experimental settings of all experiments are unified, and we utilized the three performance measures described in the previous section. All tables in
this section show the results based on the testing (or unseen) data.
Case study-I: Predicting the hourly total number of rented bikes in the capital bike sharing system.
Table 1 shows the results of both models using one and two hidden layers. To avoid overfitting, we did not
increase the number of hidden layers; in particular, we found that the error values did not change, and therefore,
the performance is still the same. In addition, the table shows the best values of each parameter that show the best
performance of each model. It is clear from Table 1 that the LSTM-SAE model outperforms the DLSTM model
on the three performance measures. Given that both models have a deep structure using the original LSTM, these
results assert the impact of adopting the approach of the unsupervised pre-trained LSTM instead of the randomized initialization for LSTM cells. For visual assessment, the relation between the original data and their prediction for the LSTM-based SAE model and the DLSTM model is illustrated in Figs. 6 and 7 for one hidden layer
and two hidden layers, respectively. For clarity, these two figures show the last 100 observations of the testing data.
Case study-II: Predicting the hourly PM2.5 concentration in the air of Beijing.
In a similar way,
Table 2 shows the results of both models using one and two hidden layers. Again, it is obvious that the LSTM-SAE
model outperforms the DLSTM model on two performance measures, namely, MAE and SMAPE. Regarding
the RMSE measure, we found that the DLSTM outperforms the LSTM-SAE, where the former shows 23.75 and
the latter shows 24.04, i.e., a minor difference. The visual relation between the original data and their predictions
using both models is illustrated in Figs. 8 and 9 for one hidden layer and two hidden layers, respectively, for only
the last 100 observations of testing data.
Results Analysis and Discussion
In the previous section, we validated the performance of the proposed LSTM-SAE model against our previous model DLSTM5 to solve the MTS forecasting problem. In this section, we will validate both models against
state-of-the-art machine learning models that are used to solve the same problems using the same datasets. We
already overviewed these reference models in the section of Related Work. All validations are based on the three
performance metrics RMSE, MAE, and SMAPE. As we explained in the performance measures subsection, the
performance metric MAE is more accurate than RMSE, and SMAPE is more accurate and efficient than both of
them. The reason for this is widely demonstrated in the literature, indicating that the percentage error measures
No. of hidden
No. of hidden
Table 1.  The results of DLSTM5 and LSTM-SAE using dataset of case study-I.
Figure 6.  Original data vs. prediction for case 1 with 1 layer.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
are the most appropriate tools to assess the performance of forecasting models60. Accordingly, in this discussion
section, we will mainly rely on the values of the SMAPE measure if its values are available. However, if SMAPE’s
value is not available in the corresponding reference, we will rely first on the MAE values, and then we will rely
on the RMSE values. Additionally, since both case studies have similar experimental conditions, we will base our
analysis on the error values or performance comparison across both cases.
LSTM-SAE vs. DLSTM.
For easier comparison, we will merge both Tables 1 and 2 for both case studies into
one table. It is clear from Table 3 that the proposed model LSTM-SAE outperforms our previous model DLSTM5
in all performance measures except in the RMSE measure in case study-II. On the scale of this measure, the
Figure 7.  Original data vs. prediction for case 1 with 2 layer.
No. of hidden
No. of hidden
Table 2.  The results of DLSTM5 and LSTM-SAE using data set of case study 2.
Figure 8.  Original data vs. prediction for case 2 with 1 layer.
Figure 9.  Original data vs. prediction for case 2 with 2 layer.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
DLSTM gains 23.7, whereas the LSTM-SAE gains 24.1, whilst in the other two measures, MAE and SMAPE, the
latter approach outperforms the former. If we adhere to our justifications about the three performance measures,
then we can confirm the superiority of the LSTM-SAE over the DLSTM in solving MTS forecasting problems.
These results clearly show the impact of stacking LSTMs in an autoencoder fashion as a kind of pre-trained
DLSTM, and its performance is better than the original DLSTM that depended on randomized initialization to
the units of the LSTM. In other words, the unsupervised pre-training approach enhances the DLSTM’s performance better than the supervised approach of the DLSTM5. The reason is because UTS problems usually include
one variable or one feature, where there is no correlation with other variables. Therefore, it is expected that the
DLSTM will perform well in such regression problems. However, there are many variables in MTS regression
problems and they are highly correlated as well. In such complex situations, the random initialization of cells will
lead the learning algorithm to become trapped in different local minima, depending on the values of the other
parameters’ initialization. This coincides with what is demonstrated in the machine learning literature, indicating
that training deep architectures with several layers using random weights initialization and supervised training
provides worse results than training shallow architectures18,19.
Furthermore, we noticed that the unsupervised pre-training approach assists the model to converge faster
than the supervised approach of DLSTM. Table 4 lists the number of epochs required from each model to converge in both case studies; in the case of the LSTM-SAE model, this is the number of epochs in the fine-tuning
phase. We extended the list to show number of epochs required up to three hidden layers to track the convergence
closely. In case study-I, the DLSTM model needs 500 epochs to converge, whereas LSTM needs 355 epochs to
converge. Likewise, in case study-II, the DLSTM model needs 1182 epoch, whereas the LSTM-SAE needs 197
epochs to converge. Of course, these parameters are mainly dependent on the dataset, but they provide us with an
indication about computational requirements for each model.
Overall, the unsupervised pre-training indeed enhances the performance of the DLSTM model and leads to
better convergence but with the cost of increasing the overall training of the LSTM-SAE model because of the
two phases of training (pre-training and fine-tuning), and this is the trade-off with the improved performance.
LSTM-SAE vs. reference models.
Towards an overall evaluation and analysis for the proposed model,
Table 5 shows a comparison for the proposed model with other reference models using the same dataset of case
study-I to solve the same problem43. In principal, a comparison with the results of other models in different
experimental conditions is common in the machine learning community, as long as the comparison is based
on tracking the computational performance of each model to solve the same problem using the same dataset
across the same performance measures. The benefit of such a comparison is that it will confirm the validation of
the proposed model against several counterparts. As the authors of reference models43 used the RMSE measure,
similar to our paper here, we will compare their results with ours for the RMSE measure only, as shown in Table 5.
The reference models assessed here are: artificial immune system with regression trees (AIS-RT), regression
tree (Reg Tree), ensemble regression tree, ridge regression, adaboost regression, gradient boosting regression, and
random forest regression. It is clear that the proposed LSTM-SAE model, and even our previous DLSTM model,
outperform the other reference model43, which is AIS-Tree, as well as the other reference models developed
and compared in the same article43. Therefore, we can conclude that the proposed LSTM-SAE model provides a
greater performance improvement than ensemble approaches on regression trees.
In case study-II, we assess our two models against several recently reported approaches used to solve the same
problem using the same dataset. Table 6 shows a comparison with the results of other reference models reported
in the literature. We conduct the comparison using the performance measures that are used in these reference
papers and the current paper as well, namely, RMSE, MAE, and SMAPE. Again, according to each measure of
accuracy and efficiency reported in the literature58,59, we will rely first on the values of SMAPE, then on the values
of MAE, then finally on the values of RMSE.
Case Study
Table 3.  The comparison between DLSTM5 and LSTM-SAE in case of 2 layers in both case studies.
Case Study
No. of hidden layers
No. of epochs
No. of epochs
Table 4.  The number of epochs needed for the two models to converge in both cases studies.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The reference models assessed here are: graph convolutional network-LSTM (GC-LSTM), the original
LSTM, the original feed forward neural networks (FNN), the original multiple linear regression (MLR), wavelet
auto-regressive integrated moving average (wavelet-ARIMA), wavelet-artificial neural networks (wavelet-ANN),
CNN-LSTM, the original CNN, complete ensemble-least squares support vector machine (LSSVM), the original
general regression neural network (GRNN), and the traditional and original auto-regressive integrated moving
average (ARIMA). These models are reported originally in many articles in the literature.
It is clear from Table 6 that the proposed LSTM-SAE model and our previous model DLSTM outperform all
other models on the level of both MAE and SMAPE performance measures, which confirms the superiority of
our model (the models in Zhao et al.47 is measured on MAPE that is the baseline measure and belong to same category of the SMAPE measure that is used in Table 6). There is only one exception, where the GC-LSTM45 model
outperforms our models and all other reference models on the scale of the RMSE performance measure. Again,
we can conclude that the LSTM-SAE model provides a greater performance improvement than several machine
learning baseline and top-of-the-line models.
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a pre-trained LSTM-based stacked autoencoder (LSTM-SAE) approach in a layer-wise
unsupervised learning fashion to replace the random weight initialization approach of the units of the deep LSTM
(DSLTM) model that we previously presented. The proposed approach is tested and validated to solve the multivariate time series forecasting problem using different two case studies and different datasets. The experimental
results clearly show that the layer-wise pre-training approach improved the performance of DLSTM and led to
better and faster convergence. In addition, the layer-wise pre-training fashion is more suitable to problems that
include multiple and correlated variables. It could learn the latent features automatically from the dynamically
changing multivariate inputs that are included in the two case studies treated in the paper. This performance is
further confirmed by its favourable comparative performance with several machine learning baseline models
that solve the same case studies. However, the side effect of the unsupervised pre-training approach lies in the
longer training time that is required to sequentially implement the two phases: the pre-training phase and the
fine-tuning phase. This will motivate us to combine a suitable selective attention mechanism to improve the training time and reduce the time complexity.
Received: 2 May 2019; Accepted: 12 November 2019;
Published: xx xx xxxx
Baseline Model
LSTM-SAE (Proposed)
AIS-RT (Presented in)43
Reg Tree43
Ensemble Regression Tree43
Ridge Regression43
Adaboost Regression43
Gradient Boosting Regression43
Random Forest Regression43
Table 5.  Comparison of the proposed model with other models using data set of case study-I.
LSTM-SAE (Proposed)
Wavelet-ARIMA46
Wavelet-ANN46
CNN-LSTM44
CE-WOA-LSSVM47
Table 6.  Comparison of the proposed model with other models using data set of case study-II.
Scientific Reports | 9:19038 | 
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/