NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COVID-19 AND REMOTE WORK:
AN EARLY LOOK AT US DATA
Erik Brynjolfsson
John J. Horton
Adam Ozimek
Daniel Rock
Garima Sharma
Hong-Yi TuYe
Working Paper 27344
 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
MIT's COUHES ruled this project exempt . Code & Data: https://
github.com/johnjosephhorton/remote_work/. Thanks to Sam Lord for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at 
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Erik Brynjolfsson, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and
Hong-Yi TuYe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data
Erik Brynjolfsson, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong-Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 27344
JEL No. I15,J21,L23,M15,M5
We report the results of a nationally-representative sample of the US population during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The survey ran in two waves from April 1-5, 2020 and May 2-8, 2020. Of
those employed pre-COVID-19, we find that about half are now working from home, including
35.2% who report they were commuting and recently switched to working from home. In
addition, 10.1% report being laid-off or furloughed since the start of COVID-19. There is a strong
negative relationship between the fraction in a state still commuting to work and the fraction
working from home. We find that the share of people switching to remote work can be predicted
by the incidence of COVID-19 and that younger people were more likely to switch to remote
work. Furthermore, states with a higher share of employment in information work including
management, professional and related occupations were more likely to shift toward working from
home and had fewer people laid off or furloughed. We find no substantial change in results
between the two waves, suggesting that most changes to remote work manifested by early April.
Erik Brynjolfsson
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-414
Cambridge, MA 02142
 
John J. Horton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
 
Adam Ozimek
 
Daniel Rock
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-412
Cambridge, MA 02142
 
Garima Sharma
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
 
Hong-Yi TuYe
Sloan School of Management
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
 
Code and Data are available at 
Introduction
The on-going COVID-19 pandemic is rapidly transforming how, and even
whether, people work. Large numbers of people have remained in their homes
to avoid the disease or due to shelter-in-place orders. Many businesses are
closed and many people are not working remotely. There have been enormous and unprecedented increases in workers ﬁling unemployment insurance
claims . These changes in work
and employment have immediate implications for the economy, and may lead
to permanent shifts that last beyond the pandemic.
To get a real-time sense of how ﬁrms and workers are responding, we
conducted two waves of surveys using Google Consumer Surveys (GCS), one
each in April and May.1 In the April version of the survey we asked a single
question: ““Have you started to work from home in the last 4 weeks?” with
the following response options:
1. “I continue to commute to work”
2. “I have recently been furloughed or laid-oﬀ”
3. “Used to commute, now work from home”
4. “Used to work from home and still do”
5. “Used to work from home, but now I commute”
1GCS is a relatively low-cost tool for rapidly collecting responses to simple questions
Stephens-Davidowitz and Varian , and response representativeness is often comparable to similar alternatives .
6. “None of the above / Not working for pay”
In the May version, we updated the question to: ““Have you started to work
from home in the last 2 months?”
We launched a ﬁrst wave of our survey on April 1, 2020 and collected
responses until April 5, collecting a total of 25,000 responses. We launched a
second wave on May 2, 2020, collecting 25,001 responses until May 8, 2020.
We ﬁnd across both waves that over one third of workers have responded
to the pandemic by shifting to remote work, while another 10% have been
laid-oﬀor furloughed. There is a great deal of variation across states in the
share of people switching to remote work as well the share of people who
continue to commute. These can each be predicted by incidence of COVID-
19 as well as the industry composition of the state prior to the onset of the
crisis. We also ﬁnd that younger people were more likely than older people
to switch from commuting to remote work. Responses did not meaningfully
diﬀer across the two survey waves, suggesting that most changes to remote
work had already manifested by early April.
We ﬁrst report results from the May version of the survey in the main ﬁgures,
and explore across-time diﬀerences in Section 2.5 below. Of the respondents,
13,937 reported something other than “None of the above...”
This gives
an implied employment rate of 56%, which is slightly lower than the BLS
estimate of about 60%.2 For the rest our analysis, we restrict our sample to
those reporting being employed prior to the onset of COVID-19.
The distribution of answers pooled over all respondents is shown in Figure 1. We can see that the most common response from workers was that
they continue to commute, at 37.1% (95% CI is [35.8,38.4]). But the next
2 
most common was that they have switched from commuting to working from
The fraction of workers who switched to working from home is about
35.2%. In addition, 15.0% reporting they were already working from home
pre-COVID-19. This suggests about half the workforce is now working from
home, signiﬁcantly more than the Dingel and Neiman estimate of 37%
of people working at home.3
We ﬁnd that 10.1% of workers report recently being laid oﬀor furloughed.
This fraction is lower than the BLS estimate of 14.7% for April. The diﬀerence may reﬂect the way respondents interpreted the phrase “furloughed or
laid-oﬀ” or “None of the above / Not working for pay” in our survey, while
the BLS reports a person as being unemployed if they have been out of a job
for a month and searching for employment. 4
Geographic variation
COVID-19 has aﬀected various parts of the US diﬀerently, with the main
epicenter in New York City. In Figure 2, we plot the fraction of respondents
choosing each answer by region. GCS captures a respondent’s city and state,
which are then mapped to the regions “Northeast”, “Midwest”, “West”, and
In the ﬁrst facet from the left, we can see that the South has the highest
3Our estimates are broadly consistent with the broader literature, which includes a
relatively wide range of estimates. Krantz-Kentkrantz uses 2013-2017 American
Time Use Survey (ATUS) data to show 20.5% of workers working from home in some
way on an average day. However, our question implies working from home all the time.
The remote worker fraction in the ATUS is 11.4%. Our 14.2% estimate is also broadly
consistent with the “Freelancing in America Survey” that reported 16.8% of workers report
doing most or all of their work remotely, though this includes people working from coworking spaces, coﬀee shops, homes, etc . At the lowest end, the 2019
Census reports 5.3% of workers as “working from home.”
The wide range in answers
suggests respondent uncertainty about the precise meaning of questions. Nevertheless,
our results lie well within the existing estimates.
4 
Figure 1: Answers to the question “Have you started to work from home in
the last 2 months?”, conditional upon being in the labor force from a US
Used to work from home, but now I commute
I have recently been furloughed or laid−off
Used to work from home and still do
Used to commute, now work from home
I continue to commute to work
% of working respondents
fraction still commuting to work and the Northeast has the lowest. In the
second facet from the right, we can see that the Northeast has the highest
fraction of respondents switching to working from home, and the South has
the fewest. The Northeast started from the lowest fraction working from
home, though these fractions are imprecisely estimated and are all fairly
similar to each other. The Northeast fraction now working from home is
For a ﬁner-grained look, we plot responses by state.
In Figure 5 we
plot the fraction of respondents that switched to working remotely. As we
saw in Figure 2, the highest fraction switching to working from home are
in the Northeast. The South and parts of the Midwest show substantially
less remote work. It is important to keep in mind that some of these point
estimates are fairly imprecise.
Figure 2: Responses by US region
Used to commute,
now work from
Used to work from
home and still do
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
% of respondents
By gender and age
In Figure 3 we report responses by inferred gender. Fractions are computed
separately for males and females, and then a slope graph is used to show
diﬀerences. Within all questions at a 95% conﬁdence interval, the diﬀerences
between gender are not statistically signiﬁcant. Within our sample, however,
it appears that men were modestly more likely to continue to commute to
work, and likewise women more were more likely to report switching from
commuter to work from home status. Men were also slightly more likely to
have been recently furloughed or laid-oﬀ. Consistently working from home
workers show little diﬀerence in gender composition.
In Figure 4 we report responses by inferred age. A similar proportion of
workers continue to commute to work across all age groups, as is also the case
for the recently furloughed or for the contingent of laid-oﬀ workers. On the
other hand, the proportion of respondents that has recently converted from
commuting to work to remote work steadily declines from the 25-34 age group
to the 65 and older category. The diﬀerences between the 25-34 age group and
the 65 and older group are statistically signiﬁcant, and, as Figure 4 shows,
younger workers (above age 25) are more likely to have been converted to
work from home from commuting.
Survey respondents in older age groups also reported remaining working
remotely with greater propensities. These results are directionally consistent
with the 2019 Census, though our estimates are larger. The diﬀerences may
arise from a diﬀerence in the question asked. The Census asks about how
workers get to work. The 2019 Upwork “Freelancing in America” study
found younger workers were modestly more likely to work mostly or entirely
from home Upwork . It is possible that our survey is somewhere in
between, grouping people who do some work at home with those who are
fully committed remote labor. We will investigate further in future work.
Figure 3: Responses by gender
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
commute, now
work from home
Used to work
from home and
Used to work
from home, but
now I commute
% of respondents
Figure 4: Responses by inferred age
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
commute, now
work from home
Used to work
from home and
Age of respondents
% of respondents
Figure 5: Fraction now working remotely, by US State
Predictors of across-state variation
The fractions laid-oﬀor furloughed by US State are shown in Figure 6.
In Figure 7 we plot the fraction of respondents working from home versus
the fraction still commuting by US state. There is a clear negative relationship, suggesting a fraction of current commuters could potentially transition
to work-from-home status. Each 10 percentage point increase in the fraction
still commuting is associated with about a 6 percentage point decline in the
fraction of workers now working from home.
Table 1 documents how heterogeneity in COVID-19 infection rates (measured as the log of cases per 100,000 individuals5) aﬀects switching to remote
work or continuing to work from home. We report results from the April
(wave 1) as well as May (wave 2) waves of the survey. Column (1) shows
that a doubling in COVID-19 cases per 100k individuals is associated with a
5% rise in the fraction of workers who switch to working from home in wave
 
Figure 6: Fraction Laid-oﬀ/furloughed, by US State
Figure 7: Still commuting versus work from home fractions by US State
Still commuting to work
1 and a 4.3% rise in wave 2.
Column (2) shows a similar rise in COVID-19 incidence as predicting a
5.4% fall in the fraction of those continuing to commute in wave 1, and a
2.7% fall in wave 2. Waves 1 and 2 show substantial consistency, supporting
the conclusion that most changes to remote work occurred by the ﬁrst wave.
We would expect these relationships if higher spread is associated with higher
responsiveness of government or individuals. Surprisingly, we do not ﬁnd a
strong or statistically signiﬁcant relationship between our measure of incidence and survey reports of being furloughed or laid-oﬀ. These associations
are not to be interpreted as causal and future work will explore the causal
eﬀect of the pandemic on switches into remote work.
Tables 2, 3, and 4 document how the pre-COVID distribution of economic activity across states predicts shifts into remote work. In Table 2 we
look at how the pre-COVID share of workers working from home inﬂuences survey responses. Interestingly, pre-COVID work
from home share is not strongly predictive of COVID-induced shares of people working from home or continuing to commute in either of the two survey
Table 3 shows not all occupations have been aﬀected equally. In particular, states with more workers in “management, professional and related occupations” ) were more likely to have large shifts
into remote work. This is consistent with the classiﬁcation of these occupations by the Bureau of Labor Statistics as having high potential for working
from home. Columns (1)-(2) show that in the April wave of the survey a
1% rise in the share of workers in these occupations is associated with a 1.1%
rise in those reporting now working from home and 1.1% decline in those reporting that they continue to commute to work. The May wave yields similar
numbers at 1.1% rise in those reporting now working from home and a 0.9%
decline in those continuing to commute. Column (3) also shows a greater
share in these occupations as being associated with a decline in furloughs or
Table 1: Predicting remote work by state incidence of COVID-19
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
Panel A: Wave 1
Log cases per 100k
population
Observations
Panel B: Wave 2
Log cases per 100k
population
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Table 2: Predicting remote work by pre COVID-19 work from home
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
Panel A: Wave 1
Pre-COVID fraction
working from home
Observations
Panel B: Wave 2
Pre-COVID fraction
working from home
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Table 3: Management, Professional, and Related Occupations
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
Panel A: Wave 1
Observations
Panel B: Wave 2
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Table 4 shows that prior share in manufacturing employment is not a
statistically signiﬁcant predictor of switches into remote work.
as expected, the sign of the coeﬃcient is negative. Similarly, pre-COVID-19
manufacturing share positively predicts continuing to commute. This pattern
is statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in Wave 2 of the survey; a
1% increase the pre-COVID-19 share of employment in manufacturing is
associated with a 0.84% increase in continuing to commute to work.
Table 4: Manufacturing
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
Panel A: Wave 1
Observations
Panel B: Wave 2
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Taken together, these results suggest that places with greater capacity
for increasing the amount of working from home are not necessarily places
where workers are already working from home. Instead, the occupation mix
is more predictive than prior remote work of the “remote-ability” of the
marginal job that is not yet remote. Of course, these estimates are especially relevant for short-run adjustments that workers and their employers
can make. The longer term capacity to rely on remote work and associated
hysteresis in employment patterns will take months to years to make accurate
measurement possible.
Impact on unemployment
A natural question is how these various measures vary with unemployment
and UI claims by state.
In Table 5, we combine our data with that on
the April unemployment rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics 6. BLS
classiﬁes an individual as unemployed if they were out of work and searching
for at least four weeks. Our goal is to gauge the extent to which our survey
measures (from Wave 2) predict changes in unemployment between February
and April 2020.
Column (1) of Table 5 ﬁnds that a 1% rise in the fraction of those still
commuting to work is associated with 0.18% fall in unemployment rate. Column (2) ﬁnds a similar negative albeit not statistically signiﬁcant relationship
between working from home and the unemployment rate. Column (3) shows
that a 1% rise in survey reports of being unemployed or laid oﬀis associated
with a 0.53% rise in the unemployment rate.
Since COVID may have lowered the intensity of unemployed individuals’
search activity, causing BLS to under-report COVID-driven layoﬀs, we repeat the above exercise with the dependent variable being the negative of
the change in employed individuals (using payroll) between February and
April 2020, i.e. additions to unemployment from payroll between February
and April 2020. Unsurprisingly, across all speciﬁcations, the state population
explains a great deal of the variation in unemployment. We are interested in
asking whether our survey measures account for some of the residual variation.
Results reported in Table 6 paint a remarkably similar picture to the one
above. In Column (1), we append the state-speciﬁc fraction reporting that
6Accessed May 22, 2020 from 
Table 5: Predicting unemployment rate by state
Dependent variable:
Unemployment rate
Still commuting
Now WFH frac.
Laid-oﬀfrac.
Still WFH frac.
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
they were still commuting to work. The higher the fraction reporting still
commuting, the lower the log change in unemployment for that state. States
that still have large numbers commuting to work should have fewer lay-oﬀs,
and so the coeﬃcient on the fraction still commuting should be negative.
This pattern is consistent with the observed negative relationship between
continuing to commute and the unemployment rate.
In Column (2), the greater the fraction that reports working from home,
the higher the log change in unemployment. The fraction working from
home should, on the one hand, have a protective eﬀect, keeping workers from
becoming unemployed, but on other hand, a state with a high WFH fraction
has likely had a particularly severe labor market shock, with many additional
workers laid-oﬀ. What seems likely is that workers who would otherwise be
continuing to commute to work are splitting into (a) work-from-home or (b)
becoming unemployed.
Column (3), which includes a direct measure of reported lay-oﬀs is positive
and signiﬁcant, but lower than expected in magnitude. Our expectation is
that the elasticity of log of unemployment to the fraction laid-oﬀ should be 1.
This discrepancy might be driven by survey respondents reporting “None of
the above / Not working for pay” instead of “I have recently been furloughed
or laid-oﬀ”.
Finally, in Table 7, we combine our data with that on UI claims from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We regress the log of the UI claims in a
state from mid-March till the end of April on the state’s population and the
state-speciﬁc fraction for each of the response possibilities.
To interpret these results, consider a state i that has population P opi,
an employment rate of Ei and a COVID-19-induced fraction of the working
population laid-oﬀ of LOi. If UI claims perfectly measured lay-oﬀs, then the
state’s UI claims would be PopiEiLOi and so a regression of log UI claims on
the log of each of the terms should give each component a coeﬃcient of
1. In the regressions in Table 7, we use a state-speciﬁc employment rate
Table 6: Predicting unemployment numbers by state
Dependent variable:
Log of unemployed
Log of state
population
Still commuting
Now WFH frac.
Laid-oﬀfrac.
Still WFH frac.
[1em] Constant
[1em] Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
pre-COVID-19 calculated from labor force participation per our own survey
and the state population.
Columns 1-3 of Table 7 reveal patterns remarkably similar to Tables 5 and
6 above. The higher the fraction reporting still commuting, the lower the UI
claims for that state. The greater the fraction that reports working from
home, the higher the UI claims. The higher the reported layoﬀ response, the
higher the UI claims.
Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that workers who would otherwise
be continuing to commute to work are splitting into (a) work-from-home or
(b) becoming unemployed and ﬁling for UI.
Changes over time
Survey responses between the ﬁrst wave (April 1-5) and second wave (May
2-8) of the survey do not demonstrate signiﬁcantly diﬀerent patterns, driven
largely by strong positive correlations in responses. For example, when looking within states, the correlation in reports of workers having switched into
remote work is 0.79; for continuing to commute to work, the correlation is
0.73, and for being laid oﬀ or furloughed it is 0.63. As expected, the tables
above thus reveal little change in pattern over time of workers switching into
remote work, continuing to commute, or being laid oﬀ or furloughed. An
earlier version of the paper 7, which plotted Figures 1-7 using data from the
ﬁrst wave, shows results from the two survey waves as also revealing
remarkably similar patterns. Taken together, these suggest that most shortterm changes to remote work and commuting had already occurred by the
ﬁrst week of April.
To gauge whether changes in employment are dynamically responding to
the COVID-19 crisis, we regress state-level changes in survey responses across
the two survey waves on changes in state-level COVID-19 incidence. Table
8 reports results. Column (1) reveals that the change in COVID-19 incidence
is mildly predictive of changes in switches into remote work. A 1 point
7Can be accessed at 
Table 7: Predicting UI claims by state
Dependent variable:
Log state six week UI claims
Log of state
population
Log of LFPR
Still commuting
Now WFH frac.
Laid-oﬀfrac.
Still WFH frac.
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
change in log of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 individuals between April and
May increases switches into remote work during this period by 2%. Change in
COVID-19 incidence does not, however, appear to aﬀect either continuing to
commute or layoﬀs and furloughs.
Table 8: Predicting changes to work using changes to COVID
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
Log change in COVID
cases per 100k
Observations
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤ 0.1 : ∗, p ≤ 0.05 : ∗∗ and p ≤ .01 : ∗ ∗ ∗.
Implications and suggestions for future work
These are a set of preliminary analyses of a rapidly-evolving crisis. We have
documented some early shifts in the economy, and it remains to be seen if
some of these changes will last beyond the end of the pandemic. For in-stance,
once businesses and individuals invest in the ﬁxed costs of remote work,
including technology but perhaps more importantly in developing the
necessary human capital and organizational processes, then they may decide
to stay with the new methods. Furthermore, the crisis has forced people
to try out new approaches, some of which may be unexpectedly eﬃcient or
eﬀective. In either case, lasting changes from the crisis would be expected.
Long term changes may involve not only remote work, but also the struc-
ture of industries and international trade. For example, tasks that can be
done by remote workers may be more likely to be oﬀ-shored, as distance
becomes less relevant. The tasks that comprise many occupations may be
unbundled and re-bundled to separate those that require in-person presence
at a business from those that can be done remotely. Remote work is one
way in which employers can protect both the health and job security of their
employees. Additional work to understand these changes is needed.
Conclusion
We document some early facts about how the US labor force is responding to
COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we ﬁnd that between February and May
2020 over one third of the labor force switched to remote work, resulting in
about half of American workers now working from home. The state-level
COVID-19 infection rates predict these switches. Furthermore, states with
more people in management, professional and related occupations were more
likely to see large shifts toward working from home and had fewer people laid
oﬀ or furloughed.
If there is hysteresis as people learn new ways to work remotely and businesses reorganize, the pandemic-driven changes may portend more lasting
eﬀects on the organization of work. We will continue to track changes to
the nature of remote work, asking how pandemic-induced changes transform
workplaces in the short and long-term.
The code and data for this project are here: work/.