1094-7167/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
I n t e l l i g e n t I n f o r m a t i o n P r o c e s s i n g
Identifying
Communities of
Practice through
Ontology Network
Harith Alani, Srinandan Dasmahapatra, Kieron O’Hara, and Nigel Shadbolt,
University of Southampton
ommunities of practice—groups of individuals interested in a particular job, procedure, or work domain—informally swap insights on work-related tasks, often
through quick chats by the water cooler. They act as corporate memories, transfer best
practice, provide mechanisms for situated learning, and act as foci for innovation.1,2
Increasingly, organizations are harnessing communities of practice to carry out important knowledge management functions.3 However, a significant first step
is identifying the community, which often doesn’t designate itself as such, and its members, who don’t know
they belong! So, this step involves determining which
people in a community of practice have common interests in particular practices or functions and producing
sets or clusters of related individuals. Community
identification traditionally demands heavy resources
and often includes extensive interviewing.
In this article, we describe Ontocopi (Ontology-
Based Community of Practice Identifier), a tool to
help identify communities. Ontocopi lets you infer the
informal relations that define a community of practice from the presence of more formal relations. For
instance, if A and B have no formal relation but they
have both authored papers with C (formal relation),
they might share interests (informal relation). Because
Ontocopi works in this way, we cannot claim without
qualification that it identifies communities of practice. Significant informal relations might have little or
no connection to the formal ones. Here, we refer to
the networks uncovered by Ontocopi as COPs and to
informal social networks as communities of practice.
We work under the assumption that COPs are sometimes decent proxies for communities of practice.
We developed Ontocopi within the Advanced
Knowledge Technologies (AKT) project4for ontologybased network analysis (ONA), which finds sets of
instances associated with a selected instance in a knowledge base. (See the related sidebar.) By ontology, we
mean combining a taxonomic structure of classes and
relations with the knowledge base that results from
instantiating the classes with domain objects. If you
suppose that such an ontology represents a domain’s
objects and relations, you can analyze the connections
between the objects. Ontocopi uses ontological relations to discover connections between objects that the
ontology only implicitly represents. For example, the
tool can discover that two people have similar patterns
of interaction,work with similar people,go to the same
conferences, and subscribe to the same journals.
Using an ontology to analyze such networks provides you with semantics for classes and relations.
So, during analysis, you can select targeted relations
for the community of practice and increase their
weight in the algorithm and assign low or zero
weights to unimportant relations. However, choosing
the ontology is an important step because its content
determines ONA’s effectiveness. For example, the
papers people publish are likely to be important for
determining their interests, but if their publications
This article describes
Ontocopi, a tool for
identifying
communities of
practice by analyzing
ontologies of relevant
working domains.
Ontocopi spots
patterns in ontological
formal relations,
traversing the ontology
from instance to
instance via selected
relations.
do not appear in the ontology, it cannot supply information about them.
Ontocopi provides an algorithmic instantiation of the general ONA method. It plugs
into the Protégé-2000 ontology and knowledge base editor.5 Our experiments used an
ontology developed within the AKT project
to describe the immediate academic domain
of Southampton University’s Electronics and
Computer Science Department, including
people, papers, projects, and conferences.2
Figure 1 shows the Ontocopi user interface. Panel A displays the ontology classes
that users can select. Panel B displays
instances of the selected class that the user
can choose. Ontocopi finds the COP of the
chosen instance. When the user clicks the Get
COP button (Panel C), a spreading activation
search on the ontology moves from the
selected instance to other instances connected to it by the selected relations, up to a
maximum number of links. Weights of linked
instances are calculated and a table (Panel D)
displays the results. (The following sections
describe the rest of the interface and our exact
method for COP calculation.)
Selection modes
The system lets users select manual, automatic, and semiautomatic modes. For
instance, in the display of relations and
weights (Panel E), users can manually control weight allocation and alter them at any
time. They can also select fully automatic or
semiautomatic allocation.
Manual. The system lets users manually
select relationships of interest and weight
them by pressing the + button (Panel E). For
example, if you are interested in people’s collaborations on projects and coauthorships,
you can select the relations member of project, has author, and published in. You can
then set weights for these relations to increase
or decrease their impact on the COP to be
identified. The less weight you give a relation, the smaller its impact. This approach lets
users completely control which relationships
to traverse and how to weight them. But, you
must know what the relationships represent
and their relative importance. A relation’s
weight on the results not only proportionally
affects the weight of other selected relations
but also affects the number of these relations
in the ontology. The more you use a relation,
the greater its effect on results because it is
traversed more often than other relations.
Automatic. The system can also select relations and calculate their weights automatically on the basis of how often the relations
appear in the ontology, which indicates the
relations’ level of importance to that ontology and whether it provides good information about them. You can activate the fully
automatic approach with the Frequency of
Occurrence check box (Panel G).
Ontologies are usually populated unevenly.
When an ontology is populated with
instances, certain relations are normally used
more than others, with some relations not
used at all for each node (instance) i in the graph,
and for every edge, we associate a weight R(i, j), representing
the weight transferred from node j to node i due to a particular (binary) relation R that the edge represents. You can assign
weights x(i) to solve the self-consistent set of equations
obtained by requiring that they be determined solely by
weight exchanges via the relational links as indicated. Because
we are interested only in the relative weights and not the
absolute values, we need only solve for x(i) modulo an overall
numerical factor—so we have to solve the equation
constant * x(i) = Ój R(i, j) * x(j).
This is an eigenvector problem, and if we further require the
weights to be positive and if the values R(i, j) are all the same
sign, the solution is the eigenvector corresponding to the
largest eigenvalue of matrix R (called the Perron eigenvector).
If the matrix is irreducible, you obtain the solution by a simple
iterative procedure—Rny is approximately proportional to the
vector of weights, x, for a large-enough natural number n and
for an arbitrary vector y (which we take to be 1, the vector
with all entries 1). The values x(i) will then measure node I’s relative importance in this network. A wide range of applications
that order network data build on this method.1
To find the COP of an individual represented as node p, we
find the Perron eigenvectors of two matricesthe matrix with
elements R(i, j) and the matrix with elements R(i, p) and R(p, j)
set to zero. (In practice, these elements are set to a very small
number (1 − z), where z is very close to 1, to prevent the matrix
from becoming reducible.) The change in these sets of values
x(i) in the two cases is a measure of p’s influence on each of the
other participants i in the network the ontology represents.
Because this requires a computation over all instances in an
ontology, you must explicitly check the transitive closure of the
relations (matrix R’s irreducibility).
Note that this ONA characterization doesn’t distinguish
between people and other types of nodes; it is a perfectly general method. So, although communities of practice are primarily
structured around people, they also include objects,2 and a COP
can be based on any instance. Also, ONA’s usefulness depends
on the ontology containing sufficient relevant and explicit information to help define the desired implicit relations.
As a first approximation, we implemented the iterative calculation (Rn.1) as a local spreading-activation algorithm with
an asynchronous update rule (as described in the algorithm
section). This approximation emphasizes the changes in the x
values that are first order in z, with further heuristic
adjustments (such as the locking mechanism) based on experiments. This lets us interpret the results on the basis of the
semantics encoded in the ontology depending on various procedural modifications, as we see in the main article.
References
1. L. Page et al., The PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to
the Web, tech. report SIDL-WP-1999-0120, Stanford Univ., Palo
Alto, Calif., 1999.
2. E. Wenger, R.L. McDermott, and W. Snyder, Cultivating Communities
of Practice, Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2002.
Ontology-Based Network Analysis
remains empty). This occurs because information is unavailable or because less effort
was spent collecting it (a reflection of its relative importance). However, full automation
can cause unevenness of representative data
in the knowledge acquisition phase in some
legacy knowledge sources.
So, fully automatic relation selection
bypasses problems with user uncertainty, but
frequency of use might only partially measure relevance to user interests.
Semiautomatic.The semiautomatic approach
compromises by letting users select a concept
of interest such as Person through the display
(Panel F). This process limits automatic relation setting to only those used between specified concepts. You can activate it from the
Selected Classes check box (Panel G). This
approach lets users limit the COP to certain
concepts when they’re unaware of the underlying relationship modeling.
The algorithm
The Ontocopi expansion algorithm generates the selected instance’s COP by identifying the set of close instances and ranking them
by the weights they accumulate from several
path traversals. It applies a breadth-first,
spreading-activation search, traversing the
semantic relations between instances (ignoring directionality) until it reaches a link threshold. This threshold is the maximum allowed
number of consecutive links traversed
between nodes, selected through Panel G.
The link threshold lets COPs have different
ranges. A narrow COP might comprise only
entities directly related to a project (project
employees, member organizations, themes),
while a wider COP might include indirectly
related entities such as colleagues’coauthors or
other projects about the same theme or subject. Figure 2 shows the pseudocode for Ontocopi’s COP calculation algorithm.
Now consider the example network in Figure 3. Assume we need to identify query
instance A’s COP, using the relationships
hasAuthor, memberOf, and attended, with the
weights 1.0, 0.6, and 0.3. All instances have an
initial weight of 1. Activation spreads from the
query instance to neighboring instances in the
network up to a given number of links. In the
first expansion, query instance A passes on
weights to all of its connected instances. The
amount of weight passed equals the instance’s
weight multiplied by the traversed relationship’s weight. In this case,A passes 1 ∗ 0.6 to
D and 1 ∗ 1 to H. We add these to their initial
weights of 1. In return, these instances pass
their total weights to all their neighbors, so D,
for example, passes (1 + 1 ∗ 0.6) ∗ 0.6 to B and
A. Expansion stops when the link paths are
exhausted or the link threshold is reached. (In
the algorithm,locking and unlocking instances
prevent feedback loops from continuing until
it reaches the link threshold). We then raise
results to the power 1/n to normalize them
computer.org/intelligent
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
I n t e l l i g e n t I n f o r m a t i o n P r o c e s s i n g
Figure 1. The Ontocopi user interface. (See the main text for a description of the labeled panels.)
according to their link distance, where n is the
minimum number of links traversed to reach
the instance starting from the query instance.
Instances therefore accumulate weight on the
basis of the number of relevant relations they
have with the initial instance.
The number of links to expand greatly
affects the COP results because of the simplification introduced in this implementation. The
algorithm attempts to identify the instances
most like the query instance within a boundary the given link threshold defines. When we
limit expansion to only one link, all identified
instances have a direct relation to the query
instance. As the number of links increases, so
will the number of instances that have only an
indirect link with the query instance.
In terms of its intellectual roots, the Ontocopi algorithm derives ideas from the literature on similarity measures and applies them to
ONA. It builds on an approach introduced by
Chris Paice,6 in which relevance values of
instances increase with the number of semantic paths leading to these instances. However,
because you can represent ontological relationships bidirectionally (has-author versus
authored-by), our algorithm differs from
Paice’s in that it ignores relationship direction.
Furthermore, our algorithm lets an instance
transfer some weight back to its “source”
instance to ease a problem that arises when you
apply Paice’s method to a dense ontology: If
activation spreads over more than a few links
and reaches heavily connected instances (influential hubs), these instances receive disproportionately high weights accumulated from
their numerous connections. Hence, our algorithm introduces a one-step-backwards weight
transfer to give extra weight back to source
instances. Nevertheless, you can propagate a
high percentage of a hub’s weight to some of
its further connected instances, which in turn
can earn an unjustified high COP ranking. To
solve this, you can compensate by adjusting
the weight passed from an instance based on
the number of connections. The more connections an instance has, the more general it is and
the less weight it can transfer.
Refining the picture
Getting the COP right depends on the ontology, the user’s aims, and the domain. Even if
rules of thumb emerged from long-term study
of the technique, you would still need to experiment within any new domain to establish the
ontology’s network properties.
Let’s assume the user wants to identify the
COP of a person named Shadbolt, an instance
of the class Academic Staff (as in Figure 1).
The user can select relations and weight them
manually or use the semiautomatic or automatic selection. Then, the user sets the link
threshold and maximum number of COP
results. The number of results implicitly sets
a weight threshold to filter out any instance
with a final weight less than the calculated
value. This process also controls the number
of results to display.
We describe the results of a set of experiments in which we used different settings to
identify Shadbolt’s COP in the AKT ontology. (We only considered the first 20 results
of each experiment.)
Standard runs using automatic
and manual settings
We first use a link threshold of 2 to identify Shadbolt’s immediate COP. The automatic relations selector sets the highest
weight of 1 to the relationship hasAuthor,
which is why most objects in Shadbolt’s
COP are people and why the highly ranked
people in Shadbolt’s COP generally share the
highest number of joint publications. Figure
4a shows that the closest person to Shadbolt
is O’Hara, Shadbolt’s trusty lieutenant, who
works in the same department and has coauthored more than 30 papers with him.
Increasing the link threshold to 4, leaving
the relation settings unchanged, gives the
COP shown in Figure 4b. More instances are
reached because of the analysis’s extended
range. Instances accumulate higher weights
as more weights are passed around and new
paths are explored. This wider COP includes
instances indirectly connected to the query
MARCH/APRIL 2003
computer.org/intelligent
Figure 3. Example ontology network.
Figure 2. Pseudocode for the COP calculation algorithm.
Initialise all instances weights to 1
Create a relationship-array of selected relationships and weights
Set query instance as the current instance
Mark current instance as unlocked and add it to an instance-array
Loop to the maximum number of links to traverse
Search for the first unlocked instance in instance-array
Mark instance as locked
Set instance as the current instance
Get all instances connected to current instance with a relationship in the relationship-array
Loop to number of connected instances
If instance not in instance-array (new instance) and within given time-interval
Weight of instance = initial weight + current instance
weight ∗weight of connecting relationship
Mark instance as unlocked and add it to instance-array
If instance already in instance array
Weight of instance = instance weight + current instance
weight ∗weight of connecting relationship
If not found then exit
instance through other instancesas in the
case of supervisors of someone’s coauthors.
Hence, we see new people with fewer direct
connections coming into the picture due to
their connections with others; a COP with a
higher link threshold can suggest COP memberships that an unaided subject would probably not ascertain.
To identify more specific COP types, the
user can select the relations of interest and
weight them manually or semiautomatically.
For example, to identify Shadbolt’s COP on
the basis of his coauthors, project collaborators, and coworkers, the user can select the
relationships hasAuthor, memberOfProject,
and memberOf (that is, member of a department). The relationship weights must reflect
the relative importance of the relationships
to the COP the user seeks, and the user must
allocate them manually.
Ignoring instances
Studying the effect of losing an employee
or project on the collaboration and communication lines between others in an organization helps uncover areas that such events
could weaken. Identifying critical areas can
help decision makers and planners maintain
existing links and fill gaps.
To this end, Ontocopi lets users ignore specific instances when calculating a COP (Panel
H in Figure 1). An ignored instance doesn’t
appear in a COP or on any of the relation
paths, thus eliminating its effect entirely. Figure 5 shows the COP with respect to the concepts of People and Project; Figure 5a is the
full COP, and Figure 5b is the COP calculated
while ignoring a particular project,Artequakt.
The COP differs slightly when Artequakt no
longer exists. For example, Kim is not in the
COP anymore. This indicates that the project
will weaken or lose its connection with Kim
(who is one of Artequakt’s main contributors)
if this project ends. The management team
might prepare for this situation by creating
new links to Kim before such an event occurs.
Temporally-based COP identification
The COPs Ontocopi uncovers are at best
proxies for actual communities of practice. A
clear difference between COPs and communities of practice is that the latter are dynamicworkers typically move in different communities as their working patterns and
seniority levels changeand a COP is static
(or at least as static as the ontology being used
for analysis). For example, if a relationship
changesyou stop working on a projectand
the ontology is updated to reflect that,the COP
will no longer have a record of the project.
However, if the ontology contains temporal
information, Ontocopi can use it to present a
more dynamic picture. For example, when the
ontology represents the start and end dates of
computer.org/intelligent
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
I n t e l l i g e n t I n f o r m a t i o n P r o c e s s i n g
Figure 5. COP based on Person and Project with (a) all instances considered and (b) the
Artequakt project ignored.
Figure 4. Shadbolt’s COP; automatic selection with (a) 2 links and (b) 4 links.
a worker’s employment on a project, you can
set Ontocopi to focus only on relationships
obtained within a specified pair of dates. Say
you want to test the intuition that projects and
coauthors in 2003 have better representation
in the current community than those prior to
1990. When an ontology contains the information required to make the calculation,
Ontocopi can produce a snapshot or a series of
snapshots of a COP at a particular time.
Previous examples using the AKT ontology identified COPs using default temporal
boundaries . But when
we apply temporal limits (Panel G, bottom, in
Figure 1), we can look at certain intervals’
COPs. The COP algorithm checks whether
each new instance is associated with a date. If
that date falls outside the given temporal interval, it ignores that instance. Figure 6 shows
Shadbolt’s COPs in three different periods,
focusing on coauthorship relations. Hedgecock, Stobart, and Underwood are highly
ranked in Figure 6a but excluded from the
COP in Figure 6b. Others such as Reichgelt,
Burton, and Rugg are some of the most relevant to Shadbolt’s COP in Figure 6a but fade
gradually when their ranks drop in Figure 6b
and disappear completely in Figure 6c. New
people in the COP always replace the fading
ones. For example O’Hara, Elliott, and Cottam appear in Figure 6b and maintain very
high ranks in Figure 6c.
Figure 7 shows the time-related ranks of
other people in Shadbolt’s coauthorshipbased COP. The rate of change depends, of
course, on individuals fading from and moving into the COP. For example, Reichgelt
climbed from fourth in 1987 to the top in
1991, then dropped until he disappeared for
good in 1995. A new person, Elliott, joined
this COP in 1995 and started to secure higher
positions but also began to fade after 1998.
Figure 7’s discontinuous curves show that we
had insufficient data for each person when
some yearly calculations occurred.
MARCH/APRIL 2003
computer.org/intelligent
Figure 6. Shadbolt’s COPs: (a) 1985–1990, (b) 1991–1997, and (c) 1998–2002.
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Figure 7. Changing ranks in Shadbolt’s COPs.
Ontologies tend to lack temporal information because it’s difficult to capture and represent such information. Some results of timebased COPs are inaccurate due to information
loss. For example, even though the AKT
ontology captures paper publication dates,
they lack the start and submission dates. Nevertheless, when you track someone’s career
development, it can help to restrict ONA to a
particular period. For example, to help find a
new person for a certain job, you could calculate the predecessor’s COP over the time in
which he or she did that job.
Applications
COP detection can play an indirect role in
numerous other management processes. The
technique can extract implicit information
from existing ontologies and play an interesting role in bootstrapping.
Organizational memory
A key problem in creating a usable organizational memory stems from its initial
setup. When the OM contains little initial
content, people can lack motivation to use it,
producing a shortage of further content,
cheap maintenance, and feedback. On the
other hand, if the OM has a lot of content,
users can overload on out-of-context information, and the large knowledge acquisition
overhead generated by the content creation
will increase the OM’s initial costs.
However, when instantiated ontologies
describe sufficient amounts of organizational
structure, developers or users could use ONA
(or Ontocopi) to create extra content.7An ONA
algorithm could create interesting content on
the fly, even during early stages of OM development. Users could easily employ ONA to
suggest people to talk to about particular problems or issues that arise. If a user’s question to
the OM provided a starting node for an ONA,
the analysis could provide related concepts and
identify people strongly associated with the
start node. In the context of information overload, users can always adjust ONA and alter
their search criteria from the system defaults.
Moreover, ONA remains context sensitive
(where context is featured implicitly in the
ontologies) but also generic. Furthermore, in
ontology analysis, the user doesn’t need to
know anything about the ontology.
Recommender systems
A similar bootstrapping problem exists with
recommender systems. These systems learn
about user preferences for,say,Web pages over
time and automatically find new pages similar
to the user’s historical preferences. In the
Quickstep recommender system for online
research papers,explicit feedback and browsed
URLs help form user interest profiles, and the
system computes a daily set of recommendations. The user can offer feedback to improve
the training set and classification accuracy.
Our team has investigated integrating
Quickstep and Ontocopi to help with the bootstrapping problem.8 Upon startup, an ontology gives Quickstep an initial set of publications for each user. When a new user is added,
the ontology provides this person’s publication list (if those papers are already in the
ontology), and Ontocopi provides a new COP
by performing an ONA with the new user as
a starting node. This COP (the most similar
users) can then feed into a correlation between
the new user’s history of publication and similar user profiles to form the new initial profile.
Referential integrity
A third example application area for Ontocopi occurs within ontology development itself.
As merging legacy ontologies, databases, and
other information stores create more ontologies, problems will inevitably occur in preserving referential integrity across the merger.
For example,you might refer to the same object
or concept with different names (say, Alani,
Harith,and H. Alani). We are investigating clustering potential instance duplicates in an ontology by using generic heuristics and soft string
similarity measures and then using ONA to
analyze the connections between the clustered
instances.9 Using them as the starting nodes of
the analysis, we can calculate the instances’
COPs within the ontology under construction
itself and the degree of overlap between the
COPs as a similarity measure. When the measure passes some threshold, it proves that the
two instances, although represented by different names, are identical.
Thus far, we considered the results from
analyzing transitive extensions of relationships to infer COP properties. But an ontology also provides metadata for interfacing
with document repositories, which have their
own sets of metadata, such as abstracts of
publications. In our academic domain, we
can use these sets to characterize COPs by
finding word-use patterns in document
abstracts authored by COP members. This
information is not encoded in the ontology;
we extract it by statistical analyses of the
abstracts correlated with authorship details.
We start with a matrix of COP cooccurrences (by treating, say, the top five members
of a COP as a single author) and words
obtained from the abstracts. We then create a
probabilistic model of this cooccurrence
(using Hofmann’s model10), which minimizes the statistical distance between the
empirically observed data and a multinomial
hidden variable model. The hidden variable
identifies clusters of words related by common use. Briefly, the joint probability of an
event of a word or author pair is given by
P(word, author) = Sz P(word | z)
P(author | z) P(z),
where z indexes the hidden variable, and we
derive the conditional probabilities on the
right-hand side from the data.10 The result is
a set of probabilities of COP keywords that
could help to independently characterize it.
We might also use them to compare COPs or
estimate the probabilities that someone
would belong to one.
e would like to find better ways to
present Ontocopi’s results. At the
moment, they appear as a list of instances,
together with accumulated weights, which is
only minimally enlightening. Researchers
have experimented with more interesting
visualizations,2 which we could adapt. For
example, when Ontocopi performs an analysis with an instance ignored, it could visually
explain the conclusions. Or, to explain why
instances accumulated their weights, 3D
visualization might trace the shortest path
from the initial instance to the target or represent the numbers in a calculation.
Because a COP is an artificial construct,
its boundaries are not well defined. The user
selects the number of instances to display,
and the display cuts off at this point. We
experimented with fixed-number and fixedweight display models, and both have points
for and against them.
With regard to identifying communities of
practice, management itself lacks established
methodologies, which obviously makes it difficult to integrate Ontocopi within a standard
method. When we can precisely characterize
Ontocopi’s contribution to community management, it will be simpler to produce informative visualizations of results, and we are
working on achieving this. Appropriate visualizations and the forms the explanations take
depend on the application. We would like to
computer.org/intelligent
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
I n t e l l i g e n t I n f o r m a t i o n P r o c e s s i n g
research the sorts of queries that Ontocopi
could answer and how to visualize them.
Finally, as we discussed, hubs bring in very
large weights, distorting the COP. They also
cause noise by connecting with irrelevant
instances. We are trying to work out the best
response. Should the activation stop spreading? We are identifying hubs and studying
their effects in ONA’s complete instantiation.
Although our weighting system lets us distinguish between relations of different significance, we have no easy way of doing this
with instances. For example, it is probably
more important from the COP point of view
to be a member of a small group than of a
large one (it says more about Alani that he is
in the Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia
Group, than that he is at the University of
Southampton). We could use instance connectivity and class hierarchical level as indications of instance specificity.
Ontocopi is a flourishing prototype that
taught us much about the properties of
ontologies and communities of practice. We
dealt with numerous issues and discovered
many new interesting problems. Each new
problem tells us more about communities
and their representation; each new answer
raises more problems. We hope that we have
uncovered a virtuous circle that will help
improve the management of communities
within organizations.
Acknowledgments
The Advanced Knowledge Technologies Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration, sponsored by
the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council Grant GR/N15764/01, supports this work.
The AKT IRC comprises the Universities of
Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Sheffield, and Southampton
and the Open University. An earlier version of this
article was presented at the 2002 IFIP Workshop on
Intelligent Information Processing under the title
“OntocopiMethods and Tools for Identifying
Communities of Practice.” We thank the workshop
audience for their comments and Mark Musen for
selecting this article for this special issue.