Human Pose Estimation with Iterative Error Feedback
Jo˜ao Carreira∗
 
UC Berkeley
Pulkit Agrawal
 
UC Berkeley
Katerina Fragkiadaki†
 
UC Berkeley
Jitendra Malik
 
UC Berkeley
Hierarchical feature extractors such as Convolutional
Networks (ConvNets) have achieved impressive performance on a variety of classiﬁcation tasks using purely feedforward processing. Feedforward architectures can learn
rich representations of the input space but do not explicitly model dependencies in the output spaces, that are quite
structured for tasks such as articulated human pose estimation or object segmentation. Here we propose a framework
that expands the expressive power of hierarchical feature
extractors to encompass both input and output spaces, by
introducing top-down feedback. Instead of directly predicting the outputs in one go, we use a self-correcting model
that progressively changes an initial solution by feeding
back error predictions, in a process we call Iterative Error
Feedback (IEF). IEF shows excellent performance on the
task of articulated pose estimation in the challenging MPII
and LSP benchmarks, matching the state-of-the-art without
requiring ground truth scale annotation.
1. Introduction
Feature extractors such as Convolutional Networks
(ConvNets) represent images using a multi-layered hierarchy of features and are inspired by the structure and
functionality of the visual pathway of the human brain
 . Feature computation in these models is purely feedforward, however, unlike in the human visual system where
feedback connections abound . Feedback can be
used to modulate and specialize feature extraction in early
layers in order to model temporal and spatial context (e.g.
priming ), to leverage prior knowledge about shape for
segmentation and 3D perception, or simply for guiding visual attention to image regions relevant for the task under
∗Now at Google DeepMind.
†Now at Google.
consideration.
Here we are interested in using feedback to build predictors that can naturally handle complex, structured output
spaces. We will use as running example the task of 2D human pose estimation , where the goal is to
infer the 2D locations of a set of keypoints such as wrists,
ankles, etc, from a single RGB image. The space of 2D
human poses is highly structured because of body part proportions, left-right symmetries, interpenetration constraints,
joint limits (e.g. elbows do not bend back) and physical connectivity (e.g. wrists are rigidly related to elbows), among
others. Modeling this structure should make it easier to pinpoint the visible keypoints and make it possible to estimate
the occluded ones.
Our main contribution is in providing a generic framework for modeling rich structure in both input and output
spaces by learning hierarchical feature extractors over their
joint space.
We achieve this by incorporating top-down
feedback – instead of trying to directly predict the target
outputs, as in feedforward processing, we predict what is
wrong with their current estimate and correct it iteratively.
We call our framework Iterative Error Feedback, or IEF.
In IEF, a feedforward model f operates on the augmented input space created by concatenating (denoted by
⊕) the RGB image I with a visual representation g of the
estimated output yt to predict a “correction” (ϵt) that brings
yt closer to the ground truth output y. The correction signal ϵt is applied to the current output yt to generate yt+1
and this is converted into a visual representation by g, that
is stacked with the image to produce new inputs xt+1 = I
⊕g(yt) for f, and so on iteratively. This procedure is initialized with a guess of the output (y0) and is repeated until
a predetermined termination criterion is met. The model
is trained to produce bounded corrections at each iteration,
e.g. ||ϵt||2 < L. The motivation for modifying yt by a
bounded amount is that the space of xt is typically highly
non-linear and hence local corrections should be easier to
 
Figure 1: An implementation of Iterative Error Feedback (IEF) for 2D human pose estimation. The left panel shows the input
image I and the initial guess of keypoints y0, represented as a set of 2D points. For the sake of illustration we show only 3 out
of 17 keypoints, corresponding to the right wrist (green), left wrist (blue) and top of head (red). Consider iteration t: predictor
f receives the input xt – image I stacked with a “rendering” of current keypoint positions yt – and outputs a correction ϵt.
This correction is added to yt, resulting in new keypoint position estimates yt+1. The new keypoints are rendered by function
g and stacked with image I, resulting in xt+1, and so on iteratively. Function f was modeled here as a ConvNet. Function
g converts each 2D keypoint position into one Gaussian heatmap channel. For 3 keypoints there are 3 stacked heatmaps
which are visualized as channels of a color image. In contrast to previous works, in our framework multi-layered hierarchical
models such as ConvNets can learn rich models over the joint space of body conﬁgurations and images.
learn. The working of our model can be mathematically
described by the following equations:
ϵt = f(xt)
yt+1 = yt + ϵt
xt+1 = I ⊕g(yt+1),
where functions f and g have additional learned parameters Θf and Θg, respectively. Although we have used the
predicted error to additively modify yt in equation 2, in general yt+1 can be a result of an arbitrary non-linear function
that operates on yt, ϵt.
In the running example of human pose estimation, yt is
vector of retinotopic positions of all keypoints that are individually mapped by g into heatmaps (i.e. K heatmaps for K
keypoints). The heatmaps are stacked together with the image and passed as input to f (see ﬁgure 1 for an overview).
The “rendering” function g in this particular case is not
learnt – it is instead modelled as a 2D Gaussian having a
ﬁxed standard deviation and centered on the keypoint location. Intuitively, these heatmaps encode the current belief in
keypoint locations in the image plane and thus form a natural representation for learning features over the joint space
of body conﬁgurations and the RGB image.
The dimensionality of inputs to f is H × W × (K + 3),
where H, W represent the height and width of the image
and (K + 3) correspond to K keypoints and the 3 color
channels of the image. We model f with a ConvNet with
parameters Θf (i.e. ConvNet weights). As the ConvNet
takes I ⊕g(yt) as inputs, it has the ability to learn features
over the joint input-output space.
2. Learning
In order to infer the ground truth output (y), our method
iteratively reﬁnes the current output (yt). At each iteration,
f predicts a correction (ϵt) that locally improves the current
output. Note that we train the model to predict bounded
corrections, but we do not enforce any such constraints at
test time. The parameters (Θf, Θg) of functions f and g in
our model, are learnt by optimizing equation 4,
h(ϵt, e(y, yt))
where, ϵt and e(y, yt) are predicted and target bounded
corrections, respectively. The function h is a measure of
distance, such as a quadratic loss. T is the number of correction steps taken by the model. T can either be chosen to
be a constant or, more generally, be a function of ϵt (i.e. a
termination condition).
We optimize this cost function using stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with every correction step being an independent training example. We grow the training set progres-
Algorithm 1 Learning Iterative Error Feedback with Fixed
Path Consolidation
1: procedure FPC-LEARN
Initialize y0
for t ←1 to (Tsteps) do
for all training examples (I, y) do
ϵt ←e(y, yt)
for j ←1 to N do
Update Θf and Θg with SGD, using loss h
and target corrections E
13: end procedure
sively: we start by learning with the samples corresponding
to the ﬁrst step for N epochs, then add the samples corresponding to the second step and train another N epochs, and
so on, such that early steps get optimized longer – they get
consolidated.
As we only assume that the ground truth output (y) is
provided at training time, it is unclear what the intermediate
targets (yt) should be. The simplest strategy, which we employ, is to predeﬁne yt for every iteration using a set of ﬁxed
corrections e(y, yt) starting from y0, obtaining (y0, y1, ..y).
We call our overall learning procedure Fixed Path Consolidation (FPC) which is formally described by algorithm 1.
The target bounded corrections for every iteration are
computed using a function e(y, yt), which can take different forms for different problems. If for instance the output
is 1D, then e(y, yt) = max(sign(y −yt) · α, y −yt) would
imply that the target “bounded” error will correct yt by a
maximum amount of α in the direction of y.
2.1. Learning Human Pose Estimation
Human pose was represented by a set of 2D keypoint locations y : {yk ∈ℜ2, k ∈[1, K]} where K is the number of
keypoints and yk denotes the kth keypoint. The predicted
location of keypoints at the tth iteration has been denoted by
t , k ∈[1, K]}. The rendering of yt as heatmaps concatenated with the image was provided as inputs to a ConvNet (see section 1 for details). The ConvNet was trained to
predict a sequence of “bounded” corrections for each keypoint (ϵk
t ) . The corrections were used to iteratively reﬁne
the keypoint locations.
Let u = yk −yk
t and the corresponding unit vector be
||u||2 . Then, the target “bounded” correction for the
tth iteration and kth keypoint was calculated as:
t ) = min(L, ||u||) · ˆu
where L denotes the maximum displacement for each keypoint location. An interesting property of this function is
that it is constant while a keypoint is far from the ground
truth and varies only in scale when it is closer than L to the
ground truth. This simpliﬁes the learning problem: given an
image and a ﬁxed initial pose, the model just needs to predict a constant direction in which to move keypoints, and
to ”slow down” motion in this direction when the keypoint
becomes close to the ground truth. See ﬁg. 2 for an illustration.
The target corrections were calculated independently for
each keypoint in each example and we used an L2 regression loss to model h in eq. 4. We set L to 20 pixels in
our experiments. We initialized y0 as the median of ground
truth 2D keypoint locations on training images and trained
a model for T = 4 steps, using N = 3 epochs for each
new step. We found the fourth step to have little effect on
accuracy and used 3 steps in practice at test time.
ConvNet architecture.
We employed a standard ConvNet architecture pre-trained on Imagenet: the very deep
googlenet 1. We modiﬁed the ﬁlters in the ﬁrst convolution layer (conv-1) to account for 17 additional channels
due to 17 keypoints. In our model, the conv-1 ﬁlters operated on 20 channel inputs. The weights of the ﬁrst three
conv-1 channels (i.e. the ones corresponding to the image)
were initialized using the weights learnt by pre-training on
Imagenet. The weights corresponding to the remaining 17
channels were randomly initialized with Gaussian noise of
variance 0.1. We discarded the last layer of 1000 units that
predicted the Imagenet classes and replaced it with a layer
containing 32 units, encoding the continuous 2D correction
2 expressed in Cartesian coordinates (the 17th ”keypoint” is
the location of one point anywhere inside a person, marking
her, and which is provided as input both during training and
testing, see section 3). We used a ﬁxed ConvNet input size
of 224 × 224.
3. Results
We tested our method on the two most challenging
benchmarks for 2D human pose estimation: the MPII Human Pose dataset , which features signiﬁcant scale variation, occlusion, and multiple people interacting, and Leeds
Sports Pose dataset (LSP) which features complex
poses of people in sports. For each person in every image,
the goal is to predict the 2D locations of all its annotated
keypoints.
MPII – Experimental Details. Human pose is represented
1The VGG-16 network produced similar results, but required signiﬁcantly more memory.
2Again, we do not bound explicitly the correction at test time, instead
the network is taught to predict bounded corrections.
Figure 2: In our human pose estimation running example, the sequence of corrections ϵt moves keypoints along lines in the
image, starting from an initial mean pose y0 (left), all the way to the ground truth pose y (right), here shown for two different
images. This simpliﬁes prediction at test time, because the desired corrections to each keypoint are constant for each image,
up to the last one which is a scaled version. Feedback allows the model to detect when the solution is close and to reduce
”keypoint motion”, as in a control system. Linear trajectories are shown for only a subset of the keypoints, to limit clutter.
as a set of 16 keypoints. An additional marking-point in
each person is available both for training and testing, located somewhere inside each person’s boundary. We represent this point as an additional channel and stack it with
the other 16 keypoint channels and the 3 RGB channels that
we feed as input to a ConvNet. We used the same publicly
available train/validation splits of . We evaluated the
accuracy of our algorithm on the validation set using the
standard PCKh metric , and also submitted results for
evaluation on the test set once, to obtain the ﬁnal score.
We cropped 9 square boxes centered on the markingpoint of each person, sampled uniformly over scale, from
1.4× to 0.3× of the smallest side of the image and resized
them to 256 × 256 pixels. Padding was added as necessary
for obtaining these dimensions and the amount of training
data was further doubled by also mirroring the images. We
used the ground truth height of each person at training time,
which is provided on MPII, and select as training examples
the 3 boxes for each person having a side closest to 1.2× the
person height in pixels. We then trained googlenet models
on random crops of 224 × 224 patches, using 6 epochs of
consolidation for each of 4 steps. At test time, we predict
which one of the 9 boxes is closest to 1.2× the height of
the person in pixels, using a shallower model, the VGG-S
ConvNet , trained for that task using an L2 regression
loss. We then align our model to the center 224×224 patch
of the selected window. The MatConvnet library was
employed for these experiments.
We train our models using keypoint positions for both
visible and occluded keypoints, which MPII provides in
many cases whenever they project on to the image (the exception are people truncated by the image border). We zero
out the backpropagated gradients for missing keypoint annotations. Note that often keypoints lie outside the cropped
image passed to the ConvNet, but this poses no issues to our
formulation – keypoints outside the image can be predicted
and are still visible to the ConvNet as tails of rendered Gaussians.
Comparison with State-of-the-Art. The standard evaluation procedure in the MPII benchmark assumes ground truth
scale information is known and images are normalized using this scale information. The current state-of-the-art is
the sliding-window approach of Tompson et al and IEF
roughly matches this performance, as shown in table 1. In
the more realistic setting of unknown scale information, the
best previous result so far is from Tompson et al. which
was the ﬁrst work to experiment with this setting and obtained 66.0 PCKh. IEF signiﬁcantly improves upon this
number to 81.3. Note however that the emphasis in Tompson et al’s system was efﬁciency and they trained and tested
their model using original image scales – searching over a
multiscale image pyramid or using our automatic rescaling
procedure should presumably improve their performance.
See the MPII website for more detailed results.
Yang & Ramanan 
Pischulin et al 
Tompson et al. 
Tompson et al. 
Table 1: MPII test set PCKh-0.5 results for Iterative Error Feedback (IEF) and previous approaches, when ground truth scale
information at test time is provided (top) and in the more automatic setting when it is not available (bottom). UBody and
FBody stand for upper body and full body, respectively.
Step Number
Figure 3: Evolution of PCKh at 0.5 overlap as function
of correction step number on the MPII-human-pose validation set, using the ﬁnetuned googlenet network. The model
aligns more accurately to parts like the head and shoulders,
which is natural, because these parts are easier to discriminate from the background and have more consistent appearance than limbs.
LSP – Experimental Details.
In LSP, differently from
MPII, images are usually tight around the person whose
pose is being estimated, are resized so people have a ﬁxed
size, and have lower resolution. There is also no marking
point on the torsos so we initialized the 17th keypoints used
in MPII to the center of the image. The same set of keypoints is evaluated as in MPII and we trained a model using the same hyper-parameters on the extended LSP training set. We use the standard LSP evaluation code supplied
with the MPII dataset and report person-centric PCP scores
in table 2. Our results are competitive with the current stateof-the-art of Chen and Yuille .
4. Analyzing IEF
In this section, we perform extensive ablation studies to
validate four choices of the IEF model: 1) proceeding iteratively instead of in a single shot, 2) predicting bounded
corrections instead of directly predicting the target outputs,
3) curriculum learning of our bounded corrections, and 4)
modeling the structure in the full output space (all body
joints in this case) over carrying out independent predictions for each label.
Iterative v/s Direct Prediction. For evaluating the importance of progressing towards solutions iteratively we trained
models to directly predict corrections to the keypoint locations in a single shot (i.e. direct prediction). Table 3
shows that IEF that additively regresses to keypoint locations achieves PCKh-0.5 of 81.0 as compared to PCKh of
74.8 achieved by directly regressing to the keypoints.
Iterative Error Feedback v/s Iterative Direct Prediction.
Is iterative prediction of the error important or iterative prediction of the target label directly (as in e.g., ) performs comparably? In order to answer this question we
trained a model from the pretrained googlenet to iteratively
predict the ground truth keypoint locations (as opposed to
predicting bounded corrections).
For comparing performance, we used the same number of iterations for this baseline model and IEF. Table 3 shows that IEF achieves PCKh-
0.5 of 81.0 as compared to PCKh of 73.4 by iterative direct prediction. This can be understood by the fact that the
learning problem in IEF is much easier. In IEF, for a given
image, the model is trained to predict constant corrections
except for the last one which is a scaled version. In iterative
direct prediction, because each new pose estimate ends up
somewhere around the ground truth, the model must learn
to adjust directions and magnitudes in all correction steps.
Importance of Fixed Path Consolidation (FPC). The FPC
method (see algorithm 1) for training a IEF model makes N
corrections is a curriculum learning strategy where in the
ith(i ≤N) training stage the model is optimized for performing only the ﬁrst i corrections. Is this curriculum learning strategy necessary or can all the corrections be simultaneously trained? For addressing this question we trained an
alternative model that trains for all corrections in all epochs.
We trained IEF with and without FPC for the same number
of SGD iterations and the performance of both these models is illustrated in ﬁgure 4. The ﬁgure shows that without
FPC, the performance drops by almost 10 PCKh points on
the validation set and that there is signiﬁcant drift when performing several correction steps.
Pishchulin et al. 
Tompson et al. 
Fan et al. 
Chen and Yuille 
Table 2: Person-centric PCP scores on the LSP dataset test set for IEF and previous approaches.
Iterative Error Feedback (IEF)
Direct Prediction
Iterative Direct Prediction
Table 3: PCKh-0.5 results on the MPII validation set for models ﬁnetuned from googlenet using Iterative Error Feedback
(IEF), direct regression to the keypoint locations (direct prediction), and a model that was trained to iteratively predict human
pose by regressing to the ground truth keypoint locations (instead of bounded corrections) in each iteration, starting from the
pose in the previous iteration. The results show that our proposed approach results in signiﬁcantly better performance.
Step Number
Without FPC
Validation PCKh-0.5 scores for different number of correction steps taken, when ﬁnetuning a IEF model
from a googlenet base model using stochastic gradient descent with either Fixed Path Consolidation (With FPC), or
directly over all training examples (Without FPC), for the
same amount of time. FPC leads to signiﬁcantly more accurate results, leading to models that can perform more correction steps without drifting. It achieves this by consolidating
the learning of earlier steps and progressively increasing the
difﬁculty of the training set by adding additional correction
Learning Structured Outputs. One of the major merits of
IEF is supposedly that it can jointly learn the structure in input images and target outputs. For human pose estimation,
IEF models the space of outputs by augmenting the image
with additional input channels having gaussian renderings
centered around estimated keypoint locations . If it is the
case that IEF learns priors over the appropriate relative locations of the various keypoints, then depriving the model
of keypoints other than the one being predicted should decrease performance.
In order to evaluate this hypothesis we trained three different IEF models and tested how well each predicted the
location of the “Left Knee” keypoint. The ﬁrst model had
only one input channel corresponding to the left knee, the
second model had two channels corresponding to left knee
and the left hip. The third model was trained using all keypoints in the standard IEF way. The performance of these
three models is reported in table 4. As a baseline, regression gets 64.6, whereas the IEF model with a single additional input channel for the left knee gets PCKh of 69.2
This shows that feeding back the current estimate of the left
knee keypoint allows for more accurate localization by itself. Furthermore, the IEF model over both left knee and
left hip gets PCKh of 72.8. This suggests that the relationship between neighboring outputs has much of the information, but modeling all joints together with the image still
wins, obtaining a PCKh of 73.8.
5. Related Work
There is a rich literature on structured output learning
 (e.g. see references in ) but it is a relatively modern topic in conjunction with feature learning, for computer
vision .
Here we proposed a feedback-based framework for
structured-output learning. Neuroscience models of the human brain suggest that feedforward connections act as information carriers while numerous feedback connections act as
modulators or competitive inhibitors to aid feature grouping
 , ﬁgure-ground segregation and object recognition
 . In computer vision, feedback has been primarily used
so far for learning selective attention ; in attention
is implemented by estimating a bounding box in an image
Direct Prediction of All Joints
IEF Left Knee
IEF Left Knee + Left Hip
IEF All Joints
Left Knee PCKh-0.5
MPII validation PCKh-0.5 results for left knee localization when using IEF and both training and predicting
different subsets of joints. We also show the result obtained using a direct prediction variant similar to plain regression on
all joints (having the mean pose Gaussian maps in the input). Modeling global body structure jointly with the image leads to
best results by ”IEF All Joints”. Interestingly, feedback seems to add value by itself and IEF on the left knee, in isolation,
signiﬁcantly outperforms the direct prediction baseline.
for the algorithm to process next, while in attention is
formed by selecting some convolutional features over others
(it does not have a spatial dimension).
Stacked inference methods are another
related family of methods. Differently, some of these methods consider each output in isolation , all use different weights or learning models in each stage of inference
 or they do not optimize for correcting their current estimates but rather attempt to predict the answer from scratch
at each stage . In concurrent work, Oberweger et
al proposed a feedback loop for hand pose estimation
from kinect data that is closely related to our approach. The
autocontext work of is also related and iteratively computes label heatmaps by concatenating the image with the
heatmaps previously predicted. IEF is inspired by this work
and we show how this iterative computation can be carried
out effectively with deep Convnet architectures, and with
bounded error corrections, rather than aiming for the answer from scratch at each iteration.
Another line of work aims to inject class-speciﬁc spatial
priors using coarse-to-ﬁne processing, e.g. features arising
from different layers of ConvNets were recently used for instance segmentation and keypoint prediction . For pose
inference, combining multiple scales aids in capturing subtle long-range dependencies (e.g. distinguishing the
left and right sides of the body which depend on whether a
person is facing the camera). The system in our human pose
estimation example can be seen as closest to approaches
employing “pose-indexed features” , but leveraging hierarchical feature learning. Graphical models can also
encode dependencies between outputs and are still popular
in many applications, including human pose estimation .
Classic spatial alignment and warping computer vision
models, such as snakes, and Active Appearance Models (AAMs) have similar goals as the proposed IEF, but
are not learned end-to-end – or learned at all – employ linear shape models and hand designed features and require
slower gradient computation which often takes many iterations before convergence. They can get stuck in poor local
minimas even for constrained variation (AAMs and small
out-of-plane face rotations). IEF, on the other hand, is able
to minimize over rich articulated human 3D pose variation,
starting from a mean shape. Although extensions that use
learning to drive the optimization have been proposed ,
typically these methods still require manually deﬁned energy functions to measure goodness of ﬁt.
6. Conclusions
While standard ConvNets offer hierarchical representations that can capture the patterns of images at multiple levels of abstraction, the outputs are typically modeled as ﬂat
image or pixel-level 1-of-K labels, or slightly more complicated hand-designed representations. We aimed in this
paper to mitigate this asymmetry by introducing Iterative
Error Feedback (IEF), which extends hierarchical representation learning to output spaces, while leveraging at heart
the same machinery. IEF works by, in broad terms, moving
the emphasis from the problem of predicting the state of the
external world to one of correcting the expectations about
it, which is achieved by introducing a simple feedback connection in standard models.
In our pose estimation working example we opted for
feeding pose information only into the ﬁrst layer of the ConvNet for the sake of simplicity. This information may also
be helpful for mid-level layers, so as to modulate not only
edge detection, but also processes such as junction detection or contour completion which advanced feature extractors may need to compute. We also have only experimented
so far feeding back ”images” made up of Gaussian distributions. There may be more powerful ways to render topdown pose information using parametrized computational
blocks (e.g. deconvolution) that can then be learned jointly
with the rest of the model parameters using standard backpropagation. This is desirable in order to attack problems
with higher-dimensional output spaces such as 3D human
pose estimation or segmentation.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by ONR MURI
N00014-14-1-0671 and N00014-10-1-0933. Jo˜ao Carreira
was partially supported by the Portuguese Science Foundation, FCT, under grant SFRH/BPD/84194/2012. Pulkit
Agrawal was partially supported by a Fulbright Science
and Technology Fellowship. We gratefully acknowledge
NVIDIA corporation for the donation of Tesla GPUs for
this research. We thank Georgia Gkioxari and Carl Doersch
for helpful comments.
Mean shape
Ground Truth
Figure 5: Example poses obtained using the proposed method IEF on the MPII validation set. From left to right we show the
sequence of corrections the method makes – on the right is the ground truth pose, including annotated occluded keypoints,
which are not evaluated. Note that IEF is robust to left-right ambiguities and is able to rotate the initial pose by up to 180 (ﬁrst
and ﬁfth row), can align across occlusions (second and third rows) and can handle scale variation (second, fourth and ﬁfth
rows) and truncation (ﬁfth row). The bottom two rows show failure cases. In the ﬁrst one, the predicted conﬁguration captures
the gist of the pose but is misaligned and not scaled properly. The second case shows several people closely interacting and
the model aligns to the wrong person. The black borders show padding. Best seen in color and with zoom.