1Guidelines and Guidance
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement
David Moher1,2*, Alessandro Liberati3,4, Jennifer Tetzlaff1, Douglas G. Altman5, The PRISMA Group"
1 Ottawa Methods Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 2 Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 3 Universita` di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 4 Centro Cochrane Italiano, Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario
Negri, Milan, Italy, 5 Centre for Statistics in Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Introduction
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have become increasingly
important in health care. Clinicians read them to keep up to date
with their field , and they are often used as a starting point for
developing clinical practice guidelines. Granting agencies may
require a systematic review to ensure there is justification for
further research , and some health care journals are moving in
this direction . As with all research, the value of a systematic
review depends on what was done, what was found, and the clarity
of reporting. As with other publications, the reporting quality of
systematic reviews varies, limiting readers’ ability to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of those reviews.
Several early studies evaluated the quality of review reports. In
1987, Mulrow examined 50 review articles published in four leading
medical journals in 1985 and 1986 and found that none met all eight
explicit scientific criteria, such as a quality assessment of included
studies . In 1987, Sacks and colleagues evaluated the adequacy
of reporting of 83 meta-analyses on 23 characteristics in six domains.
Reporting was generally poor; between one and 14 characteristics
were adequately reported (mean = 7.7; standard deviation = 2.7). A
1996 update of this study found little improvement .
In 1996, to address the suboptimal reporting of meta-analyses,
international
QUOROM Statement (QUality Of Reporting Of Meta-analyses),
which focused on the reporting of meta-analyses of randomized
controlled trials . In this article, we summarize a revision of
these guidelines, renamed PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses), which have been
updated to address several conceptual and practical advances in
the science of systematic reviews (Box 1).
Terminology
The terminology used to describe a systematic review and metaanalysis has evolved over time. One reason for changing the name
from QUOROM to PRISMA was the desire to encompass both
systematic reviews and meta-analyses. We have adopted the
definitions used by the Cochrane Collaboration . A systematic
review is a review of a clearly formulated question that uses
systematic and explicit methods to identify, select, and critically
appraise relevant research, and to collect and analyze data from
the studies that are included in the review. Statistical methods
(meta-analysis) may or may not be used to analyze and summarize
the results of the included studies. Meta-analysis refers to the use of
statistical techniques in a systematic review to integrate the results
of included studies.
Developing the PRISMA Statement
A three-day meeting was held in Ottawa, Canada, in June 2005
with 29 participants, including review authors, methodologists,
clinicians, medical editors, and a consumer. The objective of the
Ottawa meeting was to revise and expand the QUOROM
checklist and flow diagram, as needed.
The executive committee completed the following tasks, prior to
the meeting: a systematic review of studies examining the quality
of reporting of systematic reviews, and a comprehensive literature
search to identify methodological and other articles that might
inform the meeting, especially in relation to modifying checklist
items. An international survey of review authors, consumers, and
groups commissioning or using systematic reviews and metaanalyses was completed, including the International Network of
Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA) and the
Guidelines International Network (GIN). The survey aimed to
ascertain views of QUOROM, including the merits of the existing
checklist items. The results of these activities were presented
during the meeting and are summarized on the PRISMA Web site
( 
Only items deemed essential were retained or added to the
checklist. Some additional items are nevertheless desirable, and
review authors should include these, if relevant . For example,
it is useful to indicate whether the systematic review is an update
 of a previous review, and to describe any changes in
procedures from those described in the original protocol.
Group Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
Analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLoS Med 6(7): e1000097. doi:10.1371/
journal.pmed.1000097
Published July 21, 2009
Copyright:  2009 Moher et al. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Funding: PRISMA was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research;
Universita` di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy; Cancer Research UK; Clinical Evidence
BMJ Knowledge; the Cochrane Collaboration; and GlaxoSmithKline, Canada. AL is
funded, in part, through grants of the Italian Ministry of University . DGA is funded
by Cancer Research UK. DM is funded by a University of Ottawa Research Chair.
None of the sponsors had any involvement in the planning, execution, or write-up
of the PRISMA documents. Additionally, no funder played a role in drafting the
manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests
Abbreviations: PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and
Meta-Analyses; QUOROM, QUality Of Reporting Of Meta-analyses.
Provenance: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. In order to
encourage dissemination of the PRISMA Statement, this article is freely accessible
on the PLoS Medicine Web site ( and will be also
 
and Open Medicine. The authors jointly hold the copyright of this article. For
details on further use, see the PRISMA Web site now require all clinical trials to be registered
in an effort to increase transparency and accountability .
Those aspects are also likely to benefit systematic reviewers,
possibly reducing the risk of an excessive number of reviews
addressing the same question and providing greater
transparency when updating systematic reviews.
The PRISMA Statement
The PRISMA Statement consists of a 27-item checklist (Table 1;
see also Text S1 for a downloadable Word template for researchers
to re-use) and a four-phase flow diagram (Figure 1; see also Figure
S1 for a downloadable Word template for researchers to re-use).
The aim of the PRISMA Statement is to help authors improve the
reporting of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. We have focused
on randomized trials, but PRISMA can also be used as a basis for
reporting systematic reviews of other types of research, particularly
evaluations of interventions. PRISMA may also be useful for critical
appraisal of published systematic reviews. However, the PRISMA
checklist is not a quality assessment instrument to gauge the quality
of a systematic review.
From QUOROM to PRISMA
The new PRISMA checklist differs in several respects from the
QUOROM checklist, and the substantive specific changes are
highlighted
2. Generally,
‘‘decouples’’ several items present in the QUOROM checklist
and, where applicable, several checklist items are linked to
improve consistency across the systematic review report.
The flow diagram has also been modified. Before including
studies and providing reasons for excluding others, the review
team must first search the literature. This search results in records.
Once these records have been screened and eligibility criteria
applied, a smaller number of articles will remain. The number of
included articles might be smaller (or larger) than the number of
studies, because articles may report on multiple studies and results
from a particular study may be published in several articles. To
capture this information, the PRISMA flow diagram now requests
information on these phases of the review process.
Endorsement
The PRISMA Statement should replace the QUOROM Statement for those journals that have endorsed QUOROM. We hope
thatotherjournalswillsupportPRISMA;theycandosobyregistering
on the PRISMA Web site. To underscore to authors, and others, the
importance of transparent reporting of systematic reviews, we
encourage supporting journals to reference the PRISMA Statement
and include the PRISMA Web address in their Instructions to
Authors. We also invite editorial organizations to consider endorsing
PRISMA and encourage authors to adhere to its principles.
The PRISMA Explanation and Elaboration Paper
In addition to the PRISMA Statement, a supporting Explanation and Elaboration document has been produced following
the style used for other reporting guidelines . The process
Box 1: Conceptual Issues in the Evolution from
QUOROM to PRISMA
Completing a Systematic Review Is an Iterative
Process The conduct of a systematic review depends
heavily on the scope and quality of included studies: thus
systematic reviewers may need to modify their original
review protocol during its conduct. Any systematic review
reporting guideline should recommend that such changes
can be reported and explained without suggesting that
they are inappropriate. The PRISMA Statement (Items 5, 11,
16, and 23) acknowledges this iterative process. Aside from
Cochrane reviews, all of which should have a protocol,
only about 10% of systematic reviewers report working
from a protocol . Without a protocol that is publicly
accessible, it is difficult to judge between appropriate and
inappropriate modifications.
distinction
straightforward
systematic
assessments of the reporting of an individual study,
because the reporting and conduct of systematic reviews
are, by nature, closely intertwined. For example, the failure
of a systematic review to report the assessment of the risk
of bias in included studies may be seen as a marker of poor
conduct, given the importance of this activity in the
systematic review process .
Study-Level Versus Outcome-Level Assessment of
Risk of Bias For studies included in a systematic review, a
thorough assessment of the risk of bias requires both a
‘‘study-level’’ assessment (e.g., adequacy of allocation
concealment) and, for some features, a newer approach
‘‘outcome-level’’
assessment.
outcome-level
assessment involves evaluating the reliability and validity
of the data for each important outcome by determining
the methods used to assess them in each individual study
 . The quality of evidence may differ across outcomes,
even within a study, such as between a primary efficacy
systematically measured, and the assessment of serious
harms , which may rely on spontaneous reports by
investigators. This information should be reported to allow
an explicit assessment of the extent to which an estimate
of effect is correct .
Importance of Reporting Biases Different types of
interpretation of systematic reviews. Selective reporting
of complete studies (e.g., publication bias) as well as
the more recently empirically demonstrated ‘‘outcome
reporting bias’’ within individual studies should be
considered by authors when conducting a systematic
review and reporting its results. Though the implications of
these biases on the conduct and reporting of systematic
reviews themselves are unclear, some previous research
has identified that selective outcome reporting may occur
also in the context of systematic reviews .
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org
July 2009 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e1000097
of completing this document included developing a large database
of exemplars to highlight how best to report each checklist item,
and identifying a comprehensive evidence base to support the
inclusion of each checklist item. The Explanation and Elaboration
document was completed after several face to face meetings and
numerous iterations among several meeting participants, after
which it was shared with the whole group for additional revisions
and final approval. Finally, the group formed a dissemination
subcommittee to help disseminate and implement PRISMA.
Discussion
The quality of reporting of systematic reviews is still not
optimal . In a recent review of 300 systematic reviews,
few authors reported assessing possible publication bias ,
even though there is overwhelming evidence both for its
existence and its impact on the results of systematic
reviews . Even when the possibility of publication bias is
assessed, there is no guarantee that systematic reviewers have
assessed or interpreted it appropriately . Although the
absence of reporting such an assessment does not necessarily
indicate that it was not done, reporting an assessment of possible
publication bias is likely to be a marker of the thoroughness of
the conduct of the systematic review.
Several approaches have been developed to conduct systematic
reviews on a broader array of questions. For example, systematic
reviews are now conducted to investigate cost-effectiveness ,
diagnostic or prognostic questions , genetic associations
 , and policy making . The general concepts and topics
covered by PRISMA are all relevant to any systematic review, not
just those whose objective is to summarize the benefits and harms
of a health care intervention. However, some modifications of the
checklist items or flow diagram will be necessary in particular
circumstances. For example, assessing the risk of bias is a key
concept, but the items used to assess this in a diagnostic review are
likely to focus on issues such as the spectrum of patients and the
verification of disease status, which differ from reviews of
interventions. The flow diagram will also need adjustments when
reporting individual patient data meta-analysis .
We have developed an explanatory document to increase
the usefulness of PRISMA. For each checklist item, this document
contains an example of good reporting, a rationale for its inclusion,
and supporting evidence, including references, whenever possible.
We believe this document will also serve as a useful resource for
those teaching systematic review methodology. We encourage
journals to include reference to the explanatory document in their
Instructions to Authors.
Like any evidence-based endeavor, PRISMA is a living
document. To this end we invite readers to comment on the
revised version, particularly the new checklist and flow diagram,
through the PRISMA Web site. We will use such information to
inform PRISMA’s continued development.
Figure 1. Flow of information through the different phases of a systematic review.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097.g001
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org
July 2009 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e1000097
Table 1. Checklist of items to include when reporting a systematic review or meta-analysis.
Section/Topic
Checklist Item
Reported on
Identify the report as a systematic review, meta-analysis, or both.
Structured summary
Provide a structured summary including, as applicable: background; objectives; data sources; study eligibility
criteria, participants, and interventions; study appraisal and synthesis methods; results; limitations; conclusions
and implications of key findings; systematic review registration number.
INTRODUCTION
Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known.
Objectives
Provide an explicit statement of questions being addressed with reference to participants, interventions,
comparisons, outcomes, and study design (PICOS).
Protocol and registration
Indicate if a review protocol exists, if and where it can be accessed (e.g., Web address), and, if available, provide
registration information including registration number.
Eligibility criteria
Specify study characteristics (e.g., PICOS, length of follow-up) and report characteristics (e.g., years considered,
language, publication status) used as criteria for eligibility, giving rationale.
Information sources
Describe all information sources (e.g., databases with dates of coverage, contact with study authors to identify
additional studies) in the search and date last searched.
Present full electronic search strategy for at least one database, including any limits used, such that it could be
Study selection
State the process for selecting studies (i.e., screening, eligibility, included in systematic review, and, if applicable,
included in the meta-analysis).
Data collection process
Describe method of data extraction from reports (e.g., piloted forms, independently, in duplicate) and any
processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators.
Data items
List and define all variables for which data were sought (e.g., PICOS, funding sources) and any assumptions and
simplifications made.
Risk of bias in individual
Describe methods used for assessing risk of bias of individual studies (including specification of whether this was
done at the study or outcome level), and how this information is to be used in any data synthesis.
Summary measures
State the principal summary measures (e.g., risk ratio, difference in means).
Synthesis of results
Describe the methods of handling data and combining results of studies, if done, including measures of
consistency (e.g., I2) for each meta-analysis.
Risk of bias across studies
Specify any assessment of risk of bias that may affect the cumulative evidence (e.g., publication bias, selective
reporting within studies).
Additional analyses
Describe methods of additional analyses (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression), if done,
indicating which were pre-specified.
Study selection
Give numbers of studies screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions
at each stage, ideally with a flow diagram.
Study characteristics
For each study, present characteristics for which data were extracted (e.g., study size, PICOS, follow-up period)
and provide the citations.
Risk of bias within studies
Present data on risk of bias of each study and, if available, any outcome-level assessment (see Item 12).
Results of individual studies
For all outcomes considered (benefits or harms), present, for each study: (a) simple summary data for each
intervention group and (b) effect estimates and confidence intervals, ideally with a forest plot.
Synthesis of results
Present results of each meta-analysis done, including confidence intervals and measures of consistency.
Risk of bias across studies
Present results of any assessment of risk of bias across studies (see Item 15).
Additional analysis
Give results of additional analyses, if done (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression [see Item 16]).
DISCUSSION
Summary of evidence
Summarize the main findings including the strength of evidence for each main outcome; consider their
relevance to key groups (e.g., health care providers, users, and policy makers).
Limitations
Discuss limitations at study and outcome level (e.g., risk of bias), and at review level (e.g., incomplete retrieval of
identified research, reporting bias).
Conclusions
Provide a general interpretation of the results in the context of other evidence, and implications for future
Describe sources of funding for the systematic review and other support (e.g., supply of data); role of funders for
the systematic review.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097.t001
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org
July 2009 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e1000097
Supporting Information
Flow of information through the different
phases of a systematic review (downloadable template
document for researchers to re-use).
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097.s001 (0.08 MB
Checklist of items to include when reporting a
systematic review or meta-analysis (downloadable template document for researchers to re-use).
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097.s002 (0.04 MB
Acknowledgments
The following people contributed to the PRISMA Statement: Doug
Altman, DSc, Centre for Statistics in Medicine (Oxford, UK); Gerd
Antes, PhD, University Hospital Freiburg (Freiburg, Germany); David
Atkins, MD, MPH, Health Services Research and Development Service,
Veterans Health Administration (Washington, D. C., US); Virginia
Barbour, MRCP, DPhil, PLoS Medicine (Cambridge, UK); Nick Barrowman, PhD, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario (Ottawa, Canada);
Jesse A. Berlin, ScD, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and
Development (Titusville, New Jersey, US); Jocalyn Clark, PhD, PLoS
Medicine (at the time of writing, BMJ, London, UK); Mike Clarke, PhD,
UK Cochrane Centre (Oxford, UK) and School of Nursing and
Midwifery, Trinity College (Dublin, Ireland); Deborah Cook, MD,
Departments of Medicine, Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
McMaster University (Hamilton, Canada); Roberto D’Amico, PhD,
Universita` di Modena e Reggio Emilia (Modena, Italy) and Centro
Cochrane Italiano, Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
(Milan, Italy); Jonathan J. Deeks, PhD, University of Birmingham
(Birmingham, UK); P. J. Devereaux, MD, PhD, Departments of
Medicine, Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University
(Hamilton, Canada); Kay Dickersin, PhD, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health (Baltimore, Maryland, US); Matthias Egger,
MD, Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern
(Bern, Switzerland); Edzard Ernst, MD, PhD, FRCP, FRCP(Edin),
Peninsula Medical School (Exeter, UK); Peter C. Gøtzsche, MD, MSc,
The Nordic Cochrane Centre (Copenhagen, Denmark); Jeremy Grimshaw, MBChB, PhD, FRCFP, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute
(Ottawa, Canada); Gordon Guyatt, MD, Departments of Medicine,
Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University (Hamilton,
Canada); Julian Higgins, PhD, MRC Biostatistics Unit (Cambridge, UK);
John P. A. Ioannidis, MD, University of Ioannina Campus (Ioannina,
Greece); Jos Kleijnen, MD, PhD, Kleijnen Systematic Reviews Ltd
(York, UK) and School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI),
University of Maastricht (Maastricht, Netherlands); Tom Lang, MA,
Tom Lang Communications and Training (Davis, California, US);
Alessandro Liberati, MD, Universita`
di Modena e Reggio Emilia
(Modena, Italy) and Centro Cochrane Italiano, Istituto Ricerche
Farmacologiche Mario Negri (Milan, Italy); Nicola Magrini, MD, NHS
Centre for the Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Health Care – CeVEAS
(Modena, Italy); David McNamee, PhD, The Lancet (London, UK);
Lorenzo Moja, MD, MSc, Centro Cochrane Italiano, Istituto Ricerche
Farmacologiche Mario Negri (Milan, Italy); David Moher, PhD, Ottawa
Methods Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Ottawa, Canada);
Cynthia Mulrow, MD, MSc, Annals of Internal Medicine (Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, US); Maryann Napoli, Center for Medical Consumers
(New York, New York, US); Andy Oxman, MD, Norwegian Health
Services Research Centre (Oslo, Norway); Ba’ Pham, MMath, Toronto
Health Economics and Technology Assessment Collaborative (Toronto,
Canada) (at the time of the first meeting of the group, GlaxoSmithKline
Canada, Mississauga, Canada); Drummond Rennie, MD, FRCP, FACP,
University of California San Francisco (San Francisco, California, US);
Margaret Sampson, MLIS, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario
(Ottawa, Canada); Kenneth F. Schulz, PhD, MBA, Family Health
International (Durham, North Carolina, US); Paul G. Shekelle, MD,
PhD, Southern California Evidence Based Practice Center (Santa
Monica, California, US); Jennifer Tetzlaff, BSc, Ottawa Methods
Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Ottawa, Canada); David
Tovey, FRCGP, The Cochrane Library, Cochrane Collaboration
Table 2. Substantive specific changes between the QUOROM checklist and the PRISMA checklist (a tick indicates the presence of
the topic in QUOROM or PRISMA).
Section/Topic
QUOROM and PRISMA ask authors to report an abstract. However, PRISMA is not
specific about format.
Introduction
This new item (4) addresses the explicit question the review addresses using the PICO
reporting system (which describes the participants, interventions, comparisons, and
outcome(s) of the systematic review), together with the specification of the type of
study design (PICOS); the item is linked to Items 6, 11, and 18 of the checklist.
This new item (5) asks authors to report whether the review has a protocol and if so
how it can be accessed.
Although reporting the search is present in both QUOROM and PRISMA checklists,
PRISMA asks authors to provide a full description of at least one electronic search
strategy (Item 8). Without such information it is impossible to repeat the authors’
Assessment of
risk of bias in
included studies
Renamed from ‘‘quality assessment’’ in QUOROM. This item (12) is linked with
reporting this information in the results (Item 19). The new concept of ‘‘outcomelevel’’ assessment has been introduced.
Assessment of
risk of bias across
This new item (15) asks authors to describe any assessments of risk of bias in the
review, such as selective reporting within the included studies. This item is linked
with reporting this information in the results (Item 22).
Discussion
Although both QUOROM and PRISMA checklists address the discussion section,
PRISMA devotes three items (24–26) to the discussion. In PRISMA the main types of
limitations are explicitly stated and their discussion required.
This new item (27) asks authors to provide information on any sources of funding for
the systematic review.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097.t002
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org
July 2009 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e1000097
(Oxford, UK) (at the time of the first meeting of the group, BMJ,
Population Health, University of Ottawa (Ottawa, Canada).
Author Contributions
ICMJE criteria for authorship read and met: DM AL JT DGA. Wrote the
first draft of the paper: DM AL DGA. Contributed to the writing of the
paper: DM AL JT DGA. Participated in regular conference calls, identified
the participants, secured funds, planned the meeting, participated in the
meeting, and drafted the manuscript: DM AL DGA. Participated in
identifying the evidence base for PRISMA, refining the checklist, and
drafting the manuscript: JT. Agree with the recommendations: DM AL JT