Pixel2Mesh: Generating 3D Mesh Models
from Single RGB Images
Nanyang Wang1 ⋆, Yinda Zhang2 ⋆, Zhuwen Li3 ⋆,
Yanwei Fu4, Wei Liu5, Yu-Gang Jiang1 †
1Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2Princeton University 3Intel Labs 4School of Data Science, Fudan University 5Tencent AI Lab
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract. We propose an end-to-end deep learning architecture that produces a
3D shape in triangular mesh from a single color image. Limited by the nature
of deep neural network, previous methods usually represent a 3D shape in volume or point cloud, and it is non-trivial to convert them to the more ready-to-use
mesh model. Unlike the existing methods, our network represents 3D mesh in a
graph-based convolutional neural network and produces correct geometry by progressively deforming an ellipsoid, leveraging perceptual features extracted from
the input image. We adopt a coarse-to-ﬁne strategy to make the whole deformation procedure stable, and deﬁne various of mesh related losses to capture properties of different levels to guarantee visually appealing and physically accurate
3D geometry. Extensive experiments show that our method not only qualitatively
produces mesh model with better details, but also achieves higher 3D shape estimation accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art.
Keywords: 3D shape generation · Graph convolutional neural network · Mesh
reconstruction · Coarse-to-ﬁne · End-to-end framework
Introduction
Inferring 3D shape from a single perspective is a fundamental human vision functionality but is extremely challenging for computer vision. Recently, great success has been
achieved for 3d shape generation from a single color image using deep learning techniques . Taking advantage of convolutional layers on regular grids or multi-layer
perception, the estimated 3D shape, as the output of the neural network, is represented
as either a volume or point cloud . However, both representations lose important
surface details, and is non-trivial to reconstruct a surface model (Fig. 1), i.e. a mesh,
which is more desirable for many real applications since it is lightweight, capable of
modelling shape details, easy to deform for animation, to name a few.
In this paper, we push along the direction of single image reconstruction, and propose an algorithm to extract a 3D triangular mesh from a single color image. Rather
⋆indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.
 
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
Input Image
Volume from [Choy et al.]
Convert using [Lorensen et al.]
Pixel2Mesh (Ours)
Point cloud from [Fan et al.]
Convert using [Bernardini et al.]
Fig. 1. Given a single color image and an initial mesh, our method can produce a high-quality
mesh that contains details from the example.
than directly synthesizing, our model learns to deform a mesh from a mean shape to
the target geometry. This beneﬁts us from several aspects. First, deep network is better
at predicting residual, e.g. a spatial deformation, rather than structured output, e.g. a
graph. Second, a series of deformations can be added up together, which allows shape
to be gradually reﬁned in detail. It also enables the control of the trade-off between the
complexity of the deep learning model and the quality of the result. Lastly, it provides
the chance to encode any prior knowledge to the initial mesh, e.g. topology. As a pioneer study, in this work, we speciﬁcally work on objects that can be approximated using
3D mesh with genus 0 by deforming an ellipsoid with a ﬁxed size. In practice, we found
most of the commonly seen categories can be handled well under this setting, e.g. car,
plane, table, etc. To achieve this goal, there are several inherent challenges.
The ﬁrst challenge is how to represent a mesh model, which is essentially an irregular graph, in a neural network and still be capable of extracting shape details effectively
from a given color image represented in a 2D regular grid. It requires the integration
of the knowledge learned from two data modalities. On the 3D geometry side, we directly build a graph based fully convolutional network (GCN) on the mesh
model, where the vertices and edges in the mesh are directly represented as nodes and
connections in a graph. Network feature encoding information for 3D shape is saved
on each vertex. Through forward propagation, the convolutional layers enable feature
exchanging across neighboring nodes, and eventually regress the 3D location for each
vertex. On the 2D image side, we use a VGG-16 like architecture to extract features
as it has been demonstrated to be successful for many tasks . To bridge these
two, we design a perceptual feature pooling layer which allows each node in the GCN
to pool image features from its 2D projection on the image, which can be readily obtained by assuming known camera intrinsic matrix. The perceptual feature pooling is
enabled once after several convolutions (i.e. a deformation block described in Sec. 3.4)
using updated 3D locations, and hence the image features from correct locations can be
effectively integrated with 3D shapes.
Given the graph representation, the next challenge is how to update the vertex location effectively towards ground truth. In practice, we observe that network trained to
directly predict mesh with a large number of vertices is likely to make mistake in the
beginning and hard to ﬁx later. One reason is that a vertex cannot effectively retrieve
features from other vertices with a number of edges away, i.e. the limited receptive ﬁeld.
Pixel2Mesh
To solve this problem, we design a graph unpooling layer, which allows the network to
initiate with a smaller number of vertices and increase during the forward propagation.
With fewer vertices at the beginning stages, the network learns to distribute the vertices
around to the most representative location, and then add local details as the number
of vertices increases later. Besides the graph unpooling layer, we use a deep GCN enhanced by shortcut connections as the backbone of our architecture, which enables
large receptive ﬁelds for global context and more steps of movements.
Representing the shape in graph also beneﬁts the learning procedure. The known
connectivity allows us to deﬁne higher order loss functions across neighboring nodes,
which are important to regularize 3D shapes. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a surface normal
loss to favor smooth surface; an edge loss to encourage uniform distribution of mesh
vertices for high recall; and a laplacian loss to prevent mesh faces from intersecting
each other. All of these losses are essential to generate quality appealing mesh model,
and none of them can be trivially deﬁned without the graph representation.
The contributions of this paper are mainly in three aspects. First, we propose a
novel end-to-end neural network architecture that generates a 3D mesh model from a
single RGB image. Second, we design a projection layer which incorporates perceptual
image features into the 3D geometry represented by GCN. Third, our network predict
3D geometry in a coarse to ﬁne fashion, which is more reliable and easy to learn.
Related Work
3D reconstruction has been well studied based on the multi-view geometry (MVG) 
in the literature. The major research directions include structure from motion (SfM) 
for large-scale high-quality reconstruction and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) for navigation. Though they are very successful in these scenarios, they
are restricted by 1) the coverage that the multiple views can give and 2) the appearance
of the object that wants to reconstruct. The former restriction means MVG cannot reconstruct unseen parts of the object, and thus it usually takes a long time to get enough
views for a good reconstruction; the latter restriction means MVG cannot reconstruct
non-lambertian (e.g. reﬂective or transparent) or textureless objects. These restrictions
lead to the trend of resorting to learning based approaches.
Learning based approaches usually consider single or few images, as it largely relies
on the shape priors that it can learn from data. Early works can be traced back to Hoiem
et al. and Saxena et al. . Most recently, with the success of deep learning architectures and the release of large-scale 3D shape datasets such as ShapeNet , learning
based approaches have achieved great progress. Huang et al. and Su et al. retrieve shape components from a large dataset, assemble them and deform the assembled
shape to ﬁt the observed image. However, shape retrieval from images itself is an illposed problem. To avoid this problem, Kar et al. learns a 3D deformable model for
each object category and capture the shape variations in different images. However, the
reconstruction is limited to the popular categories and its reconstruction result is usually lack of details. Another line of research is to directly learn 3D shapes from single
images. Restricted by the prevalent grid-based deep learning architectures, most works
 outputs 3D voxels, which are usually with low resolutions due to the memory
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
constraint on a modern GPU. Most recently, Tatarchenko et al. have proposed an
octree representation, which allows to reconstructing higher resolution outputs with a
limited memory budget. However, a 3D voxel is still not a popular shape representation
in game and movie industries. To avoid drawbacks of the voxel representation, Fan et
al. propose to generate point clouds from single images. The point cloud representation has no local connections between points, and thus the point positions have a very
large degree of freedom. Consequently, the generated point cloud is usually not close
to a surface and cannot be used to recover a 3D mesh directly. Besides these typical 3D
representations, there is an interesting work which uses a so-called “geometry image” to represent a 3D shape. Thus, their network is a 2D convolutional neural network
which conducts an image to image mapping. Our works are mostly related to the two
recent works and . However, the former adopts simple silhouette supervision,
and hence does not perform well for complicated objects such as car, lamp, etc; the
latter needs a large model repository to generate a combined model.
Our base network is a graph neural network ; this architecture has been adopted
for shape analysis . In the meanwhile, there are charting-based methods which directly apply convolutions on surface manifolds for shape analysis. As far as
we know, these architectures have never been adopted for 3D reconstruction from single images, though graph and surface manifold are natural representations for meshed
objects. For a comprehensive understanding of the graph neural network, the chartingbased methods and their applications, please refer to this survey .
Preliminary: Graph-based Convolution
We ﬁrst provide some background about graph based convolution; more detailed introduction can be found in . A 3D mesh is a collection of vertices, edges and faces
that deﬁnes the shape of a 3D object; it can be represented by a graph M = (V, E, F),
where V = {vi}N
i=1 is the set of N vertices in the mesh, E = {ei}E
i=1 is the set of
E edges with each connecting two vertices, and F = {fi}N
i=1 are the feature vectors
attached on vertices. A graph based convolutional layer is deﬁned on irregular graph as:
p ∈Rdl, f l+1
∈Rdl+1 are the feature vectors on vertex p before and after the
convolution, and N(p) is the neighboring vertices of p; w0 and w1 are the learnable
parameter matrices of dl × dl+1 that are applied to all vertices. Note that w1 is shared
for all edges, and thus (1) works on nodes with different vertex degrees. In our case, the
attached feature vector fp is the concatenation of the 3D vertex coordinate, feature encoding 3D shape, and feature learned from the input color image (if they exist). Running
convolutions updates the features, which is equivalent as applying a deformation.
Pixel2Mesh
3x3 conv, 64
3x3 conv, 64
3x3 conv, 128
3x3 conv, 128
3x3 conv, 256
3x3 conv, 256
3x3 conv, 256
3x3 conv, 512
3x3 conv, 512
3x3 conv, 512
3x3 conv, 512
3x3 conv, 512
3x3 conv, 512
Perceptual Feature Pooling
Pooling, 2x2
Pooling, 2x2
Pooling, 2x2
Pooling, 2x2
Deformation
Deformation
Deformation
Perceptual Feature Pooling
Perceptual Feature Pooling
Input Image
Ellipsoid Mesh
156 vertices
628 vertices
2466 vertices
Fig. 2. The cascaded mesh deformation network. Our full model contains three mesh deformation
blocks in a row. Each block increases mesh resolution and estimates vertex locations, which are
then used to extract perceptual image features from the 2D CNN for the next block.
System Overview
Our model is an end-to-end deep learning framework that takes a single color image as
input and produces a 3D mesh model in camera coordinate. The overview of our framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. The whole network consists an image feature network and
a cascaded mesh deformation network. The image feature network is a 2D CNN that
extract perceptual feature from the input image, which is leveraged by the mesh deformation network to progressively deform an ellipsoid mesh into the desired 3D model.
The cascaded mesh deformation network is a graph-based convolution network (GCN),
which contains three deformation blocks intersected by two graph unpooling layers.
Each deformation block takes an input graph representing the current mesh model with
the 3D shape feature attached on vertices, and produces new vertices locations and features. Whereas the graph unpooling layers increase the number of vertices to increase
the capacity of handling details, while still maintain the triangular mesh topology. Starting from a smaller number of vertices, our model learns to gradually deform and add
details to the mesh model in a coarse-to-ﬁne fashion. In order to train the network to
produce stable deformation and generate an accurate mesh, we extend the Chamfer
Distance loss used by Fan et al. with three other mesh speciﬁc loss – Surface normal
loss, Laplacian regularization loss, and Edge length loss. The remaining part of this
section describes details of these components.
Initial ellipsoid
Our model does not require any prior knowledge of the 3D shape, and always deform
from an initial ellipsoid with average size placed at the common location in the camera
coordinate. The ellipsoid is centered at 0.8m in front of the camera with 0.2m, 0.2m,
0.4m as the radius of three axis. The mesh model is generated by implicit surface algorithm in Meshlab and contains 156 vertices. We use this ellipsoid to initialize our
input graph, where the initial feature contains only the 3D coordinate of each vertex.
Mesh deformation block
The architecture of mesh deformation block is shown in Fig. 3 (a). In order to generate
3D mesh model that is consistent with the object shown in the input image, the deformation block need to pool feature (P) from the input image. This is done in conjunction
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
Perceptual
(a) Mesh Deformation Block
(b) Perceptual Feature Pooling
Fig. 3. (a) The vertex locations Ci are used to extract image features, which are then combined
with vertex features Fi and fed into G-ResNet. L means a concatenation of the features. (b) The
3D vertices are projected to the image plane using camera intrinsics, and perceptual feature is
pooled from the 2D-CNN layers using bilinear interpolation.
with the image feature network and a perceptual feature pooling layer given the location
of vertex (Ci−1) in the current mesh model. The pooled perceptual feature is then concatenated with the 3D shape feature attached on the vertex from the input graph (Fi−1)
and fed into a series of graph based ResNet (G-ResNet). The G-ResNet produces, also
as the output of the mesh deformation block, the new coordinates (Ci) and 3d shape
feature (Fi) for each vertex.
Perceptual feature pooling layer We use a VGG-16 architecture up to layer conv5 3
as the image feature network as it has been widely used. Given the 3D coordinate of a
vertex, we calculate its 2D projection on input image plane using camera intrinsics, and
then pool the feature from four nearby pixels using bilinear interpolation. In particular,
we concatenate feature extracted from layer ‘conv3 3’, ‘conv4 3’, and ‘conv5 3’, which
results in a total dimension of 1280. This perceptual feature is then concatenated with
the 128-dim 3D feature from the input mesh, which results in a total dimension of
1408. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 (b). Note that in the ﬁrst block, the perceptual feature
is concatenated with the 3-dim feature (coordinate) since there is no learnt shape feature
at the beginning.
G-ResNet After obtaining 1408-dim feature for each vertex representing both 3D shape
and 2D image information, we design a graph based convolutional neural network to
predict new location and 3D shape feature for each vertex. This requires efﬁcient exchange of the information between vertices. However, as deﬁned in (1), each convolution only enables the feature exchanging between neighboring pixels, which severely
impairs the efﬁciency of information exchanging. This is equivalent as the small receptive ﬁeld issue on 2D CNN.
To solve this issue, we make a very deep network with shortcut connections 
and denote it as G-ResNet (Fig. 3 (a)). In this work, the G-ResNet in all blocks has
the same structure, which consists of 14 graph residual convolutional layers with 128
channels. The serial of G-ResNet block produces a new 128-dim 3D feature. In addition
Pixel2Mesh
(a) Graph Unpooling
(b) Comparison between face-based and edge-based unpooling
Initial Mesh
Face-based
Edge-based
Fig. 4. (a) Black vertices and dashed edges are added in the unpooling layer. (b) The face based
unpooling leads to imbalanced vertex degrees, while the edge-based unpooling remains regular.
to the feature output, there is a branch which applies an extra graph convolutional layer
to the last layer features and outputs the 3D coordinates of the vertex.
Graph unpooling layer
The goal of unpooling layer is to increase the number of vertex in the GCNN. It allows
us to start from a mesh with fewer vertices and add more only when necessary, which
reduces memory costs and produces better results. A straightforward approach is to
add one vertex in the center of each triangle and connect it with the three vertices of
the triangle (Fig. 4 (b) Face-based). However, this causes imbalanced vertex degrees,
i.e. number of edges on vertex. Inspired by the vertex adding strategy of the mesh
subdivision algorithm prevalent in computer graphics, we add a vertex at the center of
each edge and connect it with the two end-point of this edge (Fig. 4 (a)). The 3D feature
for newly added vertex is set as the average of its two neighbors. We also connect
three vertices if they are added on the same triangle (dashed line.) Consequently, we
create 4 new triangles for each triangle in the original mesh, and the number of vertex
is increased by the number of edges in the original mesh. This edge-based unpooling
uniformly upsamples the vertices as shown in Fig. 4 (b) Edge-based.
We deﬁne four kinds of losses to constrain the property of the output shape and the
deformation procedure to guarantee appealing results. We adopt the Chamfer loss to
constrain the location of mesh vertices, a normal loss to enforce the consistency of surface normal, a laplacian regularization to maintain relative location between neighboring vertices during deformation, and an edge length regularization to prevent outliers.
These losses are applied with equal weight on both the intermediate and ﬁnal mesh.
Unless otherwise stated, we use p for a vertex in the predicted mesh, q for a vertex in
the ground truth mesh, N(p) for the neighboring pixel of p, till the end of this section.
Chamfer loss The Chamfer distance measures the distance of each point to the other
set: lc = P
p minq ∥p −q∥2
q minp ∥p −q∥2
2. It is reasonably good to regress the
vertices close to its correct position, however is not sufﬁcient to produce nice 3D mesh
(see the result of Fan et al. in Fig. 1).
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
Normal loss We further deﬁne loss on surface normal to characterize high order properties: ln = P
q=arg minq(∥p−q∥2
2) ∥⟨p −k, nq⟩∥2
2, s.t. k ∈N(p) where q is the
closest vertex for p that is found when calculating the chamfer loss, k is the neighboring pixel of p, ⟨·, ·⟩is the inner product of two vectors, and nq is the observed surface
normal from ground truth.
Essentially, this loss requires the edge between a vertex with its neighbors to perpendicular to the observation from the ground truth. One may ﬁnd that this loss does
not equal to zero unless on a planar surface. However, optimizing this loss is equivalent
as forcing the normal of a locally ﬁtted tangent plane to be consistent with the observation, which works practically well in our experiment. Moreover, this normal loss is
fully differentiable and easy to optimize.
Regularization Even with the Chamfer loss and Normal loss, the optimization is easily
stucked in some local minimum. More speciﬁcally, the network may generate some
super large deformation to favor some local consistency, which is especially harmful at
the beginning when the estimation is far from ground truth, and causes ﬂying vertices
Laplacian regularization To handle these problem, we ﬁrst propose a Laplacian term
to prevent the vertices from moving too freely, which potentially avoids mesh selfintersection. The laplaician term serves as a local detail preserving operator, that encourages neighboring vertices to have the same movement. In the ﬁrst deformation
block, it acts like a surface smoothness term since the input to this block is a smootheverywhere ellipsoid; starting from the second block, it prevents the 3D mesh model
from deforming too much, so that only ﬁne-grained details are added to the mesh
model. To calculate this loss, we ﬁrst deﬁne a laplacian coordinate for each vertex p
as δp = p −P
∥N (p)∥k, and the laplacian regularization is deﬁned as: llap =
2, where δ′
p and δp are the laplacian coordinate of a vertex after and before
a deformation block.
Edge length regularization. To penalize ﬂying vertices, which ususally cause long edge,
we add an edge length regularization loss: lloc = P
k∈N(p) ∥p −k∥2
The overall loss is a weighted sum of all four losses, lall = lc+λ1ln+λ2llap+λ3lloc,
where λ1 = 1.6e −4, λ2 = 0.3 and λ3 = 0.1 are the hyperparameters which balance
the losses and ﬁxed for all the experiments.
Experiment
In this section, we perform an extensive evaluation on our model. In addition to comparing with previous 3D shape generation works for evaluating the reconstruction accuracy,
we also analyse the importance of each component in our model. Qualitative results on
both synthetic and real-world images further show that our model produces triangular
meshes with smooth surfaces and still maintains details depicted in the input images.
Pixel2Mesh
Experimental setup
Data. We use the dataset provided by Choy et al. . The dataset contains rendering
images of 50k models belonging to 13 object categories from ShapeNet , which is a
collection of 3D CAD models that are organized according to the WordNet hierarchy. A
model is rendered from various camera viewpoints, and camera intrinsic and extrinsic
matrices are recorded. For fair comparison, we use the same training/testing split as in
Choy et. al. .
Evaluation Metric. We adopt the standard 3D reconstruction metric. We ﬁrst uniformly sample points from our result and ground truth. We calculate precision and recall by checking the percentage of points in prediction or ground truth that can ﬁnd a
nearest neighbor from the other within certain threshold τ. A F-score as the harmonic mean of precision and recall is then calculated. Following Fan et. al. , we also
report the Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD). For F-Score,
larger is better. For CD and EMD, smaller is better.
On the other hand, we realize that the commonly used evaluation metrics for shape
generation may not thoroughly reﬂect the shape quality. They often capture occupancy
or point-wise distance rather than surface properties, such as continuity, smoothness,
high-order details, for which a standard evaluation metric is barely missing in literature.
Thus, we recommend to pay attention on qualitative results for better understanding of
these aspects.
Baselines. We compare the presented approach to the most recent single image reconstruction approaches. Speciﬁcally, we compare with two state-of-the-art methods -
Choy et. al. (3D-R2N2) producing 3D volume, and Fan et. al. (PSG) producing
point cloud. Since the metrics are deﬁned on point cloud, we can evaluate PSG directly
on its output, our method by uniformly sampling point on surface, and 3D-R2N2 by
uniformly sampling point from mesh created using the Marching Cube method.
We also compare to Neural 3D Mesh Renderer (N3MR) which is so far the
only deep learning based mesh generation model with code public available. For fair
comparison, the models are trained with the same data using the same amount of time.
Training and Runtime. Our network receives input images of size 224 × 224, and
initial ellipsoid with 156 vertices and 462 edges. The network is implemented in Tensorﬂow and optimized using Adam with weight decay 1e-5. The batch size is 1; the
total number of training epoch is 50; the learning rate is initialized as 3e-5 and drops to
1e-5 after 40 epochs. The total training time is 72 hours on a Nvidia Titan X. During
testing, our model takes 15.58ms to generate a mesh with 2466 vertices.
Comparison to state of the art
Tab. 1 shows the F-score with different thresholds of different methods. Our approach
outperforms the other methods in all categories except watercraft. Notably, our results
are signiﬁcantly better than the others in all categories under a smaller threshold τ,
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
N3MR Ours 3D-R2N2
watercraft
Table 1. F-score (%) on the ShapeNet test set at different thresholds, where τ = 10−4. Larger is
better. Best results under each threshold are bolded.
showing at least 10% F-score improvement. N3MR does not perform well, and its result
is about 50% worse than ours, probably because their model only learns from limited
silhouette signal in images and lacks of explicit handling of the 3D mesh.
We also show the CD and EMD for all categories in Tab. 2. Our approach outperforms the other methods in most categories and achieves the best mean score. The
major competitor is PSG, which produces a point cloud and has the most freedom; this
freedom leads to smaller CD and EMD, however does not necessarily leads to a better
mesh model without proper regularization. To demonstrate this, we show the qualitative
results to analyze why our approach outperforms the others. Fig. 8 shows the visual results. To compare the quality of mesh model, we convert volumetric and point cloud to
mesh using standard approaches . As we can see, the 3D volume results produced
by 3D-R2N2 lack of details due to the low resolution, e.g., the legs are missing in the
chair example as shown in the 4-th row of Fig. 8. We tried octree based solution 
to increase the volume resolution, but found it still hard to recover surface level details
as much as our model. PSG produces sparse 3D point clouds, and it is non-trivial to
recover meshes from them. This is due to the applied Chamfer loss acting like a regression loss which gives too much degree of freedom to the point cloud. N3MR produces
very rough shape, which might be sufﬁcient for some rendering tasks, however cannot
recover complicated objects such as chairs and tables. In contrast, our model does not
suffer from these issues by leveraging a mesh representation, integration of perceptual
feature, and carefully deﬁned losses during the training. Our result is not restricted by
the resolution due to the limited memory budget and contains both smooth continuous
surface and local details.
Pixel2Mesh
N3MR Ours 3D-R2N2
1.113 11.766 0.965
2.986 17.062 2.563
1.747 11.641 1.297
1.946 11.809 1.399
1.891 14.097 1.536
1.222 14.741 1.314
3.490 16.720 2.951
0.397 11.889 0.667
2.207 14.876 1.642
2.121 12.842 1.480
1.019 17.649 0.724
watercraft
0.945 11.425 0.814
1.653 13.386 1.380
Table 2. CD and EMD on the ShapeNet test set. Smaller is better. Best results under each threshold are bolded.
Category -ResNet -Laplacian -Unpooling -Normal -Edge length Full model
Table 3. Ablation study that evaluates the contribution of different ideas to the performance of
the presented model. The table reports all 4 measurements. For F-score, larger is better. For CD
and EMD, small is better.
Ablation Study
Now we conduct controlled experiments to analyse the importance of each component
in our model. Tab. 3 reports the performance of each model by removing one component
from the full model. Again, we argue that these commonly used evaluation metrics does
not necessarily reﬂect the quality of the recovered 3D geometry. For example, the model
with no edge length regularization achieves the best performance across all, however, in
fact produces the worst mesh (Fig. 5, the last 2nd column). As such, we use qualitative
result Fig. 5 to show the contribution of each component in our system.
Graph Unpooling We ﬁrst remove the graph unpooling layers, and thus each block
has the same number of vertices as in the last block of our full model. It is observed
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
Input image
- Edge Length
- Laplacian
- Unpooling
Full model
Fig. 5. Qualitative results for ablation study. This ﬁgure truly reﬂects the contribution of each
components especially for the regularization ones.
that the deformation makes mistake easier at beginning, which cannot be ﬁxed later on.
Consequently, there are some obvious artifacts in some parts of the objects.
G-ResNet We then remove the shortcut connections in G-ResNet, and make it regular
GCN. As can be seen from Tab. 3, there is a huge performance gap in all four measurement metrics, which means the failure of optimizing Chamfer distance. The main
reason is the degradation problem observed in the very deep 2D convolutional neural
network. Such problem leads to a higher training error (and thus higher testing error)
when adding more layers to a suitably deep model . Essetially, our network has 42
graph convolutional layers. Thus, this phenomenon has also been observed in our very
deep graph neural network experiment.
Loss terms We evaluate the function of each additional terms besides the Chamfer loss.
As can be seen in Fig. 5, removing normal loss severely impairs the surface smoothness
and local details, e.g. seat back; removing Laplacian term causes intersecting geometry
because the local topology changes, e.g. the hand held of the chair; removing edge
length term causes ﬂying vertices and surfaces, which completely ruins the surface
characteristics. These results demonstrate that all the components presented in this work
contribute to the ﬁnal performance.
Number of Deformation Blocks We now analyze the effects of the number of blocks.
Figure Fig. 6 (left) shows the mean F-score(τ) and CD with regard to the number of
blocks. The results indicate that increasing the number of blocks helps, but the beneﬁt
is getting saturated with more blocks, e.g. from 3 to 4. In our experiment, we found
that 4 blocks results in too many vertices and edges, which slow down our approach
dramatically even though it provides better accuracy on evaluation metrics. Therefore,
we use 3 blocks in all our experiment for the best balance of performance and efﬁciency.
Fig. 6 (right) shows the output of our model after each deformation block. Notice how
mesh is densiﬁed with more vertices and new details are added.
Pixel2Mesh
Input image
Block 1 (156)
Block 2 (628)
Block 3 (2466)
Number of blocks
Fig. 6. Left: Effect of number of blocks. Each curve shows the mean F-score (τ) and CD for
different number of blocks. Right: Sample examples showing the output after each block.
Fig. 7. Qualitative results of real-world images from the Online Products dataset and Internet.
Reconstructing Real-World images
Following Choy et. al. , we test our network on the Online Products dataset and
Internet images for qualitative evaluation on real images. We use the model trained
from ShapeNet dataset and directly run on real images without ﬁnetuning, and show
results in Fig. 7. As can be seen, our model trained on synthetic data generalizes well
to the real-world images across various categories.
Conclusion
We have presented an approach to extract 3D triangular meshes from singe images.
We exploit the key advantages the mesh presentation can bring to us, and the key issues required to solve for success. The former includes surface normal constraints and
information propagation along edges; the latter includes perceptual features extracted
from images as a guidance. We carefully design our network structure and propose a
very deep cascaded graph convolutional neural network with “shortcut” connections.
Meshes are progressively reﬁned by our network trained end-to-end with the chamfer
N. Wang⋆, Y. Zhang⋆, Z. Li⋆, Y. Fu, W, Liu, Y. Jiang
Fig. 8. Qualitative results. (a) Input image; (b) Volume from 3D-R2N2 , converted using
Marching Cube ; (c) Point cloud from PSG , converted using ball pivoting ; (d)
N3MR ; (e) Ours; (f) Ground truth.
loss and normal loss. Our results are signiﬁcantly better than the previous state-of-theart using other shape representations such as 3D volume or 3D point cloud. Thus, we
believe mesh representation is the next big thing in this direction, and we hope that the
key components discovered in our work can support follow-up works that will further
advance direct 3D mesh reconstruction from single images.
Future work Our method only produces meshes with the same topology as the initial
mesh. In the future, we will extend our approach to more general cases, such as scene
level reconstruction, and learn from multiple images for multi-view reconstruction.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by two projects from NSFC (#61622204
and #61572134), two projects from STCSM (#16JC1420401 and #16QA1400500),
Eastern Scholar (TP2017006), and The Thousand Talents Plan of China (for young
professionals, D1410009).
Pixel2Mesh