Artificial intelligence (AI) is projected to substantially influence clinical practice in the
foreseeable future. However, despite the excitement around the technologies, it is yet rare
to see examples of robust clinical validation of the technologies and, as a result, very few
are currently in clinical use. A thorough, systematic validation of AI technologies using
adequately designed clinical research studies before their integration into clinical practice is
critical to ensure patient benefit and safety while avoiding any inadvertent harms. We would
like to suggest several specific points regarding the role that peer-reviewed medical journals
can play, in terms of study design, registration, and reporting, to help achieve proper and
meaningful clinical validation of AI technologies designed to make medical diagnosis and
prediction, focusing on the evaluation of diagnostic accuracy efficacy. Peer-reviewed medical
journals can encourage investigators who wish to validate the performance of AI systems for
medical diagnosis and prediction to pay closer attention to the factors listed in this article
by emphasizing their importance. Thereby, peer-reviewed medical journals can ultimately
facilitate translating the technological innovations into real-world practice while securing
patient safety and benefit.
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence; Machine Learning; Decision Support Techniques; Peer Review;
Journalism, Medical; Validation Studies
INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) is projected to substantially influence clinical practice in the
foreseeable future, especially in areas of diagnosis, risk assessment and prognostication
through predictive algorithms. Notably, promising results have recently been reported
regarding the application of convolutional neural networks,1-3 a deep learning technology
used for analyzing images. In medicine, convolutional neural networks have been utilized in
the diagnostic analysis of a variety of medical images such as those of the retinal fundus,4,5
histopathology,6 endoscopy,7 and the full range of radiologic8-11 images. However, despite the
excitement around the technologies, it is yet rare to see examples of robust clinical validation
J Korean Med Sci. 2018 May 28;33(22):e152
 
eISSN 1598-6357·pISSN 1011-8934
Special Article
Received: Feb 9, 2018
Accepted: Mar 29, 2018
Address for Correspondence:
Seong Ho Park, MD, PhD
Department of Radiology and Research
Institute of Radiology, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 88
Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505,
E-mail: 
© 2018 The Korean Academy of Medical
This is an Open Access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial License (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)
which permits unrestricted non-commercial
use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly
Seong Ho Park
 
Herbert Y. Kressel
 
This work was supported by the Industrial
Strategic technology development program
(10072064) funded by the Ministry of Trade
Industry and Energy (MOTIE, Korea).
Disclosure
The authors have no potential conflicts of
interest to disclose.
Seong Ho Park 1 and Herbert Y. Kressel
1Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea
2Department of Radiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Connecting Technological Innovation
in Artificial Intelligence to Real-world
Medical Practice through Rigorous
Clinical Validation: What Peer-reviewed
Medical Journals Could Do
Editing, Writing &
Publishing
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Park SH, Kressel HY.
Supervision: Kressel HY. Writing - original
draft: Park SH. Writing - review & editing:
Kressel HY.
of these clinical applications and, as a result, very few are currently in clinical use.12-14 Despite
the potential of AI technologies, it cannot be denied that the application of AI in health care
is overhyped and is at risk of commercial exploitation to a certain extent.13 The ultimate
purpose of introducing AI into medicine is to achieve better, safer care for our patients.
A thorough, systematic validation of AI technologies using adequately designed clinical
research studies before their integration into clinical practice is critical to ensure patient
benefit and safety while avoiding any inadvertent harms. The importance of proper clinical
validation of AI technologies used for medicine has recently been underscored by multiple
premier peer-reviewed medical journals13-16 and a comprehensive methodologic guide for
the clinical validation17 has also recently been published. Peer-reviewed medical journals
play a crucial role in the pathway towards the clinical validation of AI technologies used for
medicine as the peer-reviewed medical journals employ a fundamental mechanism that vets
the scientific and clinical value, validity, and integrity of research studies. The importance
of peer-reviewed medical journals as more authoritative and reliable sources for updates
regarding clinical validation of AI technologies is further highlighted these days since many
related research studies are also published without peer review, in repositories such as https://
arxiv.org, a repository of electronic preprints, which is moderated but not peer-reviewed,
and does rely on peer to peer expertise in clinical evaluation of these technologies, thereby
potentially adding to the existing hype around AI.18
With these issues in mind, we would like to suggest several specific points regarding the
role that peer-reviewed medical journals can play to help achieve proper and meaningful
clinical validation of AI technologies designed for use in medicine, especially diagnostic and
predictive software tools developed with deep learning technology and high-dimensional
data. AI can be applied to medicine in various ways. Of those, in this article, we will consider
AI technologies designed to make medical diagnosis and prediction, i.e., classification tasks
(for example, a distinction between cancer and benign disease or between good and poor
responders to a therapy), built with “big” clinical datasets, as such technologies underpin
the data-driven precision medicine in the AI era. Appraisal of AI technologies for medical
diagnosis and prediction can be performed at different levels of efficacy19 such as diagnostic
accuracy efficacy (for example, a study by Ting et al.5), patient outcome efficacy (for example,
a study by the INFANT Collaborative Group20), and societal efficacy that considers costbenefit and cost-effectiveness. This article will focus on the evaluation of diagnostic accuracy
efficacy. Although this article deals with some fundamental methodologic principles, the
purpose of this article is not to provide comprehensive explanations on related methodology.
Further methodologic details can be found in a recent methodologic guide.17 Also, for an
exemplary paper which successfully addressed the points to be discussed in this article, a
study by Ting et al.5 could be referred.
POINTS FOR PEER-REVIEWED MEDICAL JOURNALS
TO EMPHASIZE TO HELP ACHIEVE PROPER CLINICAL
VALIDATION OF AI
First, clarification of the meaning of the word validation as used in AI and machine learning
(ML) articles would be helpful since, unlike the commonly accepted definition of the term
validation in medicine/health literature,21 this term is also used in AI/ML literature as technical
jargon with a somewhat different meaning. According to the convention in the field of AI/ML,
 
 
Medical Journals for Validating Artificial Intelligence
validation as the technical jargon also refers to a particular step in the sequence of training,
validation, and test steps for algorithm development (Fig. 1), where the validation step is to
fine-tune the algorithm after training (see studies by Lakhani and Sundaram8 and Larson
et al.9 for example).17,22 Journals should try to avoid confusion with the use of the term, for
example, by referring to the fine-tuning step and clinical validation as “internal validation”
and “external validation,” respectively, or explicitly naming them “fine-tuning step” and
“clinical validation,” respectively.
Second, the use of adequately sized datasets that are collected in newly recruited patients or at
different sites than the dataset used for algorithm development and training which effectively
represent the target patients undergoing a given diagnostic/predictive procedure in a “realworld” clinical practice setting are essential for “external” validation of the clinical performance
of AI systems (for example, a study by Ting et al.5) to achieve an unbiased assessment (Fig.
1). The importance of using proper external datasets in validating the performance of AI
systems built with deep learning cannot be overstated because mechanistic interrogations of
 
 
Medical Journals for Validating Artificial Intelligence
Development of an AI model
Clinical validation of
the performance of
an AI model
Split of dataset for training, validationa, and test steps
A developed diagnostic/predictive AI model
aA technical jargon that
means “algorithm tuning”
Large dataset typically
made through convenience
case-control collection
Independent external
dataset for clinical
validation (data collected
from well-deﬁned clinical
cohorts avoiding spectrum
Data for training
validation
Fig. 1. Typical processes for development and clinical validation of an artificial intelligence model such as a deep
learning algorithm for medical diagnosis and prediction.
The dataset used to develop a deep learning algorithm is typically convenience case-control data, which is prone
to spectrum bias.17 The algorithm development goes through training, validation, and test steps, for which the
entire dataset is then split, for example, 50% for the training step and 25% each for the validation and test
steps.22 The term validation here is a technical jargon that means tuning of the algorithm under development,
unlike the commonly accepted definition in medicine/health literature as in clinical validation. The test step,
if performed using the typical split-sample “internal” validation method, should be distinguished from the
true external validation as the former falls short of validating the clinical performance or generalizability of
the developed algorithm. The use of a dataset that is collected in a manner that minimizes spectrum bias in
newly recruited patients or at different sites than the dataset used for algorithm development, which effectively
represents the target patients in a real-world clinical practice, is essential for external validation of the clinical
performance of an AI algorithm.
AI = artificial intelligence.
the results created by a deep learning network are difficult due to the “black-box” nature of
the technology, i.e., one cannot simply look inside a deep neural network to understand how
it works to give a particular output due to the complex web of multiple interconnected layers
and innumerable individual weights calculated with back-propagation for myriad artificial
neuronal connections.1,13,15,16 In addition, split-sample “internal” validation, i.e., validation
of the performance using a fraction of data that is randomly split from the entire dataset and
is kept unused for algorithm training (for example, studies by Ehteshami Bejnordi et al.6,
Lakhani and Sundaram8, and Yasaka et al.10) should be distinguished from the true external
validation mentioned above (Fig. 1). In contrast with the true external validation, split-sample
validation, which has on occasion been termed as external validation in published papers, is
statistically inadequate to account for overfitting and cannot generally avoid spectrum bias.17
Therefore, although split-sample validation may demonstrate the internal technical validity of
an AI algorithm, it falls short of validating its clinical performance or generalizability.17 More
in-depth explanations can be found elsewhere.17 Overfitting and spectrum bias are significant
pitfalls that can substantially exaggerate the performance of an AI system.16,17,23 Overfitting
refers to a situation in which a learning algorithm customizes itself too much to the training
data, including idiosyncratic spurious statistical associations, to the extent that it negatively
impacts the algorithm's ability to generalize to new data while exaggerating its performance on
the training dataset.1,17 It can be particularly problematic in overparameterized classification
models built with high-dimensional data.24,25 An overparameterized model is a mathematical
model that contains too many “x” parameters (called high-dimensional) relative to the number
of data to feed the model for training.24,25 An example is an AI algorithm using convolutional
neural network to analyze medical images as each pixel of an image is considered a separate x
parameter in the mathematical model. Spectrum bias indicates a situation in which the spectrum
of patient manifestations (e.g., severity, stage, or duration of the disease; presence and severity
of comorbidities; demographic characteristics, etc.) in the data used for algorithm training
does not adequately reflect the spectrum in those to whom the algorithm will be applied in
clinical practice. This can be another source of data overfitting. Use of proper external datasets
as explained earlier is crucial to avoid these pitfalls, for which prospectively collected data are
better than those obtained in retrospective cohorts.
Third, use of large datasets obtained from multiple institutions for validation of the clinical
performance of an AI system should be encouraged. Performance of an AI system may
vary according to the selection of validation datasets due to differences in the degree of
overfitting and patient manifestation spectrum between the datasets. Some types of data
such as radiologic images may also be subject to additional sources of variability as different
scanners/vendors and scan parameters/techniques may also influence the performance of
AI systems.16,26 Therefore, using datasets obtained from multiple institutions would be
advantageous in achieving more robust validation of the performance. One good example is
a study by Ting et al.5 in which authors used ten multiethnic cohorts obtained from multiple
institutions for external validation of the performance of their AI algorithm.
Fourth, prospective registration of studies to validate the performance of AI systems, like
registration of clinical trials of interventions (for example, at clinicaltrials.gov), can be
proposed to increase transparency in the validation. With varying performance results
obtained with different datasets from multiple institutions as previously mentioned, some
researchers or sponsors might be inclined to selectively report favorable results, which
would create a problem of under-reporting unfavorable results. Such under-reporting
was a significant reason why the policy of prospectively registering clinical trials was first
 
 
Medical Journals for Validating Artificial Intelligence
introduced in 2005 by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE). In
compliance with the ICMJE policy, numerous medical journals consider reports of trials for
publication only if they had been registered in any of the publicly accessible trial registries
accepted by the ICMJE before enrollment of the first study participant. Similar requirements
have also been implemented by regulatory governmental organizations and funders.
Likewise, prospective registration of diagnostic test accuracy studies, which include studies
to validate the performance of AI systems, has already been proposed.27 Adoption of this
policy by medical journals as well as by governmental agencies and funders will enhance
transparency in the validation of the performance of AI systems.
Fifth, in addition to the points mentioned above to improve the quality and transparency in
validating the performance of AI systems, for AI systems developed with supervised learning
(i.e., outcome statuses for an algorithm to predict are provided as labeled data for algorithm
training) using data labeled by human interpreters, it would be important to advise the
investigators to clarify the experience and training of the individuals doing the labeling and
the variability between those doing the labeling. The ultimate performance of an AI system is
profoundly influenced by the quality of the data used for training the system, and the quality
of labeling is an important factor for evaluating the performance of an AI system.
Lastly, encouraging authors to refer to Standards for Reporting Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD)28
and Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or
Diagnosis (TRIPOD),21 the Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research
(EQUATOR) Network guidelines for reporting diagnostic accuracy studies and multivariable
prediction model for individual prognosis or diagnosis, respectively, would be helpful for
improving the completeness and consistency in reporting studies to validate the performance
of AI systems although these guidelines are not customized for AI. Guidelines specific to
reporting AI/ML predictive models29 are also available albeit not as widely implemented as
STARD or TRIPOD and would facilitate better reporting of the research results.
Peer-reviewed medical journals can encourage investigators who wish to validate the
performance of AI systems for medical diagnosis and prediction to pay closer attention to the
factors listed in this article by emphasizing their importance. Thereby, peer-reviewed medical
journals can promote execution and reporting of more robust clinical validation of AI systems
and can ultimately facilitate translating the technological innovations into real-world practice
while securing patient safety and benefit.