Learning without Forgetting
Zhizhong Li, Derek Hoiem, Member, IEEE
Abstract—When building a uniﬁed vision system or gradually adding new capabilities to a system, the usual assumption is that training
data for all tasks is always available. However, as the number of tasks grows, storing and retraining on such data becomes infeasible. A
new problem arises where we add new capabilities to a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), but the training data for its existing
capabilities are unavailable. We propose our Learning without Forgetting method, which uses only new task data to train the network
while preserving the original capabilities. Our method performs favorably compared to commonly used feature extraction and
ﬁne-tuning adaption techniques and performs similarly to multitask learning that uses original task data we assume unavailable. A
more surprising observation is that Learning without Forgetting may be able to replace ﬁne-tuning with similar old and new task
datasets for improved new task performance.
Index Terms—Convolutional Neural Networks, Transfer Learning, Multi-task Learning, Deep Learning, Visual Recognition
INTRODUCTION
ANY practical vision applications require learning
new visual capabilities while maintaining performance on existing ones. For example, a robot may be
delivered to someone’s house with a set of default object
recognition capabilities, but new site-speciﬁc object models
need to be added. Or for construction safety, a system can
identify whether a worker is wearing a safety vest or hard
hat, but a superintendent may wish to add the ability to
detect improper footware. Ideally, the new tasks could be
learned while sharing parameters from old ones, without
suffering from Catastrophic Forgetting , (degrading
performance on old tasks) or having access to the old
training data. Legacy data may be unrecorded, proprietary,
or simply too cumbersome to use in training a new task.
This problem is similar in spirit to transfer, multitask, and
lifelong learning.
We aim at developing a simple but effective strategy on a
variety of image classiﬁcation problems with Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) classiﬁers. In our setting, a CNN
has a set of shared parameters θs (e.g., ﬁve convolutional
layers and two fully connected layers for AlexNet architecture), task-speciﬁc parameters for previously learned
tasks θo (e.g., the output layer for ImageNet classiﬁcation
and corresponding weights), and randomly initialized taskspeciﬁc parameters for new tasks θn (e.g., scene classiﬁers).
It is useful to think of θo and θn as classiﬁers that operate
on features parameterized by θs. Currently, there are three
common approaches (Figures 1, 2) to learning θn while
beneﬁting from previously learned θs:
Feature Extraction (e.g., ): θs and θo are unchanged,
and the outputs of one or more layers are used as features
for the new task in training θn.
Fine-tuning (e.g., ): θs and θn are optimized for the
new task, while θo is ﬁxed. A low learning rate is typically
used to prevent large drift in θs. Potentially, the original
Z. Li and D. Hoeim are with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, IL, 61801.
E-mail: {zli115,dhoiem}@illinois.edu
network could be duplicated and ﬁne-tuned for each new
task to create a set of specialized networks.
It is also possible to use a variation of ﬁne-tuning where
part of θs – the convolutional layers – are frozen to prevent
overﬁtting, and only top fully connected layers are ﬁnetuned. This can be seen as a compromise between ﬁnetuning and feature extraction. In this work we call this
method Fine-tuning FC where FC stands for fully connected.
Joint Training (e.g., ): All parameters θs, θo, θn are
jointly optimized, for example by interleaving samples from
each task. This method’s performance may be seen as an
upper bound of what our proposed method can achieve.
Each of these strategies has a major drawback. Feature
extraction typically underperforms on the new task because
the shared parameters fail to represent some information
that is discriminative for the new task. Fine-tuning degrades
performance on previously learned tasks because the shared
parameters change without new guidance for the original
task-speciﬁc prediction parameters. Duplicating and ﬁnetuning for each task results in linearly increasing test time
as new tasks are added, rather than sharing computation
for shared parameters. Fine-tuning FC, as we show in our
experiments, still degrades performance on the new task.
Joint training becomes increasingly cumbersome in training
as more tasks are learned and is not possible if the training
data for previously learned tasks is unavailable.
Besides these commonly used approaches, methods ,
 have emerged that can continually add new prediction
tasks by adapting shared parameters without access to training data for previously learned tasks. (See Section 2)
In this paper, we expand on our previous work ,
Learning without Forgetting (LwF). Using only examples
for the new task, we optimize both for high accuracy for the
new task and for preservation of responses on the existing
tasks from the original network. Our method is similar
to joint training, except that our method does not need
the old task’s images and labels. Clearly, if the network is
preserved such that θo produces exactly the same outputs
on all relevant images, the old task accuracy will be the
 
Fig. 1. We wish to add new prediction tasks to an existing CNN vision system without requiring access to the training data for existing tasks. This
table shows relative advantages of our method compared to commonly used methods.
Duplicating and
Learning without
Fine Tuning
Extraction
Forgetting
new task performance
original task performance
training efﬁciency
testing efﬁciency
storage requirement
requires previous task data
same as the original network. In practice, the images for the
new task may provide a poor sampling of the original task
domain, but our experiments show that preserving outputs
on these examples is still an effective strategy to preserve
performance on the old task and also has an unexpected
beneﬁt of acting as a regularizer to improve performance
on the new task. Our Learning without Forgetting approach
has several advantages:
(1) Classiﬁcation performance: Learning without Forgetting outperforms feature extraction and, more surprisingly, ﬁne-tuning on the new task while greatly
outperforming using ﬁne-tuned parameters θs on the
old task. Our method also generally perform better in
experiments than recent alternatives , .
(2) Computational efﬁciency: Training time is faster than
joint training and only slightly slower than ﬁne-tuning,
and test time is faster than if one uses multiple ﬁnetuned networks for different tasks.
(3) Simplicity in deployment: Once a task is learned, the
training data does not need to be retained or reapplied
to preserve performance in the adapting network.
Compared to our previous work , we conduct more
extensive experiments. We compare to additional methods
– ﬁne-tune FC, a commonly used baseline, and Less Forgetting Learning, a recently proposed method. We experiment
on adjusting the balance between old-new task losses, providing a more thorough and intuitive comparison of related
methods (Figure 7). We switch from the obsolete Places2 to a
newer Places365-standard dataset. We perform stricter, more
careful hyperparameter selection process, which slightly
changed our results. We also include more detailed explanation of our method. Finally, we perform an experiment on
application to video object tracking in Appendix A.
RELATED WORK
Multi-task learning, transfer learning, and related methods
have a long history. In brief, our Learning without Forgetting approach could be seen as a combination of Distillation
Networks and ﬁne-tuning . Fine-tuning initializes
with parameters from an existing network trained on a
related data-rich problem and ﬁnds a new local minimum
by optimizing parameters for a new task with a low learning
rate. The idea of Distillation Networks is to learn parameters
in a simpler network that produce the same outputs as a
more complex ensemble of networks either on the original
training set or a large unlabeled set of data. Our approach
differs in that we solve for a set of parameters that works
well on both old and new tasks using the same data to
supervise learning of the new tasks and to provide unsupervised output guidance on the old tasks.
Compared methods
Feature Extraction , uses a pre-trained deep CNN to
compute features for an image. The extracted features are
the activations of one layer (usually the last hidden layer) or
multiple layers given the image. Classiﬁers trained on these
features can achieve competitive results, sometimes outperforming human-engineered features . Further studies 
show how hyper-parameters, e.g. original network structure, should be selected for better performance. Feature
extraction does not modify the original network and allows
new tasks to beneﬁt from complex features learned from
previous tasks. However, these features are not specialized
for the new task and can often be improved by ﬁne-tuning.
Fine-tuning modiﬁes the parameters of an existing
CNN to train a new task. The output layer is extended with
randomly intialized weights for the new task, and a small
learning rate is used to tune all parameters from their original values to minimize the loss on the new task. Sometimes,
part of the network is frozen (e.g. the convolutional layers)
to prevent overﬁtting. Using appropriate hyper-parameters
for training, the resulting model often outperforms feature
extraction , or learning from a randomly initialized
network , . Fine-tuning adapts the shared parameters
θs to make them more discriminative for the new task, and
the low learning rate is an indirect mechanism to preserve
some of the representational structure learned in the original
tasks. Our method provides a more direct way to preserve
representations that are important for the original task,
improving both original and new task performance relative
to ﬁne-tuning in most experiments.
Multitask learning (e.g., ) aims to improve all tasks
simultaneously by combining the common knowledge from
all tasks. Each task provides extra training data for the parameters that are shared or constrained, serving as a form of
regularization for the other tasks . For neural networks,
Caruana gives a detailed study of multi-task learning.
Usually the bottom layers of the network are shared, while
the top layers are task-speciﬁc. Multitask learning requires
data from all tasks to be present, while our method requires
only data for the new tasks.
Adding new nodes to each network layer is a way
to preserve the original network parameters while learning new discriminative features. For example, Terekhov et
random initialize + train
ground truth
(b) Fine-tuning
(d) Joint Training
ground truth
old tasks’
ground truth
(c) Feature Extraction
ground truth
(e) Learning without Forgetting
ground truth
model (a)’s
response for
(a) Original Model
(old task 𝑚)
(test image)
(old task 1)
Fig. 2. Illustration for our method (e) and methods we compare to (b-d). Images and labels used in training are shown. Data for different tasks are
used in alternation in joint training.
al. propose Deep Block-Modular Neural Networks for
fully-connected neural networks, and Rusu et al. propose Progressive Neural Networks for reinforcement learning. Parameters for the original network are untouched, and
newly added nodes are fully connected to the layer beneath
them. These methods has the downside of substantially
expanding the number of parameters in the network, and
can underperform both ﬁne-tuning and feature extraction if insufﬁcient training data is available to learn the
new parameters, since they require a substantial number of
parameters to be trained from scratch. We experiment with
expanding the fully connected layers of original network
but ﬁnd that the expansion does not provide an improvement on our original approach.
Topically relevant methods
Our work also relates to methods that transfer knowledge
between networks. Hinton et al. propose Knowledge
Distillation, where knowledge is transferred from a large
network or a network assembly to a smaller network for
efﬁcient deployment. The smaller network is trained using a
modiﬁed cross-entropy loss (further described in Sec. 3) that
encourages both large and small responses of the original
and new network to be similar. Romero et al. builds
on this work to transfer to a deeper network by applying
extra guidance on the middle layer. Chen et al. proposes
the Net2Net method that immediately generates a deeper,
wider network that is functionally equivalent to an existing one. This technique can quickly initialize networks for
faster hyper-parameter exploration. These methods aim to
produce a differently structured network that approximates
the original network, while we aim to ﬁnd new parameters
for the original network structure (θs, θo) that approximate
the original outputs while tuning shared parameters θs for
new tasks.
Feature extraction and ﬁne-tuning are special cases of
Domain Adaptation (when old and new tasks are the same)
or Transfer Learning (different tasks). These are different
from multitask learning in that tasks are not simultaneously
optimized. Transfer Learning uses knowledge from one
task to help another, as surveyed by Pan et al. . The
Deep Adaption Network by Long et al. matches the
RKHS embedding of the deep representation of both source
and target tasks to reduce domain bias. Another similar
domain adaptation method is by Tzeng et al. , which
encourages the shared deep representation to be indistinguishable across domains. This method also uses knowledge
distillation, but to help train the new domain instead of
preserving the old task. Domain adaptation and transfer
learning require that at least unlabeled data is present for
both task domains. In contrast, we are interested in the
case when training data for the original tasks (i.e. source
domains) are not available.
Methods that integrate knowledge over time, e.g. Lifelong Learning and Never Ending Learning , are also
related. Lifelong learning focuses on ﬂexibly adding new
tasks while transferring knowledge between tasks. Never
Ending Learning focuses on building diverse knowledge
and experience (e.g. by reading the web every day). Though
topically related to our work, these methods do not provide
a way to preserve performance on existing tasks without the
original training data. Ruvolo et al. describe a method
to efﬁciently add new tasks to a multitask system, cotraining all tasks while using only new task data. However,
the method assumes that weights for all classiﬁers and
regression models can be linearly decomposed into a set
of bases. In contrast with our method, the algorithm applies
only to logistic or linear regression on engineered features,
and these features cannot be made task-speciﬁc, e.g. by ﬁnetuning.
Concurrently developed methods
Concurrent with our previous work , two methods have
been proposed for continually add and integrate new tasks
without using previous tasks’ data.
A-LTM , developed independently, is nearly identical
in method but has very different experiments and conclusions. The main differences of method are in the weight
decay regularization used for training and the warm-up step
that we use prior to full ﬁne-tuning.
However, we use large datasets to train our initial network (e.g. ImageNet) and then extend to new tasks from
smaller datasets (e.g. PASCAL VOC), while A-LTM uses
small datasets for the old task and large datasets for the new
task. The experiments in A-LTM ﬁnd much larger loss
due to ﬁne-tuning than we do, and the paper concludes that
maintaining the data from the original task is necessary to
maintain performance. Our experiments, in contrast, show
that we can maintain good performance for the old task
while performing as well or sometimes better than ﬁnetuning for the new task, without access to original task data.
We believe the main difference is the choice of old-task
new-task pairs and that we observe less of a drop in oldtask performance from ﬁne-tuning due to the choice (and in
part to the warm-up step; see Table 2(b)). We believe that
our experiments, which start from a well-trained network
and add tasks with less training data available, are better
motivated from a practical perspective.
Less Forgetting Learning is also a similar method,
which preserves the old task performance by discouraging the shared representation to change. This method argues that the task-speciﬁc decision boundaries should not
change, and keeps the old task’s ﬁnal layer unchanged,
while our method discourages the old task output to change,
and jointly optimizes both the shared representation and the
ﬁnal layer. We empirically show that our method outperforms Less Forgetting Learning on the new task.
LEARNING WITHOUT FORGETTING
Given a CNN with shared parameters θs and task-speciﬁc
parameters θo (Fig. 2(a)), our goal is to add task-speciﬁc
parameters θn for a new task and to learn parameters that
work well on old and new tasks, using images and labels
from only the new task (i.e., without using data from existing
tasks). Our algorithm is outlined in Fig. 3, and the network
structure illustrated in Fig. 2(e).
First, we record responses yo on each new task image
from the original network for outputs on the old tasks
(deﬁned by θs and θo). Our experiments involve classiﬁcation, so the responses are the set of label probabilities for
each training image. Nodes for each new class are added
to the output layer, fully connected to the layer beneath,
with randomly initialized weights θn. The number of new
parameters is equal to the number of new classes times the
number of nodes in the last shared layer, typically a very
small percent of the total number of parameters. In our
experiments (Sec. 4.2), we also compare alternate ways of
modifying the network for the new task.
Next, we train the network to minimize loss for all tasks
and regularization R using stochastic gradient descent. The
regularization R corresponds to a simple weight decay of
0.0005. When training, we ﬁrst freeze θs and θo and train
θn to convergence (warm-up step). Then, we jointly train
all weights θs, θo, and θn until convergence (joint-optimize
step). The warm-up step greatly enhances ﬁne-tuning’s oldtask performance, but is not so crucial to either our method
or the compared Less Forgetting Learning (see Table 2(b)).
We still adopt this technique in Learning without Forgetting
(as well as most compared methods) for the slight enhancement and a fair comparison.
For simplicity, we denote the loss functions, outputs, and
ground truth for single examples. The total loss is averaged
over all images in a batch in training. For new tasks, the
loss encourages predictions ˆyn to be consistent with the
ground truth yn. The tasks in our experiments are multiclass
classiﬁcation, so we use the common , multinomial
logistic loss:
Lnew(yn, ˆyn) = −yn · log ˆyn
where ˆyn is the softmax output of the network and yn is
the one-hot ground truth label vector. If there are multiple
new tasks, or if the task is multi-label classiﬁcation where
we make true/false predictions for each label, we take the
sum of losses across the new tasks and the labels.
For each original task, we want the output probabilities
for each image to be close to the recorded output from the
original network. We use the Knowledge Distillation loss,
which was found by Hinton et al. to work well for
encouraging the outputs of one network to approximate the
outputs of another. This is a modiﬁed cross-entropy loss that
increases the weight for smaller probabilities:
Lold(yo, ˆyo) = −H(y′
log ˆy′(i)
where l is the number of labels and y′(i)
modiﬁed versions of recorded and current probabilities y(i)
If there are multiple old tasks, or if an old task is multi-label
classiﬁcation, we take the sum of the loss for each old task
and label. Hinton et al. suggest that setting T > 1,
which increases the weight of smaller logit values and
encourages the network to better encode similarities among
classes. We use T = 2 according to a grid search on a held
LEARNINGWITHOUTFORGETTING:
Start with:
θs: shared parameters
θo: task speciﬁc parameters for each old task
Xn, Yn: training data and ground truth on the new task
Initialize:
Yo ←CNN(Xn, θs, θo)
// compute output of old tasks for new data
θn ←RANDINIT(|θn|)
// randomly initialize new parameters
Deﬁne ˆYo ≡CNN(Xn, ˆθs, ˆθo)
// old task output
Deﬁne ˆYn ≡CNN(Xn, ˆθs, ˆθn)
// new task output
ˆθs,ˆθo,ˆθn
λoLold(Yo, ˆYo) + Lnew(Yn, ˆYn) + R(ˆθs, ˆθo, ˆθn)
Fig. 3. Procedure for Learning without Forgetting.
out set, which aligns with the authors’ recommendations.
In experiments, use of knowledge distillation loss leads to a
slightly better but very similar performance to other reasonable losses. Therefore, it is important to constrain outputs
for original tasks to be similar to the original network, but
the similarity measure is not crucial.
λo is a loss balance weight, set to 1 for most our experiments. Making λ larger will favor the old task performance
over the new task’s, so we can obtain a old-task-new-task
performance line by changing λo. (Figure 7)
Relationship to joint training. As mentioned before, the
main difference between joint training and our method is
the need for the old dataset. Joint training uses the old task’s
images and labels in training, while Learning without Forgetting no longer uses them, and instead uses the new task
images Xn and the recorded responses Yo as substitutes.
This eliminates the need to require and store the old dataset,
brings us the beneﬁt of joint optimization of the shared θs,
and also saves computation since the images Xn only has
to pass through the shared layers once for both the new
task and the old task. However, the distribution of images
from these tasks may be very different, and this substitution may potentially decrease performance. Therefore, joint
training’s performance may be seen as an upper-bound for
our method.
Efﬁciency comparison. The most computationally expensive part of using the neural network is evaluating or backpropagating through the shared parameters θs, especially
the convolutional layers. For training, feature extraction is
the fastest because only the new task parameters are tuned.
LwF is slightly slower than ﬁne-tuning because it needs
to back-propagate through θo for old tasks but needs to
evaluate and back-propagate through θs only once. Joint
training is the slowest, because different images are used
for different tasks, and each task requires separate backpropagation through the shared parameters.
All methods take approximately the same amount of
time to evaluate a test image. However, duplicating the
network and ﬁne-tuning for each task takes m times as long
to evaluate, where m is the total number of tasks.
Implementation details
We use MatConvNet to train our networks using
stochastic gradient descent with momentum of 0.9 and
dropout enabled in the fully connected layers. The data
normalization (mean subtraction) of the original task is used
for the new task. The resizing follows the implementation
of the original network, which is 256 × 256 for AlexNet and
256 pixels in the shortest edge with aspect ratio preserved
for VGG. We randomly jitter the training data by taking
random ﬁxed-size crops of the resized images with offset
on a 5 × 5 grid, randomly mirroring the crop, and adding
variance to the RGB values like in AlexNet . This data
augmentation is applied to feature extraction too.
When training networks, we follow the standard practices for ﬁne-tuning existing networks. For random initialization of θn, we use Xavier initialization. We use a
learning rate much smaller than when training the original
network (0.1 ∼0.02 times the original rate). The learning
rates are selected to maximize new task performance with
a reasonable number of epochs. For each scenario, the same
learning rate are shared by all methods except feature extraction, which uses 5× the learning rate due to its small
number of parameters.
We choose the number of epochs for both the warmup step and the joint-optimize step based on validation on
the held-out set. We look at only the new task performance
during validation. Therefore our selected hyperparameter
favors the new task more. The compared methods converge
at similar speeds, so we used the same number of epochs for
each method for fair comparison; however, the convergence
speed heavily depend on the original network and the task
pair, and we validate for the number of epoch separately
for each scenario. We perform stricter validation than in our
previous work , and the number of epochs is generally
longer for each scenario. One exception is ImageNet→Scene
where we observe overﬁtting and have to shorten the training for feature extraction. We lower the learning rate once
by 10× at the epoch when the held out accuracy plateaus.
To make a fair comparison, the intermediate network
trained using our method (after the warm-up step) is used
as a starting point for joint training and Fine Tuning, since
this may speed up training convergence. In other words,
for each run of our experiment, we ﬁrst freeze θs, θo and
train θn, and use the resulting parameters to initialize our
method, joint training and ﬁne-tuning. Feature extraction is
trained separately because does not share the same network
structure as our method.
For the feature extraction baseline, instead of extracting
features at the last hidden layer of the original network (at
the top of θs), we freeze the shared parameters θs, disable
the dropout layers, and add a two-layer network with 4096
nodes in the hidden layer on top of it. This has the same
effect of training a 2-layer network on the extracted features.
For joint training, loss for one task’s output nodes is applied
to only its own training images. The same number of images
are subsampled for every task in each epoch to balance their
loss, and we interleave batches of different tasks for gradient
EXPERIMENTS
Our experiments are designed to evaluate whether Learning
without Forgetting (LwF) is an effective method to learn a
new task while preserving performance on old tasks. We
compare to common approaches of feature extraction, ﬁnetuning, and ﬁne-tuning FC, and also Less Forgetting Learning
(LFL) . These methods leverage an existing network for
a new task without requiring training data for the original
tasks. Feature extraction maintains the exact performance
on the original task. We also compare to joint training
(sometimes called multitask learning) as an upper-bound
on possible old task performance, since joint training uses
images and labels for original and new tasks, while LwF
uses only images and labels for the new tasks.
We experiment on a variety of image classiﬁcation problems with varying degrees of inter-task similarity. For the
original (“old”) task, we consider the ILSVRC 2012 subset
of ImageNet and the Places365-standard dataset. Note
that our previous work used Places2, a taster challenge in
ILSVRC 2015 and an earlier version of Places365, but
the dataset was deprecated after our publication. ImageNet
has 1,000 object category classes and more than 1,000,000
training images. Places365 has 365 scene classes and ∼
1, 600, 000 training images. We use these large datasets also
because we assume we start from a well-trained network,
which implies a large-scale dataset. For the new tasks,
we consider PASCAL VOC 2012 image classiﬁcation 
(“VOC”), Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation (“CUB”), and MIT indoor scene classiﬁcation 
(“Scenes”). These datasets have a moderate number of images for training: 5,717 for VOC; 5,994 for CUB; and 5,360 for
Scenes. Among these, VOC is very similar to ImageNet, as
subcategories of its labels can be found in ImageNet classes.
MIT indoor scene dataset is in turn similar to Places365.
CUB is dissimilar to both, since it includes only birds and
requires capturing the ﬁne details of the image to make a
valid prediction. In one experiment, we use MNIST 
as the new task expecting our method to underperform,
since the hand-written characters are completely unrelated
to ImageNet classes.
We mainly use the AlexNet network structure because it is fast to train and well-studied by the community , , . We also verify that similar results hold
using 16-layer VGGnet on a smaller set of experiments.
For both network structures, the ﬁnal layer (fc8) is treated
as task-speciﬁc, and the rest are shared (θs) unless otherwise
speciﬁed. The original networks pre-trained on ImageNet
and Places365-standard are obtained from public online
We report the center image crop mean average precision
for VOC, and center image crop accuracy for all other
tasks. We report the accuracy of the validation set of VOC,
ImageNet and Places365, and on the test set of CUB and
Scenes dataset. Since the test performance of the former
three cannot be evaluated frequently, we only provide the
performance on their test sets in one experiment. Due to the
randomness within CNN training, we run our experiments
three times, and report the mean performance.
Our experiments investigate adding a single new task to
the network or adding multiple tasks one-by-one. We also
examine effect of dataset size and network design. In ablation studies, we examine alternative response-preserving
losses, the utility of expanding the network structure, and
ﬁne-tuning with a lower learning rate as a method to preserve original task performance. Note that the results have
multiple sources of variance, including random initialization and training, pre-determined termination (performance
can ﬂuctuate by training 1 or 2 additional epochs), etc.
Main experiments
Single new task scenario. First, we compare the results
of learning one new task among different task pairs and
different methods. Table 1(a), 1(b) shows the performance of
our method, and the relative performance of other methods
compared to it using AlexNet. We also visualize the old-new
performance comparison on two task pairs in Figure 7. We
make the following observations:
On the new task, our method consistently outperforms ﬁnetuning, LFL, ﬁne-tuning FC, and feature extraction except for ImageNet→MNIST and Places365→CUB using
ﬁne-tuning. The gain over ﬁne-tuning was unexpected
and indicates that preserving outputs on the old task is
an effective regularizer. (See Section 5 for a brief discussion). This ﬁnding motivates replacing ﬁne-tuning with
LwF as the standard approach for adapting a network
to a new task.
On the old task, our method performs better than ﬁne-tuning
but often underperforms feature extraction, ﬁne-tuning FC,
and sometimes LFL. By changing shared parameters θs,
ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly degrades performance on the
task for which the original network was trained. By
jointly adapting θs and θo to generate similar outputs to
the original network on the old task, the performance
loss is greatly reduced.
Considering both tasks, Figure 7 shows that if λo is adjusted,
LwF can perform better than LFL and ﬁne-tuning FC on the
new task for the same old task performance on the ﬁrst task
pair, and perform similarly to LFL on the second. Indeed, ﬁne-tuning FC gives a performance between ﬁnetuning and feature extraction. LwF provides freedom of
changing the shared representation compared to LFL,
which may have boosted the new task performance.
Our method performs similarly to joint training with
AlexNet. Our method tends to slightly outperform joint
training on the new task but underperform on the old
task, which we attribute to a different distribution in
Performance for the single new task scenario. For all tables, the difference of methods’ performance with LwF (our method) is reported to facilitate
comparison. Mean Average Precision is reported for VOC and accuracy for all others. On the new task, LwF outperforms baselines in most
scenarios, and performs comparably with joint training, which uses old task training data we consider unavailable for the other methods. On the old
task, our method greatly outperforms ﬁne-tuning and achieves slightly worse performance than joint training. An exception is the ImageNet-MNIST
task where LwF does not perform well on the old task.
(a) Using AlexNet structure (validation performance for ImageNet/Places365/VOC)
ImageNet→VOC
ImageNet→CUB
ImageNet→Scenes
Places365→VOC
Places365→CUB
Places365→Scenes
ImageNet→MNIST
LwF (ours)
Fine-tuning
Fine-tune FC
Feat. Extraction
Joint Training
(b) Test set performance
Places365→VOC
LwF (ours)
Fine-tuning
Feat. Extraction
Joint Training
(c) Using VGGnet structure
ImageNet→CUB
ImageNet→Scenes
LwF (ours)
Fine-tuning
Fine-tune FC
Feat. Extraction
Joint Training
the two task datasets. Overall, the methods perform
similarly, a positive result since our method does not
require access to the old task training data and is faster
to train. Note that sometimes both tasks’ performance
degrade with λo too large or too small. We suspect that
making it too large essentially increases the old task
learning rate, potentially making it suboptimal, and
making it too small lessens the regularization.
Dissimilar new tasks degrade old task performance more.
dissimilar
Places365 , and adapting the network to CUB leads
to a Places365 accuracy loss of 8.4% (3.8% + 4.6%) for
ﬁne-tuning, 3.8% for LwF, and 1.5% (3.8% −2.3%)
for joint training. In these cases, learning the new
task causes considerable drift in the shared parameters,
which cannot fully be accounted for by LwF because
the distribution of CUB and Places365 images is very
different. Even joint training leads to more accuracy loss
on the old task because it cannot ﬁnd a set of shared
parameters that works well for both tasks. Our method
does not outperform ﬁne-tuning for Places365→CUB
and, as expected, ImageNet→MNIST on the new task,
since the hand-written characters provide poor indirect
supervision for the old task. The old task accuracy
drops substantially with ﬁne-tuning and LwF, though
more with ﬁne-tuning.
Similar observations hold for both VGG and AlexNet structures, except that joint training outperforms consistently for
VGG, and LwF performs worse than before on the old task.
(Table 1(c)) This indicates that these results are likely to
hold for other network structures as well, though joint
training may have a larger beneﬁt on networks with
more representational power. Among these results, LFL
diverges using stochastic gradient descent, so we tuned
down the learning rate (0.5×) and used λi = 0.2
Multiple new task scenario. Second, we compare different methods when we cumulatively add new tasks to the
system, simulating a scenario in which new object or scene
categories are gradually added to the prediction vocabulary.
We experiment on gradually adding VOC task to AlexNet
trained on Places365, and adding Scene task to AlexNet
trained on ImageNet. These pairs have moderate difference
between original task and new tasks. We split the new task
classes into three parts according to their similarity – VOC
into transport, animals and objects, and Scenes into large
rooms, medium rooms and small rooms. (See supplemental
material) The images in Scenes are split into these three
subsets. Since VOC is a multilabel dataset, it is not possible
to split the images into different categories, so the labels
are split for each task and images are shared among all the
Each time a new task is added, the responses of all other
tasks Yo are re-computed, to emulate the situation where
data for all original tasks are unavailable. Therefore, Yo for
older tasks changes each time. For feature extractor and joint
training, cumulative training does not apply, so we only
report their performance on the ﬁnal stage where all tasks
are added. Figure 4 shows the results on both dataset pairs.
Our ﬁndings are usually consistent with the single new task
experiment: LwF outperforms ﬁne-tuning, feature extraction,
LFL, and ﬁne-tuning FC for most newly added tasks. However,
LwF performs similarly to joint training only on newly added
tasks (except for Scenes part 1), and underperforms joint training
on the old task after more tasks are added.
Inﬂuence of dataset size. We inspect whether the size of the
new task dataset affects our performance relative to other
methods. We perform this experiment on adding CUB to
(a) Places365→VOC
(b) ImageNet→Scenes
fine-tuning
joint training
feat. extraction
LwF (ours)
fine-tune FC
Fig. 4. Performance of each task when gradually adding new tasks to a pre-trained network. Different tasks are shown in different sub-graphs.
The x-axis labels indicate the new task added to the network each time. Error bars shows ±2 standard deviations for 3 runs with different θn
random initializations. Markers are jittered horizontally for visualization, but line plots are not jittered to facilitate comparison. For all tasks, our
method degrades slower over time than ﬁne-tuning and outperforms feature extraction in most scenarios. For Places2→VOC, our method performs
comparably to joint training.
(a) CUB accuracy (new)
(b) ImageNet accuracy (old)
fine-tuning
joint training
feat. extraction
LwF (ours)
fine-tune FC
Fig. 5. Inﬂuence of subsampling new task training set on compared methods. The x-axis indicates diminishing training set size. Three runs of our
experiments with different random θn initialization and dataset subsampling are shown. Scatter points are jittered horizontally for visualization, but
line plots are not jittered to facilitate comparison. Differences between LwF and compared methods on both the old task and the new task decrease
with less data, but the observations remain the same. LwF outperforms ﬁne-tuning despite the change in training set size.
ImageNet AlexNet. We subsample the CUB dataset to 30%,
10% and 3% when training the network, and report the result on the entire validation set. Note that for joint training,
since each dataset has a different size, the same number
of images are subsampled to train both tasks (resampled
each epoch), which means a smaller number of ImageNet
images being used at one time. Our results are shown
in Figure 5. Results show that the same observations hold.
Our method outperforms ﬁne-tuning on both tasks. Differences
between methods tend to increase with more data used, although
the correlation is not deﬁnitive.
Design choices and alternatives
Choice of task-speciﬁc layers. It is possible to regard more
layers as task-speciﬁc θo, θn (see Figure 6(a)) instead of
regarding only the output nodes as task-speciﬁc. This may
provide advantage for both tasks because later layers tend
to be more task speciﬁc . However, doing so requires
more storage, as most parameters in AlexNet are in the ﬁrst
two fully connected layers. Table 2(a) shows the comparison
on three task pairs. Our results do not indicate any advantage
to having additional task-speciﬁc layers.
Network expansion. We explore another way of modifying the network structure, which we refer to as “network
(a) More task-specific layers
(b) Network Expansion
rand init + train
Net2Net weights
0-init’d weights
new task label
recorded old
tasks’ response
Fig. 6. Illustration for alternative network modiﬁcation methods. In (a), more fully connected layers are task-speciﬁc, rather than shared. In (b),
nodes for multiple old tasks (not shown) are connected in the same way. LwF can also be applied to Network Expansion by unfreezing all nodes
and matching output responses on the old tasks.
Performance of our method versus various alternative design choices. In most cases, these alternative choices do not provide consistent
advantage or disadvantage compared to our method.
(a) Changing the number of task-speciﬁc layers, using network expansion, or attempting to lower θs’s
learning rate when ﬁne-tuning.
ImageNet→CUB
ImageNet→Scenes
Places365→VOC
LwF at output layer (ours)
last hidden layer
2nd last hidden (Fig. 6(a))
network expansion
network expansion + LwF
ﬁne-tuning (10% θs learning rate)
(b) Performing LwF and ﬁne-tuning with and without warmup. The warmup step is not crucial
for LwF, but is essential for ﬁne-tuning’s old task performance.
ImageNet→CUB
ImageNet→Scenes
Places365→VOC
ﬁne-tuning
LwF (no warm-up)
ﬁne-tuning (no warm-up)
LFL (no warm-up)
expansion”, which adds nodes to some layers. This allows
for extra new-task-speciﬁc information in the earlier layers
while still using the original network’s information.
Figure 6(b) illustrates this method. We add 1024 nodes
to each layer of the top 3 layers. The weights from all nodes
at previous layer to the new nodes at current layer are
initialized the same way Net2Net would expand a layer
by copying nodes. Weights from new nodes at previous
layer to the original nodes at current layer are initialized to
zero. The top layer weights of the new nodes are randomly
re-initialized. Then we either freeze the existing weights
and ﬁne-tune the new weights on the new task (“network
expansion”), or train using Learning without Forgetting as
before (“network expansion + LwF”). Note that both methods needs the network to scale quadratically with respect to
the number of new tasks.
Table 2(a) shows the comparison with our original
method. Network expansion by itself performs better than feature
extraction, but not as well as LwF on the new task. Network
Expansion + LwF performs similarly to LwF with additional
computational cost and complexity.
Effect of lower learning rate of shared parameters. We
investigate whether simply lowering the learning rate of
the shared parameters θs would preserve the original task
performance. The result is shown in Table 2(a). A reduced
learning rate does not prevent ﬁne-tuning from signiﬁcantly
reducing original task performance, and it reduces new task
performance. This shows that simply reducing the learning rate
of shared layers is insufﬁcient for original task preservation.
L2 soft-constrained weights. Perhaps an obvious alternative to LwF is to keep the network parameters (instead of the
response) close to the original. We compare with the baseline
that adds 1
2λo∥w −w0∥2 to the loss for ﬁne-tuning, where
w and w0 are ﬂattened vectors of all shared parameters θs
and their original values. We change the coefﬁcient λo and
observe its effect on the performance. λo is set to 0.15, 0.5,
1.5, 2.5 for Places365→VOC, and 0.005, 0.015, 0.05, 0.15, 0.25
for ImageNet→Scene.
As shown in Figure 7, our method outperforms this baseline,
which produces a result between feature extraction (no parameter
Old task performance
New task performance
(a) Places365→VOC
Old task performance
New task performance
(b) ImageNet→Scene
Fine-tuning
Joint Training
Feat. Extraction
LwF (ours)
Fine-tune FC
L2 soft constraint
Old task performance
New task performance
(c) Places365→VOC
Old task performance
New task performance
(d) ImageNet→Scene
Fine-tuning
Feat. Extraction
LwF (ours)
LwF (cross-entropy)
LwF (L1 loss)
LwF (L2 loss)
Fig. 7. Visualization of both new and old task performance for compared methods, some with different weights of losses. (a)(b): comparing methods;
(c)(d): comparing losses. Larger symbols signiﬁes larger λo, i.e. heavier weight towards response-preserving loss.
change) and ﬁne-tuning (free parameter change). We believe that
by regularizing the output, our method maintains old task
performance better than regularizing individual parameters, since many small parameter changes could cause big
changes in the outputs.
Choice of response preserving loss. We compare the use of
L1, L2, cross-entropy loss, and knowledge distillation loss
with T = 2 for keeping y′
o similar. We test on the same
task pairs as before. Figure 7 shows our results. Results indicate our knowledge distillation loss slightly outperforms compared
losses, although the advantage is not large.
DISCUSSION
We address the problem of adapting a vision system to a
new task while preserving performance on original tasks,
without access to training data for the original tasks. We
propose the Learning without Forgetting method for convolutional neural networks, which can be seen as a hybrid of
knowledge distillation and ﬁne-tuning, learning parameters
that are discriminative for the new task while preserving
outputs for the original tasks on the training data. We show
the effectiveness of our method on a number of classiﬁcation
As another use-case example, we investigate using LwF
in the application of tracking in Appendix A. We build on
MD-Net , which views tracking as a template classiﬁcation task. A classiﬁer transferred from training videos is ﬁnetuned online to classify regions as the object or background.
We propose to replace the ﬁne-tuning step with Learning
without Forgetting. We leave the details and implementation to the appendix. We observe some improvements by
applying LwF, but the difference is not statistically signiﬁcant.
Our work has implications for two uses. First, if we want
to expand the set of possible predictions on an existing
network, our method performs similarly to joint training
but is faster to train and does not require access to the
training data for previous tasks. Second, if we care only
about the performance for the new task, our method often
outperforms the current standard practice of ﬁne-tuning.
Fine-tuning approaches use a low learning rate in hopes that
the parameters will settle in a “good” local minimum not too
far from the original values. Preserving outputs on the old
task is a more direct and interpretable way to to retain the
important shared structures learned for the previous tasks.
We see several directions for future work. We have
demonstrated the effectiveness of LwF for image classi-
ﬁcation and one experiment on tracking, but would like
to further experiment on semantic segmentation, detection,
and problems outside of computer vision. Additionally, one
could explore variants of the approach, such as maintaining
a set of unlabeled images to serve as representative examples for previously learned tasks. Theoretically, it would be
interesting to bound the old task performance based on
preserving outputs for a sample drawn from a different
distribution. More generally, there is a need for approaches
that are suitable for online learning across different tasks,
especially when classes have heavy tailed distributions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by NSF Awards 14-46765 and
10-53768 and ONR MURI N000014-16-1-2007.