Deep Multimodal Representation Learning from Temporal Data
Xitong Yang∗1, Palghat Ramesh2, Radha Chitta∗3, Sriganesh Madhvanath∗3,
Edgar A. Bernal∗4 and Jiebo Luo5
1University of Maryland, College Park
3Conduent Labs US
4United Technologies Research Center
5University of Rochester
 ,
 ,
3{Radha.Chitta,
Sriganesh.Madhvanath}@conduent.com,
 ,
 
In recent years, Deep Learning has been successfully
applied to multimodal learning problems, with the aim of
learning useful joint representations in data fusion applications. When the available modalities consist of time series
data such as video, audio and sensor signals, it becomes
imperative to consider their temporal structure during the
fusion process. In this paper, we propose the Correlational
Recurrent Neural Network (CorrRNN), a novel temporal
fusion model for fusing multiple input modalities that are
inherently temporal in nature. Key features of our proposed
model include: (i) simultaneous learning of the joint representation and temporal dependencies between modalities,
(ii) use of multiple loss terms in the objective function, including a maximum correlation loss term to enhance learning of cross-modal information, and (iii) the use of an attention model to dynamically adjust the contribution of different input modalities to the joint representation. We validate our model via experimentation on two different tasks:
video- and sensor-based activity classiﬁcation, and audiovisual speech recognition. We empirically analyze the contributions of different components of the proposed CorrRNN
model, and demonstrate its robustness, effectiveness and
state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets.
1. Introduction
Automated decision-making in a wide range of realworld scenarios often involves acquisition and analysis of
data from multiple sources. For instance, human activity
may be more robustly monitored using a combination of
video cameras and wearable motion sensors than with either
∗Work carried out while at PARC, a Xerox Company
Figure 1. Different multimodal learning tasks. (a) Non-temporal
model for non-temporal data . (b) Non-temporal model for
temporal data .
(c) Proposed CorrRNN model: temporal
model for temporal data.
sensing modality by itself. When analyzing spontaneous
socio-emotional behaviors, researchers can use multimodal
cues from video, audio and physiological sensors such as
electro-cardiograms (ECG) . However, fusing information from different modalities is usually nontrivial due to
the distinct statistical properties and highly non-linear relationships between low-level features of the modalities.
Prior work has shown that multimodal learning often provides better performance on tasks such as retrieval, classiﬁcation and description . When the modalities
being fused are temporal in nature, it becomes desirable to
design a model for temporal multimodal learning (TML)
that can simultaneously fuse the information from different
sources, and capture temporal structure within the data.
In the past ﬁve years, several deep learning based approaches have been proposed for TML, in particular, for
audio-visual data.
Early models proposed for audioviarXiv:1704.03152v1 [cs.CV] 11 Apr 2017
sual speech recognition (AVSR) were based on the use
of non-temporal models such as deep multimodal autoencoders or deep Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM)
 applied to concatenated data across a number of
consecutive frames. More recent models have attempted
to model the inherently sequential nature of temporal data,
e.g., Conditional RBMs , Recurrent Temporal Multimodal RBMs (RTMRBM) for AVSR, and Multimodal
Long-Short-Term Memory networks for speaker identiﬁcation .
We believe that a good model for TML should simultaneously learn a joint representation of the multimodal input,
and the temporal structure within the data. Moreover, the
model should be able to dynamically weigh different input
modalities to enable emphasis on the more useful signal(s)
and to provide robustness to noise, a known weakness of
AVSR . Third, the model should be able to generalize to
different kinds of multimodal temporal data, not just audiovisual data. Finally, the model should be tractable and efﬁcient to train. In this paper, we introduce the Correlational
Recurrent Neural Network (CorrRNN), a novel unsupervised model that satisﬁes the above desiderata.
An interesting characteristic of multimodal temporal
data from many application scenarios is that the differences
across modalities stem largely from the use of different
sensors such as video cameras, motion sensors and audio
recorders, to capture the same temporal phenomenon. In
other words, modalities in multimodal temporal data are often different representations of the same phenomena, which
is usually not the case with other multimodal data such as
images and text, which are related because of their shared
high-level semantics. Motivated by this observation, our
CorrRNN attempts to explicitly capture the correlation between modalities through maximizing a correlation-based
loss function, as well as minimizing a reconstruction-based
loss for retaining information.
This observation regarding correlated inputs has motivated previous work in multi-view representation learning
using the Deep Canonically Correlated Autoencoder (DC-
CAE) and Correlational Neural Network .
model extends this work in two important ways.
an RNN-based encoder-decoder framework that uses Gated
Recurrent Units (GRU) is introduced to capture the temporal structure, as well as long-term dependencies and correlation across modalities. Second, dynamic weighting is
used while encoding input sequences to assign different
weights to input modes based on their contribution to the
fused representation.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel generic model for temporal multimodal learning that combines an Encoder-Decoder
RNN framework with Multimodal GRUs, a multiaspect learning objective, and a dynamic weighting
mechanism;
• We show empirically that our model outperforms stateof-the-art methods on two different application tasks:
video- and sensor-based activity classiﬁcation and
audio-visual speech recognition; and
• Our proposed approach is more tractable and efﬁcient
to train compared with RTMRBM and other probabilistic models designed for TML.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Sec. 2, we review the related work on multimodal learning.
We describe the proposed CorrRNN model in Sec. 3. Sec. 4
introduces the two application tasks and datasets used in our
experiments. In Secs. 4.1 and 4.2, we present empirical results demonstrating the robustness and effectiveness of the
proposed model. The ﬁnal section presents conclusions and
future research directions.
2. Related work
In this section, we brieﬂy review some related work on
deep-learning-based multimodal learning and temporal data
fusion. Generally speaking, and from the standpoint of dynamicity, fusion frameworks can be classiﬁed based on the
type of data they support (e.g., temporal vs. non-temporal
data) and the type of model used to fuse the data (e.g., temporal vs. non-temporal model) as illustrated in Fig. 1.
2.1. Multimodal Deep Learning
Within the context of data fusion applications, deep
learning methods have been shown to be able to bridge the
gap between different modalities and produce useful joint
representations .
Generally speaking, two main
approaches have been used for deep-learning-based multimodal fusion. The ﬁrst approach is based on common
representation learning, which learns a joint representation
from the input modalities. The second approach is based
on Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) , which learns
separate representations for the input modalities while maximizing their correlation.
An example of the ﬁrst approach, the Multimodal Deep
Autoencoder (MDAE) model , is capable of learning a
joint representation that is predictive of either input modality.
This is achieved by performing simultaneous selfreconstruction (within a modality) and cross-reconstruction
(across modalities). Srivastava et al. propose to learn a
joint density model over the space of multimodal inputs using Multimodal Deep Boltzmann Machines (MDBM). Once
trained, it is able to infer a missing modality through Gibbs
sampling and obtain a joint representation even in the absence of some modalities. This model has been used to
build a practical AVSR system . Sohn et al. propose a new learning objective to improve multimodal learning, and explicitly train their model to reason about missing
modalities by minimizing the variation of information.
CCA-based methods, on the other hand, aim to learn separate features for the different modalities such that the correlation between them is mutually maximized. They are
commonly used in multi-view learning tasks. In order to
improve the ﬂexibility of CCA, Deep CCA (DCCA) 
was proposed to learn nonlinear projections using deep networks. Weirang et al. extended this work by combining DCCA with the multimodal deep autoencoder learning
objective . The Correlational Neural Network model 
is similar in that it integrates two types of learning objectives into a single model to learn a common representation.
However, instead of optimizing the objective function under
the hard CCA constraints, it only maximizes the empirical
correlation of the learned projections.
2.2. Temporal Models for Multimodal Learning
In contrast to multimodal learning using non-temporal
models, there is little literature on fusing temporal data
using temporal models. Amer et al. proposed a hybrid model for fusing audio-visual data in which a Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machines (CRBM) is used to
model short-term multimodal phenomena and a discriminative Conditional Random Field (CRF) is used to enhance
the model. In more recent work , the Recurrent Temporal Multimodal RBM was proposed which learns joint
representations and temporal structures. The model yields
state-of-the-art performance on the ASVR datasets AVLetters and AVLetters2. A supervised multimodal LSTM was
proposed in for speaker identiﬁcation using face and
audio sequences. The method was shown to be robust to
both distractors and image degradation by modeling longterm dependencies over multimodal high-level features.
3. Proposed Model
In this section, we describe the proposed CorrRNN
model. We start by formulating the temporal multimodal
learning problem mathematically. For simplicity, and without loss of generality, we consider the problem of fusing two
modalities X and Y ; it should be noted, however, that the
model seamlessly extends to more than two modalities. We
then present an overview of the model architecture, which
consists of two components: the multimodal encoder and
the multimodal decoder. We describe the multimodal encoder, which extracts the joint data representation, in Sec.
3.3, and the multimodal decoder, which attempts to reconstruct the individual modalities from the joint representation
in Sec. 3.4.
3.1. Temporal Multimodal Learning
Let us denote the two temporal modalities as sequences
of length T, namely X
2 , ..., xm
T ) and Y =
Multimodal Encoder
Multimodal Decoder
Figure 2. Basic architecture of the proposed model
2 , ..., yn
T ), where xm
t denotes the m dimensional feature of modality X at time t. For simplicity, we omit the
superscripts m and n in most of the following discussion.
In order to achieve temporal multimodal learning, we
fuse the two modalities at time t by considering both their
current state and history.
Speciﬁcally, at time t we append the recent per-modality history to the current samples xt and yt to obtain extended representations ˜xt =
{xt−l, ..., xt−1, xt} and ˜yt = {yt−l, ..., yt−1, yt}, where l
denotes the scope of the history taken into account. Given
pairs of multimodal data sequences {( ˜xi, ˜yi)}N
i=1, our goal
is to train a feature learning model M that learns a ddimensional joint representation
i=1 which simultaneously fuses information from both modalities and captures
underlying temporal structures.
3.2. Model Overview
We ﬁrst describe the basic model architecture, as shown
in Fig. 2.
We implement an Encoder-Decoder framework, which enables sequence-to-sequence learning 
and learning of sequence representations in an unsupervised
fashion . Speciﬁcally, our model consists of two recurrent neural nets: the multimodal encoder and the multimodal decoder. The multimodal encoder is trained to map
the two input sequences into a joint representation, i.e., a
common space. The multimodal decoder attempts to reconstruct two input sequences from the joint representation
obtained by the encoder. During the training process, the
model learns a joint representation that retains as much information as possible from both modalities.
In our model, both the encoder and decoder are two-layer
networks. The multimodal inputs are ﬁrst mapped to separate hidden layers before being fed to a common layer called
the fusion layer. Similarly, the joint representation is ﬁrst
decoded to separate hidden layers before reconstruction of
the multimodal inputs takes place.
The standard Encoder-Decoder framework relies on the
Joint Representation
Modality Y
Modality X
Figure 3. The structure of the multimodal encoder. It includes three modules: Dynamic Weighting module (DW), GRU module (GRU) and
Correlation module (Corr).
(reconstruction) loss function only in the decoder. As mentioned in Section 1, in order to obtain a better joint representation for temporal multimodal learning, we introduce two
important components into the multimodal encoder, one
that explicitly captures the correlation between the modalities, and another that performs dynamic weighting across
modality representations. We also consider different types
of reconstruction losses to enhance the capture of information within and between modalities.
Once the model is trained using a pair of multimodal inputs, the multimodal encoder plays the role of a feature extractor. Speciﬁcally, the activations of the fusion layer in
the encoder at the last time step is output as the sequence
feature representation. Two types of feature representation
may be obtained depending on the model inputs: if both
input modalities are present, we obtain their joint representation; on the other hand, if only one of the modalities is
present, we obtain an “enhanced” unimodal representation.
The model may be extended to more than two modalities
by maximizing the sum of correlations between all pairs of
modalities. This can be implemented by adding more correlation modules to the multimodal encoder.
3.3. Multimodal Encoder
The multimodal encoder is designed to fuse the input
modality sequences into a common representation such that
a coherent input is given greater importance, and the correlation between the inputs is maximized. Accordingly, three
main modules are used by the multimodal encoder at each
time step.
• Dynamic Weighting module (DW): Dynamically assigns weights to the two modalities by evaluating the
coherence of the incoming signal with recent past history.
• GRU module (GRU): Fuses the input modalities to
generate the fused representation. The module also
captures the temporal structure of the sequence using
forget and update gates.
• Correlation module (Corr):
Takes the intermediate
states generated by the GRU module as inputs to compute the correlation-based loss.
The structure of the multimodal encoder and the relationships among the three modules are illustrated in Fig. 3. We
now describe the implementation of these modules in detail.
The Dynamic Weighting module assigns a weight to
each modality input at a given time step according to an
evaluation of its coherence over time. With reference to recent work on attention models , our approach may be
characterized as a soft attention mechanism that enables the
model to focus on the modality with the more useful signal when, for example, the other is corrupted with noise.
The dynamic weights assigned to the input modalities are
based on the agreement between their current input and the
fused data representation from the previous time step. This
is based on the intuition that an input corrupted by noise
would be less in agreement with the fused representation
from the previous time step when compared with a “clean”
input. We use bilinear functions to evaluate the coherence
t of the two modalities, namely:
t = xtA1hT
t = ytA2hT
where A1 ∈Rm×d, A2 ∈Rn×d are parameters learned
during the training of the module.
The weights of the
two modalities is obtained by normalizing the scores using
Laplace smoothing:
1 + exp(αi
t ), i = 1, 2
(a) Unimodal GRU
(b) Multimodal GRU
Figure 4. Block diagram illustrations of unimodal and multimodal
GRU modules.
The GRU module (see Fig. 4(b)) is a multimodal extension of the standard GRU (see Fig. 4(a)), and contains
different gating units that modulate the ﬂow of information
inside the module. The GRU module takes xt and yt as input at time step t and keeps track of three quantities, namely
the fused representation ht, and modality-speciﬁc representations h1
t. The fused representation ht constitutes a single representation of historical multimodal input that propagates along the time axis to maintain a consistent concept
and learn its temporal structure. The modality-speciﬁc representations h1
t may be thought of as projections of the
modality inputs which are maintained so that a measure of
their correlation can be computed. The computation within
this module may be formally expressed as follows:
t + Urht−1 + bi
t + Uzht−1 + bi
t ⊙ht−1) + bi
+ Uh(rt ⊙ht−1)
t = (1 −zi
t) ⊙ht−1 + zi
ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙˜ht
where σ is the logistic sigmoid function and ϕ is the hyperbolic tangent function, r and z are the input to the reset
and update gates, and h and ˜h represent the activation and
candidate activation, respectively, of the standard GRU .
Note that our model uses separate weights for the different inputs X and Y , which differs from the approach
proposed in .
However, as we enforce an explicit
correlation-based loss term in the fusing process, our model
in principle can capture both the correlation across modalities, and speciﬁc aspects of each modality.
The Correlation module computes the correlation between the projections of the modality inputs h1
t obtained from the GRU module. Formally, given N mappings
of two modalities H1
i=1 and H2
time t, the correlation is calculated as follows:
denote the correlation-based loss function as Lcorr
t ) and maximize the correlation between two
modalities by maximizing this function. In practice, the empirical correlation is computed within a mini-batch of size
3.4. Multimodal Decoder
The multimodal decoder attempts to reconstruct the individual modality input sequences X and Y simultaneously,
from the joint representation ht computed by the multimodal encoder described above. By minimizing the reconstruction loss at training, the resulting joint representation
retains as much information as possible from both modalities. In order to better share information across the modalities, we introduce two additional reconstruction loss terms
into the multimodal decoder: cross-reconstruction and selfreconstruction. These two terms not only beneﬁt the joint
representation, but also improve the performance of the
model in cases when only one of the modalities is present,
as shown in Section 4.1. In all, our multimodal decoder
includes three reconstruction losses:
• Fused-reconstruction loss. The error in reconstructing ˜xi and ˜yi from joint representation ˜hi = f( ˜xi, ˜yi).
Lfused = L(g(f( ˜xi, ˜yi)), ˜xi) + βL(g(f( ˜xi, ˜yi), ˜yi)
• Self-reconstruction loss. The error in reconstructing
˜xi from ˜xi, and ˜yi from ˜yi.
Lself = L(g(f( ˜xi)), ˜xi) + βL(g(f( ˜yi), ˜yi)
• Cross-reconstruction loss. The error in reconstructing ˜xi from ˜yi, and ˜yi from ˜xi.
Lcross = L(g(f( ˜yi), ˜xi) + βL(g(f( ˜xi)), ˜yi)
where β is a hyperparameter used to balance the relative
scale of the loss function values of the two input modalities, and f, g denote the functional mappings implemented
by the multimodal encoder and decoder, respectively. The
objective function used to train our model may thus be expressed as:
(Lfused + Lcross + Lself) −λLcorr
where λ is a hyperparameter used to scale the contribution
of the correlation loss term, and N is the mini-batch size
used in the training stage. The objective function thus combines different forms of reconstruction losses computed by
the decoder, with the correlation loss computed as part of
the encoding process. We use a stochastic gradient descent
algorithm with an adaptive learning rate to optimize the objective function above.
4. Empirical Analysis
In the following sections, we describe experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of CorrRNN at modeling temporal multimodal data. We demonstrate its general applicability to multimodal learning problems by evaluating it
on multiple datasets, covering two different types of multimodal data (video-sensor and audio-video) and two different application tasks (activity classiﬁcation and audiovisual speech recognition). We also evaluate our model in
three multimodal learning settings for each task. We
review these settings in Table 1.
Supervised
Multimodal
Cross Modality
Shared Represe-
ntation Learning
Table 1. Multimodal Learning settings, where X and Y are different input modalities
For each application task and dataset, the CorrRNN
model is ﬁrst trained in an unsupervised manner using both
the input modalities and the composite loss function described. The trained model is then used to extract the fused
representation and the modality-speciﬁc representations of
the data. Each of the multimodal learning settings is then
implemented as a supervised classiﬁcation task using a classiﬁer, either an SVM or a logistic-regression classiﬁer (in
order to maintain consistency, the choice of classiﬁer depends on the method involved in the benchmarking implemented).
4.1. Experiments on Video-Sensor Data
In this section, we apply the CorrRNN model to the task
of human activity classiﬁcation. For this purpose, we use
the ISI dataset , a multimodal dataset in which 11
subjects perform seven actions related to an insulin selfinjection activity.
The dataset includes egocentric video
data acquired using a Google Glass wearable camera, and
motion data acquired using an Invensense motion wrist sensor. Each subject’s video and motion data is manually labeled and segmented into seven videos corresponding to the
seven actions in the self-injection procedure. Each of these
videos are further segmented into short video clips of ﬁxed
Implementation Details
We ﬁrst temporally synchronize the video and motion sensor data with the same sampling rate of 30 fps. We compute
a 1024-dimensional CNN feature representation for each
video frame using GoogLeNet . Raw motion sensor signals are smoothed by applying an averaging ﬁlter of width
4. Sensor features are obtained by computing the output
of the last convolutional layer (layer 5) of a Deep Convolutional and LSTM (DCL) Network pre-trained on the
OPPORTUNITY dataset to the smoothed sensor data
input. The extracted features are a temporal sequence of
448-dimensional elements.
We build sequences from the video and sensor data, using a sliding window of 8 frames with a stride of 2, sampled from a duration of 2 seconds, resulting in 13, 456 sequences. These video and motion sequences are used to
train the CorrRNN model, using stochastic gradient descent
with the mini-batch size set to 256. The values of β and λ
were set to 1 and 0.1, respectively; these values were optimized using grid search methods.
Figure 5 shows the activity recognition accuracy of the proposed CorrRNN model. We evaluate the contribution of
each component in our model under the various multimodal
learning settings listed in Table 1. In order to understand the
contribution of different aspects of the CorrRNN design, we
also evaluate different model conﬁgurations summarized in
Table 2. The baseline results are obtained by ﬁrst training a
single layer GRU recurrent neural network with 512 hidden
units, separately for each modality. The 512-dimensional
Description
Single-layer GRU RNN per modality
Objective uses only Lfused term
Objective uses Lfused & Lself
Objective uses Lfused & Lcross
Objective uses Lfused,Lself & Lcross
Objective uses all loss terms
Objective uses all loss terms & dyn. weights
Table 2. CorrRNN model conﬁgurations evaluated
Figure 5. Classiﬁcation accuracy on the ISI dataset for different
model conﬁgurations
hidden layer representations obtained from each network
are then reduced to 256 dimensions using PCA, and concatenated to obtain a 512-dimensional fused representation.
We observe that the fused representation obtained using
CorrRNN signiﬁcantly improves over this baseline fused
representation.
Each loss component contributes to better performance,
especially in the settings of cross-modality learning and
shared representation learning. Performance in the presence
of poor ﬁdelity or noisy modality (for instance, the motion
sensor modality) is boosted by the inclusion of the other
modality, due to the cross reconstruction loss component.
Inclusion of the correlation loss and dynamic weighting further improves the accuracy.
In Table 3, we compare the correlation between the projections of the modality inputs for different model conﬁgurations. This measure of correlation is computed as the
mean encoder loss over the training data in the ﬁnal training epoch, divided by the number of hidden units in the fusion layer. These values demonstrate that the use of the
correlation-based loss term maximizes the correlation between the two projections, leading to a richer joint and
shared representations.
4.2. Experiments on Audio-Video Data
The task of audio-visual speech classiﬁcation using multimodal deep learning has been well studied in the literature . In this section, we focus on comparing the
Conﬁguration
Correlation
Table 3. Normalized correlation for different model conﬁgurations
performance of the proposed model with other published
methods on the AVLetters and CUAVE datasets:
• AVLetters includes audio and video of 10 speakers uttering the English alphabet three times each. We
use the videos corresponding to the ﬁrst two times for
training (520 videos) and the third time for testing (260
This dataset provides pre-extracted lip regions scaled to 60 × 80 pixels for each video frame
and 26-dimensional Mel-Frequency Cepstrum Coefﬁcient (MFCC) features for the audio.
• CUAVE consists of videos of 36 speakers pronouncing the digits 0-9. Following the protocol in ,
we use the ﬁrst part of each video, containing the
frontal facing speakers pronouncing each digit 5 times.
The even-numbered speakers are used for training,
and the odd-numbered speakers are used for testing.
The training dataset contains 890 videos and the test
data contains 899 videos. We pre-processed the video
frames to extract only the region of interest containing
the mouth, and rescaled each image to 60 × 60 pixels.
The audio is represented using 26-dimensional MFCC
Implementation Details
We reduced the dimensionality of the video features of both
the datasets to 100 using PCA whitening, and concatenated
the features representing every 3 consecutive audio samples, in order to align the audio and the video data. In order
to train the CorrRNN model, we generated sequences with
length 8 using a stride of 2. Training was performed using
stochastic gradient descent with the size of the mini-batch
set to 32. The number of hidden units in the hidden layers
was set to 512. After training the model in an unsupervised
manner, the joint representation generated by CorrRNN is
treated as the fused feature. Similar to , we ﬁrst break
down the fused features of each speaking example into one
and three equal slices and perform mean-pooling over each
slice. The mean-pooled features for each slice are then concatenated and used to train a linear SVM classiﬁer in a supervised manner.
Table 4 showcases the classiﬁcation performance of the proposed CorrRNN model using the Corr-DW conﬁguration on
the AVLetters and the CUAVE datasets. The fused representation of the audio-video data generated using the CorrRNN model is used to train and test an SVM classiﬁer.
We observe that the CorrRNN representation leads to more
accurate classiﬁcation than the representation generated by
non-temporal models such as Multimodal deep autoencoder
(MDAE), multimodal deep belief networks (MDBN), and
the multimodal deep Boltzmann machines (MDBM). This
is because the CorrRNN model is able to learn the temporal dependencies between the two modalities. CorrRNN
also outperforms conditional RBM (CRBM), and RTM-
RBM models due to the incorporation of the correlational
loss and the dynamic weighting mechanism.
The CorrRNN model also produces rich representations
for each modality, as demonstrated in the cross-modality
and shared representation learning experimental results in
Table 5. Indeed, there is a signiﬁcant improvement in accuracy from using CorrRNN features relative to the scenarios where only the raw features for both audio and video
modalities are used, and this improvement holds for both
the datasets. For instance, the accuracy improves by more
than two times on the CUAVE dataset by learning the video
features with both audio and video, compared to learning
only with the video features.
In the shared representation learning experiments, we learn the feature representation using both the audio and video modalities, but the
supervised training and testing are performed using different modalities. The results show that the CorrRNN model
captures the correlation between the modalities very well.
In order to evaluate the robustness of the CorrRNN
model to noise, we added white Gaussian noise at 0dB SNR
to the original audio signal in the CUAVE dataset.
Unlike prior models whose performance degrades signiﬁcantly
(12 −20%) due to presence of noise , there is only a minor decrease of about 5% in the accuracy of the CorrRNN
model, as shown in Table 6. This may be ascribed to the
richness of the cross-modal information embedded in the
fused representation learned by CorrRNN.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed CorrRNN, a new model
for multimodal fusion of temporal inputs such as audio,
video and sensor data. The model, based on an Encoder-
Decoder framework, learns joint representations of the multimodal input by exploiting correlations across modalities.
The model is trained in an unsupervised manner (i.e., by
minimizing an input-output reconstruction loss term and
maximizing a cross-modality-based correlation term) which
obviates the need for labeled data, and incorporates GRUs
RTMRBM 
Table 4. Classiﬁcation performance for audio-visual speech recognition on the AVLetters and CUAVE datasets, compared to the best
published results in literature, using the fused representation of the
two modalities.
Table 5. Classiﬁcation accuracy for the cross-modality and shared
representation learning settings. MDAE results from .
Clean Audio
Noisy Audio
MDAE + Audio RBM
Table 6. Classiﬁcation accuracy for audio-visual speech recognition on the CUAVE dataset, under clean and noisy audio conditions. White Gaussian noise is added to the audio signal at 0dB
SNR. Baseline results from .
to capture long-term dependencies and temporal structure in
the input. We also introduced a dynamic weighting mechanism that allows the encoder to dynamically modify the
contribution of each modality to the feature representation
being computed. We have demonstrated that the CorrRNN
model achieves state-of-the-art accuracy in a variety of temporal fusion applications. In the future, we plan to apply the
model to a wider variety of multimodal learning scenarios.
We also plan to extend the model to seamlessly ingest asynchronous inputs.