A Network Diffusion Model of Disease Progression in Dementia
Ashish Raj1,*, Amy Kuceyeski1, and Michael Weiner2
1Department of Radiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 515 E. 71 Street, Suite
S123, New York, NY 10044, USA
2Department of Radiology, University of California at San Francisco, Center for Imaging of
Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIND), SF Veterans Administration Hospital (114M), 4150 Clement
Street, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA
Patterns of dementia are known to fall into dissociated but dispersed brain networks, suggesting
that the disease is transmitted along neuronal pathways rather than by proximity. This view is
supported by neuropathological evidence for “prion-like” transsynaptic transmission of disease
agents like misfolded tau and beta amyloid. We mathematically model this transmission by a
diffusive mechanism mediated by the brain’s connectivity network obtained from tractography of
14 healthy-brain MRIs. Subsequent graph theoretic analysis provides a fully quantitative, testable,
predictive model of dementia. Specifically, we predict spatially distinct “persistent modes,” which,
we found, recapitulate known patterns of dementia and match recent reports of selectively
vulnerable dissociated brain networks. Model predictions also closely match T1-weighted MRI
volumetrics of 18 Alzheimer’s and 18 frontotemporal dementia subjects. Prevalence rates
predicted by the model strongly agree with published data. This work has many important
implications, including dimensionality reduction, differential diagnosis, and especially prediction
of future atrophy using baseline MRI morphometrics.
INTRODUCTION
Dementia is estimated to affect 25 million people worldwide, of whom 30%–70% have
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and 10% frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Neuropathological
evidence points to a neuronal/synaptic poliencephalopathy , with the
disease beginning in the gray matter with accumulation of misfolded beta amyloid and/or tau
protein and progressing along extant fiber pathways via secondary Wallerian degeneration,
disconnection, and loss of signaling, axonal reaction, and postsynaptic dendrite retraction
 . Atrophy patterns captured from longitudinal magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) via segmentation, atlasbased parcellation , and volumetric analysis indicate that progression occurs along vulnerable
© 2012 Elsevier Inc.
*Correspondence: .
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes five figures and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online
at doi:10.1016/j. neuron.2011.12.040.
Author Contributions: A.R. conceptualized this study and developed the mathematical model, performed all correlations and statistical
tests, and wrote the manuscript. He is responsible for the classification results as well as the disease prevalence results and the
corresponding model predictions. A.K. performed volumetric analysis of AD/bvFTD/aged patients and extracted the healthy-brain
structural network. She also helped fine-tune the manuscript. M.W. provided guidance, clinical input, and interpretation, MRI data for
volumetric analysis, and improvement of the manuscript. A.R. would like to thank Dr. Norman Relkin for valuable advice.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
 
Neuron. 2012 March 22; 73(6): 1204–1215. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.12.040.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
fiber pathways rather than by proximity . This view is supported by recent studies showing alterations in
brain networks due to neurodegeneration . Amyloid
deposition, metabolism, and atrophy in AD show spatially distinct involvement of the
posterior temporal heteromodal network , while the frontal (behavioral) variant of FTD (bvFTD) appears restricted to the
orbitofrontal network. These findings led to the network-degeneration view that various
dementias selectively target distinct intrinsic brain networks .
This view is strongly supported by new neuropathological evidence that numerous disease
proteins, including alpha-synuclein, beta-amyloid, and TDP-43, have the capacity to misfold
and march throughout local and then long-range circuits via transsynaptic spread . Misfolded proteins can trigger misfolding of adjacent
same-species proteins, which in turn cascade along neuronal pathways. Pathological tau
conformers can induce nonfolded tau to adopt pathological conformations . Tau misfolding could propagate from the exterior to the interior of a cell . These findings suggest a “prion-like” mechanism of transmission underlying all
dementias . However, both the network-degeneration view and
supporting pathological data are descriptive rather than explicative, qualitative rather than
model-based.
In this paper, we ask (1) what biophysical model might capture the microscopic properties of
prion-like disease progression and (2) what are its macroscopic consequences? To answer
the first question we propose a diffusive mechanism, a classic model of random dispersion
driven by concentration gradients with wide physiological applicability, for instance in
modeling neuronal apoptosis dynamics via diffusible “death factors” and neuronal transport and transsynaptic movement of neurotransmitters
 . Diffusive spread is an excellent model for any disease-causing
agent (e.g., tau, amyloid, or synuclein) whose interneuronal advance fulfills the criterion that
the rate of propagation is proportional to concentration-level differentials—see, for instance,
Hardy . In this paper, we derive the behavior of this diffusive prion-like propagation
on whole-brain structural connectivity networks, obtained from whole-brain tractography of
diffusion MRI scans.
To answer the second question, of the macroscopic consequences of prion-like diffusive
progression, we restrict this diffusive progression to follow the fiber pathways defined by
the brain connectivity network and mathematically derive the resulting macroscopic
dynamics of this progression. The main objective of this study was to determine whether the
macroscopic consequences of this kind of diffusive prion-like propagation on the wholebrain healthy network (henceforth called the “network diffusion model”) are consistent with,
or predictive of, the large-scale patterns of disease seen in various dementias. First, we show
that the network diffusion model implies the presence of “eigenmodes” representing distinct
spatial patterns that bear a strong resemblance to known patterns of various dementias.
Using statistical correlation analysis, we found strong evidence that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between the healthy network’s eigenmodes and atrophy patterns of normal
aging, AD, and bvFTD. Interestingly, these eigenmodes also recapitulate recent findings of
dissociated brain networks selectively targeted by different dementias . This may help provide a systemic
explanation for the network degeneration theory, hitherto unexplained, as a simple
consequence of network dynamics. The network diffusion model can accurately infer the
population-wide prevalence rates of various dementias and can explain, why bvFTD has
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
higher prevalence than AD in early stages, and why it subsequently becomes much less
prevalent than AD.
There is no need to invoke region-specific neuropathy, e.g., mesial temporal origin , or selective vulnerability within dissociated functional networks . This implies that all dementias, hitherto considered pathophysiologically and
etiologically distinct, might share a common progression mechanism. We demonstrate the
role of network eigenmodes as biomarkers and as highly effective basis functions for
dimensionality reduction, classification, and automated differential diagnosis. This might be
especially advantageous for heterogeneous and mixed dementia, which are poorly served by
classically described clinical phenotypes. Most important, the model provides a clear path
for predicting future atrophy in individuals starting from baseline scans.
Visual Correspondence between Eigenmodes and Dementias
Figure 1 provides an overview of the datasets and processing steps, with network analysis
using 14 healthy young subjects (left panel) and volumetric analysis of T1-weighted MRI
scans of 18 AD, 18 bvFTD, and 19 age-matched normal subjects (right panel). The t-statistic
of cortical volumes of AD and bvFTD patients, normalized by young healthy controls, are
shown in Figures 2 and 3 as wire-and-ball plots, along with the values of two eigenmodes of
the healthy network evaluated at the same brain regions. The wires denote network
connections, the size of each ball is proportional to the atrophy level in that region of interest
(ROI) (normalized by ROI size), and the color denotes lobar membership. ROIs showing
negative atrophy are considered statistical noise and are not shown. T-scores of cortical
atrophy as well as eigenmodes are shown in Figure 4 mapped on the cortical surface of the
90-region cerebral atlas. Extreme levels (±2 SD from mean values) were capped to aid
visualization. Since the colors are uniform within each ROI, the apparent spatial resolution
of these surface renderings may be somewhat deceptive. Note that the ball-wire plots are not
directly comparable due to the above color scaling and absence of subcortical structures in
the surface maps. The crucial observation is that persistent eigenmodes of network diffusion
appear homologous to characteristic atrophy patterns observed in various dementias.
The first (steady-state) eigenmode, whose eigenvalue is zero, is not shown here, because it is
relatively uninteresting, varying simply according to region size, in rough correspondence to
atrophy seen in normal aging. In order to ensure that these results are not due to a specific
choice of volumetric algorithm or choice of anatomic atlas, we repeated the same study
using volumetric data obtained by the FreeSurfer software and a
different 86-region atlas (Figure 5). Measured atrophy patterns generally match the cortical
atrophy seen using the automated anatomic labeling (AAL) atlas (Figure 4), but exact match
is not to be expected due to both methodological as well as ROI size and shape differences.
It is important to note, however, that the visual correspondence between eigenmodes and
atrophy remains intact, and the former generally agree with classic AD/bvFTD pathology,
which implies that these results are not methodology-specific. We show later (Figures S5
and S6 available online) that our results are also insensitive to inter-subject variability.
Comparison of Eigenmodes with Measured and Published Atrophy Findings
The second-most persistent mode (Figures 2 and 4, top rows) closely resembles typical
Alzheimer’s atrophy in mesial temporal, posterior cingulate, and limbic structures, as well as
lateral temporal and dorsolateral frontal cortex . This eigenmode shows strong involvement of the medial and lateral temporal lobes,
which are involved in memory, and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, implicated in working
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
memory . The main fibers connecting these regions are the
superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), the splenium of corpus callosum, and the cingulum
bundle. While agreement is good with our own volumetric findings (Figures 2 and 4, bottom
rows) and excellent with the published literature , there were some areas of disagreement with our
volumetric findings in the parietal, frontolateral, and frontoinsular areas. We attribute these
differences to small sample size and technical limitations of tractography, co-registration,
and volumetrics.
The third persistent eigenmode (Figures 3 and 5, top rows) is in good agreement with our
bvFTD data (Figures 3 and 5, bottom rows) and published findings , which indicate prominent atrophy in the orbitofrontal
and anterior cingulate regions. This eigenmode is particularly strong in the lateral temporal
lobe and the superior frontal, dorsolateral, and orbital cortices— areas that deal with
executive function, decision making, expectation, balancing risk versus reward, and
inhibition. Degeneration of the orbito-frontal cortex was linked to disinhibited behavior, and
the superior frontal gyrus has been associated with self-awareness .
The main fiber bundles connecting these regions are the SLF, genu of corpus callosum, and
uncinate fasciculus.
The clear temporal and frontal involvement predicted by our model is, if anything, closer to
the classic bvFTD patterns than is shown by our bvFTD patients . We attribute these discrepancies to clinical heterogeneity in our bvFTD cohort,
whose risk of misdiagnosis based purely on clinical presentation is high,
around 20%–30% , and to pathological heterogeneity . Temporal atrophy commonly attributed to bvFTD
might represent a different disease altogether . Finally, early
bvFTD is known to affect frontal regions primarily but spreads to the temporal lobe over
time . This behavior is predicted by our model: after
the third eigenmode corresponding to bvFTD has run its course (half-life 1/λ3), subsequent
degeneration will primarily follow eigenmode 2 (much longer half-life 1/λ2) corresponding
to AD and exhibiting prominent temporal involvement. This may also explain repeated
findings of AD pathology in clinically diagnosed bvFTD .
The fourth and higher eigenmodes probably capture degenerative processes occurring less
frequently, as well as the heterogeneity found in common dementias. Since higher modes are
eventually overtaken by more persistent modes, they are harder to isolate in aged
populations. The parietal and cingulate atrophic pattern of the fourth eigenmode in Figure
S3 is somewhat suggestive of Huntington’s disease and corticobasal degeneration and might act as a conduit for these rare genetic diseases.
Taken together, the spatial patterns described by our eigenmodes are homologous to
dementia patterns described in several studies and to our own small sample of AD and
bvFTD subjects; they also bear a resemblance to recently observed spatially distinct
networks characterized internally by close functional correlations .
Correlation with Measured Atrophy Patterns
The t-statistic of parcellated diseased versus young healthy volumes was correlated against
each hypothesized eigenmode and plotted in Figure 6. In addition we show correlations
involving the mean young healthy ROI volume data, tvol, in order to test our supposition that
the first eigenmode, u1, simply reflects the size of each region. Pearson’s correlation
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
coefficient and the p value of a one-sided t test are also given, and they indicate statistically
significant correlation at the level of α < 0.05 for the diagonal plots, but not for the “cross”
plots. The sole discordant result is the high correlation observed between u2 and bvFTD,
which is again attributable to the unusually high temporal involvement seen in our bvFTD
subjects. The strong correlation between normal aging and the first eigenmode (Figure S4)
supports the hypothesis that the latter corresponds to normal aging. While the ROI-wise
correlation is highly significant and the match is very good in proximate neighborhoods,
small discrepancies are apparent (Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5) and preclude complete
correspondence between measured and predicted atrophy. These discrepancies might be
attributed to methodological limitations, the small sample size, clinical/pathological
heterogeneity, and possible misdiagnosis of dementia patients.
To overcome the problem of multiple comparisons, we assessed a separate measure of
statistical significance. As in Seeley et al. , we separate the measured atrophy pattern
of each disease state into two groups of ROIs: (1) atrophied ROIs (t-statistic > 1), and (2) the
remaining ROIs. The atrophied ROIs coincided with well-known regions affected in each
disease. (For the young healthy subjects’ ROI volume data, tvol, the set 1 consists simply of
the largest regions by volume.) Then we use a one-tailed t test to test whether the predicted
atrophy pattern of nodes in these two sets (1 and 2) are statistically different and report the p
values in Figure 6 under p2. Thus, two separate measures of significance are used to
substantiate our main hypothesis—that there is a one-to-one correspondence between
dementias and network eigenmodes.
Diagnostic Power of Persistent Modes
We now show that persistent modes form an effective and parsimonious basis on which
atrophy data can be projected for differential diagnosis. Figure 7A shows the mean within
each dementia group of the relative strength of the dot product, d(k,n), which is a projection
of the atrophy pattern of the kth subject onto the nth eigenmode. A one-to-one
correspondence between dementias and eigenmodes is obvious: the normal aging group
exhibits the highest contribution from the first eigenmode, u1; the AD group displays the
highest contribution from u2; and the bvFTD displays the highest contribution from u3.
Figure 7B is a scatter plot of d(k,n = 1,2,3) for AD and bvFTD subjects. There is visually
appreciable separation between the two groups, indicating that the eigenmodes are acting as
an effective basis for dimensionality reduction and classification. The classification receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve using projections onto the four smallest eigenmodes is
shown in Figure 7D, along with the ROC of a direct dimensionality reduction using
principal components analysis (PCA). It is noteworthy that PCA, which is conventionally
the “optimum” reduced-space representation, does not produce better classification than
eigenmodes. Since classifier accuracy depends on the number of basis vectors, in Figure 7C
we plot the area under the ROC curve as a function of the dimensionality of the feature
space for both eigenmodes and PCA. Clearly, eigenmodes appear to do a better job of
dimensionality reduction and diagnostic classification than PCA. Note that some false
positives for both classifiers are expected due to clinical misdiagnosis.
Prediction of Population-wide Prevalence Rates
Figure 8 (left) shows the correlation between 1/λi and published prevalence rates of three
major degenerative disorders. The predicted order of prevalence matches published data:
AD (highest prevalence), then bvFTD, then Huntington’s (which was included as an
example of a rare degenerative disorder with similarities to the fourth eigenmode). Figure 8
(right) shows that the prevalence of AD and bvFTD as a function of age generally agrees
with the curves predicted by our model at almost all ages. Since theoretical prevalence relies
on the unknown disease progression rate, β, and the age of onset —neither of which are available a priori—we optimized these for best fit with published
data. This is justified, because the unknown parameters are not arbitrary but fully natural
physiological parameters. The model correctly predicts that early prevalence of bvFTD
should be higher than AD, equaling AD at around 60 years of age, mirroring recent
prevalence studies of AD and bvFTD under 65 years . The model
also correctly predicts that with age the relative prevalence of AD versus bvFTD should
increase . While predicted bvFTD prevalence is a bit higher than
published prevalence, we note that FTD is now considered highly under-diagnosed
 . Considering the highly variable and cohort-dependent nature of
known prevalence studies, the strong agreement provides further support to the model.
Bootstrap Analysis of Variability among Subjects
Although our hypotheses were validated using group means of atrophy and connectivity,
individual subjects are known to vary greatly in both. Hence, we must address the question
of natural intersubject variability. How sensitive are the presented results to the choice of
particular subjects used in our study, given our moderate sample size? We performed a
principled statistical analysis using bootstrap sampling with replacement (details in
Supplemental Experimental Procedures) which simulates the variability within a sample
group by resampling the group multiple times. In Figure S5, we show histograms of various
test statistics germane to this paper. We conclude that the data available in this study provide
self-consistent results, with no bias associated with our choice of group-mean networks and
DISCUSSION
We have shown that the macroscopic modeling of dementia patterns as a diffusive prion-like
propagation can recapitulate classic patterns of common dementias. Our conclusions are not
liable to be significantly altered due to choice of volumetric or network algorithm (Figure 5)
or due to intersubject variability (Figure S5). There are several implications of these
Clinical and Diagnostic Implications
The predicted time evolution of various eigenmodes of the diffusion model bears a strong
correlation with the age-dependent prevalence rates of both AD and bvFTD. To our
knowledge, no other existing model can accurately match this strong age dependence
observed in prevalence studies in dementia. From the classification and principal
components analysis (Figure 7) we conclude that network diffusion eigenmodes are an
effective basis for dimensionality reduction of atrophy in dementia, producing even better
classification accuracy than the optimal basis identified by PCA. This suggests a possible
role for our model in unsupervised, automated, and regionally unbiased differential
diagnosis of various dementias. Instead of dealing with high-dimensional and complex
whole-brain atrophy patterns, future neuroradiologists might simply look at the relative
contribution of the first three to four eigenmodes in any person’s brain and treat them as
clinical biomarkers. This approach could be especially helpful in cases of mixed dementia,
where classical region-based atrophy descriptors might prove unsatisfactory.
However, the most important clinical application of this model could well be in the
prediction of cognitive decline. Starting from baseline MRI volumetrics for estimation of
model parameters, the model in Equation 1 can be subsequently used to predict future
atrophy of an individual subject. If the measured and predicted “future” atrophy are deemed
statistically close, then it would serve to further validate our hypotheses as well as provide a
valuable prognostic aid to the clinician. This will allow a neurologist to predict what the
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
patient’s neuroanatomic, and therefore cognitive, state will be at any given point in the
future. Knowledge of what the future holds will allow patients to make informed choices
regarding their lifestyle and therapeutic interventions.
Relationship to Network Degeneration Hypothesis
Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5 present an uncanny parallel to recent findings of network degeneration.
That brain networks are altered in neurodegeneration is now established . Distinct, nonoverlapping spatial patterns are seen in AD and bvFTD , which Seeley et al. characterized as belonging to the default
mode and salience networks, respectively. The relation between dementia and separate
intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) appears convincing, but the
underlying cause remains unexplained. Conjectures regarding selective vulnerability of
different functional networks sharing synchronous neural activity, region-specific functional
loads, or some as yet unknown structural, metabolic, and physiological aspects of neural
network biology were put forth . Buckner et al. 
conjectured that early metabolic activity in the default network is somehow later implicated
in AD progression.
Interestingly, our macroscopic diffusion model can explain these findings without requiring
any kind of selective vulnerability, regional specificity, or shared functional load. We note
that our persistent eigenmodes and functional ICNs are roughly homologous, because
ultimately they are both the result of eigen decomposition (PCA) of implicit brain networks.
When ICNs are obtained using hierarchical graph clustering of functional correlation
networks, they are mathematically congruent with eigenmodes of network Laplacian
 . This congruence may explain why dementias appear to fall
into distinct ICNs—a strictly mechanical consequence of diffusive network dynamics. Even
with possibly random starting configurations, network dynamics are sufficient to produce
regional specificity; however, this does not imply that the conventional focal origin or
selective vulnerability hypotheses are incorrect. It could be that the starting configuration is
dictated by selective vulnerability due to various stressors , but the subsequent patterns are
determined by macroscopic network dynamics. Our model merely accommodates a
conception of these diseases that is fully consistent with known findings but does not require
focal origin or selective vulnerability.
Relationship to Prion-like Cerebral Proteopathy
Our model is based on current evidence of prion-like protein misfolding, which propagates
within neurons as well as transsynaptically, where retrograde axonal transport deficits cut
off the growth-factor supply to projection neurons, begetting axonal degeneration, synapse
loss, and postsynaptic dendrite retraction. There is mounting neuropathological evidence
that numerous disease proteins, including tau, alpha-synuclein, beta-amyloid, and TDP-43,
have the capacity to misfold and march through neural circuits via transsynaptic spread
 .
If a common concentration-dependent diffusive prion-like process can reproduce subsequent
atrophy patterns, this raises a somewhat unorthodox possibility that diverse degenerative
etiologies have common macroscopic consequences. Indeed, our model does not
differentiate between individual proteopathic carriers, bunching them together into a
generalized “disease factor.” This is justified on two grounds. First, there is a considerable
diversity of published opinion on the etiology of neurodegeneration and the effect of individual misfolding proteins . Second, and more important, the specific biochemical
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
properties of the prion-like agent may be inconsequential for the macroscopic and chronic
manifestation of disease, as evidenced from recent joint histopathological/morphometric
studies. The idea that proteopathic carriers with varied etiology can have a shared
progression mechanism via “permissible templating” was first raised by Hardy . The
spatial distribution of beta amyloid pathology in AD is poorly correlated with whole brain
atrophy patterns , while tau is well-correlated. However, neither tau
nor beta amyloid are specific to AD and are found in semantic dementia, frontotemporal
lobar degeneration (FTLD) subtype , dementia with Lewy bodies and
posterior cortical atrophy , etc. PIB-positive binding to A-beta
and plaques were observed in 25%–45% of cognitively normal older subjects in postmortem
autopsy studies . BvFTD accommodates an even more
bewildering array of pathological correlates, including alpha-synuclein, tau, ubiquitin,
TDP-43, and Lewy bodies .
Pereira et al. found that clinical variants of bvFTD, but not histologic variants, correlated
with regional atrophy, and that there was no volumetric difference between tau and ubiquitin
bvFTD pathology regardless of clinical subtype. No group-wise differences were found in
the atrophy patterns of tau-positive versus TDP-43-positive FTLD cases . These results indicate that clinical presentation of dementias are only dependent on
the brain regions they affect, rather than their histopathological correlates.
If true, these findings would provide strong support for our work, which infers macroscopic
consequences of proteopathic progression without being encumbered by their specifics. The
main contribution of the proposed network diffusion model is that it turns qualitative
understanding of proteopathic transmission into a quantitative, fully testable model and
provides a plausible alternative explanation for the apparent selective vulnerability of brain
regions in various dementias. The network diffusion model does not support the
“retrogenesis” hypothesis that AD is a WM-specific disease and is caused by demyelination
of late myelinating fiber pathways .
Limitations
First-Order Approximation—A model that is informed by the minutiae of the
neuropathology of degeneration, melding the most current and detailed histopathological
findings, might prove more accurate. Nevertheless, we note that as a first-order
approximation, the presented model appears to capture the essential patterns of dementia
atrophy. Simple models can sometimes capture the emergent behavior of large-scale
complex systems like the brain, which can be surprisingly linear within large phase domains
bounded by (nonlinear) phase transitions. Indeed, the emergence of predictable and regular
behavior from chaotic ensembles is considered a hallmark of complexity . For
example, the admittance of large electrical networks of capacitative and resistive elements is
known to be chaotic, yet its frequency response is essentially linear in large frequency
ranges . This kind of predictable, regular emergent behavior is seen in
complex systems as varied as the flocking of geese and complex
biological signaling networks .
Although both atrophy and the network itself must dynamically evolve due to degeneration,
our model assumes static networks in order to avoid non-linearity, which will make the
eigenmodes uninterpretable. By causing increasing network disconnection, white matter
damage may in fact accentuate rather than destroy the main feature of the model, viz
separate persistent modes of atrophy. Nevertheless, we intend to investigate nonlinear
models in our future work. We will also investigate network models based on neuronal
excitability rather than proteopathic transmission.
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The model should apply to other dementias like Huntington’s, corticobasal syndrome,
semantic dementia, and posterior cortical atrophy, but this aspect will require more data. We
expect the multiple-comparisons problem will be exacerbated and may become statistically
untenable (e.g., 36 comparisons for six dementias). Estimates of both higher eigenmodes
and rarer dementias are going to be noisier, and establishing their equivalence may require
more accurate brain networks than current technology allows.
Methodology—Several technical challenges are inherent in our processing pipeline.
Spatial and angular resolution of current HARDI data is poor, sometimes making coregistration with T1 MRI difficult. Highly atrophied subjects sometimes fail to co-register
properly. These problems necessitated manual inspection of co-registration outcomes and
rejection of problematic cases. SPM- and FreeSurfer-based volumetrics are known to be
noisy, with less-than-perfect test-retest reliability. Although we have mitigated these effects
by choosing a relatively coarse network with only 90 large-sized ROIs, they cannot be
completely ruled out. Tractography is limited by a “distance bias” and lack of spatial and
angular resolution . Conventional tractography fails to capture many
important but short-curved U-shaped fibers, whereas probabilistic tractography sometimes
leads to unrealistic fiber tracts having little anatomic justification. Finally, brain network
statistics are liable to vary with the choice and definition of nodes; hence, we have used
anatomically defined parcellations to define nodes—an approach that we feel has more
physical basis than arbitrary choice of nodes. Although we showed that our results are
largely unchanged under two quite different parcellation schemes (SPM and FreeSurfer), the
effect of other choices of network nodes remains untested.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Development of a Network Diffusion Model
We model dementia progression as a diffusion process on a hypothesized brain network =
{ , } whose nodes vi ∈ represent the ith cortical or subcortical gray matter structure, and
whose edges, ei,j ∈ , represent white-matter fiber pathways connecting structures i and j.
Structures vi comes from parcellation of brain MRI, and connection strength, ci,j, is
measured by fiber tractography . Consider an isolated population of
fibers from an affected (R2) to an unaffected (R1) region. The number of diseased afferents
from R2 to R1 is the product of the concentration, x2, of the disease factor and the interregion connection strength, c1,2. Conversely, there is a reverse diffusion from R1 to R2
proportional to x1c2,1. The total concentration of the disease factor in R1 will therefore
increase by β(x2−x1)c1,2 δt in a (short) instant δt, where β is the diffusivity constant
controlling propagation speed. Assuming bidirectional pathways, this leads, in the limit δt
→ 0, to the first-order differential equation:
(Equation 1)
A Random Walker Network-Diffusion Model of Propagation—Spectral graph
theory provides us with an elegant generalization of Equation 1 to the entire network.
Suppose the disease factor at time t at each node in the network is represented by the vector
x(t) = {x(v,t), v ∈ }. Then Equation 1 generalizes to the so-called “network heat equation”
 ,
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(Equation 2)
where H is the well-known graph Laplacian, with
(Equation 3)
This is the graph equivalent of the Laplacian diffusion operator, Δx ≜ ∇2x. Since all brain
regions are not the same size, we normalize each row and column of the Laplacian by their
sums. Note that this model only depends on the long-range transmission of proteopathic
carriers, and not on their local “leaking” via synapses and dendrites, which will be restricted
to the local microenvironment of gray matter. Since our diffusion model uses relatively
large, anatomically distinct structures as brain network nodes, the effect of localized
transmission will be predominantly intranode. Disregarding the limited effect of local
internode leaking, the network Laplacian H does not depend on self-connectivity within a
We hypothesize cortical atrophy in region k to be the accumulation of the disease process in
k, modeled as the integral
On the whole brain, this gives
. From matrix algebra, Equation 2 is satisfied
(Equation 4)
where x0 is the initial pattern of the disease process, on which the term e−βHt acts essentially
as a spatial and temporal blurring operator. We therefore call e−βHt the diffusion kernel, and
Equation 4 is interpreted as the impulse response function of the network.
Persistent Modes of Propagation—The computation of Equation 4 is accomplished
via the eigenvalue decomposition H = UΛU†, where U = [u1 … uN], giving
(Equation 5)
The eigenvalues λi of the Laplacian H are in the interval , with a single 0 eigenvalue
and a small number of near-zero eigenvalues (see Figure S1). Most eigenmodes, ui,
correspond to large eigenvalues that quickly decay due to exponentiation, leaving only the
small eigenmodes, whose absolute values we denote by “persistent modes,” to contribute
(see Figure S2A).
Dynamics—The time evolution of hypothesized atrophy is a linear combination of
eigenmodes,
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(Equation 6)
consisting of a sum of two parts, a deterministic exponential part and a case-dependent
random part, determined by the initial configuration x0 of the disease. Figure S2B shows the
deterministic part of the first three eigenmodes. Atrophy in all modes increases with time,
but lasting and substantial effect is observed only in the persistent modes. The slower the
decay rate, the more widespread and severe is the damage.
Relationship to Prevalence Rates—The rate of progression of the ith eigenmode is λi,
and its eventual atrophy is
. We hypothesize that if eigenmodes are good models
of dementia, then population-wide prevalence rates should be reflected by the overall
magnitude and rate of progression of the eigenmodes. Assuming that new neurodegenerative
attacks target all modes equally, and ignoring genetic predisposition, then for the entire
population, 1/λi should roughly translate into eventual prevalence rates of the corresponding
dementia. Relative prevalence rates of various dementias as a function of time can similarly
be predicted from the relative values of the decay curves (Equation 6) of each eigenmode.
We investigate this relationship in subsequent analysis.
Incorporating Time-Varying Neurodegenerative Attacks—Given a time-varying
externally driven disease process, a(t), the actual dynamics of the system will be given by its
convolution with the diffusion kernel:
(Equation 7)
Equation 7 implies that although the disease dynamics depends on an unknown and possibly
random external attack process, a(t), its behavior is still constrained within a small number
of distinct eigenmodes. Thus, the pathophysiological nature, location, and frequency of
neurodegenerative attacks are irrelevant in this model.
Data Description
Healthy Cohort—Axial T1 weighted FSPGR scans (TE = 1.5 ms, TR = 6.3 ms, TI = 400
ms, 15° flip angle) with 230 × 230 × 156 isotropic 1 mm voxels were acquired on a 3 Tesla
GE Signa EXCITE scanner from 14 young healthy volunteers under an existing
institutional-review-board-approved study, whose details were previously described . All participants signed written consent for this study in fulfillment of the
Helsinki Declaration. High Angular Resolution Diffusion Imaging (HARDI) data (55
directions, b = 1000 s/mm2, 72 1.8-mm thick interleaved slices, 128 × 128 matrix size) were
also acquired. Age-matched normal, AD, and bvFTD cohorts: Eighteen AD, 18 bvFTD, and
19 age- and gender-matched cognitive normal (CN) fully consenting subjects were scanned
on a 4 Tesla (Bruker/Siemens) MRI system with a 3D volumetric MPRAGE sequence (TR/
TE/TI = 2300/3/950 ms, 7° flip angle, 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 mm3 resolution, 157 continuous
sagittal slices) at University of California at San Francisco (UCSF). AD was diagnosed
according to published clinical criteria . Clinical diagnoses
were not validated using histopathology or imaging, thus opening the possibility of
misdiagnosis and pathological heterogeneity, especially in the bvFTD group, whose clinical
presentation can frequently look similar to AD or semantic dementia . Study subject characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Image Processing
Gray-matter (GM) brain regions were parcellated from all subjects’ T1-MRI scans using an
atlas-based parcellation scheme to extract 116 ROIs, collected in the
vector v = {vi|i ∈ [1, N]}. The mean and standard deviation of the ROI volumes were
determined for each disease group. Whole-brain networks were extracted from HARDI
scans of young healthy subjects only, using previously described methodology . Briefly, Q-ball reconstruction using spherical
harmonic decomposition is performed to get orientation distribution
functions at each voxel. The gray-white interface voxels of the parcellated ROIs of the
coregistered MRI/HARDI volumes are used as seed points for probabilistic tractography
 , with 1000 streamlines drawn per seed voxel. Each streamline is
assigned a probability score according to established criteria .
The connection strength, ci,j, of each ROI pair i,j is estimated by summing the probabilities
of the streamlines terminating in regions i and j. Cerebellar structures are removed, giving a
symmetric 90 × 90 connectivity matrix for each of 14 young healthy subjects. A combined
connectivity matrix C is then obtained by averaging across healthy subjects. Prior to
averaging, the individual network edges are made robust by applying a threshold obtained
from hypothesis testing at significance level p = 0.001, following Raj and Chen .
Validation of Persistent Modes—To validate our hypothesis that persistent modes are
homologous to known patterns of atrophy in several degenerative diseases, we compared the
persistent modes with atrophy from our AD/bvFTD/normal aging cohort as follows:
Persistent modes were computed using the average young-healthy-brain connectivity
network. Normalized atrophy was given by the t-statistic between the diseased group and the
healthy group, i.e.,
and formed the corresponding atrophy vector tAD = {tAD (i)|i ∈ [1,N]}, and similarly tFTD
and taging. To these data we add a vector tvol of ROI volumes obtained from the mean of
young healthy subjects, because we wish to determine whether the first eigenmode
corresponds to ROI volume. These statistical atrophy maps were visually compared with the
persistent modes and plotted in a wire-and-ball brain map (Figures 2 and 3), where the wires
denote (healthy) network connections and the balls represent gray-matter ROIs. Cortical
atrophy and eigenmode values were mapped onto the cortical surface of the 90-region
cerebral atlas (Figure 4). The same study was repeated using Free-Surfer volumetrics and a different 86-region FreeSurfer atlas. Healthy-brain connectivity networks
were recomputed using this new atlas for the purpose of seeding tracts. In order to perform
statistically rigorous hypothesis testing, we adopted a simple correlation approach. The tstatistic of atrophy within each disease group and for all cortical ROIs was correlated with
the absolute values of all hypothesized eigenmodes, and the R2 and p values of Pearson
correlation coefficients were calculated. The statistical atrophy of each disease was plotted
against each persistent mode.
Prediction of Population-wide Prevalence of Diseases
The prevalence rates of various dementias were collected from literature survey.
Unfortunately, prevalence estimates vary wildly among sources, age groups, and ethnicity,
Raj et al.
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 April 11.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
especially at low prevalence rates in younger populations. We grouped studies into decadal
age ranges from 50 to 90+ and restricted ourselves to studies in advanced (OECD) nations.
For each age range, we computed prevalence rate as a percentage of each dementia over
prevalence of ALL dementias. These data were taken from the following studies: . To this published
data we compared the theoretical prevalence that would be predicted by our model, as
described in the subsection titled Development of a Network Diffusion Model. Since the
model has two parameters (age of onset and diffusivity constant β) whose true values cannot
be uniquely determined from the literature, we estimated them by fitting the model to
published data using a simple minimization routine.
Diagnostic Power of Persistent Modes
Finally we wish to determine whether the most persistent eigenmodes have utility for the
purpose of diagnosing and classifying various dementias. Atrophy of each subject in the
aged groups was normalized using the young healthy subjects, giving a z-score, zk, for the
kth subject. We computed the dot product between zk and the nth eigenmode, giving
. In order to remove the effect of different overall extent of atrophy in different
dementias, this figure was normalized to d̄(k, n) such that Σnd̄(k, n) = 1. The latter values
were fed into a three-way (normal aging, AD, bvFTD) linear discriminate analysis (LDA)
classifier. ROC curves were obtained after repeated leave-one-out analysis whereby each
subject was classified based on training over all the other subjects. For comparison, we also
implemented a conventional classifier based directly on atrophy z-scores, zk, after
dimensionality reduction using PCA.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the following grants from the National Institutes of Health: R01 NS075425,
F32 EB012404-01, P41 RR023953-02, P41 RR023953-02S1, and R21 EB008138-02.