Unmasking the abnormal events in video
Radu Tudor Ionescu1,2, Sorina Smeureanu1,2, Bogdan Alexe1,2, Marius Popescu1,2
1University of Bucharest, 14 Academiei, Bucharest, Romania
2SecurifAI, 24 Mircea Vod˘a, Bucharest, Romania
We propose a novel framework for abnormal event detection in video that requires no training sequences. Our
framework is based on unmasking, a technique previously
used for authorship veriﬁcation in text documents, which
we adapt to our task. We iteratively train a binary classi-
ﬁer to distinguish between two consecutive video sequences
while removing at each step the most discriminant features.
Higher training accuracy rates of the intermediately obtained classiﬁers represent abnormal events. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to apply unmasking for a computer vision task. We compare our method
with several state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised
methods on four benchmark data sets. The empirical results
indicate that our abnormal event detection framework can
achieve state-of-the-art results, while running in real-time
at 20 frames per second.
1. Introduction
Abnormal event detection in video is a challenging task
in computer vision, as the deﬁnition of what an abnormal
event looks like depends very much on the context. For instance, a car driving by on the street is regarded as a normal
event, but if the car enters a pedestrian area, this is regarded
as an abnormal event. A person running on a sports court
(normal event) versus running outside from a bank (abnormal event) is another example. Although what is considered
abnormal depends on the context, we can generally agree
that abnormal events should be unexpected events that
occur less often than familiar (normal) events. As it is generally impossible to ﬁnd a sufﬁciently representative set of
anomalies, the use of traditional supervised learning methods is usually ruled out. Hence, most abnormal event detection approaches learn
a model of familiarity from a given training video and label events as abnormal if they deviate from the model. In
this paper, we consider an even more challenging setting,
in which no additional training sequences are available .
As in this setting we cannot build a model in advance and
ﬁnd deviations from it, our approach is completely unsupervised, as we brieﬂy explain next. Our method labels
Figure 1. Our anomaly detection framework based on unmasking . The steps are processed in sequential order from (A)
to (H). Best viewed in color.
a short-lasting event as abnormal if the amount of change
from the immediately preceding event is substantially large.
We quantify the change as the training accuracy of a linear
classiﬁer applied on a sliding window that comprises both
the preceding and the currently examined event, as illustrated in Figure 1. We consider that the ﬁrst half of the
window frames are labeled as normal and take them as reference. We suppose the second half are labeled as abnormal, but we seek to ﬁnd if this hypothesis is indeed true.
We extract both motion and appearance features from the
frames, and train a binary classiﬁer with high regulariza-
 
tion to distinguish between the labeled frames. We retain
the training accuracy of the classiﬁer and repeat the training
process by eliminating some of the best features. This process is known as unmasking and it was previously used
for authorship veriﬁcation of text documents. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to apply unmasking for a
computer vision task. After a certain number of iterations
with unmasking, we can build a proﬁle (plot) with the collected accuracy rates in order to assess if the current event,
represented by the second half of the frames, does contain
enough changes to consider it abnormal. Intuitively, if the
change is signiﬁcant, the classiﬁcation accuracy should stay
high even after eliminating a certain amount of discriminating features. Otherwise, the accuracy should drop much
faster as the discriminating features get eliminated, since the
classiﬁer will have a hard time separating two consecutive
normal events. We estimate the accuracy proﬁle obtained
by unmasking with the mean of the accuracy rates, and consider the mean value to represent the anomaly score of the
frames belonging to the current event.
We perform abnormal event detection experiments on
the Avenue , the Subway , the UCSD and the
UMN data sets in order to compare our unsupervised
approach with a state-of-the-art unsupervised method as
well as several supervised methods . The empirical results indicate that we obtain better results than the unsupervised approach and,
on individual data sets, we reach or even surpass the accuracy levels of some supervised methods . Unlike the approach of , our method can process the video
in real-time at 20 frames per second.
We organize the paper as follows. We present related
work on abnormal event detection in Section 2. We describe our unsupervised learning framework in Section 3.
We present the abnormal event detection experiments in
Section 4. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Abnormal event detection is usually formalized as an
outlier detection task , in which the general approach is to learn
a model of normality from training data and consider the
detected outliers as abnormal events. Some abnormal event
detection approaches are based on learning
a dictionary of normal events, and label the events not represented by the dictionary as abnormal. Other approaches
have employed deep features or locality sensitive hashing ﬁlters to achieve better results.
There have been some approaches that employ unsupervised steps for abnormal event detection , but
these approaches are not fully unsupervised. The approach
presented in is to build a model of familiar events from
training data and incrementally update the model in an unsupervised manner as new patterns are observed in the test
data. In a similar fashion, Sun et al. train a Growing
Neural Gas model starting from training videos and continue the training process as they analyze the test videos for
anomaly detection. Ren et al. use an unsupervised approach, spectral clustering, to build a dictionary of atoms,
each representing one type of normal behavior. Their approach requires training videos of normal events to construct the dictionary. Xu et al. use Stacked Denoising Auto-Encoders to learn deep feature representations in
a unsupervised way. However, they still employ multiple
one-class SVM models to predict the anomaly scores.
To the best of our knowledge, the only work that does
not require any kind of training data for abnormal event detection is . The approach proposed in is to detect
changes on a sequence of data from the video to see which
frames are distinguishable from all the previous frames. As
the authors want to build an approach independent of temporal ordering, they create shufﬂes of the data by permuting
the frames before running each instance of the change detection. Our framework is most closely related to , but
there are several key differences that put a signiﬁcant gap
between the two approaches. An important difference is
that our framework is designed to process the video online,
as expected for practical real-world applications. Since the
approach of Del Giorno et al. needs to permute the test
video frames before making a decision, the test video can
only be processed ofﬂine. As they discriminate between
the frames in a short window and all the frames that precede the window, their classiﬁer will require increasingly
longer training times as the considered window reaches the
end of the test video. In our case, the linear classiﬁer requires about the same training time in every location of the
video, as it only needs to discriminate between the ﬁrst half
of the frames and the second half of the frames within the
current window. Moreover, we train our classiﬁer in several
loops by employing the unmasking technique. Del Giorno
et al. use the same motion features as . We also use
spatio-temporal cubes to represent motion, but we remove the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) step for two
reasons. First of all, we need as many features as we can get
for the unmasking technique which requires more features
to begin with. Second of all, training data is required to
learn the PCA projection. Different from , we additionally use appearance features from pre-trained convolutional
neural networks . With all these distinct characteristics,
our framework is able to obtain better performance in terms
of accuracy and time, as shown in Section 4.
We propose an abnormal event detection framework
based on unmasking, that requires no training data. Our
anomaly detection framework is comprised of eight major
steps, which are indexed from A to H in Figure 1. We next
provide an overview of our approach, leaving the additional
details about the non-trivial steps for later. We ﬁrst apply a
sliding window algorithm (step A) and, for each window of
2 · w frames (step B), we suppose that the ﬁrst w frames are
normal and the last w frames are abnormal (step C). After
extracting motion or appearance features (step D), we apply
unmasking (steps E to G) by training a classiﬁer and removing the highly weighted features for a number of k loops.
We take the accuracy rates after each loop (step F) and build
the accuracy proﬁle of the current window (step G). Abnormal events correspond to high (almost constant) accuracy
proﬁles (depicted in red), while normal events correspond
to dropping accuracy proﬁles (depicted in blue). We compute the anomaly score for the last w frames as the mean of
the retained accuracy rates (step H).
For the sake of simplicity, there are several important aspects that are purposely left out in Figure 1. First of all,
we divide the frames into 2 × 2 spatial bins, thus obtaining four sub-videos, which we process individually through
our detection framework until step G. Hence, for each video
frame, we produce four anomaly scores, having one score
per bin. Before step H, we assign the score of each frame
as the maximum of the four anomaly scores corresponding
to the 2 × 2 bins. Second of all, we apply the framework
independently using motion features on one hand and appearance features on the other. For each kind of features,
we divide the video into 2 × 2 bins and obtain a single
anomaly score per frame as detailed above. To combine
the anomaly scores from motion and appearance features,
we employ a late fusion strategy by averaging the scores
for each frame, in step H. Third of all, we take windows at
a predeﬁned interval s (stride), where the choice of s can
generate overlapping windows (e.g. s = 1 and w = 10). In
this situation, the score of a frame is obtained by averaging
the anomaly scores obtained after processing every separate window that includes the respective frame in its second
half. We apply a Gaussian ﬁlter to temporally smooth the ﬁnal anomaly scores. We present additional details about the
motion and appearance features (step D) in Section 3.1, and
about the unmasking approach (steps E to G) in Section 3.2.
3.1. Features
Unlike other approaches , we apply the same steps
in order to extract motion and appearance features from
video, irrespective of the data set.
Motion features.
Given the input video, we resize all
frames to 160 × 120 pixels and uniformly partition each
frame to a set of non-overlapping 10 × 10 patches. Corresponding patches in 5 consecutive frames are stacked together to form a spatio-temporal cube, each with resolution
10 × 10 × 5. We then compute 3D gradient features on
each spatio-temporal cube and normalize the resulted feature vectors using the L2-norm. To represent motion, we
essentially employ the same approach as , but without reducing the feature vector dimension from 500 to 100
components via PCA. This enables us to keep more features
for unmasking. Since unmasking is about gradually eliminating the discriminant features, it requires more features to
begin with. As , we eliminate the cubes that have no
motion gradients (the video is static in the respective location). We divide the frames into 2×2 spatial bins of 80×60
pixels each, obtaining at most 48 cubes per bin. Bins are individually processed through our detection framework. It
is important to mention that each spatio-temporal cube is
treated as an example in step E (Figure 1) of our framework. Although we classify spatio-temporal cubes as ,
we assign the anomaly score to the frames, not the cubes.
Appearance features. In many computer vision tasks, for
instance predicting image difﬁculty , higher level features, such as the ones learned with convolutional neural
networks (CNN) are the most effective. To build our
appearance features, we consider a pre-trained CNN architecture able to process the frames as fast as possible,
namely VGG-f . Considering that we want our detection framework to work in real-time on a standard desktop
computer, not equipped with expensive GPU, the VGG-f 
is an excellent choice as it can process about 20 frames per
second on CPU. We hereby note that better anomaly detection performance can probably be achieved by employing deeper CNN architectures, such as VGG-verydeep ,
GoogLeNet or ResNet .
The VGG-f model is trained on the ILSVRC benchmark . It is important to note that ﬁne-tuning the CNN
for our task is not possible, as we are not allowed to use
training data in our unsupervised setting. Hence, we simply
use the pre-trained CNN to extract deep features as follows.
Given the input video, we resize the frames to 224 × 224
pixels. We then subtract the mean imagine from each frame
and provide it as input to the VGG-f model. We remove
the fully-connected layers (identiﬁed as fc6, fc7 and softmax) and consider the activation maps of the last convolutional layer (conv5) as appearance features. While the fullyconnected layers are adapted for object recognition, the last
convolutional layer contains valuable appearance and pose
information which is more useful for our anomaly detection
task. Ideally, we would like to have at least slightly different
representations for a person walking versus a person running. From the conv5 layer, we obtain 256 activation maps,
each of 13×13 pixels. As for the motion features, we divide
the activation maps into 2 × 2 spatial bins of 7 × 7 pixels
each, such that the bins have a one-pixel overlap towards the
center of the activation map. For each bin, we reshape the
bins into 49 dimensional vectors and concatenate the vectors corresponding to the 256 ﬁlters of the conv5 layer into
a single feature vector of 12544 (7 × 7 × 256) components.
The ﬁnal feature vectors are normalized using the L2-norm.
3.2. Change Detection by Unmasking
The unmasking technique is based on testing the
degradation rate of the cross-validation accuracy of learned
models, as the best features are iteratively dropped from
the learning process. Koppel et al. offer evidence that
this unsupervised technique can solve the authorship veri-
ﬁcation problem with very high accuracy. We modify the
original unmasking technique by considering the training
accuracy instead of the cross-validation accuracy, in order
to use this approach for online abnormal event detection in
video. We apply unmasking for each window of 2·w frames
at a stride s, where w and s are some input parameters of
our framework. Our aim is to examine if the last w frames
in a given window represent an abnormal event or not. To
achieve this purpose, we compare them with the ﬁrst w (reference) frames in the window. We assume that the ﬁrst w
frames are labeled as normal and the last w frames are labeled as abnormal, and train a linear classiﬁer to distinguish
between them. By training a classiﬁer without unmasking,
we would only be able to determine if the ﬁrst half of the
window is distinguishable from the second half. Judging
by the classiﬁer’s accuracy rate, we may consider that the
last w frames are abnormal if the accuracy is high and normal if the accuracy is low. This is essentially the underlying hypothesis of , with the difference that they assume
all preceding frames (from the entire test video) as normal.
Nevetheless, we consider only the immediately preceding w
frames as reference for our algorithm to run in real-time. As
the number of normal (reference) samples is much lower,
the classiﬁer might often distinguish two normal events with
high accuracy, which is not desired. Our main hypothesis is
that if two consecutive events are normal, then whatever differences there are between them will be reﬂected in only a
relatively small number of features, despite possible differences in motion and appearance. Therefore, we need to apply unmasking in order to determine how large is the depth
of difference between the two events. Similar to , we
train a Logistic Regression classiﬁer with high regularization. Different from , we eliminate the m best features
and repeat the training for a number of k loops, where m
and k are some input parameters of our framework. As the
most discriminant features are gradually eliminated, it will
be increasingly more difﬁcult for the linear classiﬁer to distinguish the reference examples, that belong to the ﬁrst half
of the window, from the examined examples, that belong
to the second half. However, if the training accuracy rate
over the k loops drops suddenly, we consider that the last
w frames are normal according to our hypothesis. On the
other hand, if the accuracy trend is to drop slowly, we consider that the analyzed frames are abnormal. Both kinds of
accuracy proﬁles are shown in step G of Figure 1 for illustrative purposes, but, in practice, we actually obtain a single
accuracy proﬁle for a given window. In the end, we average
the training accuracy rates over the k loops and consider the
average value to represent the degree of anomaly of the last
w frames in the window. We thus assign the same anomaly
score to all the examined frames. It is interesting to note
that Del Giorno et al. consider the probability that an
example belongs to the abnormal class, hence assigning a
different score to each example.
4. Experiments
4.1. Data Sets
We show abnormal event detection results on four data
sets. It is important to note that we use only the test videos
from each data set, and perform anomaly detection without
using the training videos to build a model of normality.
Avenue. We ﬁrst consider the Avenue data set , which
contains 16 training and 21 test videos. In total, there are
15328 frames in the training set and 15324 frames in the test
set. Each frame is 640 × 360 pixels. Locations of anomalies are annotated in ground truth pixel-level masks for each
frame in the testing videos.
Subway. One of the largest data sets for anomaly detection
in video is the Subway surveillance data set . It contains two videos, one of 96 minutes (Entrance gate) and
another one of 43 minutes (Exit gate). The Entrance gate
video contains 144251 frames and the Exit gate video contains 64903 frames, each with 512×384 resolution. Abnormal events are labeled at the frame level. In some previous
works , the ﬁrst 15 minutes (22500 frames) in both
videos are kept for training, although others have used
more than half of the video for training.
UCSD. The UCSD Pedestrian data set is perhaps one
of the most challenging anomaly detection data sets.
includes two subsets, namely Ped1 and Ped2. Ped1 contains 34 training and 36 test videos with a frame resolution of 238 × 158 pixels. There are 6800 frames for training and 7200 for testing. Pixel-level anomaly labels are
provided for only 10 test videos in Ped1. All the 36 test
videos are annotated at the frame-level. Ped2 contains 16
training and 12 test videos, and the frame resolution is
360 × 240 pixels. There are 2550 frames for training and
2010 for testing.
Although Ped2 contains pixel-level as
well as frame-level annotations for all the test videos, most
previous works have reported the pixellevel performance only for Ped1. The videos illustrate various crowded scenes, and anomalies are bicycles, vehicles,
skateboarders and wheelchairs crossing pedestrian areas.
UMN. The UMN Unusual Crowd Activity data set 
consists of three different crowded scenes, each with 1453,
4144, and 2144 frames, respectively. The resolution of each
frame is 320 × 240 pixels. In the normal settings people
walk around in the scene, and the abnormal behavior is de-
Feature Extraction
Prediction
Time (FPS)
Time (FPS)
VGG-f conv5
VGG-f conv5
VGG-f conv5
VGG-f conv5
VGG-f conv5
VGG-f conv5
3D gradients
3D gradients + conv5 (late fusion)
Table 1. Abnormal event detection results using various features, bins and window strides in our framework. The frame-level and the
pixel-level AUC measures are computed on ﬁve test videos randomly chosen from the Avenue data set. For all models, the window size
is 10 and the regularization parameter is 0.1. The number of frames per second (FPS) is computed by running the models on a computer
with Intel Core i7 2.3 GHz processor and 8 GB of RAM using a single core.
ﬁned as people running in all directions.
4.2. Evaluation
We employ ROC curves and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) as the evaluation metric, computed
with respect to ground truth frame-level annotations, and,
when available (Avenue and UCSD), pixel-level annotations.
We deﬁne the frame-level and pixel-level AUC
as and others. At the frame-level, a frame
is considered a correct detection if it contains at least one
abnormal pixel. At the pixel-level, the corresponding frame
is considered as being correctly detected if more than 40%
of truly anomalous pixels are detected. We use the same
approach as to compute the pixel-level AUC. The
frame-level scores produced by our framework are assigned
to the corresponding spatio-temporal cubes.
The results
are smoothed with the same ﬁlter used by in order
to obtain our ﬁnal pixel-level detections. Although many
works include the Equal Error Rate
(EER) as evaluation metric, we agree with that metrics
such as the EER can be misleading in a realistic anomaly
detection setting, in which abnormal events are expected to
be very rare. Thus, we do not use the EER in our evaluation.
4.3. Implementation Details
We extract motion and appearance features from the
test video sequences. We use the code available online at
 to compute the
3D motion gradients. For the appearance features, we consider the pre-trained VGG-f model provided in MatConvNet . To detect changes, we employ the Logistic Regression implementation from VLFeat . In all the experiments, we set the regularization parameter of Logistic
Regression to 0.1, and we use the same window size as ,
namely w = 10. We use the same parameters for both motion and appearance features.
In Table 1, we present preliminary results on ﬁve test
videos from the Avenue data set to motivate our parameter
and implementation choices. Regarding the CNN features,
we show that slightly better results can be obtained with the
conv5 features rather than the fc6 or fc7 features. An improvement of 2.5% is obtained when we include unmasking. In the unmasking procedure, we use k = 10 loops
and eliminate the best m = 50 features (top 25 weighted
as positive and top 25 weighted as negative).
A performance gain of 1.4% can also be achieved when we divide
the frames into 2 × 2 bins instead of processing the entire
frames. As for the stride, we present results with choices for
s ∈{1, 2, 5, 10}. The time increases as we apply unmasking and spatial bins, but we can compensate by increasing
the stride. We can observe that strides up to 10 frames do
not imply a considerable decrease in terms of frame-level or
pixel-level AUC. Thus, we can set the stride to 5 for an optimal trade-off between accuracy and speed. We show that
very good results can also be obtained with motion features.
In the end, we combine the two kinds of features and reach
our best frame-level AUC (82.6%). For the speed evaluation, we independently measure the time required to extract
features and the time required to predict the anomaly scores
on a computer with Intel Core i7 2.3 GHz processor and 8
GB of RAM using a single core. We present the number
of frames per second (FPS) in Table 1. Using two cores,
one for feature extraction and one for change detection by
unmasking, our ﬁnal model is able to process the videos at
nearly 20 FPS. For the rest of the experiments, we show results with both kinds of features using a stride of 5 and bins
of 2 × 2, and perform change detection by unmasking.
4.4. Results on the Avenue Data Set
We ﬁrst compare our unmasking framework based on
several types of features with an unsupervised approach 
as well as a supervised one . The frame-level and pixellevel AUC metrics computed on the Avenue data set are presented in Table 2. Compared to the state-of-the-art unsuper-
Lu et al. 
Del Giorno et al. 
Ours (conv5)
Ours (3D gradients)
Ours (late fusion)
Table 2. Abnormal event detection results in terms of frame-level
and pixel-level AUC on the Avenue data set.
Our unmasking
framework is compared with a state-of-the-art unsupervised approach as well as a supervised one .
Figure 2. Frame-level anomaly detection scores (between 0 and 1)
provided by our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy, for test video 4 in the Avenue data set. The video has 947
frames. Ground-truth abnormal events are represented in cyan,
and our scores are illustrated in red. Best viewed in color.
Figure 3. True positive (top row) versus false positive (bottom row)
detections of our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy. Examples are selected from the Avenue data set. Best
viewed in color.
vised method , our framework brings an improvement of
2.3%, in terms of frame-level AUC, and an improvement
of 2.0%, in terms of pixel-level AUC. The results are even
more impressive, considering that our framework processes
the video online, while the approach proposed in works
only in ofﬂine mode. Moreover, our frame-level and pixellevel AUC scores reach about the same level as the supervised method . Overall, our results on the Avenue data
set are noteworthy.
Figure 2 illustrates the frame-level anomaly scores, for
test video 4 in the Avenue data set, produced by our unmasking framework based on combining motion and appearance features using a late fusion strategy. According
to the ground-truth anomaly labels, there are two abnormal
events in this video. In Figure 2, we notice that our scores
correlate well to the ground-truth labels, and we can easily identify both abnormal events by setting a threshold of
around 0.5, without including any false positive detections.
Entrance gate
Cong et al. 
Del Giorno et al. 
Ours (conv5)
Ours (3D gradients)
Ours (late fusion)
Table 3. Abnormal event detection results in terms of frame-level
AUC on the Subway data set. Our unmasking framework is compared with a state-of-the-art unsupervised approach as well as
a supervised one .
Figure 4. True positive (top row) versus false positive (bottom row)
detections of our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy. Examples are selected from the Subway Entrance gate.
Best viewed in color.
However, using this threshold there are some false positive
detections on other test videos from the Avenue data set. We
show some examples of true positive and false positive detections in Figure 3. The true positive abnormal events are
a person running and a person throwing an object, while
false positive detections are a person holding a large object
and a person sitting on the ground.
4.5. Results on the Subway Data Set
On the Subway data set, we compare our unmasking
framework with two approaches, an unsupervised one 
and a supervised one . The comparative results are presented in Table 3. On this data set, we generally obtain
better results by using motion features rather than appearance features. Our late fusion strategy is not able to bring
any improvements. Nevertheless, for each and every type
of features, we obtain better results than the state-of-the-art
unsupervised approach . When we combine the features,
our improvements are 1.5% on the Entrance gate video and
3.3% on the Exit gate video. Remarkably, we even obtain
better results than the supervised method on the Exit
gate video. On the other hand, our unsupervised approach,
as well as the approach of Del Giorno et al. , obtains
much lower results on the Entrance gate video.
Although there are many works that used the Subway
data set in the experiments , most of these
works did not use the frame-level AUC as evaluation metric. Therefore, we excluded these works from
Kim et al. 
Mehran et al. 
Mahadevan et al. 
Cong et al. 
Saligrama et al. 
Lu et al. 
Ren et al. 
Xu et al. 
Zhang et al. 
Sun et al. 
Ours (conv5)
Ours (3D gradients)
Ours (late fusion)
Table 4. Abnormal event detection results in terms of frame-level
and pixel-level AUC on the UCSD data set. Our unmasking framework is compared with several state-of-the-art supervised methods .
our comparison presented in Table 3. However, there is a
recent work that provides the frame-level AUC, but it
uses only 47% of the Entrance gate video for testing. For
a fair comparison, we evaluated our unmasking framework
based on the late fusion strategy in their setting, and obtained a frame-level AUC of 78.1%. Our score is nearly
14.6% lower than the score of 92.7% reported in , con-
ﬁrming that there is indeed a signiﬁcant performance gap
between supervised and unsupervised methods on the Entrance gate video. Nevertheless, in Figure 4, we can observe
some interesting qualitative results obtained by our framework on the Entrance gate video. The true positive abnormal events are a person sidestepping the gate and a person
jumping over the gate, while false positive detections are
two persons walking synchronously and a person running
to catch the train.
4.6. Results on the UCSD Data Set
Del Giorno et al. have excluded the UCSD data set
from their experiments because nearly half of the frames
in each test video contain anomalies, and, they expect abnormal events to be rare in their setting. Although we believe that our approach would perform optimally in a similar setting, we still compare our unsupervised approach
with several state-of-the-art methods that require training
data . In Table 4,
we present the frame-level and pixel-level AUC for Ped1,
and the frame-level AUC for Ped2. In terms of frame-level
AUC, we obtain better results than two supervised methods . In terms of pixel-level AUC, we obtain better
results than four methods . On Ped1, our
results are only 3 or 4% lower than to those reported by
Ren et al. , while more recent supervised approaches
achieve much better results . As most of the previ-
Figure 5. Frame-level ROC curves of our framework versus on UCSD Ped1. Best viewed in color.
Figure 6. Pixel-level ROC curves of our framework versus on UCSD Ped1. Best viewed in color.
Figure 7. True positive (top row) versus false positive (bottom row)
detections of our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy. Examples are selected from the UCSD data set. Best
viewed in color.
ous works, we have included the frame-level and pixel-level
ROC curves for Ped1, to give the means for a thorough comparison with other approaches. Figure 5 shows the framelevel ROC corresponding to the frame-level AUC of 68.4%
reached by our unmasking framework based on late fusion,
while Figure 6 shows the pixel-level ROC corresponding to
the pixel-level AUC of 52.4% obtained with the same con-
Mehran et al. 
Cong et al. 
Saligrama et al. 
Zhang et al. 
Sun et al. 
Del Giorno et al. 
Ours (conv5)
Ours (3D gradients)
Ours (late fusion)
Table 5. Abnormal event detection results in terms of frame-level
AUC on the UMN data set. Our unmasking framework is compared with several state-of-the-art supervised methods as well as an unsupervised approach .
Figure 8. Frame-level anomaly detection scores (between 0 and 1)
provided by our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy, for the ﬁrst scene in the UMN data set. The video has
1453 frames. Ground-truth abnormal events are represented in
cyan, and our scores are illustrated in red. Best viewed in color.
Figure 9. True positive (top row) versus false positive (bottom row)
detections of our unmasking framework based on the late fusion
strategy. Examples are selected from the UMN data set. Best
viewed in color.
ﬁguration for our approach. Some qualitative results of our
unsupervised framework based on late fusion are illustrated
in Figure 7. The true positive abnormal events are a car
intruding a pedestrian area and a bicycle rider intruding a
pedestrian area, while false positive detections are a bicycle rider and two persons walking synchronously and two
persons walking in opposite directions.
4.7. Results on the UMN Data Set
On the UMN data set, we compare our unmasking
framework with a state-of-the-art unsupervised method 
and several supervised ones . In Table 5,
we present the frame-level AUC score for each individual
scene, as well as the average score for all the three scenes.
Compared to the unsupervised approach of Del Giorno et
al. , we obtain an improvement of 4.1%. On the ﬁrst
scene, our performance is on par with the supervised approaches . As illustrated in Figure 8, our approach is able to correctly identify the two abnormal events
in the ﬁrst scene without any false positives, by applying a
threshold of around 0.5. On the last scene, the performance
of our unmasking framework based on late fusion is less
than 2% lower than the best supervised approach . Furthermore, we are able to surpass the performance reported
in for the third scene, by 1.8%. Our results are much
worse on the second scene. We believe that the changes
in illumination when people enter the room have a negative impact on our approach. The impact becomes more
noticeable when we employ motion features alone, as the
frame-level AUC is only 84.9%. Since the CNN features are
more robust to illumination variations, we obtain a framelevel AUC of 86.5%. These observations are also applicable
when we analyze the false positive detections presented in
Figure 9. Indeed, the example in the bottom left corner of
Figure 9 illustrates that our method triggers a false detection when a signiﬁcant amount of light enters the room as
the door opens. The true positive examples in Figure 9 represent people running around in all directions.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we proposed a novel framework for abnormal event detection in video that requires no training sequences. Our framework is based on unmasking , a
technique that has never been used in computer vision, as
far as we know. We have conducted abnormal event detection experiments on four data sets in order to compare our
approach with a state-of-the-art unsupervised approach 
and several supervised methods . The empirical results indicate that our approach
gives better performance than the unsupervised method 
and some of the supervised ones . Unlike Del
Giorno et al. , we can process the video online, without
any accuracy degradation.
We have adopted a late fusion strategy to combine motion and appearance features, but we did not observe any
considerable improvements when using this strategy. In future work, we aim at ﬁnding a better way of fusing motion
and appearance features. Alternatively, we could develop
an approach to train (unsupervised) deep features on a related task, e.g. action recognition, and use these features to
represent both motion and appearance information.
Acknowledgments. Research supported by University of
Bucharest, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
through the 2017 Mobility Fund, and by SecurifAI through
Project P/38/185 funded under POC-A1-A1.1.1-C-2015.