Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 2555–2565
November 16 - 20, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Blockwise Self-Attention for Long Document Understanding
Jiezhong Qiu1⇤, Hao Ma2, Omer Levy2, Wen-tau Yih2, Sinong Wang2, Jie Tang1
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2Facebook AI
 
{haom,omerlevy,scottyih,sinongwang}@fb.com
 
We present BlockBERT, a lightweight and ef-
ﬁcient BERT model for better modeling longdistance dependencies.
Our model extends
BERT by introducing sparse block structures
into the attention matrix to reduce both memory consumption and training/inference time,
which also enables attention heads to capture either short- or long-range contextual information.
We conduct experiments on language model pre-training and several benchmark question answering datasets with various paragraph lengths. BlockBERT uses 18.7-
36.1% less memory and 12.0-25.1% less time
to learn the model. During testing, BlockBERT
saves 27.8% inference time, while having comparable and sometimes better prediction accuracy, compared to an advanced BERT-based
model, RoBERTa.
Introduction
Recent emergence of the pre-training and ﬁnetuning paradigm, exempliﬁed by methods like
ELMo , GPT-2/3 , BERT , XLNet , RoBERTa and ALBERT , has
drastically reshaped the landscape of the natural
language processing research. These methods ﬁrst
pre-train a deep model with language model objectives using a large corpus and then ﬁne-tune the
model using in-domain supervised data for target
applications. Despite its conceptual simplicity, this
paradigm has re-established the new state-of-theart baselines across various tasks, such as question
answering , coreference resolution , relation extraction and text retrieval , to name a few.
⇤This work was partially done when the ﬁrst author was
an intern at Facebook AI. Code is available at https://
github.com/xptree/BlockBERT
Building such models in practice, however, is
an extremely resource-intensive process. For instance, the training of BERT-family models is notoriously expensive. Devlin et al. report that
it takes four days to pre-train BERT-Base/BERT-
Large on 4/16 Cloud TPUs. In order to reduce the
pre-training time of RoBERTa to 1 day, Liu et al.
 use 1,024 V100 GPUs. One crucial factor
contributing to the long training time is the memory
consumption of these deep models, as it directly
affects the batch size. Although the ﬁne-tuning
stage is relatively inexpensive, the memory issue
still restricts the scenarios in which BERT can be
used. For instance, “it is currently not possible
to re-produce most of the BERT-Large results on
the paper using a GPU with 12GB-16GB of RAM,
because the maximum batch size that can ﬁt in
memory is too small.1”
Although one may think that model size is the
main contributor to the large memory consumption, our analysis (Section 2.1) shows that one of
the main bottlenecks is actually dot-product selfattention, operated in multiple layers of Transformers , the building block of
BERT. As the attention operation is quadratic to
the sequence length, this fundamentally limits the
maximum length of the input sequence, and thus
restricts the model capacity in terms of capturing
long-distance dependencies. As a result, downstream tasks have to either truncate their sequences
to leading tokens or split
their sequences with a sliding window . Ad-hoc handling of long sequences is
also required in the pre-training stage, such as updating the model using only short sequences in the
early stage .
Common strategies for reducing memory consumption, unfortunately, do not work. For instance,
1github.com/google-research/bert
shrinking the model by lowering the number of layers L, attention heads A, or hidden units H leads
to signiﬁcant performance degradation and does not
address the long sequence issue. Alternatively,
general low-memory training techniques, such as
microbatching and gradient
checkpointing essentially trade
off training time for memory consumption, prolongs the already lengthy training process.
In this work, we explore a different strategy,
sparsifying the attention layers, intending to design a lightweight and effective BERT that can
model long sequences in a memory-efﬁcient way.
Our BlockBERT extends BERT by introducing
sparse block substructures into attention matrices
to reduce both memory consumption and the number of ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs), which
also enables attention heads to capture either shortor long-range contextual information. Compared
to the previous method that also enforces sparsity , our approach is much
simpler mathematically and very easy to implement. More importantly, the results of experiments
conducted on several benchmark question answering datasets with various paragraph lengths show
that BlockBERT performs comparably or even better than the original BERT-family models, while
enjoying an 18.7-36.1% reduction in memory usage, a 12.0-25.1% reduction in training time, and a
27.8% reduction in inference time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 gives a brief introduction of the BERT
model, along with an in-depth analysis of its memory usage during training time. We describe our
proposed model in Section 3 and contrast it with existing methods that aim for creating a lighter model.
Section 4 presents the experimental results and ablation studies, followed by a survey of other related
work in Section 5 and the conclusion in Section 6.
Background: Memory Bottleneck in
Training BERT
We brieﬂy review BERT and introduce its memory
proﬁling in this section. Following the paradigm
of language model pre-training and down-stream
task ﬁne-tuning, BERT consists of multiple layers of bidirectional Transformers , where each Transformer
encoder has a multi-head self-attention layer and a
position-wise feed-forward layer. Using the same
notation as in , we denote the
number of Transformer layers by L, the number of
hidden units by H, the number of attention heads
by A, the sequence length by N, and the batch size
by B. We also assume the feed-forward hidden
unit size to be 4H.2
Memory Proﬁling
Training BERT is a memory-intensive process. In
order to identify the bottleneck, we follow the memory model proposed by Sohoni et al. , where
memory usage throughout neural network training is categorized into three main types: (1) Model
memory is used to store model parameters; (2) Optimizer memory is the additional memory used by
the speciﬁc learning algorithm during the process;
(3) Activation memory consists of the outputs of
each layer, which are cached for reuse in backpropagation to compute gradients.
Take BERT-Base training as an example. The
model has 110 million parameters, so model memory occupies 0.2 GB if parameters are stored in
half-precision ﬂoating-point format (FP16). For
Adam , the optimizer needs
additional memory to store the gradients, ﬁrst moments, and second moments of model parameters.
If stored using the same precision, the optimizer
memory should be three times of model memory.3
To calculate the exact size of activation memory
is not trivial because it depends heavily on the implementation of the toolkit. Instead, we measure
it empirically by training BERT-Base using Adam
with a memory proﬁler (more details are provided
in Appendix A.2).
We use 32 NVIDIA V100 GPUs for training.
Every single GPU thus consumes a minibatch of size b = B/32 = 8.
Figure 1(a)
shows the proﬁling result for a single GPU, where
the model/optimizer/activation memory consumes
0.21/1.03/8.49 GB, respectively. We can see that
activation memory accounts for the vast majority of
the total GPU memory (87.6%) and is thus the bottleneck. Notice that although our analysis is done
on BERT-Base, it can also be generalized to BERT-
Large and other models such as RoBERTa and XLNet .
2The default parameter settings for BERT-Base and BERT-
Large can be found in Appendix A.1
3In the current PyTorch Adam implementation, the ﬁrst
and second moments are stored in single precision. Consequently, BERT’s optimizer memory (1 GB) is ﬁve times of
model memory (0.2 GB).
activation
BERT-Base (GB)
(a) BERT-Base Training Memory
Sequence Length N
Act. Memory (GB)
0.00715N + 4.83
(b) Regression Analysis
on Activation Memory
Figure 1: Memory Proﬁling for BERT.
A Regression Analysis on Activation
For BERT, or more speciﬁcally, Transformer, the
activation memory corresponds to intermediate results of different layers. It grows linearly in all
the model hyper-parameters, except the sequence
length N, due to the attention layers. To quantify the linear and quadratic components in the
activation memory more clearly, we conduct a regression analysis as follows. Assume that the activation memory (in each GPU) is a polynomial
a2bN2 + a1bN + a0, where b is the batch size
in each GPU and ai (i = 0, 1, 2) are coefﬁcients
to be determined. If we ﬁx the total number of
tokens in a GPU to be constant (in our case, we
ﬁx b ⇥N = 4096), we should have a linear function w.r.t. N, i.e., 4096a2N + 4096a1 + a0. We
enumerate N from {128, 256, 512, 1024} in our
experiments, and plot the corresponding proﬁled
activation memory in Figure 1(b).
Using ordinary least squares (OLS), with b ⇥N = 4096,
the estimated linear function for activation memory is 0.00715 ⇥N + 4.83, where the ﬁrst term
corresponds to the O(N2) component.
N = 512 (i.e., b = 8), we can see that for
BERT-Base, the O(N2) component accounts for
3.66 GB, and the O(N) component accounts for
4.83 GB. When the sequence length N increases to
1024 (i.e., b = 4), the O(N2) component increases
to 7.32 GB, while the O(N) part is unchanged.
Techniques for Reducing Traing Memory
Observing that activation memory is the training
bottleneck, we discuss common memory reduction
techniques below.
Low Precision Low
precision is to use half-precision/mixed-precision
for training neural networks. This technique has
been widely used in Transformer training . In this work, we already
assume to use mixed-precision training by default,
as indicated in the aforementioned analysis.
Microbatching
 Microbatching is to split a batch into small microbatches (which can be ﬁt into memory), and then
run forward and backward passes on them separately with gradients for each micro-batch accumulated. Because it runs forward/backward pass
multiple times for a single batch, it trades off time
for memory.
Gradient Checkpointing Gradient checkpointing saves memory by only caching
activations of a subset of layers. The un-cached
activations will be recomputed during backpropagation from the latest checkpoint. This strategy trades
off time for memory by repeating computations and
will obviously extend training time.
Knowledge Distillation
 
Knowledge distillation aims to compress and transfer knowledge from a teacher model to a simpler
student model. However, knowledge distillation
relies on a teacher model (which is still expensive
in training time) and usually suffers from a certain
degree of performance degradation.
As common techniques are limited in reducing
both the training time and memory usage, we investigate how to optimize the dot-product attention
layers and introduce our approach next.
Model: BlockBERT
Following , the dot-product
attention in Transformer is deﬁned as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
where Q, K, V
2 RN⇥d with N to be the sequence length and d to be a hidden dimension. As
we can see, the inner product between Q and K
consumes O(N2) memory. One simple way to reduce the memory consumption of attention is to
sparsify the attention matrix. Suppose we have
a masking matrix M 2 {0, 1}N⇥N, we deﬁne a
masked version of attention as follows:
Attention(Q, K, V , M) = softmax
with operator ⊙deﬁned by
(A ⊙M)ij =
if Mij = 1
if Mij = 0 .
In this work, we design M to be a sparse block
matrix, which not only reduces memory and the
number of ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs) but
also beneﬁts from efﬁcient dense matrix support
from deep learning frameworks, such as PyTorch
and Tensorﬂow. More formally, we split the length-
N input sequence into n blocks, with each block
of length N
n .4 The N ⇥N attention matrix is then
partitioned into n⇥n blocks, where each block matrix is of the size N
n . We deﬁne a sparse block
matrix M by a permutation ⇡of {1, 2, · · · , n}:
= b (j−1)n
otherwise.
By writing Q, K, V as block matrices, such that
n]> , K = [K>
n ]> and pluging them into Equation 1, we can formally deﬁne Blockwise Attention
as follows:
Blockwise-Attention(Q, K, V , M)
Equation 3 only needs to compute and store
⇡(i) (i = 1, · · · n), each has size N
In other words, BlockBERT reduces both O(N2)
memory consumption and FLOPs by a factor of n,
n ⇥n = N⇥N
Blockwise Multi-Head Attention
Analogous to Multi-head Attention , we allow queries, keys, and values to be
projected multiple times and perform blockwise attentions in parallel. Moreover, different blockwise
attention heads can use different masking matrices.
The outputs of multiple heads are then concatenated and aggregated with another linear projection.
Let A be the number of attention heads and H the
number of hidden units. Blockwise multi-head attention is formally deﬁned as follows:
Blockwise-Multi-head-Attention(Q, K, V )
=Concat(head1, · · · headA)W O,
where for each head i, i = 1, 2, · · · , A,
headi = Blockwise-Attention(QW Q
4We assume N can be divided by n. If not, we pad the
input sequence to make N divisible.
Masking Matrices
Blockwise Attention
(1, 2) (2, 1)
(1, 2, 3) (2, 3, 1) (3, 1, 2)
Figure 2: Architecture of Blockwise Multi-head Attention, which acts as building blocks of BlockBERT. The
key idea is to introduce a sparse block masking matrix
to the N ⇥N attention matrix. The right panel shows
the masking matrices we use when n = 2, 3. For n = 2,
the masking matrices are deﬁned by permutation (1, 2),
(2, 1) and have 50% non-zeros. For n = 3, the masking
matrices are deﬁned by permutation (1, 2, 3), (2, 3, 1),
and (3, 1, 2) and have 33.33% non-zeros.
2 RH⇥d and the
projection matrix W O 2 RH⇥H.
Each masking matrix Mi is determined by a permutation
⇡i according to Equation 2.
In particular, we
choose ⇡from permutations generated by shifting
one position: σ = (2, 3, · · · , n, 1), i.e., we select
⇡2 {σ, σ2, · · · , σn}. For example, with 12 attention heads (A = 12) and 2 blocks (n = 2), we can
assign 10 heads to permutation (1, 2) and the other
2 heads to permutation (2, 1). Figure 2 illustrates
the blockwise multi-head attention with block number n 2 {2, 3}. Blockwise sparsity captures both
local and long-distance dependencies in a memoryefﬁciency way, which is crucial for long-document
understanding tasks. For instance, the identity permutation, i.e., (1, 2, · · · , n), enables each token to
attend to its nearby tokens in self-attention, while
other permutations allow tokens within the same
block attending to tokens in another block. Our
proposed BlockBERT essentially replaces the multihead attention layers in Transformer/BERT with
blockwise multi-head attention.
Analysis of Memory Usage Reduction
To validate our claim that BlockBERT with n ⇥n
blocks can reduce the O(N2) memory usage by a
factor of n, we perform the same memory proﬁling
as described in sections 2.1 and 2.2. Again, We ﬁx
the number of tokens in each GPU (b⇥N = 4096)
and choose N from {128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048}.5
As we can see from Figure 3 and Table 1, the empirical results align well with the theoretical values.
5We use GPUs of 16 GB memory for proﬁling. BERT
with N = 2048 fails due to an out-of-memory error.
When we set the number of blocks to be 2 and 3 for
BlockBERT, the estimated O(N2) activation memory decreases to 1/2 and 1/3 of BERT’s O(N2) activation memory, respectively. As shown in Table 2,
for the sequence length N = 512, BlockBERT
with 2 and 3 blocks saves 18.7% and 23.8% overall
memory, respectively. The saving is more signiﬁcant for longer sequences. When N = 1024, the
overall memory reduction of BlockBERT with 2
and 3 blocks is 27.3% and 36.1%, respectively.
Sequence Length N
Act. Memory (GB)
0.00715N + 4.83
BlockBERT n=2
0.00357N + 4.84
BlockBERT n=3
0.00238N + 4.87
Figure 3: Regression analysis on activation memory for
BERT and BlockBERT.
Act. Mem. (GB)
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
Table 1: Estimated O(N 2) and O(N) activation memory for BERT and BlockBERT.
Experiments
We evaluate the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning performance of BlockBERT. In particular, when n = 2,
we denote 10:2 to be the conﬁguration which assigns 10 heads to permutation (1, 2) and 2 to permutation (2, 1); when n = 3, we denote 8:2:2 to be
the conﬁguration which assigns 8, 2, 2 heads to permutation (1, 2, 3), (2, 3, 1), and (3, 1, 2), respectively. We compare BlockBERT with the following
baselines:
Google BERT Google BERT is the ofﬁcial pretrained model from .
RoBERTa-2seq & RoBERTa-1seq We compare
with two versions of RoBERTa .
RoBERTa-2seq is trained with both masked language model (MLM) task and next sentence prediction (NSP) task, while RoBERTa-1seq refers to
the pre-training model with only the MLM task.
SparseBERT We pre-train BERT models with its
Transformer encoder replaced by a Sparse Transformer encoder . We set its
sparsity hyper-parameters stride ` = 128 and expressivity c = 32.6 The attention masking matrix
used in Sparse Transformer and more implementation details are discussed in Appendix A.3. A
similar architecture was adopted in GPT-3 .
Pre-training
All the models follow the BERT-Base setting, i.e.,
L = 12, H = 768, A = 12, and are trained
on the same corpus — BooksCorpus and English
Wikipedia with uncased word piece tokens. Thus
all models use the same vocabulary as Google
BERT (uncased version) with vocabulary size
30,522. We ﬁx the number of tokens per batch
B ⇥N = 131, 072, i.e., if sequence length N =
512 then batch size B = 256, if sequence length
N = 1024 then batch size B = 128. The detailed
pre-training conﬁguration is listed in Appendix A.1.
Moreover, the pre-training of SparseBERT and
BlockBERT follows the RoBERTa-1seq setting, i.e.,
we drop the NSP (Next Sentence Prediction) task,
and an input sequence is up to N tokens until it
reaches a document boundary.
A summary of the pre-training performance comparison between BlockBERT and RoBERTa-1seq
is shown in Table 2. Besides memory saving, we
also achieve a signiﬁcant speedup. For example,
when N = 1024, BlockBERT (n = 2) reduces the
training time from RoBERTa’s 9.7 days to 7.5 days.
Fine-tuning Tasks
We evaluate BlockBERT on several question answering tasks, including SQuAD 1.1/2.0 and ﬁve other tasks from
the MrQA shared task7 — HotpotQA , NewsQA ,
SearchQA , TriviaQA and NaturalQA . Since MrQA does not have an ofﬁcial test
set, we follow Joshi et al. to split the devel-
6We adopt Sparse Transformer implemented by Fairseq,
which ﬁrst computes the N ⇥N attention matrix, and then
masks it to be a sparse one. This implementation cannot
avoid the O(N 2) attention computation, and thus has a similar
training time/memory cost to RoBERTa.
7mrqa.github.io
Training Time (day)
Memory (per GPU, GB)
Heads Conﬁg.
Valid. ppl
RoBERTa-1seq
BlockBERT n=2
5.83 (-12.0%)
7.91 (-18.7%)
BlockBERT n=3
5.80 (-12.5%)
7.32 (-23.8%)
RoBERTa-1seq
BlockBERT n=2
7.51 (-22.3%)
9.73 (-27.3%)
BlockBERT n=3
7.23 (-25.1%)
8.55 (-36.1%)
Table 2: Pre-training Performance Analysis.
opment set evenly to build a new development set
and test set.
These QA datasets have different paragraph
length distributions and are thus ideal for testing
the effectiveness of BlockBERT8. For example,
SQuAD, NaturalQA, and HotpotQA consist of
mostly short paragraphs (shorter than 512), while
paragraphs in SearchQA (average length 1,004)
and TriviaQA (average length 934) have around
1,000 tokens. When the input sequence is longer
than N, we follow the common practice to split it using a sliding window
of size N and stride 128. This means that for
SearchQA and TriviaQA, a model with N = 512
can only capture half of the context, while a model
with N = 1024 can accept the whole paragraph as
For all models, we adopt the same ﬁne-tuning
QA setup from Devlin et al. .
tokenized paragraph (p1, · · · , ps) and question
(q1, · · · , qt) are concatenated to be a sequence
[CLS]q1 · · · qt[SEP]p1 · · · ps[SEP].
The sequence is then fed into the pre-trained model with
two extra linear layers for predicting the start and
end positions of the answer spans. The detailed
ﬁne-tuning setting is listed in Appendix A.4. Table 3 and Table 4 report the experimental results.
BlockBERT (n=2) v.s. RoBERTa-1seq Comparing BlockBERT with RoBERTa-1seq when N =
512, we observe an absolute F1 difference from
0.04 (in NaturalQA) to 1.18 (in NewsQA), with
an average of 0.55. For N = 1024, BlockBERT
achieves more comparable or even better performance to RoBERTa-1seq, In SearchQA, NewsQA
and HotpotQA, BlockBERT achieves absolute F1
improvement of 0.39, 0.44 and 0.23, respectively.
BlockBERT v.s. SparseBERT For N = 512, it is
interesting that BlockBERT with 3 blocks (density
33.33%) performs better then SparseBERT (den-
8The detailed paragraph length distributions can be found
in Appendix A.5
Human Perf.
Google BERT
RoBERTa-2seq
RoBERTa-1seq
SparseBERT
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
RoBERTa-1seq
SparseBERT
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
Table 3: Dev set results on SQuAD 1.1/2.0. The result of XLNet(-Base) is from Yang et al. . For
BlockBERT models, their attention head conﬁgurations
are the same as Table 2.
sity 44.20%) in both SQuAD and MrQA tasks.
Similar results can be observed for N = 1024,
too. These results show that off-diagonal masking
matrices, e.g., the masking matrix deﬁned by permutation (2, 3, 1) and (3, 1, 2), play crucial roles
in BlockBERT. Furthermore, BlockBERT with 2
blocks achieve a more signiﬁcant improvement.
Effect of Long Sequence Pre-training Our observations are twofold: (1) Long sequence pre-training
beneﬁts long sequence ﬁne-tuning. In TriviaQA
and SearchQA, of which paragraph lengths are
around 1024, pre-training models with N = 1024
achieve signiﬁcantly better performance. (2) The
heterogeneity of pre-training and ﬁne-tuning sequence length may hurt performance. For example,
in SQuAD, we do not see signiﬁcant performance
gain by using pre-trained models with N = 1024;
in HotpotQA and NewsQA, longer sequence pretraining even hurts performance.
Effect of #Blocks
It is not surprising that
BlockBERT with 2 blocks (n = 2) performs better than that with 3 blocks (n = 3), because it
keeps more attention matrix entries. The biggest
difference is in SQuAD 2.0 and NewsQA with
N = 1024, where we observe an absolute loss
of 1.6 F1 by increasing block number from 2 to 3.
Efﬁcient inference with BlockBERT We benchmark test efﬁciency of RoBERTa and BlockBERT.
The benchmark code follows huggingface9. All experiments are run 30 times on a 32GB V100 GPU
with half precision (FP16). We report the average
running time in Table 5. As we can see, BlockBERT
does achieve speedup and memory reduction during test time. Take 8⇥1024, i.e., batch size B = 8,
sequence length N = 1024, as an example, we
can see that BlockBERT with 2 blocks saves 27.8%
of test time, and BlockBERT with 3 blocks saves
more (30.4%). As for memory, we can observe that
RoBERTa cannot handle an input of size 16⇥1024,
while it is possible for BlockBERT to work on it.
In summary, not only BlockBERT saves training/inference time and memory, but it also has
a competitive and sometimes better performance,
especially for tasks with longer sequences. This
demonstrates the effectiveness of our blockwise
multi-head attention approach.
Ablation Study
We ﬁx the assignment of attention heads in the
above experiments. For example, BlockBERT with
sequence length N = 512 and 2 blocks is trained
with ten heads using permutation (1, 2) and the
other two using permutation (2, 1). However, there
are other ways to assign twelve attention heads,
e.g., seven heads for permutation (1, 2) and the
other ﬁve for permutation (2, 1). It would be interesting to see how the assignment of heads affects
model performance. In this section, we grid search
attention head assignments and plot their best validation performance in 1.2M training steps. The
results are shown in Figure 4.
Our observations are threefold: (1) Identity permutations, i.e., (1, 2) and (1, 2, 3), are important.
As shown in Figure 4, all optimal solutions assign
considerable attention heads to block-diagonal matrices, since those matrices enable each token to attend to its nearby tokens; (2) Non-identity permutations follow the rule of “vital few and trivial many.”
Although identity permutations are important, assigning all attention heads to them (corresponding
to 12:0 and 12:0:0 in Figure 4) signiﬁcantly hurts
performance, since the model can not learn long-
9github.com/huggingface/transformers/
blob/master/examples/benchmarks.py
term dependencies with only identity permutation;
(3) Pre-training performance and ﬁne-tuning performance are correlated but not always consistent.
When n = 3, pre-training performance suggests
10:1:1 to be the best head assignment — ten heads
for permutation (1, 2, 3), one head for (2, 3, 1) and
one head for (3, 1, 2), but we observe that the con-
ﬁguration of 8:2:2 achieves better performance in
ﬁne-tuning tasks.
Related Work
In this section, we review the related work of memory optimization for neural network training and
recent efforts to simplify Transformer and BERT.
Low-memory neural networks training
Due to the large size of model parameters and deep
architectures, modern neural networks training requires signiﬁcant amounts of computing resources.
As a result, there is an increasing interest in training
neural networks with low memory . Mainstream techniques mostly address this
problem with a better system or engineering design, such as low-precision training , microbatching 
and gradient checkpointing . Alternatively, there also exists some research focusing
on the theoretical aspect, including the recently proposed lottery ticket hypothesis and its successful application to masked language model pre-training , several approaches have been proposed to simplify the model and its training process.
We summarize these attempts as follows:
Attention layer simpliﬁcation
There are currently two lines of research trying to simplify
the multi-head attention layers.
The ﬁrst one
focuses on attention matrix sparsiﬁcation.
Notable examples include Star Transformer , Sparse Transformer , Adaptive Sparse Transformer , Log-Sparse Transformer , Reformer and Longformer . However, due to the insufﬁcient support for sparse tensors from the current deep learning platforms, some
Google BERT
RoBERTa-2seq
RoBERTa-1seq
SparseBERT
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
RoBERTa-1seq
SparseBERT
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
Table 4: MrQA test results (Tasks are sorted decreasingly by average paragraph length). For BlockBERT models,
their attention head conﬁgurations are the same as Table 2.
valid loss
(a) N = 512, n = 2
valid loss
(b) N = 1024, n = 2
valid loss
(c) N = 512, n = 3
valid loss
(d) N = 1024, n = 3
Figure 4: Ablation over blockwise attention heads assignment.
8⇥1024 16⇥1024 24⇥1024 32⇥1024
BlockBERT n=2
BlockBERT n=3
Table 5: Test time statistics (sec) for different input size.
OOM indicates out-of-memory.
of them have to represent a sparse matrix using a
dense matrix with a binary mask or rely on customized CUDA kernels . As a
result, the speed-up or reduction in memory consumption is sometimes limited in practice. The
second line of research prunes redundant attention
heads. Examples include and
 . Our BlockBERT model belongs to the ﬁrst category, as we sparsify the attention matrix by replacing it with a block sparse
Reducing model size for pre-training Knowledge distillation is a general technique that aims to compress and transfer knowledge from a teacher model to a simpler
student model. There are two recent efforts that
apply knowledge distillation to BERT pre-training
for reducing model size: TinyBERT distills BERT using a smaller Transformer,
and Tang et al. distills BERT with a BiL-
STM . In contrast, ALBERT is a notable work
that does not take the knowledge distillation approach. It uses parameter-sharing to reduce the
number of parameters of the BERT model. As discussed in section 2.1, parameter-sharing reduces
both model memory and optimizer memory. These
two parts account for about 12.4% of total training memory for BERT-base. As for efﬁciency,
parameter-sharing reduces communication complexity in distributed training and thus saves training time as well.
In the aforementioned efﬁcient Transformers, the
model quality is often demonstrated by comparable language model perplexity, or equivalently the
bits per word/byte. It is often implicitly assumed
that similar language model perplexity implies similar pre-training model quality, namely the same
performance on the downstream tasks. We would
like to point out that this assumption does not necessarily hold. For example, the experiments on
the Enwik8 dataset by Child et al. demonstrates that Sparse Transformer “surpasses the 1.03
state-of-the-art (bits per byte) for a similarly-sized
Transformer-XL and matching the 0.99 (bits per
byte) of a model trained with more than double
the number of parameters”. However, if we compare SparseBERT (pre-training model with Sparse
Transformer backbone) against XLNet (pre-training model with Transformer-XL
backbone) in SQuAD, Table 3 shows that XLNet
still outperforms SparseBERT signiﬁcantly. Therefore, we believe that it is necessary to conduct a
comprehensive study and evaluation of existing ef-
ﬁcient Transformer models when used for masked
language model pre-training. Limited by resources,
in this work, we mainly compare BlockBERT to
pre-training using Sparse Transformer , which is the earliest attempt to design efﬁcient Transformer models and also the key contributor to the success of GPT-3 .
We plan to benchmark more models in the future.
Conclusion
In this work, we study the lightweight BERT model
with the goal of achieving both efﬁciency and effectiveness. We proﬁle and analyze the memory
bottlenecks of BERT and focus on optimize dotproduct self-attention, which consumes quadratic
memory with respect to the sequence length. To
reduce both time and memory consumption, we
present BlockBERT, which sparsiﬁes the attention
matrices to be sparse block matrices. The proposed
model achieves time and memory saving without
signiﬁcant loss of performance.
In the future, we plan to benchmark more efﬁcient Transfomers in language model pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning. We also would like to explore
more applications of BlockBERT on NLP tasks
involving long sequences such as coreference resolution and document-level
machine translation , and
also non-NLP tasks such as protein sequence modeling .
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Zhilin Yang,
Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Mandar Joshi and
Luke Zettlemoyer for the helpful suggestions.
Jiezhong Qiu and Jie Tang were partially supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (2018YFB1402600), NSFC for Distinguished Young Scholar (61825602), and NSFC
(61836013).