Statistical Pattern Recognition for Driving Styles
Based on Bayesian Probability and
Kernel Density Estimation
Wenshuo Wang, Junqiang Xi and Xiaohan Li
Abstract—Driving styles have a great inﬂuence on vehicle
fuel economy, active safety, and drivability. To recognize driving
styles of path-tracking behaviors for different divers, a statistical
pattern-recognition method is developed to deal with the uncertainty of driving styles or characteristics based on probability
density estimation. First, to describe driver path-tracking styles,
vehicle speed and throttle opening are selected as the discriminative parameters, and a conditional kernel density function
of vehicle speed and throttle opening is built, respectively, to
describe the uncertainty and probability of two representative
driving styles, e.g., aggressive and normal. Meanwhile, a posterior
probability of each element in feature vector is obtained using
full Bayesian theory. Second, a Euclidean distance method is
involved to decide to which class the driver should be subject
instead of calculating the complex covariance between every
two elements of feature vectors. By comparing the Euclidean
distance between every elements in feature vector, driving styles
are classiﬁed into seven levels ranging from low normal to
high aggressive. Subsequently, to show beneﬁts of the proposed
pattern-recognition method, a cross-validated method is used,
compared with a fuzzy logic-based pattern-recognition method.
The experiment results show that the proposed statistical patternrecognition method for driving styles based on kernel density
estimation is more efﬁcient and stable than the fuzzy logic-based
Index Terms—Statistical pattern recognition, driving styles,
kernel density estimation, full Bayesian theory, Euclidean distance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding of driving styles plays a crucial role as a supervision and control part in the “driver-vehicle-environment”
system. Driving behavior and/or driving styles (e.g., reckless
and careless driving style, anxious driving style, angry and
hostile driving style, patient and careful driving style, and dissociating driving style are deﬁned by ) have a big inﬂuence
on road safety , vehicle performance such as fuel economy
 , comfort , etc.. For example, in terms of driving skills,
an experienced driver usually drives in an economy way, while
a new driver drives in a fuel-consuming way in the same
driving environment. For driving styles, an aggressive driver
usually prefers to vehicle dirvability performance, inversely, a
Wenshuo Wang is a Ph.D. candidate in Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. Now he is studying in the
Vehicle Dynamics and Control Lab, University of California at Berkeley.
(email: , )
Junqiang Xi is a Professor in Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of
Technology, Beijing, China (email: )
Xiaohan Li is a Ph.D. candidate in Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and
Transport Systems, Chair of Human-Machine Systems, Technische Universit¨at
Berlin, Berlin, D-10587, Germany. (email: )
normal (typical) driver usually prefers to the comfort and fuel
economy. Therefore, it is important to recognize and classify
the driving styles to offer a feedback information to the vehicle
control system, allowing the intelligent and advanced vehicle
control system not only to meet individual driver’s needs in
time but also to guarantee the safety of surrounding vehicles
and the host vehicle. The essential work to achieve this goal is
to recognize driver’s driving styles or driving characteristics
and integrate them into vehicle control systems, which can
allow the vehicle to adapt the individual driver.
Recognizing driving behavior or driving styles is a challenging work since feature parameters will be various for
different driving behaviors and driving environments. Fortunately, many related solid works have been done about
applications of driver model , recognition of driver behavior
or characteristics , and the human behavior-recognition
algorithms , recognition of driver distraction . For
recognition methods of driving characteristics, they can be
roughly classiﬁed into two categories: direct method (databased method) and indirect method (model-based method).
These two methods are discussed as follows.
For indirect method, it requires to establish a driver model
that can describe driver’s basic driving characteristics such
as lane-keeping, lane-changing, and obstacle avoidance, etc.
Then, identify or extract driving characteristics based on the
parameter estimation of the proposed driver model. Because
of the non-linearity and uncertainty of driving behaviours, it is
difﬁcult to precisely identify and extract driver characteristics
in time. Fortunately, many stochastic process theories can
be applied to the recognition of driving behaviours. Hidden Markov Model (HMM), as a simple dynamic Bayesian
network, can identify the underlying relationship between
observations and states, thus it can be widely utilized to model
and predict driver’s states and driving behaviours 
 . In , the driver-vehicle system was treated as a hybridstate system, and the HMM was used to estimate driver’s
decisions when driving near intersections. Further, to model
and characterise the driving behaviour, the autoregressive with
exogenous (ARX) model was widely extended and applied.
In , a probabilistic ARX model was utilized to predict
driver behaviors and classify the driver’s driving style, i.e.,
aggressive driving and normal driving. To mimic and model
the uncertainty of driver’s behaviour, a stochastic switched-
ARX (SS-ARX) model was developed and adopted by Akita
et al. and Sekizawa et al. .
In terms of direct method, the basic process of the diarXiv:1606.01284v1 [stat.ML] 3 Jun 2016
rect method is to directly analyse the driving data (e.g.,
vehicle speed, steering wheel angle, throttle opening, etc.)
using pattern-recognition or data-analysis method without establishing relevant driver models. For recognition of driving
skills, Zhang et al. proposed a direct pattern-recognition
approach based on three recognition methods, i.e., multilayer
perception artiﬁcial neural networks (MLP-ANNs), decision
tree, and support vector machines (SVMs). The coefﬁcients
of discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of steering wheel angles
were treated as the discriminant features. In , relationships
between driver state and driver’s actions were investigated
using the cluster method with eight state-action variables.
For different driving patterns of drivers, the state-action
cluster were different, thus segmenting driver into different
patterns. Though the above mentioned works have made a
great a progress in recognition of driver behavior or driving
styles/skills/intentions, lots of challenging tasks haven’t been
overcome, such as the uncertainty of driving styles and preferences that are affected not only by driver’s psychological and
physical states, but also by driving environments (including
the trafﬁc condition, weather, road condition) and vehicle
conditions. According to the above discussion, in terms of
recognition of driving styles, there are two key issues:
• Selection of training data sets. It is difﬁcult to select
a pair of data sets that can represent or deﬁne all the
aggressive (or normal) driver, though some rule-based
strategies can roughly classify most drivers into different
categories. One reason is that the collection driving data
of an aggressive driver may not always show a aggressive
driving behavior. Another reason is that the aggressive
threshold value will be different for individuals.
• Uncertainty of driving behaviors/styles. The uncertainty
of driver behavior or driving characteristics may be
affected by the disturbance coming from driving environments, driver physical or psychological factors will
lead different driving styles even for the same driver at
different time and/or driving environments. Though the
uncertainty of driver behavior and driving characteristics
have been applied to vehicle system control 
 , it is difﬁcult to make a decision for the category
(e.g., aggressive or normal) to which the driver is subject
when the uncertain factors are involved .
For the proposed issues, a statistical method is used to
describe the uncertainty of driving styles from the point of
probability. In this work, the direct method is applied and
driving styles of path-tracking attract our attentions, i.e., aggressive driving styles and normal (typical) driving styles. To
deal with the uncertainty of driving styles, the driving data are
preprocessed using the stochastic (probability) approach. First,
a conditional distribution function – kernel density function –
is involved to describe the uncertainty of driving styles based
on the training data, which can be treated as feature parameters
of driving styles. Second, according to the kernel density
function and full Bayesian theory, the posterior probability of
any pair of input data can be calculated against every category.
And then, to make a decision to which category the driver
are subject and avoid to calculate the complex variance of
each pair elements in feature vector, the Euclidean distance is
introduced. Last, to shown beneﬁts of the proposed patternrecognition method using kernel density estimation, the crossvalidation experiment is conducted by comparing with a fuzzy
logic recognition method.
Following the overview in the ﬁrst section of this paper,
Section II discusses the way of selection of feature parameters.
Section III presents the fuzzy logic recognition algorithm and
the proposed method, including kernel density and Euclidean
distance. Section IV presents the data collection and experiment design in driving simulator. Then the experiment results
and analysis are shown in Section V. Last, the discussion and
the conclusion about this work are shown in Section VI.
II. FEATURE PARAMETERS SELECTION
The goal of feature parameter selection is to allow pattern
vectors belonging to different categories to occupy compact
and disjoint regions as much as possible in a d-dimensional
feature space . Generally, the data using for pattern
recognition of driving styles could be classiﬁed into three
categories: 1) driver-dependent, which includes the physical
signal and physiological signal that are directly related to
the human driver. In terms of physical signal, for example,
the steering angle, brake force, and throttle opening signals,
gesture signal, eyes related signal are used for recognition
of aggressive or normal driver , driver fatigue or
drowsiness , driver’s intentions etc.. For
physiological signal, rate of hear beat, EGG, or EMG signal
is usually used to recognize driver emotions or tension levels
 , etc.; 2) vehicle-dependent, which includes vehicle speed,
acceleration, yaw angle, are used for recognition of driving
skills levels or driver behaviors .; and 3)
driving environment-dependent, which includes road proﬁle,
road-tire coefﬁcients, surrounding vehicles, trafﬁc ﬂow, etc.. In
this work, the driver path-following (path-tracking) behavior
on the curve road is focused on and the vehicle-dependent
signals are selected for recognition of driving styles. To
characterize driver behavior with different driving tasks, the
feature parameter should be selected ﬁrst. For different driving
task, the parameter selection will be different(see Table I).
To select a feature parameter that can describe driving
styles when taking a curve-negotiation task, the distribution
analysis of parameters is conducted. Fig. 1 shows the basic
driving data and corresponding distributions of two driver with
different driving styles. To select a series of feature parameters,
assumptions are made as follows:
• Statistical characteristic invariance: Given a constant
driving environment, the vehicle speed or throttle opening
driver selected are relatively variable, but its statistical
property, such as distribution property, could be treated
as invariance to some degree. For example, an aggressive
driver prefers a high vehicle speed than a normal driver,
and the vehicle speed prefers to fall a constant interval
[vs ± ε, vs ∓ε], ε is a small positive value. Table II
shows two drivers with distinct driving styles (aggressive
and normal) and the statistical results indicate that the
invariance of statistical property is nearly constant for
one selected driver.
FEATURE PARAMETERS SELECTION AND PATTERN-RECOGNITION METHOD
ASSOCIATED WITH RELEVANT DRIVING CHARACTERISTICS
Driving task
Feature parameters
Car-following
–Distances between cars;
–Vehicle speed;
–Vehicle Position
Driving skill 
–Steering angle
negotiating
pathtracking)
–Vehicle speed
Driving styles 
 - 
–Acceleration;
–Yaw rate;
–Lateral displacement;
–Vehicle Speed;
–Steering angle;
–Physical signal;
–Physiological signal
–OOBNs or BNs;
–Bayesian ﬁlter
NOTES: GMM–Gaussian Mixture Model; FC – Fuzzy Clustering;
SVM – Support Vector Machine; DT – Decision Tree; MLP-NN
– Multilayer Perception-Neural Network; MPC – Model Predictive
Control; P-ARX – Probabilistic Autoregressive Exogenous; NN
– Neural Network; FL – Fuzzy Logic; HMM – Hidden Markov
Model; OOBNs – Objected-oriented Bayesian Networks
• Maximum discrimination: The selected feature parameters, to some degree, should maximize the discrimination
between different driving styles. From the statistical results in Fig. 1, it is obvious that the vehicle speed driver
selects and throttle opening driver controls are suitable to
be feature parameters.
Therefore, based on these assumptions and Fig. 1, vehicle
speed (v) and throttle opening (α) are selected as feature
parameters (x = (v, α)) to describe driver path-tracking
behavior in different kinds of styles and discussed as followed.
MEANS AND VARIANCES OF VEHICLE SPEED AND THROTTLE OPENING
FOR TWO DIFFERENT DRIVERS
Driver 1 (Aggressive)
Driver 2 (Normal)
Mean(Var) Sp
Mean(Var) Th
Mean(Var) Sp
Mean(Var) Th
56.849(317.551)
0.566(0.131)
52.492(152.317)
0.285(0.099)
61.334(256.959)
0.610(0.133)
48.530(173.298)
0.259(0.063)
61.928(250.443)
0.645(0.136)
52.925(129.773)
0.235(0.071)
61.336(273.581)
0.625(0.127)
50.565(137.977)
0.238(0.059)
64.451(307.289)
0.599(0.146)
50.666(106.973)
0.195(0.056)
64.241(301.918)
0.688(0.120)
50.531(117.186)
0.213(0.064)
63.146(296.334)
0.612(0.142)
49.487(154.639)
0.284(0.057)
61.932(263.429)
0.649(0.142)
46.344(115.193)
0.156(0.030)
64.147(287.705)
0.608(0.126)
48.247(95.392)
0.153(0.037)
A. Vehicle Speed
For driving styles when tracking a given road, the vehicle
speed is one of parameters that can directly show and characterize driver behavior and driving preferences , such as
aggressive or normal styles, shown as Fig. 1 and Table II. For
example, in Fig. 1 and Table II, it is obvious that the aggressive
prefers to vehicle speeds vagg ∈{ ∪ } km/h,
while the normal driver prefers to vehicle speeds vnorm ∈
 km/h.
B. Throttle Opening
As one of the direct control parameter by the human
driver, throttle openings can directly reﬂect driver’s preferences or driving styles. Besides, the distributions of throttle
openings for different drivers (shown in Fig. 1 and Table II)
are more distinct than accelerations. In Table II, Mean (·)
and Var (·) represent the mean and variance value of (·),
(·) ∈{SP = speed, Th = throttle opening}. For example,
Mean SP represents the mean value of vehicle speed.
Therefore, the vehicle speed v and throttle opening α are selected as the feature parameters x =(v, α) to represent driving
styles. And then, based on the selected feature parameter x, a
model f should be trained using the training data to recognize
driving styles s ∈S = {s|s = −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3}, i.e.,
f : x →s. Here, the element of set {−3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3}
represents the aggressive or normal level. A lager value of
s means that a more aggressive driving styles. For example,
s = −3 represents a lowest normal driver and s = 3 represents
a high aggressive driving style.
III. METHOD
In this section, pattern-recognition approaches of driving
styles are discussed. First, a fuzzy-logic pattern-recognition
approach is presented in the ﬁrst subsection to make a comparison with the proposed recognition method. Second, a patternrecognition is developed using kernel density estimation and
Euclidean distance from the point of statistical distribution.
The kernel density estimation method is introduced to estimate
driver’s preference based on training data. Subsequently, to
identify the level of driving styles, the Euclidean distance is
A. Fuzzy Logic
The recognition of driving styles is a vague concept that can
not precisely divide drivers into the deﬁned categories, such
as aggressive or normal, as for different drivers the aggressive
or normal scales of driving behavior will be different. Driver
behavior, which can be treated as a natural language(driving
behavior language), is vague. Our perception of the real
driving styles is pervaded by concepts which do not have
sharply deﬁned boundaries. Therefore, a mathematical tool
called fuzzy logic(FL) is widely developed and introduced
for recognition driver manoeuvre , driving proﬁle 
or driving styles and dealing with the uncertainty of driving
styles, which provides a technique to deal with imprecision
and information granularity.
In this work, the fuzzy inference system(FIS) based on
Mamdani rule are deﬁned as a fuzzy recognition system
with two inputs (i.e., vehicle speed and throttle opening)
and one output(i.e., level of driving styles). The deﬁnition of
membership function are deﬁned based on an expert driver
knowledge.
Corresponding fuzzy values of the ﬁrst input, vehicle
speed(v), are deﬁned to be lower (L), middle (M) and high
(H). The fuzzy values of second input, throttle opening(α ∈
 ), are deﬁned to be lower (L), middle (M) and high (H).
The fuzzy values of output, level of driving styles, are deﬁned
Vehicle speed [km/h]
Vehicle Speed [km/h]
Distribution
Throttle opening α
Throttle opening α
Distribution
Acceleration [m/s2]
Acceleration a
Distribution
Fig. 1. Driving data (Left column) and its distribution (Right column) for two kinds of driving styles. Red line (–) represents the aggressive driver and the
black line (–) represents the (normal) typical driver.
to be lower normal (LN), normal (N), middle (M), aggressive
(A), and high aggressive (HA). Here we code the output sets
LN and HA as −3 and 3. All membership functions are
shown in Fig. 2 and the fuzzy rules are deﬁned in Table III.
FUZZY RULES FOR DEFINITION OF DRIVING STYLES
B. Proposed method
1) Kernel Density Estimation: Kernel density estimation, as
an unsupervised learning method, can estimate a probability
density at a point x0 given a random sample x1, x2, · · · , xN
from a probability density f(x). For two classes of 1-
Dimension data sequences X1 = {x1
1, · · · , x1
i , · · · , x1
and X2 = {x2
1, · · · , x2
j, · · · , x2
m} ∈C2, where x1
X1 ∈Rn, and X2 ∈Rm, we can get two class-conditional
probability density functions f(x|C1) and f(x|C2) , also
called likelihood. In this work, the Gaussian kernel density at
point x0 is used to calculate the probability density f(x|X).
p(x|Ck) = f(x0|X)
Kλ(x0, xi)
2(∥xi −x0∥
where Kλ is the Gaussian kernel.
2) Bayesian Theory and Bayesian Decision: Suppose that
the prior probabilities P(Ck) and the conditional-probabilities
density p(x|Ck), also called posterior probability, are know for
the number of class k = 1, 2, · · · . Based on Bayes formula:
P(Ck|x) = p(x|Ck)P(Ck)
p(x|Ck)p(Ck)
And then, the posterior probability given random input x can
be estimated by Equation (2). Under (2), decisions about x
can be made:
Decide Ck if P(Ck|x) > P(C\k|x)
where P(C\k|x) represents all the left categories except for
the kth category.
Vehicle speed[km/h]
Throttle opening α
Membership function for the inputs and output of FIS. Top1:
membership functions of vehicle speed. Top2: membership functions of
throttle opening. Top3: membership functions of output. Last: whole process
mapping of FIS.
The key to calculate (2) and decide (3) is the conditional
probability density p(x|Ck). However, for a higher-dimension
feature vector in a higher-dimension feature space, the calculation for covariances of every pair of dependent components
in feature vectors will be more difﬁcult. Therefore, instead of
calculating the complicated covariances, a Euclidean distancebased making-decision method is proposed in the following
subsection.
3) Decision Making Using Euclidean Distance: Bayesian
decision can be easily used in 1-Dimension case, but for a ddimension case (d ≥2) and the elements in feature vector x
are highly dependent, it is difﬁcult to calculate the conditionalprobability p(x|Ck). To overcome the issue, the Euclidean
Distance is involved to deal with the decision-making issues,
here, to determine to which category the driver is subject and
measure the levels of driving aggressive/normal type.
Taking two classes (class A and class B) with 2-
Dimension(d = 2) case for example (Fig. 3), the posterior
probability that elements in feature vector x = (x1, x2) are
belonged to class A and B is deﬁned as fA(xl), fB(xl) for
l = 1, 2, respectively. Here, fA(xl) = P(A|xl), fB(xl) =
P(B|xl) . Given random input x∗= (x∗
2), the relevant
posterior probability fA(x∗
l ), fB(x∗
l ) can be calculated by
(1) and (2) for l = 1, 2. Given any input and project their
corresponding posterior probability into the ﬁrst quadrant,
getting A = (fA(x∗
2)) and B = (fB(x∗
and the Euclidean distance is deﬁned as
dA := ∥fA(x∗
1)2 + fA(x∗
dB := ∥fB(x∗
1)2 + fB(x∗
1, · · · , x∗
ddimension feature vectors (d ≥2) is decoupled into several simple densities of 1-dimension feature scalar and the
Bayesian decision is transformed to the Euclidean distancebased decision. The decision-making rules based on Euclidean
distance are deﬁned as follows:
• Decide class A if (dA > dB) ∧(|dA −dB| > ϵ) (Fig.
• Decide class B if (dA < dB) ∧(|dA −dB| > ϵ) (Fig.
• Decide class M if |dA −dB| ≤ϵ (Fig. 3(c))
where M is the fuzzy class between class A and B, ϵ is a
positive threshold value, ϵ ∈R+.
We should note that, when x is in a d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd for d = 3, the Euclidean distance is the
radius of a sphere. Therefore, the expanded Euclidean distance
can be calculated by:
2 , k = 1, 2, · · ·
for any input x∗= (x∗
1, · · · , x∗
i , · · · , x∗
4) Classiﬁcation Algorithm: Based on the above description, a classiﬁcation method based on conditional-kernel density fCk(x) and Euclidean distance dCk is developed. To
represent different level of driving types simply, a number
set is involved as S = {−3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3}. A lager value
of number indicates a more aggressive driving styles. The
classiﬁcation algorithm is shown in Table IV. In Table IV,
the threshold value (ϵ, ϵ) and (ϵ⋆, ϵ⋆) are selected as Table
V. For training step 3, the prior probability P(x) is set to
1/k, k is the number of classiﬁcation for training data. In this
work, k = 2, two typical driving styles of training data, i.e.,
aggressive and normal, are considered.
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this section, to show beneﬁts of the proposed recognition
approach of driving style, a series of path-tracking tests on the
curve road for different participants is conducted in the driving
simulator.
A. Driving Simulator
All the experiment data are obtained through a driving
simulator(See paper and Fig. 4). The direct driving data
(i.e., driver inputs, including steering angle, throttle opening,
braking forces) is input through the game-type driving peripherals. A bicycle-vehicle model is used as the vehicle system.
Schematic Diagram of the proposed pattern-recognition method of driving styles using kernel density estimation and Euclidean distance. Here,
f(·)(xk) = P(·|xk) represents the posterior probability, i.e., the probability that xk belongs class (·). (a)Decide input data (x∗
2) ∈A; (b) decide input
2) ∈B; and (c) decide input data (x∗
2) ∈fuzzy class M.
ALGORITHM OF THE PROPOSED RECOGNITION APPROACH FOR DRIVING
Input training data sequence X k = {xk
i } for k = 1, 2,
i = 1, · · · , n, xk
i,l}, l = 1, · · · , d
conditional-kernel
estimation
i,l|Ck) under Equation (1) for each single component
in feature vectors
Input new data x∗
i,l}, i = 1, 2, 3, · · ·
i,l|Ck) from f(xk
i,l|Ck) for k = 1, 2
Get P(Ck|xk
i,l) under Equation (2) and set fCk(x∗
i,l) for k = 1, 2
Get dCk(x∗
i,l) ⇐Equation (5)
i,l) > dC\k(x∗
i,l) −dC\k(x∗
i,l) ∈(ϵ, ϵ) (see Table V)
i ∈level s = S
else dCk(x∗
i,l) ≤dC\k(x∗
if ∥dCk(x∗
i,l) −dC\k(x∗
i,l) ∥∈(ϵ⋆, ϵ⋆) (see Table
i ∈level s = S
15: end for
16: Output the classiﬁcation for sequences data {xk
THRESHOLD VALUE OF (ϵ, ϵ) AND (ϵ∗, ϵ∗)
Aggressive style level
Normal style level
(0.02,0.2]
(0.02,0.1]
B. Road Curve
In this work, the driver path-tracking in a curve road is
focused. The road factors(e.g., road proﬁle) have a big effect
on detection of driving style patterns. To design a lifelike
Vehicle model of
Matlab/Simulink
virtual scenario
Game-type driving
peripherals
Gear shift
Brake/Acceleration/
Clutch pedal
Steering wheel
Virtual Scenario
Graphical User
Fig. 4. Schematic digram of driving simulator using for data collection .
driving environment, the road model must have the same
scale as road in the real driving environment. To except the
effects of natural factors and other disturbs, a special road
curve is designed and the natural factors are not taken into
consideration. Therefore, the requirements of road model are
subject to following criteria: continuity of the path, continuity
of the curvature, and differentiability of the set path .
Therefore, a curve road is designed as in Fig. 5.
C. Test Method
All the driving data were collected at a sample frequency
at 50 Hz in the driving simulator, including vehicle speed (v),
throttle opening (α), acceleration (a), vehicle position (x, y),
steering angle (δ), yaw angle (ϕ), etc. Eighteen people are
selected as the participant, nine of them are aggressive drivers
and other left half part are normal drivers. Each participant
should be labelled as aggressive or normal before doing a
test. During the test, every driver should follow the rules:
• All participants must be in mentally and physically normal states.
• The secondary tasks are forbidden. For example, text a
message or answer a phone while driving.
• Each participant should rest 1 minute before the next run.
• Each driver drives a car in their own driving style in the
driving simulator.
Curvature 1/ ρ
Start Point
Fig. 5. The road proﬁle (Top) and its curvature (Bottom).
V. RECOGNITION PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, the experiment results and analysis are
discussed to show beneﬁts of the proposed recognition method.
A. Cross-validation
Cross-validation (CV) method, as one of most popular
evaluation scheme, was used to evaluate the recognition performance of the proposed approach. To do CV, the available
training data set is evenly divided into q parts, called folds. All
folds except random one of folds are used for training recognition model, and the hold-out set or validation set is used for
assessing the training model. In this work, driving data sets
are evenly divided into nine folds and ﬁve folds are used for
training and four fold is used for the performance measure of
the proposed method and algorithm. CV assessment approach
makes sure that the training data sets are disjoint from the
validation sets. To evaluate the proposed recognition method,
the validation sets are grouped by aggressive and normal
drivers to test how well the recognizer may identify them from
those provided by the aggressive drivers.
The correction recognition rate (CRR) of driving styles
recognizer is deﬁned as:
⋆∈{a,n} Numa,⋆
for an aggressive driver, and
⋆∈{a,n} Numn,⋆
for a normal driver. The ﬁrst and second subscription of
Num⋆,⋆are the actual driving styles and the driving styles
recognized by the proposed method, respectively. a and n represents “aggressive drivers” and “normal drivers”, respectively.
Taking Numa,n for example, it represents the number of runs
that are grouped as aggressive drivers and classiﬁed as being
normal drivers.
B. Results and Analysis
Fig. 6 ∼Fig. 9 show the recognition result for aggressive
drivers and normal drivers, respectively, and classify them into
different levels using the proposed recognition approach and
FL algorithm. The feature analysis, efﬁciency analysis, and
stability analysis are discussed as follow.
1) Feature Analysis: From Fig. 6 and 8, it is obvious that
the aggressive driver’s driving behaviors are mostly labelled as
being an aggressive driver by using the proposed recognition
algorithm and FL algorithm, only the behaviors at the begin
of runs are labelled as being the normal driver. Furthermore,
we found that an aggressive driver may show a normal driver
behavior before entering a road curve( shown as part A, B,
C, D in Fig. 6 and part A, B, C, D, E, in Fig. 8), but after
entering the curve road, an aggressive driver will show an
aggressive behavior.
For an normal driver, in Fig. 7 and 9, driver behaviors are
barely labelled as being an aggressive driver. Conversely, most
of driving data sets are labelled as being a normal driver.
Furthermore, we found that a normal driver may perform
an aggressive driving when driving out of a curve road to
a straight line road (shown as part A in Fig. 7 and part A
in Fig. 9), but after entering a curve, the normal driver will
perform a normal driving behavior.
2) Accuracy Analysis: From Table VI, the average value of
CRRn and CRRa for eight test drivers (four aggressive and
four normal) are 0.914 and 0.862, respectively.
Compared with the FL algorithm, from Table VII, the
proposed recognition approach for driving styles is more
efﬁcient than the FL algorithm. The proposed algorithm can
improve the correctness approximately by 3.79% and 22.36%
for aggressive driver and normal driver, respectively.
3) Stability Analysis: From Table VII, for recognition of
the normal drivers, the recognition results for using FL algorithm for different normal drivers have a lager difference
(CRRn ranging from 0.602 to 0.870), while the recognition
results by using the proposed statistical pattern-recognition
approach have a smaller difference (CRRn ranging from
0.883 to 0.980), which means that the proposed recognition
method is more stable than the FL algorithm. In some degree,
the experiment results indicate that the statistical patternrecognition approach could transform the uncertainty of driver
characteristics or driving styles into a relative determinate
issue that can be easily overcome.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a statistical pattern-recognition method is proposed using kernel density estimation and Euclidean distance
to recognize driving styles. This recognition method takes
the uncertainty of driving styles into consideration from the
viewpoint of statistics. To predict the posterior probability of
being fell into which category (aggressive or normal), the
full Bayesian theory is involved. To overcome the problem of
calculating the covariance among every pair of high dependent
elements in feature vector, the Euclidean distance of projection
for each element in feature vector is used for deciding to
which category the human driver is belonged, which avoids the
Classification level
More normal
More aggressive
Start Point
Fig. 6. Recognition results for an aggressive driver using the proposed recognition method.(Left: the classiﬁcation level; Right: the classiﬁcation result when
driving on the curve road.)
Classification level
More normal
More aggressive
Start Point
Fig. 7. Recognition results for a normal driver using the proposed recognition method. (Left: the classiﬁcation level; Right: the classiﬁcation result when
driving on the curve road.)
Classification level
More normal
More aggressive
Start Point
Fig. 8. Recognition results for an aggressive driver using the fuzzy logic algorithm. (Left: the classiﬁcation level; Right: the classiﬁcation result when driving
on the curve road.)
complex calculation of covariances among each two elements
of feature vectors. And then, a cross-validation method is
used to show the beneﬁt of the proposed method, compared
with the fuzzy logic algorithm. The recognition results show
that the statistical recognition approach for driving styles
using kernel density and Euclidean distance could improve the
recognition correctness approximately by 3.79% and 22.36%
for aggressive driver and normal driver, respectively, and show
a higher stability of recognition, compared with fuzzy logic
algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all the participants who are
willing to be the experimental driver for our research and all
the members in Vehicle Dynamics & Control Lab at University
of California at Berkeley. This work was supported by China
Scholarship Council.