July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
published: 27 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01695
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
Edited by:
Benny Chain,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Adrian John Shepherd,
Birkbeck University of London,
United Kingdom
Andrew C. R. Martin,
UCL, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
 
Specialty section:
This article was submitted
to B Cell Biology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 23 April 2018
Accepted: 10 July 2018
Published: 27 July 2018
Manavalan B, Govindaraj RG,
Shin TH, Kim MO and Lee G 
iBCE-EL: A New Ensemble Learning
Framework for Improved Linear
B-Cell Epitope Prediction.
Front. Immunol. 9:1695.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01695
iBCe-eL: A New ensemble Learning
Framework for Improved Linear
B-Cell epitope Prediction
Balachandran Manavalan1, Rajiv Gandhi Govindaraj 2, Tae Hwan Shin1,3, Myeong Ok Kim 4
and Gwang Lee1,3*
1 Department of Physiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea, 2 Department of Biological Sciences,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, United States, 3 Institute of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University,
Suwon, South Korea, 4 Division of Life Science and Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus), College of Natural Sciences,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, South Korea
Identification of B-cell epitopes (BCEs) is a fundamental step for epitope-based vaccine
development, antibody production, and disease prevention and diagnosis. Due to the
avalanche of protein sequence data discovered in postgenomic age, it is essential to
develop an automated computational method to enable fast and accurate identification
of novel BCEs within vast number of candidate proteins and peptides. Although several computational methods have been developed, their accuracy is unreliable. Thus,
developing a reliable model with significant prediction improvements is highly desirable.
In this study, we first constructed a non-redundant data set of 5,550 experimentally
validated BCEs and 6,893 non-BCEs from the Immune Epitope Database. We then
developed a novel ensemble learning framework for improved linear BCE predictor
called iBCE-EL, a fusion of two independent predictors, namely, extremely randomized
tree (ERT) and gradient boosting (GB) classifiers, which, respectively, uses a combination
of physicochemical properties (PCP) and amino acid composition and a combination of
dipeptide and PCP as input features. Cross-validation analysis on a benchmarking data
set showed that iBCE-EL performed better than individual classifiers (ERT and GB), with
a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.454. Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of iBCE-EL on the independent data set. Results show that iBCE-EL significantly
outperformed the state-of-the-art method with an MCC of 0.463. To the best of our
knowledge, iBCE-EL is the first ensemble method for linear BCEs prediction. iBCE-EL
was implemented in a web-based platform, which is available at 
iBCE-EL. iBCE-EL contains two prediction modes. The first one identifying peptide
sequences as BCEs or non-BCEs, while later one is aimed at providing users with the
option of mining potential BCEs from protein sequences.
Keywords: B-cell epitope, ensemble learning, extremely randomized tree, gradient boosting, immunotherapy
INTRODUCTION
The humoral immune system is a complex network of cells that work together to protect the body
against foreign substances or antigens such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and cancerous cells.
Generally, antigens are larger in size, however, only certain parts of antigenic determinants, called
B-cell epitopes (BCEs), are recognized by specific receptors on the B-cell surface, genera­ting soluble
forms of antigen-specific antibodies (1). These antibodies play an important role in neutralization,
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and phagocytosis for the adaptive
arm of immunity (2, 3). Thus, the identification and characteri­
zation of BCEs is a fundamental step in the development of
vaccines, therapeutic antibodies, and other immunodiagnostic
tools (4–7). Today, interest in epitope-based antibodies in bio­
pharmaceutical research and development is rising due to their
selectivity, biosafety, tolerability, and high efficacy.
B-cell epitopes are broadly classified into two categories: continuous/linear and discontinuous/conformational. Continuous/
linear BCEs comprise linear stretches of residues in the anti­
gen protein sequence, while the discontinuous/conformational
BCEs comprise residues placed far apart in the antigen protein
sequence, which are brought together in three-dimensional
space through folding (8, 9). Experimental methods to identify
BCEs include X-ray crystallography, cryo-EM, nuclear mag­ne­
tic resonance, hydrogen–deuterium exchange coupled to mass
spectroscopy, peptide-based approaches, mutagenesis, and
antigen fragmentation (5, 10). However, these methods could be
expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, new sequence-based
computational methods need to be developed for rapid identification of potential BCEs. To this end, several computational
methods based on machine learning (ML) algorithms have
been developed to predict linear BCEs. These methods can be
classified into local and global methods. Local methods such as
Bcepred (11), BepiPred (12), and COBEpro (13) classify each
residue as a BCE or non-BCE in a given protein sequence; global
methods such as ABCpred (14), SVMTriP (15), IgPred (16),
and LBtope (17) predict whether a given peptide is a BCE or
non-BCE. Among global methods, LBtope is the most recently
developed one and is also publicly available.
Although global prediction methods for linear BCEs have
contributed to some development in this field, further studies are
needed for the following reasons. (i) With the rapidly increasing
number of BCEs in the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) (18, 19),
developing more accurate prediction methods using nonredundant (nr) benchmark data sets remain an important and
urgent task. (ii) Most of the existing methods use random peptides as negative data sets. Experimentally determined negative
data sets are necessary for developing efficient methods. Thus,
better methods that use ML algorithms based on high-quality
benchmarking data sets are necessary to accurately predict BCEs.
In this study, we constructed an nr data set of experimentally
validated BCEs and non-BCEs from the IEDB and excluded
sequences that showed more than 70% sequence similarity to avoid
performance bias. We investigated six different ML algorithms
[support vector machine (SVM), random forest (RF), extremely
randomized tree (ERT), AdaBoost (AB), gradient boosting (GB),
and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN)], five compositions [amino
acid composition (AAC), amino acid index (AAI), dipeptide
composition (DPC), chain-transition-distribution (CTD), and
physicochemical properties (PCP)], 23 hybrid features (different combinations of the five compositions), and six binary
profiles (BPF). We propose a novel ensemble approach, called
iBCE-EL for predicting BCEs. The ensemble approach combines
two different ML classifiers (ERT and GB) and uses the average
predicted probabilities to make a final prediction. Furthermore,
iBCE-EL achieved a significantly better overall performance on
benchmarking and independent data sets and was capable of
more accurate prediction than state-of-the-art predictor.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Construction of Benchmarking and
Independent Data Sets
To build an ML model, an experimentally well-characterized data
set is required. Therefore, we extracted a set of linear peptides
from IEDB that tested positive for immune recognition (BCEs)
and another set that tested negative (non-BCEs) (18, 19). Less
than 1% of the peptides had lower than 5 or greater than 25 amino
acid residues. We excluded these peptides from our data set
because including them may result in outliers during prediction
model development.
As mentioned in IEDB, one of the following seven different B-cell experimental assays (Qualitative binding, decreased
disease, neutralization, disassociation constant KD, antibodydependent cellular cytotoxicity, off rate, and on rate) are used to
determine whether a peptide belongs to a positive or negative set
of epitopes. Indeed, all this assay information is clearly specified
for each peptide in IEDB (sixth column of the following link:
 It is worth mentioning that the criteria for categorizing positive and negative data set
are the same as the one used in the recent study (12). To generate
high confidence in our data set, we carefully examined each
peptide assay information and considered as positive only when
it has been confirmed as positive in two or more separate B-cell
experiments. Similarly, peptides shown as negative in two or
more separate experiment and never observed as positive in any
of the above assays were considered as negative ones. To avoid
potential bias and over-fitting in the prediction model development, sequence clustering and homology reduction using
CD-HIT were performed, thus removing sequence redundancy
from the retrieved data set. Based on the design of previous
studies (20, 21), pairs of sequences that showed a sequence
identity greater than 70% were excluded, thus obtaining an nr
data set of 5,550 BCEs and 6,893 non-BCEs. Furthermore, each
peptide present in our nr data set was mapped onto the original
protein sequence, thus confirming the nature of linear epitopes.
From this nr data set, 80% of the data was randomly selected as
the benchmarking data set (4,440 BCEs and 5,485 non-BCEs)
for development of a prediction model and the remaining 20%
was used as the independent data set (1,110 BCEs and 1,408
non-BCEs).
Feature Representation of Peptides
A peptide sequence (P) can be represented as:
where p1, p2, and p3, respectively, denotes the first, second, and
third residues in the peptide P, and so forth. N denotes the peptide length. It should be noted that the residue pi is an element
of the standard amino acid {A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, P,
Q, R, S, T, V, W, Y}. To train a ML model, we formulated diverselength peptides as fixed-length feature vectors. We exploited five
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
different compositions and BPF that cover different aspects of
sequence information as described below:
Amino acid composition is the percentage of standard
amino acids; it has a fixed length of 20 features. AAC can be
formulated as follows:
20 is the percentage of composition of
amino acid type i, Ri is the number of type I appearing in the
peptide, while N is the peptide length.
Dipeptide composition is the rate of dipeptides normalized by
all possible dipeptide combinations; it has a fixed length of 400
features. DPC can be formulated as follows:
is the percentage of composition
of dipeptide type i, Ri is the number of type i appearing in the
peptide, while N is the peptide length.
Chain-transition-distribution was introduced by Dubchak
et  al. (22) for predicting protein-folding classes. It has been
widely applied in various classification problems. A detailed
description of computing CTD features was presented in our
previous study (23). Briefly, standard amino acids (20) are
classified into three different groups: polar, neutral, and hydrophobic. Composition (C) consists of percentage composition
values from these three groups for a target peptide. Transition
(T) consists of percentage frequency of a polar followed by a
neutral residue, or that of a neutral followed by a polar residue.
This group may also contain a polar followed by a hydrophobic residue or a hydrophobic followed by a polar residue.
Distribution (D) consists of five values for each of the three
groups. It measures the percentage of the length of the target
sequence within which 25, 50, 75, and 100% of the amino acids
of a specific property are located. CTD generates 21 features
for each PCP; hence, seven different PCPs (hydrophobicity,
polarizability, normalized van der Waals volume, secondary
structure, polarity, charge, and solvent accessibility) yields a
total of 147 features.
The AAindex database has a variety of physiochemical and
biochemical properties of amino acids (24). However, utilizing all
this information as input features for the ML algorithm may affect
the model performance due to redundancy. Therefore, Saha et al.
(25) classified these amino acid indices into eight clusters by fuzzy
clustering method, and the central indices of each cluster were
considered as high-quality amino acid indices. The accession
numbers of the eight amino acid indices in the AAindex database
are BLAM930101, BIOV880101, MAXF760101, TSAJ990101,
NAKH920108, CEDJ970104, LIFS790101, and MIYS990104.
These high-quality indices encode as 160-dimensional vectors
from the target peptide sequence. Furthermore, the average of
eight high-quality amino acid indices (i.e., a 20-dimensional vector) was used as an additional input feature. As our preliminary
analysis indicated that both feature sets (160 and 20) produced
similar results, we employed the 20-dimensional vector to save
computational time.
Amino acids can be grouped based on their PCP, and this
has been used to study protein sequence profiles, folding, and
functions (26). The PCP computed from the target peptide
sequence included (i) hydrophobic residues (i.e., F, I, W, L, V,
M, Y, C, A), (ii) hydrophilic residues (i.e., S, Q, T, R, K, N, D,
E), (iii) neutral residues (i.e., H,G, P); (iv) positively charged
residues (i.e., K, H, R); (v) negatively charged residues (i.e., D, E),
(vi) fraction of turn-forming residues [i.e., (N + G + P + S)/n,
where n = sequence length], (vii) absolute charge per residue (i.e.,
−.0 03 ), (viii) molecular weight, and (ix) aliphatic
index [i.e., (A + 2.9V + 3.9I + 3.9L)/n].
Each amino acid type of 20 different standard amino acids is
encoded with the following feature vector 0/1. For instance, the
first amino acid type A is encoded as b(A) = (1, 0, 0, …., 0), the
second amino acid type C is encoded as b(C) = (0, 1, 0,…., 0),
and so on. Subsequently, for a given peptide sequence P, its N or
C-terminus with length of k amino acids was encoded as:
The dimension of BPF(k) is 20 × k. Here, we considered k = 5
and 10 both at N-terminus and C-terminus, which resulted
BPFN5, BPFN10, BPFC5, and BPFC10. In addition to this, we
also generated BPFN5-BPFC5 and BPFN10-BPFC10.
Performance Assessment
A brief description of ML method employed in this study is
given in the supplementary information, whose performances
were evaluated using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
analysis and the corresponding area under the ROC curve
(AUC). An AUC value of 0.5 is equivalent to random prediction
and an AUC value of 1 represents perfection. ROC analysis is
based on the true positive rate and false positive rate at various
thresholds. Furthermore, we used sensitivity, specificity, accuracy,
and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) to assess prediction
quality, which were defined as:
Sensitivity
Specificity
FIGURE 1 | Overall framework of the proposed predictor. iBCE-EL development involved the following steps: (1) dataset curation, (2) feature extraction,
(3) exploration of six different ML algorithms and selection of an appropriate algorithm and the corresponding features, and (4) construction of ensemble model.
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
where TP is the number of true positives, i.e., BCEs classified
correctly as BCEs, and TN is the number of true negatives,
i.e., non-BCEs classified correctly as non-BCEs. FP is the number
of false positives, i.e., BCEs classified incorrectly as non-BCEs,
and FN is the number of false negatives, i.e., non-BCEs classified
incorrectly as BCEs.
Cross-Validation
In this study, we adopted the 5-fold cross-validation method,
where benchmarking data set is randomly divided into five
parts, from which four parts were used for training, and the
fifth part was used for testing. This process was repeated until
all the parts were used at least once as a test set, and the overall
performance with all five parts was evaluated.
Methodology Overview
Figure  1 shows a flowchart illustrating the methodology of
iBCE-EL, which comprises four stages: (1) construction of an nr
benchmarking data set of 9,925 peptides (4,440 BCEs and 5,485
non-BCEs) and an independent data set of 2,518 peptides (1,110
BCEs and 1,408 non-BCEs) from IEDB; (2) extraction of various
features from peptide sequences, including AAC, AAI, CTD, DPC,
and PCP, and generation of hybrid features (various combinations
of individual compositions); (3) exploration of six different ML
algorithms and selection of the appropriate ones and their corresponding features; and (4) construction of an ensemble model.
Compositional and Positional Information
Prior to the development of the ML-based prediction model,
we performed compositional analysis using combined data
set (i.e., benchmarking and independent) to understand the
nature of the preference of amino acid residues in BCEs and
non-BCEs. AAC analysis showed that Asn (N), Asp (D), Pro
(P), and Tyr (Y) were predominant in BCEs (Figure  2A).
However, Ala (A), Glu (E), Leu (L), Val (V), and Met (M) were
predominant in non-BCEs (Welch’s t-test; P  ≤  0.05). DPC
analysis showed that 32.25% of dipeptides differed significantly
between BCEs and non-BCEs (Welch’s t-test; P  ≤  0.05). Of
these, the 10 most abundant dipeptides in BCEs and non-BCEs
were PP, SP, NK, NN, PN, NP, KY, QP, PY, and DP and LA, LT,
KE, LL, VL, LQ, GL, AL, LE, and LS, respectively (Figure 2B).
These results suggested that the most abundant dipeptides in
BCEs were mostly pairs of aromatic–aromatic residues or a
positively or negatively charged residue paired with proline.
The most abundant dipeptides in non-BCEs were aliphaticaliphatic residues with hydroxyl group and aliphatic–aromatic
amino acids. Overall, the differences observed in compositional
analyses (AAC and DPC) can be used as an input feature for ML
algorithms, where it can capture hidden relationships between
features allowing a better classification. Therefore, we considered them as input features.
To better understand the positional information of each
residue, sequence logos of the first 10 residues from the N- and
C-terminals of BCEs and non-BCEs were generated using two
FIGURE 2 | Compositional and positional preference analysis. (A) and (B) respectively represent the amino acid and dipeptide preferences of BCEs and non-BCEs.
(B) Shows significant differences in top 30 dipeptides. (C,D) Represent positional conservation of 10 residues at the N- and C-terminals, respectively, between
BCEs and non-BCEs, generated using two sample logos. In (A,B), error bar is the SE that indicates the reliability of the mean. A smaller SE indicates that the
sample mean is more accurate reflection of the actual population mean.
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
sample logos ( To test their
statistical significance, the height of the peptide logos was scaled
(t-test; P < 0.05). As shown in Figure 2C, at the N-terminal, Pro
(P) at positions 2, 3, 4, and 6–10; Asn (N) at positions 2–8 and
10; Asp (D) at positions 1, 2, 8, and 10; and Tyr (Y) at positions
4, 5, 8, and 9 were significantly overrepresented, compared with
other amino acids, while Leu (L) at positions 1, 2, 5, and 7–10;
Ala (A) at positions 2, 3, and 6–9; Met (M) at positions 3, 6, 7,
and 9; and Cys (C) at positions 4, 5, and 9 were significantly
underrepresented. As shown in Figure 2D, at the C-terminal,
Pro (P) at positions 1–7 and 10; Asn (N) at positions 1, 2, 5–7,
and 9; Asp (D) at positions 3, 4, 6, and 7; and Tyr (Y) at positions
1, 3, 4, and 6–10 were significantly overrepresented, compared
with other amino acids, while Leu (L) at positions 1, 2, and 5–8;
Ala (A) at positions 3, 4, 7, and 8; Glu (E) at positions 1, 9, and
10; and Met (M) at positions 2, 7, 8, and 10 were significantly
underrepresented. Notably, the predominant amino acids in the
non-BCEs (particularly Leu, Val, and Met) were expected to be
inside the proteins and if exist on the surface were likely to be
present on the protein–protein interfaces. Conversely, the amino
acids enriched in BCEs were mostly expected to be present on
the protein surface. Overall, these results showed that BCEs and
non-BCEs have contrasting amino acid preferences, which is
consistent with the compositional analysis. Furthermore, positional preference analysis will be useful for researchers to design
de novo BCEs by substituting amino acids at the specific position
for increasing peptide efficacy. Interestingly, the properties of
linear epitopes described here based on our data set are different
from conformational epitopes (27), which is mainly due to the
local arrangement of amino acids.
Construction of Prediction Models Using
Six Different ML Algorithms
In this study, we explored six different ML algorithms, including
SVM, RF, ERT, GB, AB, and k-NN, using five different encoding
schemes (AAC, AAI, CTD, DPC, and PCP) and their combinations (17 hybrid features), which included H1 (AAC + AAI); H2
(AAC + DPC + AAI); H3 (AAC + DPC + AAI + CTD); H4
(AAC  +  DPC  +  AAI  +  CTD  +  PCP); H5 (AAC  +  DPC);
H6 (AAC + CTD); H7 (AAC + PCP); H8 (AAI + DPC); H9
(AAI + DPC + CTD); H10 (AAI + DPC + CTD + PCP); H11
(AAI  +  CTD); H12 (AAI  +  PCP); H13 (DPC  +  CTD); H14
(DPC + CTD + PCP); H15 (DPC + PCP); H16 (CTD + DPC);
and H17 (AAC + AAI + PCP). Furthermore, we used six features set based on binary profiles, including BPFN5, BPFC5,
BPFN5 + BPFC5, BPFN10, BPFC10, and BPFN10 + BPFC10. For
each feature set, we used six different ML algorithms as inputs
and optimized their corresponding ML parameters (Table S1 in
Supplementary Material) using 5-fold cross-validation on the
benchmarking data set. We repeated 5-fold cross-validation 10
times by randomly portioning the benchmarking data set and
considering median ML parameters and average performance
measures. The average performances of these six methods in
terms of MCC is shown in Figure 3. RF, ERT, and GB performed
FIGURE 3 | Performance of six different ML-based classifiers. Performance of various classifiers in distinguishing between B-cell epitopes (BCEs) and non-BCEs.
A total of 27 classifiers were evaluated using 10 independent 5-fold cross-validation techniques, and their average performances in terms of AUC is shown. The final
selected model for each ML-based method is shown with arrows. Abbreviations: AAC, amino acid composition; DPC, dipeptide composition; CTD, chain-transitiondistribution; AAI, amino acid index; PCP, physicochemical properties; H1: AAC + AAI; H2: AAC + DPC + AAI; H3: AAC + DPC + AAI + CTD; H4:
AAC + DPC + AAI + CTD + PCP; H5: AAC + DPC; H6: AAC + CTD; H7: AAC + PCP; H8: AAI + DPC; H9: AAI + DPC + CTD; H10: AAI + DPC + CTD + PCP;
H11: AAI + CTD; H12: AAI + PCP; H13: DPC + CTD; H14: DPC + CTD + PCP; H15: DPC + PCP; H16: CTD + DPC; H17: AAC + AAI + PCP; N5: BPFN5;
C5: BPFC5; N5C5: BPFN5 + BPFC5; N10: BPFN10; C10: BPFC10; and N10C10: BPFN10 + BPFC10.
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
consistently better than other ML-based methods (SVM, AB, and
k-NN), regardless of the input features, indicating that decision
tree-based methods are better suited for BCE prediction. Next,
we investigated the features that produced the best performance
for each ML algorithm. We found that SVM and k-NN performed
best when using N10C10 binary profile as input feature; ERT, RF,
GB, and AB performed best when H7, H12, H15, and PCP were
used as input features, respectively. This analysis showed that the
use of PCP-containing hybrid features as inputs could improve
the performance of the ML method. Among the 6 ML methods,
surprisingly, RF, ERT, and GB showed similar performances with
MCC of 0.437, 0.443, and 0.426, respectively, which was significantly better than MCC of other 3 ML methods (SVM: 0.287, AB:
0.398, and k-NN: 0.221).
Construction of iBCE-EL
An ensemble model (EM) refers to a combination of several
pre­diction models to make the final prediction (28). The major
advantage of EMs over single models is the reported increase
in robust­ness and accuracy (29). Here, we generated six ensemble
models by combining different ML-based models, EM1 (GB +
ERT); EM2 (GB + ERT + RF); EM3 (GB + ERT + RF + SVM);
EM4 (GB  +  ERT  +  RF  +  SVM  +  AB); EM5 (GB  +  ERT  +
RF + SVM + AB + NN); and EM6 (GB + SVM + ERT). EM
was cal­cu­lated as follows: EM =
, where n is the number of
ML-based models and P is the predicted probability value.
Notably, we optimized the probability cut-off values (P) with
respect to MCC using the grid search to define the class (BCEs
or non-BCEs), which is a quite common approach and has been
applied in various methods (30, 31). A model that produced the
highest MCC was considered as the optimal one for each ensemble
model. Surprisingly, all these ensemble models showed similar
performances (Figure S1A in Supplementary Material) and hence
it seems difficult to pick the best one. However, we checked its
transferability on an independent data set and selected a model
that showed consistent performance both on benchmarking and
independent data sets (Figure S1B in Supplementary Material).
According to this criterion, EM1 was selected as the best model
and was labeled as iBCE-EL. To compare the performance of
iBCE-EL with other ML-based models developed in this study,
same optimization procedure was applied (Figure 4). Our results
showed that iBCE-EL, RF, ERT, GB, AB, SVM, and k-NN produced the highest MCC with an optimal cut-off of 0.35, 0.47, 0.45,
0.26, 0.50, 0.41, and 0.41, respectively.
Performance of Various Methods on
Benchmarking Data Set
We compared the performance of iBCE-EL with that of the other
6 ML-based methods (RF, ERT, SVM, GB, AB, and k-NN). The
results are shown in Table  1, where the methods are ranked
according to the MCC associated with predictive capability. iBCE-
EL had the highest MCC, accuracy, and AUC of 0.454, 0.729,
and 0.782, respectively. Interestingly, MCC, accuracy, and AUC
of iBCE-EL were 0.8–15.9, 0.4–9.5, and 0.6–21.9% higher than
those of the other six ML-based methods (RF, ERT, SVM, GB, AB,
and k-NN). McNemar’s Chi-square test (32) was used to evaluate
the statistical significance of the differences in the performances
of methods. At a P-value threshold of 0.05, iBCE-EL significantly
FIGURE 4 | Optimization of probability value threshold. The x- and y-axes,
respectively, represent the probability value threshold and Matthews
correlation coefficient. The optimal value selected for each method is
shown with a circle.
TABLE 1 | Performance comparison of iBCE-EL with other ML-based methods on the benchmarking data set.
Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)
Sensitivity
Specificity
The first column represents the methods developed in this study. The columns 2–6 respectively represent the MCC, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC value. The last column
represents McNemar’s Chi-squared test was used to evaluate the performance between iBCE-EL and other methods. A P value <0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically
significant difference between iBCE-EL and the selected method (shown in bold). For comparison, we have also included LBtope (LBtope_variable_nr) cross-validation performance
on non-redundant data set.
TABLE 2 | Performance comparison of the iBCE-EL with other methods on independent data set.
Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)
Sensitivity
Specificity
The first column represents the method employed in this study. The columns 2–6, respectively, represent the MCC, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC value. The last
column represents McNemar’s Chi-squared test was used to evaluate the performance between iBCE-EL and other methods. A P value <0.05 was considered to indicate a
statistically significant difference between iBCE-EL and the selected method (shown in bold). LBtope (LBtope_variable_nr) used SVM threshold of −0.1 to define the class as
reported in Ref. (17).
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
outperformed SVM, k-NN, and AB and performed better than
RF, ERT, and GB, thus indicating the superiority of iBCE-EL.
To the best of our knowledge, iBCE-EL is the first ensemble
approach for BCE prediction. For comparison, we also included
LBtope (LBtope_variable_nr) cross-validation performance on
an nr data set published previously (17). Although four variants
are available for LBtope (LBtope_variable, LBtope_confirm,
LBtope_variable_nr and LBtope_nr), LBtope_variable_nr is the
only model that was developed using nr data set with variable
length. Hence, we included only this model for comparison and
evaluation. The accuracy, AUC, and MCC of iBCE-EL were
higher than those of LBtope by ~6, 12.4, and 5.2%, respectively.
To assess generalization and practical applicability of these
models, we evaluated them using independent data set and
compared their performances.
Performance of Various Methods on
Independent Data Set
By comparing the newly developed method with existing algorithms on the same data set, we could estimate the percentage of
improvement. We compared the performance of iBCE-EL with
those of LBtope and six other ML-based models. As shown in
Table 2, iBCE-EL showed MCC, accuracy, and AUC of 0.463,
0.732, and 0.789, respectively. Indeed, the MCC, accuracy, and
AUC of iBCE-EL were ~2.0–19.4, ~0.5–11.7, and ~1.0–10.4%
higher than those of the other methods, thus indicating the
superiority of iBCE-EL.
At a P-value threshold of 0.05, iBCE-EL significantly outperformed SVM, AB, k-NN and LBtope, and performed better than
ERT, RF and GB, thus indicating that our approach is indeed
a significant improvement over the pioneering approaches
FIGURE 5 | Receiver operating characteristic curves of the various prediction models. Results of 5-fold cross-validation on (A) a benchmarking data set and
(B) independent data set.
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
in predicting linear BCEs. Interestingly, iBCE-EL performed
consistently in both benchmarking and independent data sets
(Figure 5) among the methods developed in this study suggesting
its suitability for BCE prediction, despite the complexity of the
problem. We made significant efforts to curate a large nr data
set, explore various ML algorithms, and select an appropriate one
for constructing an ensemble model thus resulting in consistent
performance.
Comparison of iBCE-EL With LBtope
Methodology
We compared our method and LBtope (LBtope_variable_nr)
in terms of algorithm characteristics. Since the variation in
the number of B-cell experiments were considered to classify
the peptides (positive or negative), LBtope used ~2-fold larger
benchmarking data set than iBCE-EL. Moreover, we tested for
significant differences in the data set using positional information analysis. However, we did not observe any significant differences between these two methods (Figure S2 in Supplementary
Material). The choice of ML algorithm is different between these
two methods, i.e., SVM used in LBtope, however, a combination of ERT and GB (ensemble model) were used in iBCE-EL.
Interestingly, three features such as AAC, PCP, and DPC provide
the most discriminative power for identifying BCEs; however,
only DPC was used in LBtope.
Web Server Implementation
Prediction methodologies available as web servers will be helpful
for experimentalists, and several web servers for protein function predictions have been reported (23, 33–38). A web server
has been developed to implement the iBCE-EL method and
made publicly accessible at www.thegleelab.org/iBCE-EL for the
use of the wider research community. Python, JAVA script, and
HTML languages were employed to construct the web server.
Users can submit amino acid sequences in the FASTA format.
The output of the web server contains the class and predicted
BCE probability values. The data set used in this study can also
be downloaded from the iBCE-EL web server.
DISCUSSION
Computational identification of BCEs is one of the hot research
topics in bioinformatics. An increasing number of experi­
mentally validated BCEs is growing exponentially in IEDB,
where most BCEs are found to be derived from protein sequen­
ces. To identify BCEs from a given protein sequence, experi­
mental methods seem to be time-consuming, highly expensive,
and complex to be utilized in a high-throughput manner.
Therefore, recent efforts have focused on the development of
computational methods to accelerate the identification of BCEs
(12–15, 17, 39–46). Most existing BCE prediction methods
were developed using very small data sets, with negative ones
derived from randomly chosen peptides that are not experimentally validated (13–15, 17, 40, 42). This practice is quite
common in other peptide-based prediction methods, including
those for anticancer, antifungal, and cell-penetrating peptides
(30, 47, 48). Among existing methods, LBtope is the latest
publicly available tool with three different prediction models
(17). It was developed using an nr data set that produced an
accuracy of 66.7%, which is far from satisfactory. Hence, a novel
method with better accuracy is necessitated. In this study, we
developed a novel software called iBCE-EL, which allowed us
to predict BCEs from a given primary peptide sequence based
on the features derived from a set of experimentally validated
BCEs and non-BCEs.
To the best of our knowledge, the data set we utilized was the
most stringent redundancy-reduced data set with variable length
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695
of epitopes (12–25 amino acid residues). Recent studies demonstrated that BCEs with shorter lengths (7–12 amino acids) bind
antibodies poorly (49). Therefore, such shorter peptides were not
considered in our data set. In general, models developed using
such high-quality data sets would have a wide range of applications in modern biology (50). Before developing the prediction
model, we analyzed our data set to understand the compositional
and positional preferences of BCEs and non-BCEs. We found
that Pro and Asn were highly abundant in BCEs, compared to
non-BCEs. These observations were consistent with the results
of previous reports, where immunoglobulin binding antigenic
regions were found to be rich in Pro/Gly (51, 52) residues. Future
studies should focus on the experimental validation of the biological significance of various dipeptides we found to be involved
in B-cell induction.
It is essential to explore different ML algorithms using the
same data set and then select the best one, instead of arbitrarily
selecting an ML algorithm (47, 53–58). We explored six different ML algorithms (SVM, RF, ERT, AB, GB, and k-NN) and 23
different features encoding schemes for classifying BCEs and
non-BCEs. All the features and ML algorithms used in this
study have been successfully applied in various sequence-based
classification methods (53–55, 59–61); however, only SVM and
DPC were used in LBtope (17). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study to evaluate several ML algorithms for
BCE prediction. Our systematic evaluation of features and
ML algorithms revealed that RF, ERT, and GB showed similar
performances, respectively, with a combination of PCP and
AAI, a combination of PCP and AAC, and a combination of
DPC and PCP as input features. Subsequently, we constructed
an ensemble method called iBCE-EL by fusing ERT and GB.
iBCE-EL performed better than individual component classifiers. The ensemble approach has been successfully applied
for various problems, including signal peptide prediction (62),
membrane protein type classification (63), protein subcellular
location (64), and DNase I hypersensitive site prediction (65).
However, this is the first instance where this approach has
been utilized for BCE prediction. iBCE-EL performed significantly better than the existing method and six other methods
developed in this study, when objectively evaluated on an
independent data set. Interestingly, the performance of iBCE-
EL was consistent on both benchmarking and independent
data sets, thus indicating its ability to classify unseen peptides
well when compared to other methods. The superior performance of iBCE-EL was primarily due to the larger size of the
benchmarking data set, rigorous optimization procedures to
select the final ML parameters, and the choice of ML methods
to construct the ensemble model. Future studies should focus
on identifying novel features that can be combined with the
current feature set to further improve prediction performance.
Furthermore, we expect that our proposed algorithm could
also be applied to other fields of peptide or protein function
prediction. Several authors still query whether BCE could be
considered as a discrete feature of a protein molecule or not.
Indeed, van Regenmortel suggests that an epitope is not an
intrinsic feature of a protein molecule, but is a relational entity
that can be defined only by its ability to react with the paratope
of an antibody molecule (6, 27, 43, 49, 66).
In conclusion, we proposed a novel ensemble method called
iBCE-EL to classify a given primary peptide sequence as BCE or
non-BCE. The essential component of this study is the generation
of high-quality data sets with several manually curated BCEs and
non-BCEs. iBCE-EL showed consistent performance with both
benchmarking and independent data sets, thus indicating its
effectiveness and robustness. We have also created a user-friendly
web interface, allowing researchers to use our prediction method.
iBCE-EL is the second publicly available method for predicting
BCEs, and its accuracy is remarkably higher than that of currently
available methods. We anticipate that iBCE-EL will become a
very useful tool for BCE prediction.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
BM and GL conceived and designed the experiments. BM and
RG performed the experiments. BM, RG, and TS analyzed the
data. GL and MK contributed reagents/materials/software tools.
BM, RG, and GL wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the
manuscript and agreed to its submission in its present form.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Ms. Saraswathi Nithyanantham for her support in data set preparation and Ms. Da Yeon Lee for secretarial
assistance in the preparation of the manuscript.
This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea
funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology
 and the Brain
Research Program through the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future
Planning (2016M3C7A1904392).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
 
full#supplementary-material.
FIGURE S1 | Optimization of probability value threshold. The x- and y-axes,
respectively, represent the probability value threshold and MCC. The optimal
value selected for each method is shown with a circle. (A) A benchmarking
data set and (B) independent data set.
FIGURE S2 | Comparison of position preference analysis using iBCE-EL and
LBtope data set. (A,B) Represent positional conservation of 10 residues at N-
and C-terminal, respectively, using iBCE-EL data set. (C,D) Represent positional
conservation of 10 residues at N- and C-terminal, respectively, using LBtope
Manavalan et al.
Linear B-Cell Epitope Prediction
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
July 2018  |  Volume 9  |  Article 1695