IOP PUBLISHING
REPORTS ON PROGRESS IN PHYSICS
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901 (25pp)
doi:10.1088/0034-4885/72/7/076901
LIGO: the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory
The LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration, 
B P Abbott1, R Abbott1, R Adhikari1, P Ajith2, B Allen2,3, G Allen4, R S Amin5,
S B Anderson1, W G Anderson3, M A Arain6, M Araya1, H Armandula1,
P Armor3, Y Aso1, S Aston7, P Aufmuth8, C Aulbert2, S Babak9, P Baker10,
S Ballmer1, C Barker11, D Barker11, B Barr12, P Barriga13, L Barsotti14,
M A Barton1, I Bartos15, R Bassiri12, M Bastarrika12, B Behnke9,
M Benacquista16, J Betzwieser1, P T Beyersdorf17, I A Bilenko18, G Billingsley1,
R Biswas3, E Black1, J K Blackburn1, L Blackburn14, D Blair13, B Bland11,
T P Bodiya14, L Bogue19, R Bork1, V Boschi1, S Bose20, P R Brady3,
V B Braginsky18, J E Brau21, D O Bridges19, M Brinkmann2, A F Brooks1,
D A Brown22, A Brummit23, G Brunet14, A Bullington4, A Buonanno24,
O Burmeister2, R L Byer4, L Cadonati25, J B Camp26, J Cannizzo26,
K C Cannon1, J Cao14, L Cardenas1, S Caride27, G Castaldi28, S Caudill5,
M Cavagli`a29, C Cepeda1, T Chalermsongsak1, E Chalkley12, P Charlton30,
S Chatterji1, S Chelkowski7, Y Chen9,31, N Christensen32, C T Y Chung33,
D Clark4, J Clark34, J H Clayton3, T Cokelaer34, C N Colacino35, R Conte36,
D Cook11, T R C Corbitt14, N Cornish10, D Coward13, D C Coyne1,
J D E Creighton3, T D Creighton16, A M Cruise7, R M Culter7, A Cumming12,
L Cunningham12, S L Danilishin18, K Danzmann2,8, B Daudert1, G Davies34,
E J Daw37, D DeBra4, J Degallaix2, V Dergachev27, S Desai38, R DeSalvo1,
S Dhurandhar39, M D´ıaz16, A Dietz34, F Donovan14, K L Dooley6, E E Doomes40,
R W P Drever41, J Dueck2, I Duke14, J-C Dumas13, J G Dwyer15, C Echols1,
M Edgar12, A Efﬂer11, P Ehrens1, E Espinoza1, T Etzel1, M Evans14, T Evans19,
S Fairhurst34, Y Faltas6, Y Fan13, D Fazi1, H Fehrmenn2, L S Finn38, K Flasch3,
S Foley14, C Forrest42, N Fotopoulos3, A Franzen8, M Frede2, M Frei43, Z Frei35,
A Freise7, R Frey21, T Fricke19, P Fritschel14, V V Frolov19, M Fyffe19, V Galdi28,
J A Garofoli22, I Gholami9, J A Giaime5,19, S Giampanis2, K D Giardina19,
K Goda14, E Goetz27, L M Goggin3, G Gonz´alez5, M L Gorodetsky18, S Goßler2,
R Gouaty5, A Grant12, S Gras13, C Gray11, M Gray44, R J S Greenhalgh23,
A M Gretarsson45, F Grimaldi14, R Grosso16, H Grote2, S Grunewald9,
M Guenther11, E K Gustafson1, R Gustafson27, B Hage8, J M Hallam7,
D Hammer3, G D Hammond12, C Hanna1, J Hanson19, J Harms46, G M Harry14,
I W Harry34, E D Harstad21, K Haughian12, K Hayama16, J Heefner1,
I S Heng12, A Heptonstall1, M Hewitson2, S Hild7, E Hirose22, D Hoak19,
K A Hodge1, K Holt19, D J Hosken47, J Hough12, D Hoyland13, B Hughey14,
S H Huttner12, D R Ingram11, T Isogai32, M Ito21, A Ivanov1, B Johnson11,
W W Johnson5, D I Jones48, G Jones34, R Jones12, L Ju13, P Kalmus1,
V Kalogera49, S Kandhasamy46, J Kanner24, D Kasprzyk7, E Katsavounidis14,
K Kawabe11, S Kawamura50, F Kawazoe2, W Kells1, D G Keppel1,
A Khalaidovski2, F Y Khalili18, R Khan15, E Khazanov51, P King1, J S Kissel5,
S Klimenko6, K Kokeyama50, V Kondrashov1, R Kopparapu38, S Koranda3,
D Kozak1, B Krishnan9, R Kumar12, P Kwee8, P K Lam44, M Landry11,
B Lantz4, A Lazzarini1, H Lei16, M Lei1, N Leindecker4, I Leonor21, C Li31,
H Lin6, P E Lindquist1, T B Littenberg10, N A Lockerbie52, D Lodhia7,
0034-4885/09/076901+25$90.00
© 2009 IOP Publishing Ltd
Printed in the UK
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
M Longo28, M Lormand19, P Lu4, M Lubinski11, A Lucianetti6, H L¨uck2,8,
B Machenschalk9, M MacInnis14, M Mageswaran1, K Mailand1, I Mandel49,
V Mandic46, S M´arka15, Z M´arka15, A Markosyan4, J Markowitz14, E Maros1,
I W Martin12, R M Martin6, J N Marx1, K Mason14, F Matichard5, L Matone15,
R A Matzner43, N Mavalvala14, R McCarthy11, D E McClelland44,
S C McGuire40, M McHugh53, G McIntyre1, D J A McKechan34, K McKenzie44,
M Mehmet2, A Melatos33, A C Melissinos42, D F Men´endez38, G Mendell11,
R A Mercer3, S Meshkov1, C Messenger2, M S Meyer19, J Miller12, J Minelli38,
Y Mino31, V P Mitrofanov18, G Mitselmakher6, R Mittleman14, O Miyakawa1,
B Moe3, S D Mohanty16, S R P Mohapatra25, G Moreno11, T Morioka50,
K Mors2, K Mossavi2, C MowLowry44, G Mueller6, H M¨uller-Ebhardt2,
D Muhammad19, S Mukherjee16, H Mukhopadhyay39, A Mullavey44, J Munch47,
P G Murray12, E Myers11, J Myers11, T Nash1, J Nelson12, G Newton12,
A Nishizawa50, K Numata26, J O’Dell23, B O’Reilly19, R O’Shaughnessy38,
E Ochsner24, G H Ogin1, D J Ottaway47, R S Ottens6, H Overmier19,
B J Owen38, Y Pan24, C Pankow6, M A Papa3,9, V Parameshwaraiah11, P Patel1,
M Pedraza1, S Penn54, A Perraca7, V Pierro28, I M Pinto28, M Pitkin12,
H J Pletsch2, M V Plissi12, F Postiglione36, M Principe28, R Prix2, L Prokhorov18,
O Punken2, V Quetschke6, F J Raab11, D S Rabeling44, H Radkins11, P Raffai35,
Z Raics15, N Rainer2, M Rakhmanov16, V Raymond49, C M Reed11, T Reed55,
H Rehbein2, S Reid12, D H Reitze6, R Riesen19, K Riles27, B Rivera11,
P Roberts56, N A Robertson1,12, C Robinson34, E L Robinson9, S Roddy19,
C R¨over2, J Rollins15, J D Romano16, J H Romie19, S Rowan12, A R¨udiger2,
P Russell1, K Ryan11, S Sakata50, L Sancho de la Jordana57, V Sandberg11,
V Sannibale1, L Santamar´ıa9, S Saraf58, P Sarin14, B S Sathyaprakash34,
S Sato50, M Satterthwaite44, P R Saulson22, R Savage11, P Savov31, M Scanlan55,
R Schilling2, R Schnabel2, R Schoﬁeld21, B Schulz2, B F Schutz9,34,
P Schwinberg11, J Scott12, S M Scott44, A C Searle1, B Sears1, F Seifert2,
D Sellers19, A S Sengupta1, A Sergeev51, B Shapiro14, P Shawhan24,
D H Shoemaker14, A Sibley19, X Siemens3, D Sigg11, S Sinha4, A M Sintes57,
B J J Slagmolen44, J Slutsky5, J R Smith22, M R Smith1, N D Smith14,
K Somiya31, B Sorazu12, A Stein14, L C Stein14, S Steplewski20, A Stochino1,
R Stone16, K A Strain12, S Strigin18, A Stroeer26, A L Stuver19,
T Z Summerscales56, K-X Sun4, M Sung5, P J Sutton34, G P Szokoly35,
D Talukder20, L Tang16, D B Tanner6, S P Tarabrin18, J R Taylor2, R Taylor1,
J Thacker19, K A Thorne19, A Th¨uring8, K V Tokmakov12, C Torres19,
C Torrie1, G Traylor19, M Trias57, D Ugolini59, J Ulmen4, K Urbanek4,
H Vahlbruch8, M Vallisneri31, C Van Den Broeck34, M V van der Sluys49,
A A van Veggel12, S Vass1, R Vaulin3, A Vecchio7, J Veitch7, P Veitch47,
C Veltkamp2, A Villar1, C Vorvick11, S P Vyachanin18, S J Waldman14,
L Wallace1, R L Ward1, A Weidner2, M Weinert2, A J Weinstein1, R Weiss14,
L Wen13,31, S Wen5, K Wette44, J T Whelan9,60, S E Whitcomb1, B F Whiting6,
C Wilkinson11, P A Willems1, H R Williams38, L Williams6, B Willke2,8,
I Wilmut23, L Winkelmann2, W Winkler2, C C Wipf14, A G Wiseman3,
G Woan12, R Wooley19, J Worden11, W Wu6, I Yakushin19, H Yamamoto1,
Z Yan13, S Yoshida61, M Zanolin45, J Zhang27, L Zhang1, C Zhao13, N Zotov55,
M E Zucker14, H zur M¨uhlen8 and J Zweizig1
1 LIGO—California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
2 Albert-Einstein-Institut, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Gravitationsphysik, D-30167 Hannover, Germany
3 Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA
4 Ginzton, E.L. Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
6 Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
7 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
8 Institut fur Gravitationsphysik, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, D-30167 Hannover, Germany
9 Albert-Einstein-Institut, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Gravitationsphysik, D-14476 Golm, Germany
10 Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA
11 LIGO—Hanford Observatory, Richland, WA 99352, USA
12 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK
13 School of Physics, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia
14 LIGO—Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
15 Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
16 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Brownsville and Texas Southmost College, Brownsville, TX
78520, USA
17 Department of Physics and Astronomy, San Jose State University, San Jose, CA 95192, USA
18 Relativity Group, Moscow State University, Moscow, 119992, Russia
19 LIGO—Livingston Observatory, Livingston, LA 70754, USA
20 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA
21 Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
22 Department of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
23 Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, HSIC, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK
24 Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
25 Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts - Amherst, MA 01003, USA
26 NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
27 Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
28 Department of Engineering, University of Sannio at Benevento, I-82100 Benevento, Italy
29 Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA
30 Research Scool of Physics and Engineering, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW 2678, Australia
31 Caltech-CaRT, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
32 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Carleton College, Northﬁeld, MN 55057, USA
33 School of Physics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville VIC 3010, Australia
34 School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF24 3AA, UK
35 Institute of Physics, E¨otv¨os University, ELTE 1053 Budapest, Hungary
36 Department of Physics, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano (Salerno), Italy
37 Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld S10 2TN, UK
38 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802,
39 Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune - 411007, India
40 Department of Physics, Southern University and A&M College, Baton Rouge, LA 70813, USA
41 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
42 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA
43 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
44 Research School of Physics and Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, 0200, Australia
45 Department of Physics, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Prescott, AZ 86301, USA
46 Department of Physics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
47 School of Chemistry and Physics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
48 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
49 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
50 National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan
51 Institute of Applied Physics, Nizhny Novgorod, 603950, Russia
52 Department of Physics, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, G1 1XQ, UK
53 Department of Physics, Loyola University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA
54 Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Geneva, NY 14456, USA
55 Department of Physics, Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA 71272, USA
56 Department of Physics, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI 49104, USA
57 Relativity and Gravitation Group, Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain
58 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, CA 94928, USA
59 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Trinity University, San Antonio, TX 78212, USA
60 Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA
61 Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402, USA
E-mail: 
Received 2 March 2009, in ﬁnal form 1 May 2009
Published 30 June 2009
Online at stacks.iop.org/RoPP/72/076901
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
The goal of the Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is to detect and study
gravitational waves (GWs) of astrophysical origin. Direct detection of GWs holds the promise of
testing general relativity in the strong-ﬁeld regime, of providing a new probe of exotic objects such as
black holes and neutron stars and of uncovering unanticipated new astrophysics. LIGO, a joint
Caltech–MIT project supported by the National Science Foundation, operates three multi-kilometer
interferometers at two widely separated sites in the United States. These detectors are the result of
decades of worldwide technology development, design, construction and commissioning. They are
now operating at their design sensitivity, and are sensitive to gravitational wave strains smaller than
one part in 1021. With this unprecedented sensitivity, the data are being analyzed to detect or place
limits on GWs from a variety of potential astrophysical sources.
(Some ﬁgures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)
This article was invited by B Berger.
1. Introduction
2. Gravitational waves
3. LIGO and the worldwide detector network
4. Detector description
4.1. Interferometer conﬁguration
4.2. Laser and optics
4.3. Suspensions and vibration isolation
4.4. Sensing and controls
4.5. Thermal effects
4.6. Interferometer response and calibration
4.7. Environmental monitors
5. Instrument performance
5.1. Strain noise spectra
5.2. Sensing noise sources
Seismic and thermal noise
Auxiliary degree-of-freedom noise
Actuation noise
Additional noise sources
Other performance ﬁgures-of-merit
6. Data analysis infrastructure
7. Astrophysical reach and search results
Compact binary coalescences
Continuous wave sources
Stochastic GW background
8. Future directions
Acknowledgments
References
1. Introduction
The prediction of gravitational waves (GWs), oscillations in
thespace–timemetricthatpropagateatthespeedoflight, isone
of the most profound differences between Einstein’s general
theory of relativity and the Newtonian theory of gravity that it
replaced. GWs remained a theoretical prediction for more than
50yearsuntiltheﬁrstobservationalevidencefortheirexistence
came with the discovery and subsequent observations of the
binary pulsar PSR 1913 + 16, by Russell Hulse and Joseph
Taylor. This is a system of two neutron stars (NSs) that orbit
each other with a period of 7.75 h. Precise timing of radio
pulses emitted by one of the NSs, monitored now over several
decades, shows that their orbital period is slowly decreasing at
just the rate predicted for the general-relativistic emission of
GWs . Hulse and Taylor were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics for this work in 1993.
In about 300 million years, the PSR 1913 + 16 orbit
will decrease to the point where the pair coalesces into a
single compact object, a process that will produce directly
detectable GWs.
In the meantime, the direct detection of
GWs will require similarly strong sources—extremely large
masses moving with large accelerations in strong gravitational
The goal of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory , is just that: to detect and
study GWs of astrophysical origin. Achieving this goal will
mark the opening of a new window on the universe, with
the promise of new physics and astrophysics.
In physics,
GW detection could provide information about strong-ﬁeld
gravitation, the untested domain of strongly curved space
where Newtonian gravitation is no longer even a poor
approximation.
In astrophysics, the sources of GWs that
LIGO might detect include binary NSs ; binary systems where a
black hole (BH) replaces one or both of the NSs; a stellar
core collapse which triggers a type II supernova; rapidly
rotating, non-axisymmetric NSs; and possibly processes in
the early universe that produce a stochastic background of
In the past few years the ﬁeld has reached a milestone, with
decades-old plans to build and operate large interferometric
GW detectors now realized in several locations worldwide.
This paper focuses on LIGO, which operates the most
sensitive detectors yet built. We aim to describe the LIGO
detectors and how they operate, explain how they have
achieved their remarkable sensitivity and review how their
data can be used to learn about a variety of astrophysical
phenomena.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
2. Gravitational waves
The essence of general relativity is that mass and energy
produce a curvature of four-dimensional space–time, and that
matter moves in response to this curvature.
The Einstein
ﬁeld equations prescribe the interaction between mass and
space–time curvature, much as Maxwell’s equations prescribe
the relationship between electric charge and electromagnetic
Just as electromagnetic waves are time-dependent
vacuum solutions to Maxwell’s equations, GWs are timedependent vacuum solutions to the ﬁeld equations. GWs are
oscillating perturbations to a ﬂat, or Minkowski, space–time
metric, and can be thought of equivalently as an oscillating
strain in space–time or as an oscillating tidal force between
free test masses.
As with electromagnetic waves, GWs travel at the
speed of light and are transverse in character, i.e. the strain
oscillations occur in directions orthogonal to the direction
in which the wave is propagating. Whereas electromagnetic
waves are dipolar in nature, GWs are quadrupolar: the strain
pattern contracts space along one transverse dimension, while
expanding it along the orthogonal direction in the transverse
plane (see ﬁgure 1).
Gravitational radiation is produced
by oscillating multipole moments of the mass distribution
of a system.
The principle of mass conservation rules
out monopole radiation, and the principles of linear and
angular momentum conservation rule out gravitational dipole
radiation. Quadrupole radiation is the lowest allowed form
and is thus usually the dominant form. In this case, the GW
ﬁeld strength is proportional to the second time derivative
of the quadrupole moment of the source, and it falls off in
amplitude inversely with distance from the source. The tensor
character of gravity—the hypothetical graviton is a spin-2
particle—means that the transverse strain ﬁeld comes in two
orthogonal polarizations. These are commonly expressed in
a linear polarization basis as the ‘+’ polarization (depicted in
ﬁgure 1) and the ‘×’ polarization, reﬂecting the fact that they
are rotated 45◦relative to one another. An astrophysical GW
will, in general, be a mixture of both polarizations.
GWs differ from electromagnetic waves in that they
propagate essentially unperturbed through space, as they
interact only very weakly with matter.
Furthermore, GWs
are intrinsically non-linear, because the wave energy density
itself generates additional curvature of space–time.
phenomenon is only signiﬁcant, however, very close to strong
sources of waves, where the wave amplitude is relatively
More usually, GWs distinguish themselves from
electromagnetic waves by the fact that they are very weak.
One cannot hope to detect any waves of terrestrial origin,
whether naturally occurring or manmade; instead one must
look for very massive compact astrophysical objects, moving
at relativistic velocities. For example, strong sources of GWs
that may exist in our galaxy or nearby galaxies are expected to
producewavestrengthsonEarththatdonotexceedstrainlevels
of one part in 1021. Finally, it is important to appreciate that
GW detectors respond directly to GW amplitude rather than
GW power; therefore the volume of space that is probed for
potential sources increases as the cube of the strain sensitivity.
Figure 1. A GW traveling perpendicular to the plane of the diagram
is characterized by a strain amplitude h. The wave distorts a ring of
test particles into an ellipse, elongated in one direction in one
half-cycle of the wave, and elongated in the orthogonal direction in
the next half-cycle. This oscillating distortion can be measured with
a Michelson interferometer oriented as shown. The length
oscillations modulate the phase shifts accrued by the light in each
arm, which are in turn observed as light intensity modulations at the
photodetector (green semi-circle). This depicts one of the linear
polarization modes of the GW.
3. LIGO and the worldwide detector network
As illustrated in ﬁgure 1, the oscillating quadrupolar strain
pattern of a GW is well matched by a Michelson interferometer,
which makes a very sensitive comparison of the lengths of
its two orthogonal arms.
LIGO utilizes three specialized
Michelson interferometers, located at two sites (see ﬁgure 2):
an observatory on the Hanford site in Washington houses
two interferometers, the 4 km-long H1 and 2 km-long H2
detectors; and an observatory in Livingston Parish, Louisiana,
houses the 4 km-long L1 detector.
Other than the shorter
length of H2, the three interferometers are essentially identical.
Multiple detectors at separated sites are crucial for rejecting
instrumental and environmental artifacts in the data, by
requiring coincident detections in the analysis. Also, because
the antenna pattern of an interferometer is quite wide,
source localization requires triangulation using three separated
detectors.
The initial LIGO detectors were designed to be sensitive
to GWs in the frequency band 40–7000 Hz, and capable of
detecting a GW strain amplitude as small as 10−21 . With
funding from the National Science Foundation, the LIGO sites
and detectors were designed by scientists and engineers from
the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, constructed in the late 1990s, and
commissioned over the ﬁrst 5 years of this decade.
November 2005 to September 2007, they operated at their
design sensitivity in a continuous data-taking mode. The data
from this science run, known as S5, are being analyzed for
a variety of GW signals by a group of researchers known as
the LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration . At the most sensitive
frequencies, the instrument root-mean-square (rms) strain
noise has reached an unprecedented level of 3 × 10−22 in a
100 Hz band.
Although in principle LIGO can detect and study GWs
by itself, the potential to do astrophysics can be quantitatively
and qualitatively enhanced by operation in a more extensive
network. For example, the direction of travel of the GWs and
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the LIGO observatories at Hanford,
Washington (top) and Livingston, Louisiana (bottom). The lasers
and optics are contained in the large corner buildings. From each
corner building, evacuated beam tubes extend at right angles for
4 km in each direction (the full length of only one of the arms is seen
in each photo); the tubes are covered by the arched, concrete
enclosures seen here.
the complete polarization information carried by the waves
can only be extracted by a network of detectors. Such a global
network of GW observatories has been emerging over the past
decade. In this period, the Japanese TAMA project built a
300 m interferometer outside Tokyo, Japan ; the German–
British GEO project built a 600 m interferometer near Hanover,
Germany ; and the European Gravitational Observatory
built the 3 km-long interferometer Virgo near Pisa, Italy .
In addition, plans are underway to develop a large scale GW
detector in Japan sometime during the next decade .
Early in its operation LIGO joined with the GEO project;
for strong sources the shorter, less sensitive GEO 600 detector
provides added conﬁdence and directional and polarization
information.
In May 2007 the Virgo detector began joint
observations with LIGO, with a strain sensitivity close to
that of LIGO’s 4 km interferometers at frequencies above
∼1 kHz. The LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and the Virgo
Collaboration negotiated an agreement that all data collected
from that date are to be analyzed and published jointly.
4. Detector description
Figure 1 illustrates the basic concept of how a Michelson
interferometer is used to measure a GW strain. The challenge
is to make the instrument sufﬁciently sensitive: at the targeted
strain sensitivity of 10−21, the resulting arm length change is
only ∼10−18 m, a thousand times smaller than the diameter of
a proton. Meeting this challenge involves the use of special
interferometry techniques, state-of-the-art optics, highly stable
lasers and multiple layers of vibration isolation, all of which
are described in the sections that follow. And of course a key
feature of the detectors is simply their scale: the arms are made
as long as practically possible to increase the signal due to a
GW strain. See table 1 for a list of the main design parameters
of the LIGO interferometers.
4.1. Interferometer conﬁguration
The LIGO detectors are Michelson interferometers whose
mirrors also serve as gravitational test masses.
GW will impress a phase modulation on the light in each
arm of the Michelson, with a relative phase shift of 180◦
between the arms. When the Michelson arm lengths are set
such that the un-modulated light interferes destructively at
the anti-symmetric (AS) port—the dark fringe condition—the
phase modulated sideband light will interfere constructively,
with an amplitude proportional to GW strain and the input
power. With dark fringe operation, the full power incident on
the beamsplitter is returned to the laser at the symmetric port.
Only differential motion of the arms appears at the AS port;
common mode signals are returned to the laser with the carrier
Two modiﬁcations to a basic Michelson, shown in ﬁgure 3,
increase the carrier power in the arms and hence the GW
sensitivity. First, each arm contains a resonant Fabry–Perot
optical cavity made up of a partially transmitting input mirror
and a high reﬂecting end mirror.
The cavities cause the
light to effectively bounce back and forth multiple times in
the arms, increasing the carrier power and phase shift for a
given strain amplitude. In the LIGO detectors the Fabry–Perot
cavities multiply the signal by a factor of 100 for a 100 Hz
GW. Second, a partially reﬂecting mirror is placed between
the laser and beamsplitter to implement power recycling .
In this technique, an optical cavity is formed between the
power recycling mirror and the Michelson symmetric port. By
matching the transmission of the recycling mirror to the optical
losses in the Michelson, and resonating this recycling cavity,
the laser power stored in the interferometer can be signiﬁcantly
increased. In this conﬁguration, known as a power recycled
Fabry–Perot Michelson, the LIGO interferometers increase the
power in the arms by a factor of ≈8000 with respect to a simple
Michelson.
4.2. Laser and optics
Thelasersourceisadiode-pumped, Nd : YAGmasteroscillator
and power ampliﬁer system, and emits 10 W in a single
frequency at 1064 nm . The laser power and frequency are
actively stabilized, and passively ﬁltered with a transmissive
ring cavity (pre-mode cleaner, PMC). The laser power
stabilization is implemented by directing a sample of the beam
to a photodetector, ﬁltering its signal and feeding it back to
the power ampliﬁer; this servo stabilizes the relative power
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Table 1. Parameters of the LIGO interferometers. H1 and H2 refer to the interferometers at Hanford, Washington, and L1 is the
interferometer at Livingston Parish, Louisiana.
Laser type and wavelength
Nd : YAG, λ = 1064 nm
Arm cavity ﬁnesse
Arm length (m)
Arm cavity storage time, τs (ms)
Input power at recycling mirror (W)
Power Recycling gain
Arm cavity stored power (kW)
Test mass size and mass
∅25 cm × 10 cm, 10.7 kg
Beam radius (1/e2 power) ITM/ETM
3.6 cm/4.5 cm
3.9 cm/4.5 cm
3.3 cm/3.5 cm
Test mass pendulum frequency (Hz)
Figure 3. Optical and sensing conﬁguration of the LIGO 4 km interferometers (the laser power numbers here are generic; speciﬁc power
levels are given in table 1). The IO block includes laser frequency and amplitude stabilization, and electro-optic phase modulators. The
power recycling cavity is formed between the PRM and the two ITMs, and contains the BS. The inset photo shows an input test mass mirror
in its pendulum suspension. The near face has a highly reﬂective coating for the infrared laser light, but transmits visible light. Through it
one can see mirror actuators arranged in a square pattern near the mirror perimeter.
ﬂuctuations of the beam to ∼10−7 Hz−1/2 at 100 Hz .
The laser frequency stabilization is done in multiple stages
that are more fully described in later sections.
or pre-stabilization stage, uses the traditional technique of
servo locking the laser frequency to an isolated reference
cavity using the Pound–Drever–Hall (PDH) technique ,
in this case via feedback to frequency actuators on the master
oscillator and to an electro-optic phase modulator. The servo
bandwith is 500 kHz, and the pre-stabilization achieves a
stability level of ∼10−2 Hz Hz−1/2 at 100 Hz.
transmits the pre-stabilized beam, ﬁltering out both any light
not in the fundamental Gaussian spatial mode and laser noise
at frequencies above a few megahertz . The PMC output
beam is weakly phase-modulated with two radio-frequency
(RF) sine waves, producing, to ﬁrst-order, two pairs of
sideband ﬁelds around the carrier ﬁeld; these RF sideband
ﬁelds are used in a heterodyne detection system described
After phase modulation, the beam passes into the
LIGO vacuum system. All the main interferometer optical
components and beam paths are enclosed in the ultra-high
vacuum system (10−8–10−9 Torr) for acoustical isolation and
to reduce phase ﬂuctuations from light scattering off residual
gas . The long beam tubes are particularly noteworthy
components of the LIGO vacuum system.
These 1.2 m
diameter, 4 km long stainless steel tubes were designed to
have low-outgassing so that the required vacuum could be
attained by pumping only from the ends of the tubes. This was
achieved by special processing of the steel to remove hydrogen,
followed by an in situ bakeout of the spiral-welded tubes, for
approximately 20 days at 160 ◦C.
The in-vacuum beam ﬁrst passes through the mode cleaner
(MC), a 12 m long, vibrationally isolated transmissive ring
cavity. The MC provides a stable, diffraction-limited beam
with additional ﬁltering of laser noise above several kilohertz
 , and it serves as an intermediate reference for frequency
stabilization. The MC length and modulation frequencies are
matched so that the main carrier ﬁeld and the modulation
sideband ﬁelds all pass through the MC. After the MC is
a Faraday isolator and a reﬂective 3-mirror telescope that
expands the beam and matches it to the arm cavity mode.
The interferometer optics, including the test masses,
are fused-silica substrates with multilayer dielectric coatings,
manufactured to have extremely low scatter and low
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
absorption.
The test mass substrates are polished so that
the surface deviation from a spherical ﬁgure, over the central
80 mm diameter, is typically 5 Å or smaller, and the surface
microroughness is typically less than 2 Å . The mirror
coatings are made using ion-beam sputtering, a technique
known for producing ultralow-loss mirrors .
absorption level in the coatings is generally a few parts-permillion (ppm) or less , and the total scattering loss from a
mirror surface is estimated to be 60–70 ppm.
In addition to being a source of optical loss, scattered
light can be a problematic noise source, if it is allowed to
reﬂect or scatter from a vibrating surface (such as a vacuum
systemwall)andrecombinewiththemainbeam . Sincethe
vibrating, re-scattering surface may be moving by ∼10 orders
of magnitude more than the test masses, very small levels of
scattered light can contaminate the output. To control this,
various bafﬂes are employed within the vacuum system to trap
scattered light . Each 4 km long beam tube contains
approximately 200 bafﬂes to trap light scattered at small angles
from the test masses. These bafﬂes are stainless steel truncated
cones, withserratedinneredges, distributedsoastocompletely
hide the beam tube from the line of sight of any arm cavity
mirror. Additionalbafﬂeswithinthevacuumchambersprevent
light outside the mirror apertures from hitting the vacuum
chamber walls.
4.3. Suspensions and vibration isolation
Starting with the MC, each mirror in the beam line is suspended
as a pendulum by a loop of steel wire. The pendulum provides
f −2 vibration isolation above its eigenfrequencies, allowing
free movement of a test mass in the GW frequency band. Along
the beam direction, a test mass pendulum isolates by a factor
of nearly 2 × 104 at 100 Hz. The position and orientation of
a suspended optic is controlled by electromagnetic actuators:
small magnets are bonded to the optic and coils are mounted
to the suspension support structure, positioned to maximize
the magnetic force and minimize ground noise coupling. The
actuator assemblies also contain optical sensors that measure
the position of the suspended optic with respect to its support
structure. These signals are used to actively damp eigenmodes
of the suspension.
The bulk of the vibration isolation in the GW band
is provided by four-layer mass–spring isolation stacks, to
which the pendulums are mounted.
These stacks provide
approximately f −8 isolation above ∼10 Hz , giving an
isolation factor of about 108 at 100 Hz. In addition, the L1
detector, subject to higher environmental ground motion than
the Hanford detectors, employs seismic pre-isolators between
the ground and the isolation stacks.
These active isolators
employ a collection of motion sensors, hydraulic actuators and
servo controls; the pre-isolators actively suppress vibrations in
the band 0.1–10 Hz, by as much as a factor of 10 in the middle
of the band .
4.4. Sensing and controls
The two Fabry–Perot arms and power recycling cavities
are essential to achieving the LIGO sensitivity goal, but
they require an active feedback system to maintain the
interferometer at the proper operating point . The round
trip length of each cavity must be held to an integer multiple
of the laser wavelength so that newly introduced carrier light
interferes constructively with light from previous round trips.
Under these conditions the light inside the cavities builds up
and they are said to be on resonance. In addition to the three
cavity lengths, the Michelson phase must be controlled to
ensure that the AS port remains on the dark fringe.
The four lengths are sensed with a variation of the PDH
reﬂection scheme . In standard PDH, an error signal is
generated through heterodyne detection of the light reﬂected
from a cavity. The RF phase modulation sidebands are directly
reﬂected from the cavity input mirror and serve as a local
oscillator to mix with the carrier ﬁeld. The carrier experiences
a phase shift in reﬂection, turning the RF phase modulation
into RF amplitude modulation, linear in amplitude for small
deviations from resonance. This concept is extended to the
full interferometer as follows.
At the operating point, the
carrier light is resonant in the arm and recycling cavities and
on a Michelson dark fringe. The RF sideband ﬁelds resonate
differently. One pair of RF sidebands (from phase modulation
at 62.5 MHz) is not resonant and simply reﬂects from the
recycling mirror. The other pair (25 MHz phase modulation)
is resonant in the recycling cavity but not in the arm cavities.62
The Michelson mirrors are positioned to make one arm 30 cm
longer than the other so that these RF sidebands are not on a
Michelson dark fringe. By design this Michelson asymmetry
is chosen so that most of the resonating RF sideband power is
coupled to the AS port.
In this conﬁguration, heterodyne error signals for the four
length degrees-of-freedom are extracted from the three output
ports shown in ﬁgure 3 (REF, PO and AS ports). The AS port
is heterodyned at the resonating RF frequency and gives an
error signal proportional to differential arm length changes,
including those due to a GW. The PO port is a sample of the
recycling cavity beam, and is detected at the resonating RF
frequency to give error signals for the recycling cavity length
and the Michelson phase (using both RF quadratures). The
REF port is detected at the non-resonating RF frequency and
gives a standard PDH signal proportional to deviations in the
laser frequency relative to the average length of the two arms.
Feedback controls derived from these errors signals are
applied to the two end mirrors to stabilize the differential arm
length, to the beamsplitter to control the Michelson phase
and to the recycling mirror to control the recycling cavity
length. The feedback signals are applied directly to the mirrors
through their coil-magnet actuators, with slow corrections for
the differential arm length applied with longer range actuators
that move the whole isolation stack.
The common arm length signal from the REF port
detection is used in the ﬁnal level of laser frequency
stabilization pictured schematically in ﬁgure 4.
hierarchical frequency control starts with the reference
cavity pre-stabilization mentioned in section 4.2. The prestabilization path includes an acousto-optic modulator (AOM)
62 These are approximate modulation frequencies for H1 and L1; those for H2
are about 10% higher.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Pre-Stabilized Laser
Mode Cleaner
Common Arm Length
f ~ 700 kHz
f ~ 100 kHz
f ~ 20 kHz
Figure 4. Schematic layout of the frequency stabilization servo. The laser is locked to a ﬁxed-length reference cavity through an AOM. The
AOM frequency is generated by a voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) driven by the MC servo, which is in turn driven by the common mode
arm length signal from the REF port. The laser frequency is actuated by a combination of a pockels cell (PC), piezo-actuator and thermal
driven by a voltage-controlled oscillator, through which fast
corrections to the pre-stabilized frequency can be made. The
MC servo uses this correction path to stabilize the laser
frequency to the MC length, with a servo bandwidth close to
100 kHz. The most stable frequency reference in the GW band
is naturally the average length of the two arm cavities, therefore
the common arm length error signal provides the ﬁnal level of
frequency correction. This is accomplished with feedback to
the MC, directly to the MC length at low frequencies and to
the error point of the MC servo at high frequencies, with an
overall bandwidth of 20 kHz. The MC servo then impresses
the corrections onto the laser frequency. The three cascaded
frequency loops—the reference cavity pre-stabilization, the
MC loop and the common arm length loop—together provide
160 dB of frequency noise reduction at 100 Hz, and achieve a
frequency stability of 5 µHz rms in a 100 Hz bandwidth.
The photodetectors are all located outside the vacuum
system, mounted on optical tables.
Telescopes inside the
vacuum reduce the beam size by a factor of ∼10, and the
small beams exit the vacuum through high-quality windows.
To reduce noise from scattered light and beam clipping, the
optical tables are housed in acoustical enclosures, and the more
critical tables are mounted on passive vibration isolators. Any
back-scattered light along the AS port path is further mitigated
with a Faraday isolator mounted in the vacuum system.
The total AS port power is typically 200–250 mW, and is
a mixture of RF sideband local oscillator power and carrier
light resulting from spatially imperfect interference at the
beamsplitter. The light is divided equally between four length
photodetectors, keeping the power on each at a detectable level
of 50–60 mW. The four length detector signals are summed and
ﬁltered, andthefeedbackcontrolsignalisapplieddifferentially
to the end test masses. This differential-arm servo loop has a
unity-gain bandwidth of approximately 200 Hz, suppressing
ﬂuctuations in the arm lengths to a residual level of ∼10−14 m
rms. An additional servo is implemented on these AS port
detectors to cancel signals in the RF phase orthogonal to the
differential-arm channel; this servo injects RF current at each
photodetector to suppress signals that would otherwise saturate
the detectors. About 1% of the beam is directed to an alignment
detector that controls the differential alignment of the ETMs.
Maximal power buildup in the interferometer also depends
on maintaining stringent alignment levels. Sixteen alignment
degrees-of-freedom—pitch and yaw for each of the six
interferometer mirrors and the input beam direction—are
controlled by a hierarchy of feedback loops. First, orientation
motion at the pendulum and isolation stack eigenfrequencies
is suppressed locally at each optic using optical lever angle
sensors. Second, global alignment is established with four RF
quadrant photodetectors at the three output ports as shown in
ﬁgure 3. These RF alignment detectors measure wavefront
misalignments between the carrier and sideband ﬁelds in a
spatial version of PDH detection . Together the four
detectors provide ﬁve linearly independent combinations of the
angular deviations from optimal global alignment . These
error signals feed a multiple-input multiple-output control
scheme to maintain the alignment within ∼10−8 rad rms of
the optimal point, using bandwidths between ∼0.5 and ∼5 Hz
depending on the channel.
Finally, slower servos hold the
beam centered on the optics. The beam positions are sensed
at the arm ends using dc quadrant detectors that receive the
weak beam transmitted through the ETMs, and at the corner
by imaging the beam spot scattered from the beamsplitter face
with a CCD camera.
implemented
digitally,
rate of 16 384 samples s−1 for the length controls and
2048 samples s−1 for the alignment controls. The digital control system provides the ﬂexibility required to implement the
multiple-input, multiple-output feedback controls described
above. The digital controls also allow complex ﬁlter shapes to
be easily realized, lend the ability to make dynamic changes
in ﬁltering and make it simple to blend sensor and control signals. As an example, optical gain changes are compensated to
ﬁrst order to keep the loop gains constant in time by making
real-time feed-forward corrections to the digital gain based on
cavity power levels.
The digital controls are also essential to implementing
the interferometer lock acquisition algorithm.
So far this
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
section has described how the interferometer is maintained
at the operating point.
The other function of the control
system is to acquire lock: to initially stabilize the relative
optical positions to establish the resonance conditions and
bring them within the linear regions of the error signals.
Before lock the suspended optics are only damped within
their suspension structures; ground motion and the equivalent
effect of input-light frequency ﬂuctuations cause the four
(real or apparent) lengths to ﬂuctuate by 0.1–1 µm rms over
time scales of 0.5–10 s. The probability of all four degreesof-freedom simultaneously falling within the ∼1 nm linear
region of the resonance points is thus extremely small and
a controlled approach is required.
The basic approach of
the lock acquisition scheme, described in detail in , is to
control the degrees-of-freedom in sequence: ﬁrst the powerrecycled Michelson is controlled, then a resonance of one
arm cavity is captured and ﬁnally a resonance of the other
arm cavity is captured to achieve full power buildup. A key
element of this scheme is the real-time, dynamic calculation
of a sensor transformation matrix to form appropriate length
error signals throughout the sequence. The interferometers are
kept in lock typically for many hours at a time, until lock is lost
due to environmental disturbances, instrument malfunction or
operator command.
4.5. Thermal effects
At full power operation, a total of 20–60 mW of light is
absorbed in the substrate and in the mirror surface of each
ITM, depending on their speciﬁc absorption levels. Through
the thermo-optic coefﬁcient of fused silica, this creates a weak,
though not insigniﬁcant thermal lens in the ITM substrates
Thermo-elastic distortion of the test mass reﬂecting
surface is not signiﬁcant at these absorption levels.
the ITM thermal lens has little effect on the carrier mode,
which is determined by the arm cavity radii of curvature, it
does affect the RF sideband mode supported by the recycling
cavity. This in turn affects the power buildup and mode shape
of the RF sidebands in the recycling cavity, and consequently
the sensitivity of the heterodyne detection signals .
Achieving maximum interferometer sensitivity thus depends
critically on optimizing the thermal lens and thereby the mode
shape, a condition which occurs at a speciﬁc level of absorption
in each ITM (approximately 50 mW). To achieve this optimum
mode over the range of ITM absorption and stored power
levels, eachITMthermallensisactivelycontrolledbydirecting
additional heating beams, generated from CO2 lasers, onto
each ITM . The power and shape of the heating beams
are controlled to maximize the interferometer optical gain and
sensitivity. The shape can be selected to have either a Gaussian
radial proﬁle to provide more lensing, or an annular radial
proﬁle to compensate for excess lensing.
4.6. Interferometer response and calibration
TheGWchannelisthedigitalerrorpointofthedifferential-arm
servo loop. In principle, the GW channel could be derived from
any point within this loop. The error point is chosen because
the dynamic range of this signal is relatively small, since
the large low-frequency ﬂuctuations are suppressed by the
feedback loop. To calibrate the error point in strain, the effect
of the feedback loop is divided out, and the interferometer
response to a differential arm strain is factored in ; this
process can be done either in the frequency domain or directly
in the time domain. The absolute length scale is established
using the laser wavelength, by measuring the mirror drive
signal required to move through an interference fringe. The
calibration is tracked during operation with sine waves injected
into the differential-arm loop. The uncertainty in the amplitude
calibration is approximately ±10%.
Timing of the GW
channel is derived from the Global Positioning System; the
absolute timing accuracy of each interferometer is better
than ±10 µs.
The response of the interferometer output as a function of
GW frequency is calculated in detail in . In the longwavelength approximation, where the wavelength of the GW
is much longer than the size of the detector, the response R of
a Michelson–Fabry–Perot interferometer is approximated by
a single-pole transfer function:
where the pole frequency is related to the arm cavity storage
time by fp = 1/4πτs. Above the pole frequency (fp = 85 Hz
for the LIGO 4 km interferometers), the amplitude response
drops off as 1/f . As discussed below, the measurement noise
above the pole frequency has a white (ﬂat) spectrum, and so
the strain sensitivity decreases proportionally to frequency in
this region. The single-pole approximation is quite accurate,
differing from the exact response by less than a percent up to
∼1 kHz .
In the long-wavelength approximation, the interferometer
directional response is maximal for GWs propagating
orthogonally to the plane of the interferometer arms and
linearly polarized along the arms. Other angles of incidence
or polarizations give a reduced response, as depicted by the
antenna patterns shown in ﬁgure 5. A single detector has blind
spots on the sky for linearly polarized GWs.
4.7. Environmental monitors
To complete a LIGO detector, the interferometers described
above are supplemented with a set of sensors to monitor
the local environment.
Seismometers and accelerometers
measure vibrations of the ground and various interferometer
components; microphones monitor acoustic noise at critical
locations; magnetometers monitor ﬁelds that could couple to
the test masses or electronics; radio receivers monitor RF
power around the modulation frequencies. These sensors are
used to detect environmental disturbances that can couple to
the GW channel.
5. Instrument performance
5.1. Strain noise spectra
During the commissioning period, as the interferometer
sensitivity was improved, several short science runs were
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Figure 5. Antenna response pattern for a LIGO GW detector, in the long-wavelength approximation. The interferometer beamsplitter is
located at the center of each pattern, and the thick black lines indicate the orientation of the interferometer arms. The distance from a point
of the plot surface to the center of the pattern is a measure of the GW sensitivity in this direction. The pattern on the left is for + polarization,
the middle pattern is for × polarization and the right-most one is for unpolarized waves.
Frequency (Hz)
Equivalent strain noise (Hz–1/2)
Figure 6. Strain sensitivities, expressed as amplitude spectral
densities of detector noise converted to equivalent GW strain. The
vertical axis denotes the rms strain noise in 1 Hz of bandwidth.
Shown are typical high sensitivity spectra for each of the three
interferometers (red: H1; blue: H2; green: L1), along with the
design goal for the 4 km detectors (dashed gray).
carried out, culminating with the ﬁfth science run (S5) at
design sensitivity. The S5 run collected a full year of tripledetector coincident interferometer data during the period from
November 2005 to September 2007. Since the interferometers
detect GW strain amplitude, their performance is typically
characterized by an amplitude spectral density of detector
noise (the square root of the power spectrum), expressed in
equivalent GW strain.
Typical high-sensitivity strain noise
spectra are shown in ﬁgure 6. Over the course of S5 the strain
sensitivity of each interferometer was improved, by up to 40%
compared with the beginning of the run through a series of
incremental improvements to the instruments.
The primary noise sources contributing to the H1 strain
noise spectrum are shown in ﬁgure 7.
Understanding and
controlling these instrumental noise components has been the
major technical challenge in the development of the detectors.
The noise terms can be broadly divided into two classes:
displacement noise and sensing noise. Displacement noises
cause motions of the test masses or their mirrored surfaces.
Sensing noises, on the other hand, are phenomena that limit
the ability to measure those motions; they are present even in
the absence of test mass motion. The strain noises shown in
ﬁgure 6 consist of spectral lines superimposed on a continuous
broadband noise spectrum.
The majority of the lines are
due to power lines (60, 120, 180 Hz, etc), ‘violin mode’
mechanical resonances (350, 700 Hz, etc) and calibration lines
(55, 400 and 1100 Hz). These high Q lines are easily excluded
from analysis; the broadband noise dominates the instrument
sensitivity.
5.2. Sensing noise sources
Sensing noises are shown in the lower panel of ﬁgure 7. By
design, the dominant noise source above 100 Hz is shot noise,
as determined by the Poisson statistics of photon detection.
The ideal shot-noise limited strain noise density, ˜h(f ), for this
type of interferometer is 
1 + (4πf τs)2
where λ is the laser wavelength, ¯h is the reduced Planck
constant, c is the speed of light, τs is the arm cavity storage
time, f is the GW frequency, PBS is the power incident on the
beamsplitter and η is the photodetector quantum efﬁciency.
For the estimated effective power of ηPBS = 0.9 × 250 W,
the ideal shot-noise limit is ˜h = 1.0 × 10−23 Hz−1/2 at
The shot-noise estimate in ﬁgure 7 is based on
measured photocurrents in the AS port detectors and the
measured interferometer response.
The resulting estimate,
˜h(100 Hz) = 1.3 × 10−23 Hz−1/2, is higher than the ideal
limit due to several inefﬁciencies in the heterodyne detection
process: imperfect interference at the beamsplitter increases
the shot noise; imperfect modal overlap between the carrier
and RF sideband ﬁelds decreases the signal and the fact
that the AS port power is modulated at twice the RF phase
modulation frequency leads to an increase in the time-averaged
shot noise .
Many noise contributions are estimated using stimulusresponse tests, where a sine-wave or broadband noise is
injected into an auxiliary channel to measure its coupling to
the GW channel. This method is used for the laser frequency
and amplitude noise estimates, the RF oscillator phase noise
contribution and also for the angular control and auxiliary
length noise terms described below.
Although laser noise
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Frequency (Hz)
Strain noise (Hz–1/2
SUSPENSION
Frequency (Hz)
Strain noise (Hz–1/2)
LASER AMPLITUDE
OSCILLATOR
Figure 7. Primary known contributors to the H1 detector noise spectrum. The upper panel shows the displacement noise components, while
the lower panel shows sensing noises (note the different frequency scales). In both panels, the black curve is the measured strain noise (same
spectrum as in ﬁgure 6), the dashed gray curve is the design goal and the cyan curve is the root-square-sum of all known contributors (both
sensing and displacement noises). The labeled component curves are described in the text. The known noise sources explain the observed
noise very well at frequencies above 150 Hz, and to within a factor of 2 in the 40–100 Hz band. Spectral peaks are identiﬁed as follows: c,
calibration line; p, power line harmonic; s, suspension wire vibrational mode; m, mirror (test mass) vibrational mode.
is nominally common-mode, it couples to the GW channel
through small, unavoidable differences in the arm cavity
mirrors . Frequency noise is expected to couple most
strongly through a difference in the resonant reﬂectivity of the
two arms. This causes carrier light to leak out the AS port,
which interferes with frequency noise on the RF sidebands to
create a noise signal. The stimulus-response measurements
indicate that the coupling is due to a resonant reﬂectivity
difference of about 0.5%, arising from a loss difference of tens
of ppm between the arms. Laser amplitude noise can couple
through an offset from the carrier dark fringe. The measured
coupling is linear, indicating an effective static offset of ∼1 pm,
believed to be due to mode shape differences between the arms.
5.3. Seismic and thermal noise
Displacement noises are shown in the upper panel of ﬁgure 7.
At the lowest frequencies the largest such noise is seismic
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
noise—motions of the earth’s surface driven by wind, ocean
waves, human activity and low-level earthquakes—ﬁltered by
the isolation stacks and pendulums. The seismic contribution
is estimated using accelerometers to measure the vibration at
the isolation stack support points, and propagating this motion
to the test masses using modeled transfer functions of the
stack and pendulum. The seismic wall frequency, below which
seismic noise dominates, is approximately 45 Hz, a bit higher
than the goal of 40 Hz, as the actual environmental vibrations
around these frequencies are ∼10 times higher than what was
estimated in the design.
Mechanical thermal noise is a more fundamental effect,
arising from ﬁnite losses present in all mechanical systems, and
is governed by the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem .
It causes arm length noise through thermal excitation of the
test mass pendulums (suspension thermal noise) , and
thermal acoustic waves that perturb the test mass mirror
surface (test mass thermal noise) . Most of the thermal
energy is concentrated at the resonant frequencies, which are
designed (as much as possible) to be outside the detection
band. Away from the resonances, the level of thermal motion is
proportional to the mechanical dissipation associated with the
motion. Designing the mirror and its pendulum to have very
low mechanical dissipation reduces the detection-band thermal
noise. It is difﬁcult, however, to accurately and unambiguously
establish the level of broadband thermal noise in situ; instead,
the thermal noise curves in ﬁgure 7 are calculated from
models of the suspension and test masses, with mechanical
loss parameters taken from independent characterizations of
the materials.
Forthependulummode, themechanicaldissipationoccurs
near the ends of the suspension wire, where the wire ﬂexes.
Since the elastic energy in the ﬂexing regions depends on the
wire radius to the fourth power, it helps to make the wire as
thin as possible to limit thermal noise. The pendulums are
thus made with steel wire for its strength; with a diameter of
300 µm the wires are loaded to 30% of their breaking stress.
The thermal noise in the pendulum mode of the test masses
is estimated assuming a frequency-independent mechanical
loss angle in the suspension wire of 3 × 10−4 . This is
a relatively small loss for a metal wire .
Thermal noise of the test mass surface is associated
with mechanical damping within the test mass. The fusedsilica test mass substrate material has very low mechanical
loss, of order 10−7 or smaller . On the other hand, the
thin-ﬁlm, dielectric coatings that provide the required optical
reﬂectivity—alternating layers of silicon dioxide and tantalum
pentoxide—have relatively high mechanical loss. Even though
the coatings are only a few micrometers thick, they are the
dominant source of the relevant mechanical loss, due to their
level of dissipation and the fact that it is concentrated on the
test mass face probed by the laser beam . The test mass
thermal noise estimate is calculated by modeling the coatings
as having a frequency-independent mechanical dissipation of
4 × 10−4 .
5.4. Auxiliary degree-of-freedom noise
The auxiliary length noise term refers to noise in the Michelson
and power recycling cavity servo loops which couple to the
GW channel. The former couples directly to the GW channel
while the latter couples in a manner similar to frequency noise.
Above ∼50 Hz the sensing noise in these loops is dominated
by shot noise; since loop bandwidths of ∼100 Hz are needed
to adequately stabilize these degrees-of-freedom, shot noise is
effectively added onto their motion. Their noise inﬁltration
to the GW channel, however, is mitigated by appropriately
ﬁltering and scaling their digital control signals and adding
them to the differential-arm control signal as a type of feedforward noise suppression . These correction paths reduce
the coupling to the GW channel by 10–40 dB.
We illustrate this more concretely with the Michelson
The shot-noise-limited sensitivity for the Michelson
is ∼10−16 m Hz−1/2.
Around 100 Hz, the Michelson servo
impresses this sensing noise onto the Michelson degree-offreedom (speciﬁcally, onto the beamsplitter). Displacement
noise in the Michelson couples to displacement noise in the
GW channel by a factor of π/(
2F) = 1/100, where F is
the arm cavity ﬁnesse. The Michelson sensing noise would
thus produce ∼10−18 m Hz−1/2 of GW channel noise around
100 Hz, if uncorrected. The digital correction path subtracts
the Michelson noise from the GW channel with an efﬁciency
of 95% or more. This brings the Michelson noise component
down to ∼10−20 m Hz−1/2 in the GW channel, 5–10 times
below the GW channel noise ﬂoor.
alignment sensors (both optical levers and wavefront sensors),
propagating to the test masses through the alignment control
servos. Though these feedback signals affect primarily the
test mass orientation, there is always some coupling to the
GW degree-of-freedom because the laser beam is not perfectly
aligned to the center-of-rotation of the test mass surface .
Angular control noise is minimized by a combination of
ﬁltering and parameter tuning. Angle control bandwidths are
10 Hz or less and strong low-pass ﬁltering is applied in the GW
band. In addition, the angular coupling to the GW channel
is minimized by tuning the center-of-rotation, using the four
actuators on each optic, down to typical residual coupling
levels of 10−3–10−4 m rad−1.
5.5. Actuation noise
The actuator noise term includes the electronics that produce
the coil currents keeping the interferometer locked and aligned,
starting with the digital-to-analog converters (DACs).
actuation electronics chain has extremely demanding dynamic
range requirements.
At low frequencies, control currents
of ∼10 mA are required to provide ∼5 µm of position
control, and tens of milliamperes are required to provide
∼0.5 mrad of alignment bias. Yet the current noise through
the coils must be kept below a couple of pA/
40 Hz. The relatively limited dynamic range of the DACs is
managed with a combination of digital and analog ﬁltering:
the higher frequency components of the control signals are
digitally emphasized before being sent to the DACs, and
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
then de-emphasized following the DACs with complementary
analog ﬁlters. The dominant coil current noise comes instead
from the circuits that provide the alignment bias currents,
followed closely by the circuits that provide the length
feedback currents.
5.6. Additional noise sources
In the 50–100 Hz band, the known noise sources typically
do not fully explain the measured noise.
Additional noise
mechanisms have been identiﬁed, though not quantitatively
established. Two potentially signiﬁcant candidates are nonlinear conversion of low-frequency actuator coil currents to
broadband noise (upconversion) and electric charge buildup
on the test masses.
A variety of experiments have shown
that the upconversion occurs in the magnets (neodymium iron
boron) of the coil-magnet actuators, and produces a broadband
force noise, with a f −2 spectral slope; this is the phenomenon
known as Barkhausen noise . The non-linearity is small
but not negligible given the dynamic range involved: 0.1 mN of
low-frequency (below a few hertz) actuator force upconverts
of order 10−11 N rms of force noise in the 40–80 Hz octave.
This noise mechanism is signiﬁcant primarily below 80 Hz,
and varies in amplitude with the level of ground motion at the
observatories.
Regarding electric charge, mechanical contact of a test
mass with its nearby limit-stops, as happens during a large
earthquake, can build up charge between the two objects. Such
charge distributions are not stationary; they tend to redistribute
on the surface to reduce local charge density. This produces
a ﬂuctuating force on the test mass, with an expected f −1
spectral slope. Although the level at which this mechanism
occurs in the interferometers is not well known, evidence for
its potential signiﬁcance comes from a fortuitous event with
L1. Following a vacuum vent and pump-out cycle partway
through the S5 science run, the strain noise in the 50–100 Hz
band went down by about 20%; this was attributed to charge
reduction on one of the test masses.
In addition to these broadband noises, there are a variety
of periodic or quasi-periodic processes that produce lines or
narrow features in the spectrum. The largest of these spectral
peaks are identiﬁed in ﬁgure 7. The groups of lines around
350 Hz, 700 Hz, etc are vibrational modes of the wires that
suspend the test masses, thermally excited with kT of energy
in each mode. The power line harmonics, at 60 Hz, 120 Hz,
180 Hz, etc inﬁltrate the interferometer in a variety of ways.
The 60 Hz line, for example, is primarily due to the power
line’s magnetic ﬁeld coupling directly to the test mass magnets.
As all these lines are narrow and fairly stable in frequency,
they occupy only a small fraction of the instrument spectral
bandwidth.
5.7. Other performance ﬁgures-of-merit
Whileﬁgures6and7showhigh-sensitivitystrainnoisespectra,
the interferometers exhibit both long- and short-term variation
in sensitivity due to improvements made to the detectors,
seasonal and daily variations in the environment, and the like.
One indicator of the sensitivity variation over the S5 science
RMS Strain [100 – 200 Hz]
Time per RMS [a.u.]
Figure 8. Histograms of the RMS strain noise in the band
100–200 Hz, computed from the S5 data for each of the LIGO
interferometers (red: H1; green: L1; blue: H2). Each RMS strain
value is calculated using 30 min of data. Much of the higher RMS
portions of each distribution date from the ﬁrst ∼100 days of the
run, around which time sensitivity improvements were made to all
interferometers. Typical RMS variations over daily and weekly time
scales are ±5% about the mean. With the half arm length of H2, its
RMS strain noise in this band is expected to be about two times
higher than that of H1 and L1.
run is shown in ﬁgure 8: histograms of the rms strain noise in
the frequency band of 100–200 Hz.
To get a sense of shorter term variations in the noise,
ﬁgure 9 shows the distribution of strain noise amplitudes at
three representative frequencies where the noise is dominated
by random processes.
For stationary, Gaussian noise
the amplitudes would follow a Rayleigh distribution, and
deviations from that indicate non-Gaussian ﬂuctuations. As
ﬁgure 9 suggests, the lower frequency end of the measurement
band shows a higher level of non-Gaussian noise than the
higher frequencies.
Some of this non-Gaussianity is due
to known couplings to a ﬂuctuating environment; much
of it, however, is due to glitches—any short duration
noise transient—from unknown mechanisms.
Additional
characterizations of the glitch behavior of the detectors can
be found in .
statistical
ﬁgure-of-merit
interferometer duty cycle, the fraction of time that detectors
are operating and taking science data. Over the S5 period,
the individual interferometer duty cycles were 78%, 79% and
67% for H1, H2 and L1, respectively; for double coincidence
between L1 and H1 or H2 the duty cycle was 60%; and for
triple coincidence of all three interferometers the duty cycle
was 54%. These ﬁgures include scheduled maintenance and
instrument tuning periods, as well as unintended losses of
operation.
6. Data analysis infrastructure
While the LIGO interferometers provide extremely sensitive
measurements of the strain at two distant locations, the
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
RMS Strain [x 1021]
Probability distribution function (a.u.)
Gaussian Noise
Figure 9. Distribution of strain noise amplitude for three
representative frequencies within the measurement band (data
shown for the H1 detector). Each curve is a histogram of the spectral
amplitude at the speciﬁed frequency over the second half of the S5
data run. Each spectral amplitude value is taken from the Fourier
transform of 1 s of strain data; the equivalent noise bandwidth for
each curve is 1.5 Hz. For comparison, the dashed gray lines are
Rayleigh distributions, which the measured histograms would
follow if they exhibited stationary, Gaussian noise. The high
frequency curve is close to a Rayleigh distribution, since the noise
there is dominated by shot noise. The lower frequency curves, on
the other hand, exhibit non-Gaussian ﬂuctuations.
instruments constitute only one half of the ‘Gravitational-
Wave Observatory’ in LIGO. The other half is the computing
infrastructure and data analysis algorithms required to pull out
GW signals from the noise. Potential sources and the methods
used to search for them are discussed in the next section. First,
we discuss some features of the LIGO data and their analysis
that are common to all searches.
The raw instrument data are collected and archived for offline analysis. For each detector, approximately 50 channels
are recorded at a sample rate of 16 384 Hz, 550 channels at
reduced rates of 256–4096 Hz and 6000 digital monitors at
16 Hz. The aggregate rate of archived data is about 5 MB s−1
for each interferometer. Computer clusters at each site also
produce reduced data sets containing only the most important
channels for analysis.
The detector outputs are pre-ﬁltered with a series of
data quality checks to identify appropriate time periods to
analyze. The most signiﬁcant data quality (DQ) ﬂag, ‘science
mode’, ensures the detectors are in their optimum run-time
conﬁguration; it is set by the on-site scientists and operators.
Follow-up DQ ﬂags are set for impending lock loss, hardware
injections, site disturbances and data corruptions. DQ ﬂags
are also used to mark times when the instrument is outside its
nominal operating range, for instance when a sensor or actuator
is saturating, or environmental conditions are unusually high.
Depending on the speciﬁc search algorithm, the DQ ﬂags
introduce an effective dead-time of 1–10% of the total science
mode data.
Injections of simulated GW signals are performed to
test the functionality of all the search algorithms and also to
measure detection efﬁciencies. These injections are done both
in software, where the waveforms are added to the archived
data stream, and directly in hardware, where they are added
to the feedback control signal in the differential-arm servo.
In general, the injected waveforms simulate the actual signals
being searched for, with representative waveforms used to test
searches for unknown signals.
As described in the section on instrument performance,
the local environment and the myriad interferometer degreesof-freedom can all couple to the GW channel, potentially
creating artifacts that must be distinguished from actual
signals. Instrument-based vetoes are developed and used to
reject such artifacts . The vetoes are tested using hardware
injections to ensure their safety for GW detections.
efﬁcacy of these vetoes depends on the search type.
7. Astrophysical reach and search results
LIGO was designed so that its data could be searched for GWs
from many different sources.
The sources can be broadly
characterized as either transient or continuous in nature, and
for each type, the analysis techniques depend on whether the
gravitational waveforms can be accurately modeled or whether
only less speciﬁc spectral characterizations are possible. We
therefore organize the searches into four categories according
to source type and analysis technique.
(i) Transient, modeled waveforms: the compact binary
coalescence search. The name follows from the fact that
the best understood transient sources are the ﬁnal stages of
binary inspirals , where each component of the binary
may be a NS or a BH. For these sources the waveform
can be calculated with good precision, and matched-ﬁlter
analysis can be used.
(ii) Transient, unmodeled waveforms: the gravitational-wave
bursts search. Transient systems, such as core-collapse
supernovae , BH mergers and NS quakes, may
produce GW bursts that can only be modeled imperfectly,
if at all, and more general analysis techniques are needed.
(iii) Continuous, narrow-band waveforms: the continuous
wave sources search. An example of a continuous source
of GWs with a well-modeled waveform is a spinning NS
(e.g. a pulsar) that is not perfectly symmetric about its
rotation axis .
(iv) Continuous,
waveforms:
stochastic
gravitational-wave
background
operating in the early universe, for example, could have
produced a background of GWs that is continuous but
stochastic in character .
In the following sections we review the astrophysical
results that have been generated in each of these search
categories using LIGO data; contains links to all the LIGO
observational publications. To date, no GW signal detections
have been made, so these results are all upper limits on various
GW sources. In those cases where the S5 analysis is not yet
complete, we present the most recent published results and also
discuss the expected sensitivity, or astrophysical reach, of the
search based on the S5 detector performance.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
7.1. Compact binary coalescences
Binary coalescences are unique laboratories for testing general
relativity in the strong-ﬁeld regime .
GWs from such
systems will provide unambiguous evidence for the existence
of BHs and powerful tests of their properties as predicted by
general relativity . Multiple observations will yield
valuable information about the population of such systems in
the universe, up to distances of hundreds of megaparsecs (Mpc,
1 parsec = 3.3 light years). Coalescences involving NSs will
provide information about the nuclear equation of state in
these extreme conditions. Such systems are considered likely
progenitors of short-duration gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) .
Post-Newtonian approximations to general relativity
accurately model a binary system of compact objects whose
orbit is adiabatically tightening due to GW emission .
Several examples of such binary systems exist with merger
times less than the age of the universe, most notably the binary
pulsar system PSR 1913 + 16 described previously.
an extended inspiral phase, the system becomes dynamically
unstable when the separation decreases below an innermost
stable circular orbit (approximately 25 km for two solarmass NSs) and the objects plunge and form a single BH
in the merger phase. The resulting distorted BH relaxes to
a stationary Kerr state via the strongly damped sinusoidal
oscillations of the quasi-normal modes in the ringdown phase.
The smoothly evolving inspiral and ringdown GW waveforms
can be approximated analytically, while the extreme dynamics
of the merger phase require numeric solutions to determine
the GW waveform .
Collectively, the inspiral, merger
and ringdown of a binary system is termed a compact binary
coalescence (CBC).
The waveform for a compact binary inspiral is a chirp: a
sinusoid increasing in frequency and amplitude until the end
of the inspiral phase. The inspiral phase of a binary neutron
star (BNS, with each mass assumed to be 1.4M⊙) will complete
nearly2000orbitsintheLIGObandovertensofsecondsbefore
merger, and emit a maximum GW frequency of about 1500 Hz.
Higher mass inspirals terminate at proportionally lower GW
frequencies. For non-spinning objects, the inspiral waveform
is uniquely determined by the two component masses m1
and m2 of the system .
No analytic waveforms exist
for the merger phase; calculating these waveforms is one
of the primary goals of numerical relativity .
ringdown phase is described by an exponentially damped
sinusoid, determined by the quasi-normal mode frequency and
the quality factor of the ﬁnal BH .
Analysis method.
Since the inspiral and ringdown
waveforms for a given mass pair (m1, m2) are accurately
known, searches for them are performed using optimal
matched ﬁltering employing a bank of templates covering the
desired (m1, m2) parameter space. An optimized algorithm
generates the template bank, minimizing the number of
templates while allowing a maximum signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) loss of 3% .
In practice approximately
7000 templates are used to cover total masses between
2M⊙and 35M⊙.
The matched ﬁltering process generates a trigger when the
SNR of the ﬁlter output exceeds a threshold. The threshold is
set by balancing two factors: it must be low enough so that a
good estimation can be made of the background due to detector
noise, and it must be high enough to keep the number of
triggers manageable. Associated with each trigger is a speciﬁc
template, or mass pair, and a coalescence time which maximize
the SNR for that signal event .
Triggers are ﬁrst generated independently for each
The number of false triggers created by detector
noise is then greatly reduced by ﬁnding the set of coincident
triggers—those that correspond to similar template masses and
coalescence times, within appropriate windows, between at
least two LIGO detectors.
Coincident triggers are subject
to additional consistency checks, such as the χ2 and
r2 tests.
Typically many thousands of coincident triggers per
month remain at the end of the pipeline.
These surviving
triggers are compared with the background from accidental
coincidences of triggers due to detector noise.
Time shift
trials are used to estimate the background: the analysis is
repeated with the triggers from different detectors shifted in
time relative to each other by an amount large compared with
the coincidence window. A hundred such trials are typically
For each region of mass parameter space, the time
shift trials establish a false alarm rate as a function of SNR.
In-time coincident triggers with the smallest false alarm rate
are potential detection candidates .
A large number of software injections is made to tune
the analysis pipeline and evaluate its detection efﬁciency.
The injected waveforms cover the largest practical range
of parameter space possible (component masses, spins,
orientations, sky locations and distances).
The resulting
detection efﬁciency is combined with simple models of the
astrophysical source distribution to arrive at an estimated
cumulative luminosity to which the search is sensitive. These
models predict that the rate of CBCs should be
proportional to the stellar birth rate in nearby spiral galaxies.
This birth rate can be estimated from a galaxy’s blue
luminosity63, so we express the cumulative luminosity in units
of L10, where L10 is 1010 times the blue solar luminosity (the
Milky Way contains ∼1.7L10).
Analysis results.
To date, the detection candidates
resulting from the analysis pipeline are consistent with
the estimated background and thus are likely accidental
coincidences. In the absence of detection, mass-dependent
upper limits are set on the rate of CBCs in the local universe.
These rate limits are expressed per unit L10.
An inspiral search with total masses between 2M⊙and
35M⊙has been completed using the ﬁrst calendar year of S5
data . Figure 10 shows the resulting rate upper limit for
low-mass binary coalescences as a function of the total mass
(left), and as a function of the mass of a BH in a BH–NS
system with a NS mass of 1.35M⊙(right). The same analysis
set a BNS coalescence rate upper limit of 3.8×10−2 yr−1 L−1
63 Blue luminosity is short for B-band luminosity, signifying one of a standard
set of optical ﬁlters used in measuring the luminosity of galaxies.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Figure 10. S5 year 1 upper limits on the binary coalescence rate per year and per L10 as a function of total mass of the binary system
assuming a uniform distribution in the mass ratio (left) and as a function of the mass of a BH in a BH–NS system with a NS mass of 1.35M⊙
(right). The darker area shows the excluded region when accounting for marginalization over systematic errors. The lighter area shows the
additional region that would have been excluded if systematic errors had been ignored. Reprinted ﬁgure with permission from B P Abbott
et al 2009 Phys. Rev. D 79 122001 . Copyright by the American Physical Society.
This upper limit is still signiﬁcantly higher than recent CBC
rate estimates derived from the observed BNS population—
approximately 5 × 10−5 yr−1L−1
10 for NS/NS binaries .
Since the LIGO sensitivities improved as S5 progressed,
analysis of the full data set should provide signiﬁcantly
more interesting coalescence results. In the meantime, the
astrophysical reach for these sources can be estimated from
the detector noise performance. The minute-by-minute strain
noise spectra for each detector are used to calculate the horizon
distance: the maximum distance at which an inspiral could
be detected with an SNR of 8.
For BNS inspirals, the
horizon distance was 30–35 Mpc each for L1 and H1 and about
17 Mpc for H2. Based on the increased horizon distances and
extrapolations from the ﬁrst-year search results, we expect to
achievebetterthanafactorof2increaseincumulativeexposure
with the full run analysis.
The sensitivity to BH ringdowns is similarly estimated
using the S5 detector strain noise. Figure 11 shows the single
detector range for BH ringdowns averaged over sky position
and spin orientation. The range estimate assumes 1% of total
mass is radiated as GWs, in rough agreement with numerical
simulations.
Unlike NS inspirals, the abundance of such
‘intermediate mass BHs’ and hence their merger rate is difﬁcult
to predict .
Searches are also in progress for GWs from CBCs with
total masses up to 100 solar masses, and from CBCs coincident
with short-hard GRBs observed during the S5 run. In addition,
procedures are being developed for establishing conﬁdence
in candidate detection events and for extracting the physical
parameters of detected events.
7.2. GW bursts
In addition to the well-modeled signals described in previous
sections, we search for GW ‘bursts’, deﬁned as any shortduration signal (t ≲1 s) with signiﬁcant signal power in the
detectors’ sensitive frequency band . For
example, the collapsing core of a massive star (the engine that
Horizon distance (Mpc)
Figure 11. S5 sensitivity to binary BH ringdowns for the H1 (red),
L1 (green) and H2 (blue) detectors. When the ringdown frequency
coincides with a spectral line the sensitivity is much reduced
(300M/Msun corresponds to 60 Hz).
powers a type II supernova) can emit GWs through a number
of different mechanisms . A compact binary merger—
discussed in the earlier section about CBC searches—may
be considered a burst, especially if the mass is large so that
the bulk of the long inspiral signal is below the sensitive
frequency band of the detectors, leaving only a short signal
from the actual merger to be detected. Cosmic strings, if they
exist, are generically expected to bend into cusps and kinks
which are efﬁcient radiators of beamed GWs.
well be other astrophysical sources, since any energetic event
that involves an asymmetric reshaping or re-orientation of a
signiﬁcant amount of mass will generate GWs.
Many energetic gravitational events will also emit
electromagnetic radiation and/or energetic particles that can be
observed with telescopes and other astronomical instruments,
as in the case of supernovae. Thus, besides searching for GW
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
signals alone, we can search for a class of joint emitters and
use information from conventional observations to constrain
the GW event time and sky position, allowing a more sensitive
‘externally triggered’ search. For example, GRBs and soft
gamma-ray repeater (SGR) ﬂares are highly energetic events
that make excellent targets for externally triggered GW burst
searches. While the progenitor(s) of GRBs are not entirely
clear, most if not all short-duration GRBs are thought to be
produced by mergers of NSs or of a NS with a BH, which
would radiate a great deal of energy in GWs. Similarly, SGRs
are believed to be NSs with very high magnetic ﬁelds (i.e.
magnetars) that sporadically produce ﬂares of electromagnetic
radiation. The ﬂares may be related to deformations of the NS
crust which could couple to GW emission. If an associated GW
signal for these progenitors is detected, the combined GW and
EM/particle data will reveal complementary information about
the astrophysics of the event.
7.2.1. Analysis methods.
A number of robust burst detection
methods have been developed that do not rely on knowledge
of the signal waveform. Most ﬁt into one of three general
categories: excess power, cross-correlation or coherent.
Excess power methods decompose the data into different
frequency components, either with a Fourier basis or with
some family of wavelets, and look for signal power that is
signiﬁcantly above the baseline detector noise level in some
time–frequency region. An excess power method typically
generates triggers from each detector, and then applies a
coincidence test to ﬁnd consistent event candidates with excess
power in two or more detectors.
Cross-correlation methods directly compare the data
streams from a pair of detectors to look for a common signal
within uncorrelated noise.
A cross-correlation statistic is
calculated by integrating over a short time window—ideally,
comparableinlengthtothedurationofthesignal—witharange
of relative time delays corresponding to different GW arrival
directions. The cross-correlation is insensitive to the relative
amplitude of the common signal in the two data streams which
may be different due to the antenna response of the detectors.
Coherentmethodsgeneralizetheconceptsofexcesspower
and cross-correlation to take full advantage of having three or
more data streams. Detectors at each site see a different linear
combination of the same two time-dependent GW polarization
components, so a network of detectors at three sites (e.g. the
two LIGO sites plus Virgo) has enough information to overdetermine the waveform and provide a consistency test for each
hypothetical arrival direction. This is essentially a maximum
likelihood approach on the space of possible GW signals,
except that a ‘regulator’ or Bayesian prior is used to disfavor
physically unlikely scenarios . If only two sites are
available, the use of this regulator allows a somewhat weaker
coherent analysis to be performed on data from only two
detectors. In externally triggered searches, coherent analysis
is simpler because the sky location of the potential signal is
already known. In this case two sites are sufﬁcient to fully
determine the GW signal.
Each of these analysis methods produces a statistic
(or more than one) that describes the ‘strength’ of the event
candidate.
The strength statistics are compared with the
background distribution using time shift analysis, like the CBC
Externally triggered searches also determine the
background from time shifted off-source data.
These search methods generally work well for a wide
range of signals, with some waveform-dependent variation
between methods.
They are less sensitive than matched
ﬁltering for a known signal but are computationally efﬁcient
and are often within a factor of 2 in sensitivity.
Analysis results: all-sky burst searches.
general searches are those that look for GW bursts coming
from any sky position at any time.
Because there is
no morphological distinction between a GW burst signal
and an instrumental glitch, these ‘all-sky’ searches place
stringentdemandsondataqualityevaluation, instrumentalveto
conditions and consistency tests among detectors. The primary
S4 all-sky burst search was designed to detect signals
with frequency content in the range 64–1600 Hz and durations
of up to ∼1 s. It identiﬁed event candidates with an analysis
pipeline consisting of two stages. First, a wavelet-based excess
power method was used to ﬁnd instances of coincident excess
power in all three detectors. Second, candidate triggers were
generated with highly signiﬁcant correlation compared with
background as well as positive deﬁnite correlation and strain
amplitude between the two Hanford detectors. No signiﬁcant
event candidates were identiﬁed in 15.53 days of observation;
based on this, we placed an upper limit at 90% conﬁdence on
the rate of detectable GW bursts of 0.15 per day.
To interpret a null result such as this one, a Monte Carlo
method evaluates what signals could have been detected by the
search. The data are re-processed with simulated GW signals
using the same analysis pipeline to measure the detection
efﬁciency in the presence of actual detector noise. The intrinsic
amplitude of a simulated burst signal is characterized by a
model-independent quantity, the ‘root-sum-square’ GW strain,
hrss, that expresses the amplitude of the GW signal arriving
at the Earth without regard to the response of any particular
detector. It has units of Hz−1/2, allowing it to be directly related
to the amplitude spectral density of the detector noise as shown
in ﬁgure 12.
In principle, the efﬁciency of a burst search pipeline can
be evaluated for any modeled GW waveform, e.g. from a
core collapse simulation or a binary merger signal generated
using numerical relativity. In practice, the search efﬁciency
is evaluated for a collection of ad hoc waveforms that have
certain general features but do not correspond to any particular
physical model. One of our standard waveforms is a ‘sine-
Gaussian’, a sinusoidal signal with central frequency f within
a Gaussian envelope with dimensionless width parameter Q.
Evaluating the detection efﬁciency as a function of frequency,
ﬁgure 12 shows the effective rate limit as a function of signal
strength using an ‘exclusion diagram’.
To understand the reach of the analysis in astrophysical
terms, the search sensitivity in terms of hrss can be related to a
corresponding energy emitted in GWs, EGW. As discussed in
the S4 all-sky burst search paper , for sine-Gaussians and
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
rate [events/day]
Figure 12. Exclusion diagram (rate limit at 90% conﬁdence level,
as a function of signal amplitude) for sine-Gaussian signals with
Q = 8.9. Search results from the S1, S2 and S4 science runs are
shown. (A burst search was also performed for S3, but it used only 8
days of data and systematic studies were not carried through to
produce a deﬁnitive rate limit.)
other quasi-periodic signals,
4G (2πf )2h2
where the GW energy emission is assumed to be isotropic.
GW emission is not isotropic, but the energy ﬂux varies by a
factor of no more than 4. Using the fact that the S5 data has
lower noise than S4 by approximately a factor of 2, sources
at a typical Galactic distance of 10 kpc could be detected for
energy emission in GWs as low as ∼5×10−8M⊙. For a source
in the Virgo galaxy cluster, approximately 16 Mpc away, GW
energy emission as low as ∼0.12M⊙could be detected.
We can draw more speciﬁc conclusions about detectability
for models of astrophysical sources that predict the absolute
energy and waveform emitted.
Following the discussion
in , we estimate that a similar burst search using S5 data
could detect the core-collapse signals modeled by Ott et al 
out to 0.4 kpc for their 11M⊙non-spinning progenitor (model
s11WW) and to 16 kpc for their 15M⊙spinning progenitor
(model m15b6).
The latter of these would be detectable
throughout most of our Galaxy. A merger of two 10M⊙BHs
would be detectable out to a distance of approximately 3 Mpc,
while a merger of two 50M⊙BHs could be detected as far
away as ∼120Mpc.
7.2.3. Analysis results: externally triggered burst searches.
The exceptionally intense GRB 070201 was a particularly
interesting event for a triggered burst search because the sky
position, determined from the gamma-ray data, overlapped
one of the spiral arms of the large, nearby galaxy M31
(Andromeda). An analysis of GW data found no evidence
of an inspiral or a more general burst signal; that ﬁnding ruled
out (at the ∼99% level) the possibility of a binary merger in
M31 being the origin of GRB 070201.
We have searched for GW bursts associated with the giant
ﬂare of SGR 1806 −20 that occurred on 27 December 2004
(between the S4 and S5 runs, but at a time when the LIGO H1
detector was operating, albeit with reduced sensitivity) plus
190 smaller ﬂares of SGRs 1806−20 and 1900+14 during the
S5 run . No GW signals were identiﬁed. Energy emission
limitswereestablishedforavarietyofhypotheticalwaveforms,
many of them within the energy range allowed by some
models and some as low as 3 × 1038 J. Future observations—
especially for giant ﬂares and ﬂares of the recently discovered
SGR 0501+4516 which is closer to Earth—will be sensitive
to GW energy emission at or below the level of observed
electromagnetic energies.
Externally triggered GW burst searches are in progress or
planned using observations of supernovae, anomalous optical
transients, radio bursts and neutrinos as triggers. In general,
the constraints on event time, sky position and (possibly)
signal properties provided by the external triggers make these
searches a few times more sensitive in amplitude than all-sky
searches. It is thus possible to investigate a rich population
of energetic transient events that may plausibly produce
detectable GWs.
7.3. Continuous wave sources
Continuous GW signals may be generated by rotating NSs such
as those powering millisecond radio pulsars. In these systems,
a quadrupole mass asymmetry, or ellipticity, ϵ, radiates GWs
at twice the NS rotation frequency. The maximum sustainable
ellipticity, and hence the maximum GW emission, is a function
of the NSs internal structure and equation of state. Current
limits on the ellipticity are based on the change in frequency
of the radio pulsar signal, the spin-down rate, assuming that
the spin-down is entirely due to GW emission. An especially
interesting candidate is the Crab pulsar, for which the spindown bound on ellipticity is ϵ ⩽7.2 × 10−4 and for which the
bound on detectable strain is h ⩽1.4×10−24 at about 59.6 Hz,
twice its spin frequency . ‘Standard’ NS equations of state
predict ϵ ⩽10−7, while exotic pulsars such as quark stars may
have ϵ ⩽10−4 . For most radio pulsars, however, the spindown limit overestimates the ellipticity and associated GW
emission because of electromagnetic damping of the rotation.
Compared with CBCs or bursts, NS powered millisecond
radio pulsars are a weak source of GWs which LIGO can detect
onlyifthesourceiswithinafewhundredparsecs. Nonetheless,
there are dozens of known sources within this range that may be
detected if they have sufﬁciently high ellipticity. Furthermore,
millisecond pulsars are attractive sources of continuous GWs
since the stable rotation periods allow coherent integration over
many hours, weeks and months to improve the SNR.
7.3.1. Analysis methods.
The detectable waveform from a
rotating NS is a function of at least six source parameters: two
each for the pulsar position and orientation on the sky and at
least two for the spin frequency and frequency drift (1st time
derivative). The intrinsic phase of a spinning NS waveform,
as measured in the NS’s rest frame, (T ), is modeled as
an approximate sinusoid at instantaneous frequency ν and
spin-down rate ˙ν. The observed phase in the detector frame,
φ(t), is in general a more complicated function of time due
to the variable time delay δt
The delay δt
contains components arising from the Earth’s orbital motion
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
(for which |δt| ⩽8.5 min), from the Earth’s sidereal motion
(|δt| ⩽43 µs) and from the general relativistic Shapiro delay
(|δt| ⩽120 µs) for signals passing close to the sun .
The six-dimensional parameter space and long duration
of the S5 run makes all-sky coherent searches for unknown
NSs, for which the amplitude and phase variations are
tracked throughout the observation time, computationally
prohibitive. Three techniques that trade off between sensitivity
and computation have been implemented: (1) semi-coherent,
long duration all-sky searches sensitive only to power and
neglecting phase using the entire data set ; (2) coherent,
short-duration all-sky searches sensitive to amplitude and
phase but computationally limited to ≈5000 h integration time
 ; (3) coherent, targeted searches for millisecond radio
pulsars with accurate and stable ephemerides using the entire
data set . Although the coherent targeted search is the
most sensitive, only a little more than 100 known radio pulsars
have suitable ephemerides, while NS formation rates predict
that many hundred millisecond pulsars should exist within a
detectable volume . Thus even though the all-sky searches
are not as sensitive as the targeted search, they are worth
performing.
The LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration has implemented
several different incoherent all-sky searches. The most recent
results using the S5 data are from PowerFlux .
search averages strain power from short Fourier transforms
(SFTs) over the full run to look for excess power in a narrow
frequency bin.
The SFTs are calculated using contiguous
30 min data segments. Before summing, each SFT is shifted
by a sky position-dependent factor to account for the time
delays discussed above, and weighted according to the detector
antenna response and average noise power. Frequency bins
with high SNR are checked for coincidence between multiple
detectors and followed up with coherent searches.
An alternative all-sky search using longer coherence times
(>1 day) offers improved sensitivity, but its computational
demands require a new paradigm: distributed computing
using the Einstein@Home network .
Einstein@Home
users volunteer their idle computing CPU cycles to perform
a coherent analysis.
The combined resources of 50 000
volunteers with 100 000 CPUs enables an all-sky search for
rotating NSs in 5280 h of the most sensitive S5 data.
Einstein@Home search is based on the coherent F-statistic
in the frequency domain . Each CPU in the distributed
network calculates the coherent signal for each frequency
bin and sky position for a 30 h contiguous segment.
loudest frequency bins are followed up with coincidence
studies between detectors and continuity studies with adjacent
time segments.
The deepest searches are performed for millisecond radio
pulsars with well-characterized, stable ephemerides.
154 pulsars with spin frequencies greater than 25 Hz are
selected from the Australian Telescope National Facility online
catalogue . Of these, 78 have sufﬁcient stability and timing
resolution to make knowledge of their waveform capable
of improving the detection SNR over the long observation
time. To consistently incorporate the prior information, the
targeted search uses a time-domain, Bayesian analysis in
Figure 13. Limits on GW strain from rotating NSs. Upper curve
(black points): all-sky strain upper limits on unknown NSs for
spin-down rates as high as 5 × 10−9 Hz s−1 and optimal orientation,
from analysis of the ﬁrst 8 months of S5 data . Middle curve
(gray points): expected sensitivity for the Einstein@Home search
with 5280 h of S5 data. Lower curve (gray band): expected range for
95% conﬁdence level Bayesian upper limits on radio pulsars with
known epherimides, using the full S5 data. Black triangles: upper
limits on GW emission from known radio pulsars based on their
observed spin-down rates.
which the detection likelihood is calculated for each detector.
Informationfrommultipledetectorsiscombinedtoformajoint
likelihood assuming the detectors’ noises are independent.
This procedure allows upper limits from successive science
runs to be combined and provides a natural framework for
incorporating uncertainties in the ephemerides.
Analysis results.
Analyses of the full S5 data are
underway using the techniques described above. An all-sky
search using the PowerFlux technique on the ﬁrst 8 months
of S5 with the H1 and L1 detectors has been completed .
This produced upper limits on strain amplitude in the band
50–1100 Hz. For a NS with equatorial ellipticity of 10−6, the
search was sensitive to distances as great as 500 pc.
Because of the narrow bandwidth (10−6 Hz) and complicated frequency modulation of pulsar signals, instrument
artifacts do not signiﬁcantly contribute to the noise in pulsar searches. The few exceptions—non-stationary noise near
60 Hz harmonics, wandering lines, etc—have been easy to
identify and remove.
Consequently, we can predict the
astrophysical reach of the full S5 data set with a high degree of
conﬁdence based on the performance of previous searches and
the S5 noise performance. Figure 13 shows the projected S5
strain amplitude sensitivity for the more sensitive searches,
along with the upper limits established by the PowerFlux
7.4. Stochastic GW background
A stochastic background of GWs could result from the random
superposition of an extremely large number of unresolved and
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
independent GW emission events . Such a background
is analogous to the cosmic microwave background radiation,
though its spectrum is unlikely to be thermal. The emission
events could be the result of cosmological phenomena, such
as the ampliﬁcation of vacuum ﬂuctuations during inﬂation or
in pre-big-bang models; phase transitions in the history of the
universe or cosmic strings, topological defects that may have
been formed during symmetry-breaking phase transitions in
the early universe. Or a detectable background could result
from many unresolved astrophysical sources, such as rotating
NSs, supernovae or low-mass x-ray binaries.
Theoretical models of such sources are distinguished by
the power spectra they predict for the stochastic background
production.
The spectrum is usually described by the
dimensionless quantity
GW(f ), which is the GW energy
density per unit logarithmic frequency, divided by the critical
energy density ρc to close the universe:
GW(f ) = f
In the LIGO frequency band, most of the model spectra are
well approximated by a power-law:
GW(f ) ∝f α. LIGO
analyses consider a range of values for α, though in this review
we focus on results for a frequency independent
GW (α = 0),
since many of the cosmological models predict a ﬂat or nearly
ﬂat spectrum over the LIGO band. The strain noise power
spectrum for a ﬂat
GW falls as f −3, with a strain amplitude
scale of64:
hGW = 4 × 10−22
Analysis method.
Unlike the cosmic microwave
background, any GW stochastic background will be well below
the noise ﬂoor of a single detector.
To probe below this
level, we cross-correlate the output of two detectors .
Assuming the detector noises are independent of each other,
in the cross-correlation measurement the signal—due to a
stochastic background present in each output—will increase
linearly with integration time T , whereas the measurement
noise will increase only with the square root of T . Similarly
the signal will increase linearily with the effective bandwidth
(f ) of the correlation and the noise as (f )1/2. Thus with a
sufﬁciently long observation time and wide bandwidth, a small
background signal can, in principle, be detected beneath the
detector noise ﬂoor.
The assumption of independent detector noise is crucial,
and it is valid when comparing L1 with either of the
Hanford detectors due to their wide physical separation.
But this separation also extracts a price: the coherent crosscorrelation of a stochastic background signal is reduced by
the separation time delay between the detectors and the nonparallel alignment of their arms. These effects are accounted
for by the overlap reduction function γ (f ), which is unity for
co-located and co-aligned detectors, and decreases below unity
64 We assume here and in the rest of this paper a Hubble expansion rate of
72 km/s/Mpc.
when they are shifted apart or mis-aligned. For a Livingston–
Hanford detector pair, the overlap is on average ⟨γ ⟩∼0.1 in
the sensitive band around 100 Hz.
The low-frequency noise ﬂoor of a single S5 LIGO
detector is roughly equivalent to a stochastic background
spectrum with
GW = 0.01 (hGW = 4 × 10−23 Hz−1/2 at
100 Hz). The cross-correlation measurement will be sensitive
to a background
GW lower than this noise ﬂoor by a factor of
⟨γ ⟩(T f )1/2. With a year of observation time and an effective
bandwidth of 100 Hz this is a factor of several thousand, so
we expect to probe for a stochastic background in the range
GW ∼10−5–10−6.
7.4.2. Analysis results.
Since the SNR for a search on
grows inversely with the product of the strain noise amplitude
spectra of the two detectors, the sensitivity of this search grew
quickly as the detectors improved. Analysis of the S4 data
yielded a Bayesian 90% upper limit of
GW < 6.5 × 10−5
for a ﬂat spectrum in the 51–150 Hz band . Projecting
for the S5 data, the lower strain noise and longer integration
time should improve on this by an order of magnitude. While
the cross-correlation analysis for S5 is still in progress, it is
straightforward to calculate the expected variance of the crosscorrelation using only the interferometers’ strain noise spectra
over the run. This predicts that the potential upper limit on
GW will be in the range (4–5) × 10−6.
Sucharesultwouldbetheﬁrstdirectmeasurementtoplace
a limit on
GW more stringent than the indirect bound set by
big-bang-nucleosynthesis (BBN). The BBN bound, currently
themostconstrainingboundinthebandaround100 Hz, derives
from the fact that a large GW energy density present at the
time of BBN would have altered the abundances of the light
nuclei in the universe .
For the BBN model to be
consistent with observations of these abundances, the total
GW energy density at the time of nucleosynthesis is thus
constrained.
In the limiting case that the GW energy was
conﬁned to LIGO’s sensitive band of 50–150 Hz, the BBN
GW < 1.1 × 10−5 .
The LIGO results are also being used to constrain
the parameter space of models predicting a stochastic GW
background, such as cosmic string models and pre-bigbang models .
The gamut of theoretical models and
observations pertaining to a stochastic GW background spans
an impressively wide range of frequencies and amplitudes.
These are displayed in the landscape plot of ﬁgure 14.
The analysis described so far searches for an isotropic
background of GWs. The cross-correlation method has also
been extended to search for spatial anisotropies, as might be
produced by an ensemble of astrophysical sources . Such a
GW radiometer requires spatially separated interferometers in
order to point the multi-detector antenna at different locations
on the sky. The result is a map of the power distribution of
GWs convolved with the antenna lobe of the radiometer, with
an uncertainty determined by the detector noise. Radiometer
analysis of the S4 data yielded upper limits on the GW
strain power from point sources in the range of ∼10−48–
∼10−47 Hz−1, depending on sky position and the GW power
spectrum model . The S5 analysis should improve on the
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
Figure 14. Observational limits and potential sources for a
stochastic background of GWs. The LIGO S5 curve refers to the
potential upper limit from the S5 run, based on strain noise data. The
curves corresponding to inﬂationary, cosmic-string and pre-big-bang
models are examples; the model parameters allow signiﬁcant
variation in the predicted spectra. The BBN and CMB & Matter
Spectra bounds apply to the total GW energy over the frequency
range spanned by the corresponding lines. See for more details.
strain power sensitivity by a factor of 30. The corresponding
GW energy ﬂux density that the search will be sensitive to is
∼10−10 W/m2/Hz (f/100 Hz)2.
8. Future directions
From its inception, LIGO was envisioned not as a single
experiment, but as an on-going observatory. The facilities and
infrastructure construction were speciﬁed, as much as possible,
to accommodate detectors with much higher sensitivity. We
have identiﬁed a set of relatively minor improvements to the
current instruments that can yield a factor of 2 increase
in strain sensitivity and a corresponding factor of 8 increase in
the probed volume of the universe. The two most signiﬁcant
enhancements are higher laser power and a new, more efﬁcient
readout technique for the GW channel.
Higher power is
delivered by a new master oscillator-power ampliﬁer system,
emitting35 Wofsinglefrequency1064 nmlight , 3.5times
the power of the initial LIGO lasers. For the readout, a small
mode-cleaner cavity is inserted in the AS beam path, between
the Faraday isolator and the length photodetectors. This cavity
ﬁlters out RF sidebands and the higher order mode content of
the AS port light, reducing the shot-noise power. Instead of
RF heterodyning, signal detection is done by slightly offsetting
the differential arm length from the dark fringe, and using the
resulting carrier ﬁeld as the local oscillator in a dc homodyne
detection scheme. These improvements (known collectively
as Enhanced LIGO) are currently being implemented and
commissioned on H1 and L1, and a 1–2 year science run with
these interferometers is expected to begin in mid-2009.
Signiﬁcantly greater sensitivity improvements are possible with more extensive upgrades.
Advanced LIGO will
replace the existing interferometers with signiﬁcantly improved technology to achieve a factor of at least 10 in sensitivity over the initial LIGO interferometers and to lower the
seismic wall frequency down to 10 Hz . Advanced
LIGO has been funded by the National Science Foundation,
beginning in April 2008. Installation of the Advanced LIGO
interferometers is planned to start in early 2011.
The Advanced LIGO interferometers are conﬁgured like
initial LIGO—a power-recycled Fabry–Perot Michelson—
with the addition of a signal recycling mirror at the antisymmetric output. Signal recycling gives the ability to tune
the interferometer frequency response, so that the point of
maximum response can be shifted away from zero frequency
 . The laser wavelength stays at 1064 nm, but an additional
high-power stage brings the laser power up to 200 W .
The test masses will be signiﬁcantly larger—40 kg—in order to
reduce radiation pressure noise and to allow larger beam sizes.
Larger beams and better dielectric mirror coatings combine to
reduce the test mass thermal noise by a factor of 5 compared
with initial LIGO .
The test mass suspensions become signiﬁcantly more
intricate to provide much better performance.
incorporate four cascaded stages of passive isolation, instead
of just one, including vertical isolation comparable to the
horizontal isolation at all stages except one .
test mass is suspended at the ﬁnal stage with fused-silica
ﬁbers rather than steel wires; these ﬁbers have extremely low
mechanical loss and will reduce suspension thermal noise
nearly a hundred-fold .
The current passive seismic
isolation stacks that support the suspensions are replaced with
two-stage active isolation platforms . These stages are
designed to actively reduce the ground vibration by a factor of
∼1000 in the 1–10 Hz band, and provide passive isolation at
higher frequencies. The combination of the isolation platforms
and the suspensions will reduce seismic noise to negligible
levels above approximately 10 Hz.
The successful operation of Advanced LIGO is expected
to transform the ﬁeld from GW detection to GW astrophysics.
We illustrate the potential using compact binary coalescences.
Detection rate estimates for CBCs can be made using a
combination of extrapolations from observed binary pulsars,
stellar birth rate estimates and population synthesis models.
There are large uncertainties inherent in all of these methods,
however, leading to rate estimates that are uncertain by several
orders of magnitude.
We therefore quote a range of rates,
spanning plausible pessimistic and optimistic estimates, as
well as a likely rate. For a NS mass of 1.4M⊙and a BH mass
of 10M⊙, these rate estimates for Advanced LIGO are: 0.4–
400 yr−1, with a likely rate of 40 yr−1 for NS–NS binaries;
0.2–300 yr−1, with a likely rate of 10 yr−1 for NS–BH binaries;
2–4000 yr−1, with a likely rate of 30 yr−1 for BH–BH binaries.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the United
States National Science Foundation for the construction and
operation of the LIGO Laboratory and the Particle Physics
Rep. Prog. Phys. 72 076901
B P Abbott et al
and Astronomy Research Council of the UK, the Max-Planck-
Society and the State of Niedersachsen/Germany for support
of the construction and operation of the GEO 600 detector.
The authors also gratefully acknowledge the support of the
research by these agencies and by the Australian Research
Council, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada, the Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research of India, the Department of Science and Technology
of India, the Spanish Ministerio de Educacion y Ciencia,
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the John
Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation, the Leverhulme Trust, the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation, the Research Corporation and the Alfred
P Sloan Foundation.