Last Words
Googleology is Bad Science
Adam Kilgarriff
Lexical Computing Ltd. and
University of Sussex
The World Wide Web is enormous, free, immediately available, and largely linguistic.
As we discover, on ever more fronts, that language analysis and generation beneﬁt
from big data, so it becomes appealing to use the Web as a data source. The question,
then, is how.
The low-entry-cost way to use the Web is via a commercial search engine. If the
goal is to ﬁnd frequencies or probabilities for some phenomenon of interest, we can use
the hit count given in the search engine’s hits page to make an estimate. People have
been doing this for some time now. Early work using hit counts include Grefenstette
 , who identiﬁed likely translations for compositional phrases, and Turney ,
who found synonyms; perhaps the most cited study is Keller and Lapata , who
established the validity of frequencies gathered in this way using experiments with
human subjects. Leading recent work includes Nakov and Hearst , who build
models of noun compound bracketing.
The initial-entry cost for this kind of research is zero. Given a computer and an
Internet connection, you input the query and get a hit count. But if the work is to
proceed beyond the anecdotal, a range of issues must be addressed.
First, the commercial search engines do not lemmatize or part-of-speech tag. To take
a simple case: To estimate frequencies for the verb-object pair fulﬁl obligation, Keller and
Lapata make 36 queries (to cover the whole inﬂectional paradigm of both verb and
noun and to allow for deﬁnite and indeﬁnite articles to come between them) to each of
Google and Altavista. It would be desirable to be able to search for fulﬁl obligation with
a single search. If the research question concerns a language with more inﬂection, or a
construction allowing more variability, the issues compound.
Secondly, the search syntax is limited. There are animated and intense discussions
on the CORPORA mailing list, the chief forum for such matters, on the availability or
otherwise of wild cards and ‘near’ operators with each of the search engines, and cries
of horror when one of the companies makes changes. (From my reading of the CORPORA
list, these changes seem mainly in the direction of offering less metalanguage.)
Thirdly, there are constraints on numbers of queries and numbers of hits per query.
Google only allows automated querying via its API, limited to 1,000 queries per user
per day. If there are 36 Google queries per single ’linguistic’ query, we can make just 27
linguistic queries per day. Other search engines are currently less restrictive but that
may arbitrarily change (particularly as corporate mergers are played out), and also
Google has (probably) the largest index—and size is what we are going to the Internet
Fourthly, search hits are for pages, not for instances.
Working with commercial search engines makes us develop workarounds. We
become experts in the syntax and constraints of Google, Yahoo, Altavista, and so on.
We become ‘googleologists’. The argument that the commercial search engines provide
© 2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 33, Number 1
low-cost access to the Web fades as we realize how much of our time is devoted to
working with and against the constraints that the search engines impose.
But science is hard work, and there are usually many foothill problems to be
mastered before we get to the mountains that are our true goal. So this is all regular
Or so it may seem until we consider the arbitrariness of search engine counts. They
depend on many speciﬁcs of the search engine’s practice, including how it handles spam
and duplicates. (See the entries “Yahoo’s missing pages” and “Crazy duplicates”
 in Jean V´eronis’s blog.1) The engines will give you substantially different counts,
even for repeats of the same query. In a small experiment, queries repeated the following
day gave counts over 10% different 9 times in 30, and by a factor of two different 6 times
in 30. The reasons are that queries are sent to different computers, at different points in
the update cycle, and with different data in their caches.
People wishing to use the URLs, rather than the counts, that search engines provide
in their hits pages face another issue: The hits are sorted according to a complex and
unknown algorithm (with full listings of all results usually not permitted) so we do not
know what biases are being introduced. If we wish to investigate the biases, the area we
become expert in is googleology, not linguistics.
An Academic-Community Alternative
An alternative is to work like the search engines, downloading and indexing substantial
proportions of the World Wide Web, but to do so transparently, giving reliable ﬁgures,
and supporting language researchers’ queries. In Baroni and Kilgarriff we report
on a feasibility study: We prepared Web corpora for German (‘DeWaC’) and Italian
(‘ItWaC’) with around 1.5 billion words each, now loaded into a sophisticated corpus
query tool and available for research use.2 (Of course there are various other large Web
datasets that research groups have downloaded and are using for NLP.) By sharing
good practice and resources and developing expertise, the prospects of the academic
research community having resources to compare with Google, Microsoft, and so forth,
Data Cleaning
The process involves crawling, downloading, ’cleaning’, and de-duplicating the data,
then linguistically annotating it and loading it into a corpus query tool. Expertise and
tools are available for most of these steps, with the Internet community providing
crawlers and a de-duplication algorithm and the NLP community
providing corpus query tools, lemmatizers, and POS-taggers for many languages. But
in the middle there is a logjam. The questions
How do we detect and get rid of navigation bars, headers, footers, . . . .?
How do we identify paragraphs and other structural information?
How do we produce output in a standard form suitable for further
processing?
1 
2 
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Kilgarriff
Googleology is Bad Science
always arise. Cleaning is a low-level, unglamorous task, yet crucial: The better it is
done, the better the outcomes. All further layers of linguistic processing depend on the
cleanliness of the data.
To date, cleaning has been done in isolation (and it has not been seen as interesting
enough to publish on). Resources have not been pooled, and it has been done cursorily,
if at all. Thus, a paper which describes work with a vast Web corpus of 31 million
pages devotes just one paragraph to the corpus development process, and mentions
de-duplication and language-ﬁltering but no other cleaning . A paper using that same corpus notes, in a footnote, ”as a
preprocessing step we hand-edit the clusters to remove those containing non-English
words, terms related to adult content, and other Webpage-speciﬁc clusters” . The development of open-source tools that identify and ﬁlter
out each of the many sorts of ‘dirt’ found in Web pages to give clean output will have
many beneﬁciaries, and the CLEANEVAL project3 has been set up to this end. There
will, of course, be differences of opinion about what should be ﬁltered out, and a full
toolset will provide a range of options as well as provoke discussion on what we should
include and exclude to develop a low-noise, general-language corpus that is suitable
for linguistic and language technology research by a wide range of researchers. (In the
following, I call the data that meet these criteria “running text.”)
How Much Non-Duplicate Running Text do the Commercial Search Engines
Index, and Can the Academic Community Compare?
Although the anti-googleology arguments may be acknowledged, researchers often
shake their heads and say “Ah, but the commercial search engines index so much
data.” If the goal is to ﬁnd frequencies of arbitrary ⟨noun, preposition, verb⟩and
⟨noun, preposition, noun⟩triples for PP-attachment disambiguation, then a very, very
large dataset is needed to get many non-zero counts. Researchers will continue to use
Google, Yahoo, and Altavista unless the NLP community’s resources are ‘Google-scale’.
The question this forces is, “How much non-duplicate running text do Google and
competitors index?”
For German and Italian, we addressed the question by comparing frequency counts
for a sample of words in DeWaC and ItWaC with Google frequencies. Thirty words were
randomly selected for each language. They were mid-frequency words that were not
common words in English, French, German (for Italian), Italian (for German), Portugese,
or Spanish, with at least ﬁve characters (because longer words are less likely to clash
with acronyms or words from other languages). For each of these words, Google was
searched with a number of parameters:
with and without “safe search” for excluding adult material
with language set to German/Italian
with the “all-in-text” box checked, so that documents were only included
as hits if they contained the search term
with and without the site ﬁlter set to .it domain only (for Italian), .de or .at
domains only for German
3 
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 33, Number 1
Results were not always consistent, with additional ﬁlters sometimes producing an
increased hit count, so for each word we took the midpoint of the maximum and
minimum of the results and compared this number to the DeWaC/ItWaC document
frequencies. Here there were two numbers to consider: the count before ﬁltering and
cleaning, and the count after. A sample of the results is shown in Table 1.
It would have been convenient to use the Google API but it gave much lower counts
than browser queries: A substantial number were one-eighteenth as large. Altavista,
which has a reputation for NLP-friendliness, was also explored, but because Altavista’s
index is known to be smaller than Google’s, and the goal was to compare it with the
biggest index available, Altavista results were not going to answer the critical question.
The goal is to use the ﬁgures to assess the quantity of duplicate-free, Googleindexed running text for German and Italian. The Google counts are best compared with
DeWaC/ItWaC ’raw’ counts, and a ﬁrst scaling factor will give an indication of the size
of the Google-indexed German/Italian World Wide Web inclusive of non-running-text
and duplicates. Taking the midpoint between maximum and minimum and averaging
across words, the ratio for German is 83.5:1 and for Italian, 33:1. A further scaling factor
should then be applied, based on the raw:clean ratio, to assess how much of the material
is duplicated or not running text. However, we do not know to what extent Google
applies de-duplication and other rubbish-ﬁltering strategies before calculating counts,
and DeWaC/ItWaC ﬁltering and cleaning errs towards rejecting doubtful material. The
mean ratio raw:clean is 5.3 for German, 4.5 for Italian: For a best estimate, we halve
the ﬁgures. Best estimates for the Google-indexed, non-duplicative running text are
then 45 billion words for German and 25 billion words for Italian, as summarized in
Clearly this is highly approximate, and the notion of running text needs articulation.
The point here is that a pilot project (of half a person-year’s effort) was able to provide a corpus that was several percent of Google-scale, for two languages. It provides
grounds for optimism that the Web can be used, without reliance on commercial search
engines and, at least for languages other than English, without sacriﬁcing too much in
terms of scale.
The most talked-about presentation of ACL 2005 was Franz-Josef Och’s, in which he
presented statistical MT results based on a 250 billion-word English corpus. His results
Comparing Google and DeWaC frequencies for a sample of words. ’max’ and ’min’ are the
maximum and minimum from a set of six Google searches. ’raw’ and ’clean’ are counts for the
numbers of documents that the word occurred in in DeWaC, before and after the cleaning,
ﬁltering, and de-duplication. All numbers in thousands.
verringert
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Kilgarriff
Googleology is Bad Science
Scaling up from DeWaC/ItWaC size to estimate non-duplicate German/Italian running
text indexed by Google. Scaling 1 compares Google frequencies with ’raw’ DeWac/ItWaC
frequencies. Scaling 2 compares ’raw’ and ’ﬁltered’ DeWaC/ItWaC.
DeWaC/ItWaC
% of Google
led the ﬁeld. He was in a privileged position to have access to a corpus of that size. He
works at Google.
With enormous data, you get better results. There are two possible responses for
the academic NLP community. The ﬁrst is to accept defeat: “We will never have resources on the scale of Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo, so we should accept that our
systems will not really compete, that they will be proofs-of-concept or deal with niche
problems, but will be out of the mainstream of high-performance language technology
system development.” The second is to say: We too need to make resources on this
scale available, and they should be available to researchers in universities as well as
behind corporate ﬁrewalls, and we can do it, because resources of the right scale are
available, for free, on the World Wide Web, and between us we have the skills and
the talent.