Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 1: Research Papers, pages 1–9
Belgium, Brussels, October 31 - Novermber 1, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Scaling Neural Machine Translation
Sergey Edunov△
David Grangier▽∗
Michael Auli△
△Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park & New York.
▽Google Brain, Mountain View.
Sequence to sequence learning models still require several days to reach state of the art performance on large benchmark datasets using
a single machine. This paper shows that reduced precision and large batch training can
speedup training by nearly 5x on a single 8-
GPU machine with careful tuning and implementation.1 On WMT’14 English-German
translation, we match the accuracy of Vaswani
et al. in under 5 hours when training on
8 GPUs and we obtain a new state of the art
of 29.3 BLEU after training for 85 minutes on
128 GPUs. We further improve these results
to 29.8 BLEU by training on the much larger
Paracrawl dataset. On the WMT’14 English-
French task, we obtain a state-of-the-art BLEU
of 43.2 in 8.5 hours on 128 GPUs.
Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has seen impressive progress in the recent years with the introduction of ever more efﬁcient architectures . Similar sequence-to-sequence models are also applied to other natural language
processing tasks, such as abstractive summarization and
dialog .
Currently, training state-of-the-art models on
large datasets is computationally intensive and can
require several days on a machine with 8 highend graphics processing units (GPUs).
training to multiple machines enables faster experimental turn-around but also introduces new challenges: How do we maintain efﬁciency in a distributed setup when some batches process faster
*Work done while at Facebook AI Research.
1Our implementation is available at:
 
than others (i.e., in the presence of stragglers)?
How do larger batch sizes affect optimization and
generalization performance? While stragglers primarily affect multi-machine training, questions
about the effectiveness of large batch training are
relevant even for users of commodity hardware
on a single machine, especially as such hardware
continues to improve, enabling bigger models and
batch sizes.
In this paper, we ﬁrst explore approaches to improve training efﬁciency on a single machine. By
training with reduced ﬂoating point precision we
decrease training time by 65% with no effect on
accuracy. Next, we assess the effect of dramatically increasing the batch size from 25k to over
400k tokens, a necessary condition for large scale
parallelization with synchronous training. We implement this on a single machine by accumulating
gradients from several batches before each update.
We ﬁnd that by training with large batches and by
increasing the learning rate we can further reduce
training time by 40% on a single machine. Finally, we parallelize training across 16 machines
and ﬁnd that we can reduce training time by an
additional 90% compared to a single machine.
Our improvements enable training a Transformer model on the WMT’16 En-De dataset to
the same accuracy as Vaswani et al. in just
32 minutes on 128 GPUs and in under 5 hours on
8 GPUs. This same model trained to full convergence achieves a new state of the art of 29.3 BLEU
in 85 minutes.
These scalability improvements
additionally enable us to train models on much
larger datasets. We show that we can reach 29.8
BLEU on the same test set in less than 10 hours
when trained on a combined corpus of WMT and
Paracrawl data containing ∼150M sentence pairs
(i.e., over 30x more training data). Similarly, on
the WMT’14 En-Fr task we obtain a state of the
art BLEU of 43.2 in 8.5 hours on 128 GPUs.
opt. steps
valid loss (NLL)
valid loss (NLL)
Figure 1: Validation loss for Transformer model trained with varying batch sizes (bsz) as a function of
optimization steps (left) and epochs (right). Training with large batches is less data-efﬁcient, but can be
parallelized. Batch sizes given in number of target tokens excluding padding. WMT En-De, newstest13.
Related Work
Previous research considered training and inference with reduced numerical precision for neural networks . Our work relies on
half-precision ﬂoating point computation, following the guidelines of Micikevicius et al. to
adjust the scale of the loss to avoid underﬂow or
overﬂow errors in gradient computations.
Distributed training of neural networks follows
two main strategies:
(i) model parallel evaluates different model layers on different workers and (ii) data parallel keeps a copy of the model on each worker
but distributes different batches to different machines . We rely on the second
scheme and follow synchronous SGD, which has
recently been deemed more efﬁcient than asynchronous SGD . Synchronous
SGD distributes the computation of gradients over
multiple machines and then performs a synchronized update of the model weights. Large neural machine translation systems have been recently
trained with this algorithm with success .
Recent work by Puri et al. considers
large-scale distributed training of language models (LM) achieving 109x scaling with 128 GPUs.
Compared to NMT training, however, LM training does not face the same challenges of variable
batch sizes. Moreover, we ﬁnd that large batch
training requires warming up the learning rate,
whereas their work begins training with a large
learning rate.
There has also been recent work
on using lower precision for inference only .
strategies
for improving communication efﬁciency in distributed synchronous training setting by abandoning “stragglers,” in particular by introducing redundancy in how the data is distributed across
workers .
The idea rests on coding schemes that introduce
this redundancy and enable for some workers to
simply not return an answer. In contrast, we do
not discard any computation done by workers.
Experimental Setup
Datasets and Evaluation
We run experiments on two language pairs, English to German (En–De) and English to French
For En–De we replicate the setup
of Vaswani et al. which relies on the
WMT’16 training data with 4.5M sentence pairs;
we validate on newstest13 and test on newstest14.
We use a vocabulary of 32K symbols based on a
joint source and target byte pair encoding .
For En–Fr, we train on
WMT’14 and borrow the setup of Gehring et al.
 with 36M training sentence pairs. We use
newstest12+13 for validation and newstest14 for
test. The 40K vocabulary is based on a joint source
and target BPE factorization.
We also experiment with scaling training beyond 36M sentence pairs by using data from
the Paracrawl corpus .
dataset is extremely large with more than 4.5B
pairs for En–De and more than 4.2B pairs for
We rely on the BPE vocabulary built
on WMT data for each language pair and explore ﬁltering this noisy dataset in Section 4.5.
We measure case-sensitive tokenized BLEU with
multi-bleu.pl2 and de-tokenized BLEU with
SacreBLEU3 . All results use beam
search with a beam width of 4 and length penalty
of 0.6, following Vaswani et al. 2017. Checkpoint
averaging is not used, except where speciﬁed otherwise.
Models and Hyperparameters
Transformer
et al., 2017) implemented in PyTorch in the
fairseq-py toolkit . All
experiments are based on the “big” transformer
model with 6 blocks in the encoder and decoder
Each encoder block contains a selfattention layer, followed by two fully connected
feed-forward layers with a ReLU non-linearity
between them. Each decoder block contains selfattention, followed by encoder-decoder attention,
followed by two fully connected feed-forward
layers with a ReLU between them. We include
residual connections after each
attention layer and after the combined feedforward layers, and apply layer normalization after each residual connection. We
use word representations of size 1024, feedforward layers with inner dimension 4,096, and
multi-headed attention with 16 attention heads.
We apply dropout with
probability 0.3 for En-De and 0.1 for En-Fr. In
total this model has 210M parameters for the
En-De dataset and 222M parameters for the En-Fr
Models are optimized with Adam using β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, and
ϵ = 1e−8. We use the same learning rate schedule
as Vaswani et al. , i.e., the learning rate increases linearly for 4,000 steps to 5e−4 (or 1e−3
in experiments that specify 2x lr), after which
it is decayed proportionally to the inverse square
root of the number of steps. We use label smoothing with 0.1 weight for the uniform prior distribution over the vocabulary .
All experiments are run on DGX-1 nodes
with 8 NVIDIA c⃝V100 GPUs interconnected
by Inﬁniband.
We use the NCCL2 library and
torch.distributed for inter-GPU communication.
Experiments and Results
In this section we present results for improving
training efﬁciency via reduced precision ﬂoating
point (Section 4.1), training with larger batches
(Section 4.2), and training with multiple nodes in
a distributed setting (Section 4.3).
Half-Precision Training
NVIDIA Volta GPUs introduce Tensor Cores that
enable efﬁcient half precision ﬂoating point (FP)
computations that are several times faster than
full precision operations. However, half precision
drastically reduces the range of ﬂoating point values that can be represented which can lead to numerical underﬂows and overﬂows . This can be mitigated by scaling values to ﬁt into the FP16 range.
In particular, we perform all forward-backward
computations as well as the all-reduce (gradient
synchronization) between workers in FP16.
contrast, the model weights are also available in
full precision, and we compute the loss and optimization (e.g., momentum, weight updates) in
FP32 as well. We scale the loss right after the forward pass to ﬁt into the FP16 range and perform
the backward pass as usual. After the all-reduce
of the FP16 version of the gradients with respect
to the weights we convert the gradients into FP32
and restore the original scale of the values before
updating the weights.
In the beginning stages of training, the loss
needs to be scaled down to avoid numerical over-
ﬂow, while at the end of training, when the loss
is small, we need to scale it up in order to avoid
numerical underﬂow. Dynamic loss scaling takes
care of both. It automatically scales down the loss
when overﬂow is detected and since it is not possible to detect underﬂow, it scales the loss up if no
overﬂows have been detected over the past 2,000
To evaluate training with lower precision, we
ﬁrst compare a baseline transformer model trained
on 8 GPUs with 32-bit ﬂoating point (Our reimplementation) to the same model trained with 16-
Vaswani et al. 
Our reimplementation
+ 5k tkn/gpu
16 nodes (from +2x lr)
+ overlap comm+bwd
Table 1: Training time (min) for reduced precision (16-bit), cumulating gradients over multiple backwards (cumul), increasing learning rate (2x lr) and computing each forward/backward with more
data due to memory savings (5k tkn/gpu). Average time (excl. validation and saving models) over 3
random seeds to reach validation perplexity of 4.32 (2.11 NLL). Cumul=16 means a weight update after
accumulating gradients for 16 backward computations, simulating training on 16 nodes. WMT En-De,
newstest13.
Gradient sync.
Forward/backward
Sync after 1 backward
Sync after 2 backwards
Figure 2: Accumulating gradients over multiple
forward/backward steps speeds up training by: (i)
reducing communication between workers, and
(ii) saving idle time by reducing variance in workload between GPUs.
bit ﬂoating point (16-bit). Note, that we keep
the batch size and other parameters equal. Table 1
reports training speed of various setups to reach
validation perplexity 4.32 and shows that 16-bit
results in a 2.9x speedup.
Training with Larger Batches
Large batches are a prerequisite for distributed
synchronous training, since it averages the gradients over all workers and thus the effective batch
size is the sum of the sizes of all batches seen by
the workers.
Figure 1 shows that bigger batches result in
slower initial convergence when measured in
terms of epochs (i.e. passes over the training set).
However, when looking at the number of weight
updates (i.e. optimization steps) large batches converge faster . These results
support parallelization since the number of steps
deﬁne the number of synchronization points for
synchronous training.
Training with large batches is also possible on a
single machine regardless of the number of GPUs
or amount of available memory; one simply iterates over multiple batches and accumulates the resulting gradients before committing a weight update. This has the added beneﬁt of reducing communication and reducing the variance in workload
between different workers (see Figure 2), leading
to a 36% increase in tokens/sec (Table 1, cumul).
We discuss the issue of workload variance in more
depth in Section 5.
Increased Learning Rate: Similar to Goyal
et al. and Smith et al. we ﬁnd that
training with large batches enables us to increase
the learning rate, which further shortens training
time even on a single node (2x lr).
Memory Efﬁciency: Reduced precision also
decreases memory consumption, allowing for
larger sub-batches per GPU. We switch from a
maximum of 3.5k tokens per GPU to a maximum
of 5k tokens per GPU and obtain an additional 5%
speedup (cf. Table 1; 2x lr vs. 5k tkn/gpu).
Table 1 reports our speed improvements due to
reduced precision, larger batches, learning rate increase and increased per-worker batch size. Overall, we reduce training time from 1, 429 min to 294
min to reach the same perplexity on the same hardware (8x NVIDIA V100), i.e. a 4.9x speedup.
Gradient sync.
Sync after backward
Overlap sync with backward
Figure 3: Illustration of how the backward pass in
back-propagation can be overlapped with gradient
synchronization to improve training speed.
Parallel Training
While large batch training improves training time
even on a single node, another beneﬁt of training with large batches is that it is easily parallelized across multiple nodes (machines). We run
our previous 1-node experiment over 16 nodes of
8 GPUs each (NVIDIA V100), interconnected by
Inﬁniband. Table 1 shows that with a simple, synchronous parallelization strategy over 16 nodes we
can further reduce training time from 311 minutes
to just 37 minutes (cf. Table 1; 2x lr vs. 16
However, the time spent communicating gradients across workers increases dramatically when
training with multiple nodes.
In particular, our
models contain over 200M parameters, therefore
multi-node training requires transferring 400MB
gradient buffers between machines. Fortunately,
the sequential nature of back-propagation allows
us to further improve multi-node training performance by beginning this communication in the
background, while gradients are still being computed for the mini-batch (see Figure 3).
Backpropagation proceeds sequentially from the top of
the network down to the inputs. When the gradient computation for a layer ﬁnishes, we add the
result to a synchronization buffer. As soon as the
size of the buffer reaches a predeﬁned threshold4
we synchronize the buffered gradients in a background thread that runs concurrently with backpropagation down the rest of the network.
Table 1 shows that by overlapping gradient communication with computation in the backwards pass,
we can further reduce training time by 15%, from
37 minutes to just 32 minutes (cf. Table 1; 16
4We use a threshold of 150MB in this work.
wall time (min)
valid loss (NLL)
1 node (25k bsz)
1 node (402k bsz)
16 nodes (402k bsz)
Figure 4: Validation loss (negative log likelihood
on newstest13) versus training time on 1 vs 16
a. Gehring et al. 
b. Vaswani et al. 
c. Ahmed et al. 
d. Shaw et al. 
Our result
16-node training time
BLEU on newstest2014 for WMT
English-German (En–De) and English-French
(En–Fr). All results are based on WMT’14 training data, except for En–De (b), (c), (d) and our
result which are trained on WMT’16.
nodes vs. overlap comm+bwd).
We illustrate the speedup achieved by large
batches and parallel training in Figure 4.
Results with WMT Training Data
We report results on newstest14 for English-to-
German (En-De) and English-to-French (En-Fr).
For En-De, we train on the ﬁltered version of
WMT’16 from Vaswani et al. .
Fr, we follow the setup of Gehring et al. .
In both cases, we train a “big” transformer on
16 nodes and average model parameters from the
last 10 checkpoints .
Table 2 reports 29.3 BLEU for En-De in 1h 25min
and 43.2 BLEU for En-Fr in 8h 32min.
therefore establish a new state-of-the-art for both
datasets, excluding settings with additional training data . In contrast to Table 1, Table 2 reports times to convergence, not
times to a speciﬁc validation likelihood.
detok. SacreBLEU
16-node training time
WMT + Paracrawl
detok. SacreBLEU
16-node training time
Table 3: Test BLEU (newstest14) when training
with WMT+Paracrawl data.
Results with WMT & Paracrawl Training
Fast parallel training lets us additionally explore
training over larger datasets. In this section we
consider Paracrawl , a recent
dataset of more than 4B parallel sentences for each
language pair (En-De and En-Fr).
Previous work on Paracrawl considered training
only on ﬁltered subsets of less than 30M pairs . We also ﬁlter Paracrawl by removing sentence-pairs with a source/target length
ratio exceeding 1.5 and sentences with more than
250 words. We also remove pairs for which the
source and target are copies . On
En–De, this brings the set from 4.6B to 700M.
We then train a En–De model on a clean dataset
(WMT’14 news commentary) to score the remaining 700M sentence pairs, and retain the 140M
pairs with best average token log-likelihood. To
train an En–Fr model, we ﬁlter the data to 129M
pairs using the same procedure.
Next, we explored different ways to weight the
WMT and Paracrawl data. Figure 5 shows the validation loss for En-De models trained with different sampling ratios of WMT and ﬁltered Paracrawl
data during training. The model with 1:1 ratio performs best on the validation set, outperforming the
model trained on only WMT data. For En-Fr, we
found a sampling ratio of 3:1 (WMT:Paracrawl)
performed best.
Test set results are given in Table 3. We ﬁnd that
Paracrawl improves BLEU on En–De to 29.8 but
it is not beneﬁcial for En–Fr, achieving just 42.1
vs. 43.2 BLEU for our baseline.
Analysis of Stragglers
In a distributed training setup with synchronized
SGD, workers may take different amounts of time
to compute gradients. Slower workers, or stragglers, cause other workers to wait. There are sev-
opt. steps
valid loss (NLL)
1:0 (WMT only)
0:1 (Para only)
Validation loss when training on
Paracrawl+WMT with varying sampling ratios.
1:4 means sampling 4 Paracrawl sentences for every WMT sentence. WMT En-De, newstest13.
Time, seconds
Percentage of sub-batches
Full dataset
23 ≤src len ≈
tgt len ≤27
Figure 6: Histogram of time to complete one forward and backward pass for each sub-batch in the
WMT En-De training dataset. Sub-batches consist of a variable number of sentences of similar
length, such that each sub-batch contains at most
3.5k tokens.
eral reasons for stragglers but here we focus on
the different amounts of time it takes to process
the data on each GPU.
In particular, each GPU typically processes one
sub-batch containing sentences of similar lengths,
such that each sub-batch has at most N tokens
(e.g., N = 3.5k tokens), with padding added as
required. We refer to sub-batches as the data that
is processed on each GPU worker whose combination is the entire batch. The sub-batches processed
by a worker may therefore differ from other workers in the following three characteristics: the number of sentences, the maximum source sentence
length, or the maximum target sentence length. To
illustrate how these characteristics impact training
speed, Figure 6 shows the amount of time required
to process the 44K sub-batches in the En-De training data. There is large variability in the amount
time to process sub-batches with different characteristics: the mean time to process a sub-batch is
0.11 seconds, the slowest sub-batch takes 0.228
seconds and the fastest 0.049 seconds. Notably,
there is much less variability if we only consider
batches of a similar shape (e.g., batches where
23 ≤src len ≈tgt len ≤27).
Unsurprisingly, constructing sub-batches based
on a maximum token budget as just described exacerbates the impact of stragglers. In Section 4.2
we observed that we could reduce the variance
between workers by accumulating the gradients
over multiple sub-batches on each worker before updating the weights (see illustration in Figure 2). A more direct, but na¨ıve solution is to assign all workers sub-batches with a similar shape.
However, this increases the variance of the gradients across batches and adversely affects the ﬁnal
model. Indeed, when we trained a model in this
way, then it failed to converge to the target validation perplexity of 4.32 (cf. Table 1).
As an alternative, we construct sub-batches
so that each one takes approximately the same
amount of processing time across all workers. We
ﬁrst set a target for the amount of time a sub-batch
should take to process (e.g., the 90th percentile
in Figure 6) which we keep ﬁxed across training.
Next, we build a table to estimate the processing
time for a sub-batch based on the number of sentences and maximum source and target sentence
lengths. Finally, we construct each worker’s subbatches by tuning the number of sentences until
the estimated processing time reaches our target.
This approach improves single-node throughput
from 143k tokens-per-second to 150k tokens-persecond, reducing the training time to reach 4.32
perplexity from 495 to 479 minutes (cf. Table 1,
16-bit). Unfortunately, this is less effective than
training with large batches, by accumulating gradients from multiple sub-batches on each worker
(cf. Table 1, cumul, 447 minutes). Moreover,
large batches additionally enable increasing the
learning rate, which further improves training time
(cf. Table 1, 2x lr, 311 minutes).
Conclusions
We explored how to train state-of-the-art NMT
models on large scale parallel hardware. We investigated lower precision computation, very large
batch sizes (up to 400k tokens), and larger learning rates. Our careful implementation speeds up
the training of a big transformer model by nearly 5x on one machine with 8
We improve the state-of-the-art for WMT’14
En-Fr to 43.2 vs.
41.5 for Shaw et al. ,
training in less than 9 hours on 128 GPUs. On
WMT’14 En-De test set, we report 29.3 BLEU
vs. 29.2 for Shaw et al. on the same setup,
training our model in 85 minutes on 128 GPUs.
BLEU is further improved to 29.8 by scaling the
training set with Paracrawl data.
Overall, our work shows that future hardware
will enable training times for large NMT systems that are comparable to phrase-based systems . We note that multi-node
parallelization still incurs a signiﬁcant overhead:
16-node training is only ∼10x faster than 1-node
training. Future work may consider better batching and communication strategies.