Edinburgh Research Explorer
Investigating RNN-based speech enhancement methods for
noise-robust Text-to-Speech
Citation for published version:
Valentini Botinhao, C, Wang, X, Takaki, S & Yamagishi, J 2016, Investigating RNN-based speech
enhancement methods for noise-robust Text-to-Speech. in Proceedings of 9th ISCA Speech Synthesis
Workshop. Sunnyvale, United States, pp. 159-165, 9th ISCA Speech Synthesis Workshop , Sunnyvale,
California, United States, 13/09/16. 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.21437/SSW.2016-19
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
 
Proceedings of 9th ISCA Speech Synthesis Workshop
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Investigating RNN-based speech enhancement methods for
noise-robust Text-to-Speech
Cassia Valentini-Botinhao1, Xin Wang2,3, Shinji Takaki 2, Junichi Yamagishi1,2,3
1 The Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR), University of Edinburgh, UK
2 National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3 SOKENDAI University, Japan
 , {wangxin,takaki,jyamagis}@nii.ac.jp
The quality of text-to-speech (TTS) voices built from noisy
speech is compromised.
Enhancing the speech data before
training has been shown to improve quality but voices built with
clean speech are still preferred. In this paper we investigate two
different approaches for speech enhancement to train TTS systems. In both approaches we train a recursive neural network
(RNN) to map acoustic features extracted from noisy speech to
features describing clean speech. The enhanced data is then
used to train the TTS acoustic model.
In one approach we
use the features conventionally employed to train TTS acoustic models, i.e Mel cepstral (MCEP) coefﬁcients, aperiodicity
values and fundamental frequency (F0). In the other approach,
following conventional speech enhancement methods, we train
an RNN using only the MCEP coefﬁcients extracted from the
magnitude spectrum. The enhanced MCEP features and the
phase extracted from noisy speech are combined to reconstruct
the waveform which is then used to extract acoustic features
to train the TTS system. We show that the second approach
results in larger MCEP distortion but smaller F0 errors. Subjective evaluation shows that synthetic voices trained with data
enhanced with this method were rated higher and with similar
to scores to voices trained with clean speech.
Index Terms: speech enhancement, speech synthesis, RNN
1. Introduction
Statistical parametric speech synthesis (SPSS) systems can
produce voices of reasonable quality from small amounts of
speech data. Although adaptation techniques have been shown
to improve robustness to recording conditions most studies
on SPSS are based on carefully recorded databases. The use of
less than ideal speech material is, however, of a great interest.
The possibility of using found data to increase the amount of
training material is quite attractive, particularly with the wealth
of freely available speech data and increased processing power.
In terms of applications, the creation of personalised voices 
often relies on recordings that are not of studio quality. Quality
of synthesised speech can be improved by discarding data that
is considered to be too distorted but when data quantity is small
or noise levels are too high discarding seems like a bad strategy.
Alternatively speech enhancement can be used to pre-enhance
Statistical model-based speech enhancement methods have
been shown to generate higher quality speech in subjective evaluations over Wiener, spectral subtractive and subspace algorithms . Recently there has been a strong interest towards
methods using a deep neural network (DNN) to
generate enhanced acoustic parameters from acoustic parameters extracted from noisy speech. In a deep feed-forward
neural network was used to generate a frequency-domain binary mask using a cost function in the waveform domain. A
more extensive work on speech enhancement using DNNs is
presented in where authors use more than 100 noise types
to train a feed-forward network using noise-aware training and
global variance . Authors in use text-derived features as
an additional input of a feed-forward network that generates enhanced spectrum parameters and found that distortion is smaller
when using text. In most of these studies around eleven frames
(which represent a segment of at least 220 ms) are used as input to the network in order to provide the temporal evolution
of the features. Alternatively authors in use a recursive
neural network (RNN) for speech enhancement. It is difﬁcult
to compare results across studies as often authors evaluate their
systems using different objective measures and no subjective
evaluation. It seems however that neural network based methods outperform other statistical model-based methods and that
the recursive structure is beneﬁcial.
There have not been many studies on using speech enhancement for text-to-speech. In conventional SPSS, acoustic parameters that describe the excitation and the vocal tract are used to
train an acoustic model. Authors in found that excitation
parameters are less prone to degradation by noise than cepstral
coefﬁcients. They found a signiﬁcant preference for voices built
using clean data for adaptation over voices built with noisy and
speech that has been enhanced using a subspace-based speech
enhancement method. In a work submitted on we proposed the use of an RNN to generate enhanced vocoder parameters that are used to train an acoustic model of text-to-speech.
We found that synthetic voices trained with features that have
been enhanced using an RNN were rated of better quality than
voices built with noisy data and data enhanced using a statistical model-based speech enhancement method. We found that
using text-derived features as additional input of the network
helps but not to a great extent and that fundamental frequency
(F0) errors are still quite large even after enhancement.
Most speech enhancement methods operate either on the
magnitude spectrum or some sort of parametrisation of it, or on
the binary mask domain that is used to generate an estimate of
the clean magnitude spectrum . To reconstruct the waveform, phase can be derived from the noisy signal or estimated.
In such methods F0 is not enhanced directly. We argued in 
that enhancing the acoustic parameters that are used for TTS
acoustic model training would generate better synthetic voices
as it would not require waveform reconstruction. In this paper we investigate this hypothesis in more detail by comparing
TTS vocoder
noisy waveform
TTS acoustic
model training
noisy waveform
extraction
| spectrum |
calculation
TTS vocoder
TTS acoustic
model training
enhanced waveform
MCEP + BAP
+ V/UV + F0
MCEP + BAP
+ V/UV + F0
noisy MCEP-DFT
enhanced MCEP-DFT
MCEP + BAP
+ V/UV + F0
Figure 1: Training a TTS acoustic model using an RNN-based speech enhancement method that enhances vocoded parameters directly
(top) and a parametrisation of the magnitude spectrum (bottom).
two RNN-based methods, one that operates in the TTS-style
vocoder parameter domain as proposed in and another that
enhances a set of parameters that describe the magnitude spectrum. To simplify the comparison we do not use text-derived
features in this work.
This paper is organised as follows: in Section 2 we present
a brief summary of RNNs, followed by the proposed speech enhancement systems in Section 3 and the experiments in Section
4. Discussions and conclusions follow.
2. Deep recurrent neural networks
RNNs are networks that possess at least one feed-back connection, which could potentially allow them to model sequential data. Due to the vanishing gradient problem they are
difﬁcult to train. Long short-term memory networks (LSTM)
 are recurrent networks composed of units with a particular structure and as such they do not suffer from the vanishing
gradient and can therefore be easier to train. An LSTM unit is
capable of remembering a value for an arbitrary length of time,
controlling how the input affects it, as well as how that value
is transmitted to the output and when to forget and remember previous values. LSTMs have been applied in a range of
speech problems , including regression problems such
as text-to-speech and as previously mentioned speech enhancement . LSTMs could be particularly interesting when training with real noisy data, i.e. recordings when speech is produced in noise and therefore changes
accordingly.
3. Speech Enhancement using RNNs
Fig.1 shows the two RNN-based methods that we investigate in
this paper. The diagram on the top represents the enhancement
method proposed in . We refer to this method as RNN-V. In
this method we train an RNN with a parallel database of clean
and noisy acoustic features extracted using the synthesis module
of a vocoder that is typically used for SPSS. The acoustic features extracted using this vocoder are the Mel cepstral (MCEP)
coefﬁcients from a smoothed magnitude spectrum, band aperiodicity (BAP) values, the voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) decision and
the F0. These acoustic features are extracted at a frame level using overlapping F0-adaptive windows. Once the RNN is trained
it can be used to generate enhanced acoustic features from noisy
ones, as displayed in the top diagram of Fig.1. These enhanced
features are then used to train the TTS acoustic model.
The bottom of Fig.1 shows the alternative structure we propose in this paper, which we refer to as RNN-DFT. In this
method we analyse the speech waveform using the short-term
Fourier transform (STFT) to obtain the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of each time frame. We calculate the magnitude
value of this complex signal, which we refer to simply as the
magnitude spectrum, as well as its phase. To decrease the dimensionality of the magnitude spectrum we extract M Mel cepstral coefﬁcients from the N length magnitude spectrum, truncating the number of coefﬁcients so that M<N. We refer to
these coefﬁcients as MCEP-DFT coefﬁcients. We train an RNN
with a parallel database of MCEP-DFT coefﬁcients extracted
from clean and noisy speech signals. Once the model is trained
it can be used to generate enhanced MCEP-DFT from noisy
ones. To reconstruct the speech signal these coefﬁcients are
converted to magnitude spectrum via a warped discrete cosine
transform. The enhanced magnitude spectrum and the original
phase obtained from the DFT extracted from the noisy waveform, as shown in the bottom of Fig.1, are combined and using
the inverse discrete Fourier transform we obtain the waveform
signal. This signal is once again analysed this time using the
TTS-style vocoder and the extracted features are then used to
train the TTS acoustic model.
4. Experiments
In this section we detail the database used to train and test these
methods and the experiments conducted using vocoded and synthetic speech.
4.1. Database
We selected from the Voice Bank corpus 28 speakers - 14
male and 14 female of the same accent region (England) and
another 56 speakers - 28 male and 28 female - of different accent regions (Scotland and United States). There are around
400 sentences available from each speaker. All data is sampled
at 48 kHz and orthographic transcription is also available.
To create the noisy database used for training we used ten
different noise types: two artiﬁcially generated (speech-shaped
noise and babble) and eight real noise recordings from the Demand database . The speech-shaped noise was created by
ﬁltering white noise with a ﬁlter whose frequency response
Architecture
Training data
9.86 / 10.68
2.62 / 2.41
9.55 / 7.88
40.27 / 4.38
14 female + 14 male
5.69 / 6.10
1.96 / 1.82
4.00 / 4.25
27.09 / 10.90
14 female + 14 male
4.63 / 5.06
1.83 / 1.74
2.50 / 2.30
24.52 / 8.34
4.70 / 5.89
1.85 / 1.97
2.63 / 5.01
24.08 / 39.68
6.18 / 5.23
2.04 / 1.73
5.36 / 2.32
37.87 / 6.45
28 female + 28 male
4.59 / 5.05
1.86 / 1.72
2.46 / 2.15
24.90 / 8.43
Table 1: Distortion measures calculated from the vocoded parameters of the female / male voice.
matched that of the long term speech level of a male speaker.
The babble noise was generated by adding speech from six
speakers from the Voice Bank corpus that were not used either
for either training or testing. The other eight noises were selected using the ﬁrst channel of the 48 kHz versions of the noise
recordings of the Demand database. The chosen noises were: a
domestic noise (inside a kitchen), an ofﬁce noise (in a meeting
room), three public space noises (cafeteria, restaurant, subway
station), two transportation noises (car and metro) and a street
noise (busy trafﬁc intersection). The signal-to-noise (SNR) values used for training were: 15 dB, 10 dB, 5 dB and 0 dB. We
had therefore 40 different noisy conditions (ten noises x four
SNRs), which meant that per speaker there were around ten different sentences in each condition. The noise was added to the
clean waveforms using the ITU-T P.56 method to calculate
active speech levels using the code provided in . The clean
waveforms were added to noise after they had been normalised
and silence segments longer than 200 ms had been trimmed off
from the beginning and end of each sentence.
To create the test set we selected two other speakers from
England of the same corpus, a male and a female, and ﬁve other
noises from the Demand database. The chosen noises were:
a domestic noise (living room), an ofﬁce noise (ofﬁce space),
one transport (bus) and two street noises (open area cafeteria
and a public square). We used four slightly higher SNR values:
17.5 dB, 12.5 dB, 7.5 dB and 2.5 dB. This created 20 different
noisy conditions (ﬁve noises x four SNRs), which meant that
per speaker there were around 20 different sentences in each
condition. The noise was added following the same procedure
described previously. The noisy speech database is permanently
available at: 
4.2. Acoustic features
Using STRAIGHT we extracted 60 MCEP coefﬁcients, 25
BAP components and using SPTK we extracted F0 and
V/UV information with the RAPT F0 extraction method .
9.86 / 10.68 2.62 / 2.41
9.55 / 7.88
40.27 / 4.38
1.84 / 1.61
1.24 / 1.10
0.58 / 0.62
17.14 / 1.84
9.41 / 10.13 2.75 / 2.50 10.39 / 8.49 41.17 / 4.70
8.19 / 8.36
3.15 / 2.77
8.73 / 8.28
34.03 / 6.31
4.59 / 5.05
1.86 / 1.72
2.46 / 2.15
24.90 / 8.43
4.90 / 5.22
2.44 / 2.32
2.06 / 2.44
22.59 / 3.31
Table 2: Distortion measures calculated from the vocoded parameters of the female / male voice. CLEAN* and NOISY* refer
to distortion calculated using parameters extracted from resynthesised clean and noisy signals.
All these features were extracted using a sliding window of 5 ms
shift. The resulting dimensionality of the vocoder features is 87.
Using a hamming window of 16 ms and a 4 ms shift we
extracted the DFT of 1024 size.
From its magnitude value
we extracted 87 Mel cepstral coefﬁcients. This number was
chosen to match the number of parameters extracted using the
STRAIGHT vocoder, making the comparison across methods
4.3. Speech enhancement methods
We trained different types of neural networks to map acoustic features extracted from noisy natural speech to features extracted from clean natural speech. The cost function used was
the sum of square errors across all acoustic dimensions. Similar
to we set the learning rate to 2.0 e-5 and used the stochastic gradient descent to train the model with randomly initialised
weights following a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
0.1 variance. The momentum was set to zero. We used the
CURRENNT tool to train the models using a TESLA K40
GPU board.
As a conventional speech enhancement method we choose
the statistical model-based method described in that uses
the optimally-modiﬁed log-spectral amplitude speech estimator
(OMLSA) and an improved version of the minima controlled
recursive averaging noise estimator as proposed in . The
code is available from the authors website and has been used as
a comparison point for other DNN-based speech enhancement
4.4. Objective measures
In this section we present distortion measures calculated using
the acoustic parameters extracted by the TTS vocoder. The distortion measures are the MCEP distortion in dB, the BAP distortion in dB, the F0 distortion in Hz calculated over voiced frames
and the VUV distortion calculated over the entire utterance. The
measures are calculated at a frame level across all utterances
of each test speaker (female/male) and averaged across frames.
The distortion is always calculated using vocoded parameters
extracted from clean speech as the reference. In the following
sections we analyse the effect of network architecture, amount
of training data, enhanced features and noisy type using these
distortion measures as evaluation metric.
4.4.1. Network architecture and training data
Table 1 presents the distortion measures of the noisy test
data (NOISY) and ﬁve neural network-based enhancement approaches that differ in terms of network architecture and amount
of training data. All of these networks were trained using acoustic features derived from the TTS vocoder, following the RNN-
MCEP distortion (dB)
NOISY - female
MCEP distortion (dB)
RNN - female
MCEP distortion (dB)
RNN-FFT - female
MCEP distortion (dB)
NOISY - male
MCEP distortion (dB)
RNN - male
MCEP distortion (dB)
RNN-FFT - male
Figure 2: Mel ceptral distortion per noise and SNR condition for female (top) and male (bottom).
DNN refers to a deep neural network made of four feedforward layers of 512 logistic units. RNN refers to a network
with two feed-forward layers of 512 logistic units located closest to the input and two bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) layers of
256 units closest to the output, as proposed in .
Most model-based speech enhancement methods train a
model using data from both male and female speakers, but since
the method proposed here is enhancing F0 directly we also
trained two separate models using only data from a single gender for comparison. The data used for training is noted by the
column Training data in Table 1.
We can see from this table that RNN performance is better
than DNN, particularly with respect to V/UV and MCEP distortion. The F0 distortion of the male speaker data seem however
to increase when using data from both genders for training. Results obtained using models trained with female and male data
separately are only slightly better in terms of F0 distortion but
worst in terms of MCEP distortion, possibly due to the fact that
the mixed gender model uses double the amount of data. Further increasing the amount of data from 28 to 56 speakers results
in lower MCEP and V/UV distortion but does not improve BAP
and F0 distortions.
4.4.2. Enhanced features and noise type
In this section we focus on models trained with the most amount
of data, i.e.
56 speakers of mixed gender.
Table 2 shows
the distortions of noisy speech (NOISY), resynthesised clean
(CLEAN*) and noisy (NOISY*) speech, and the enhancement
methods OMLSA, RNN-V and RNN-DFT. RNN-V is the same
system listed in the last row of the Table 1.
The resynthesised data refers to the data that has been analysed and synthesised using the STFT settings described previously. The distortion observed in CLEAN* results are errors introduced by this process while the distortions observed
in NOISY* are brought up by the resynthesis plus the presence
of additive noise. As we can see in the table, BAP, VUV and
F0 distortion slightly increased when resynthesising the clean
waveform (CLEAN*). Resynthesising noisy speech (NOISY*)
does not seem to increase MCEP distortion (compare NOISY*
and NOISY values) and only marginally increases other types
of distortion. These results seem to indicate that the reconstruction process does not greatly affect the extraction of TTS acoustic features.
Regarding the enhancement methods, Table 2 shows that
OMLSA results in more errors when compared to the RNNbased methods with respect to all acoustic features. RNN-V
obtained lower MCEP and BAP distortion for both male and
female speech, while RNN-DFT results in lower VU/V and F0
errors. In fact only this method was able to decrease the F0
errors of the male data.
For comparison we calculated the Mel cepstral distortion
of the MCEP-DFT, i.e. the cepstral coefﬁcients calculated from
the magnitude spectrum obtained via STFT analysis. The coefﬁcients extracted from clean speech were used as the reference. MCEP-DFT distortion of the female/male noisy speech
data was found to be of 9.87/10.48 dB. This value is similar to
the one obtained for the MCEP distortion (NOISY row in Table 2). MCEP-DFT distortion decreases to 4.9359/5.3829 dB
when MCEP-DFT is enhanced using an RNN. Distortion decreased but is still larger than the MCEP distortion of RNN-V
seen in Table 2.
In order to see how the performance of RNN-based methods depends on the noise type and SNR in Fig.2 we present
the distortion broken down for each noise type and SNR. From
these ﬁgures we can see that cafeteria (cafe) and living room
(living) noises are the most challenging ones: MCEP distortion
is quite high even after enhancement. This is most likely due
to the fact that recordings of these noises often contained competing speaker, music and other non-stationary noises. Bus and
ofﬁce noises, often mostly stationary, seem to distort the signal
less. The gap between the distortion brought by different noise
Female - Vocoded
Female - Synthetic
Male - Vocoded
Male - Synthetic
Figure 3: Rank results of listening experiment with vocoded (left) and synthetic (right) speech of female (top) and male (bottom).
types is made smaller with enhancement but still remains. The
decrease in distortion after the enhancement seems to be higher
for lower SNRs, in both RNN and RNN-DFT cases.
4.5. Text-to-speech
We built an hidden Markov model (HMM)-based synthetic
voice for the female and the male test data by adapting a previously trained model of an English female speaker clean data
 . MCEP coefﬁcients, BAP and Mel scale F0 statics
and delta and delta-deltas were used to train the model, forming ﬁve streams. To generate from these models we used the
maximum likelihood parameter generation algorithm considering global variance .
4.6. Subjective evaluation
We evaluated ﬁve different types of vocoded and synthetic
speech: clean speech (CLEAN), noisy speech (NOISY) and
speech enhanced by three methods (OMLSA, RNN-V, RNN-
DFT). Vocoded speech is included in this evaluation to check
whether the quality the synthetic voices is related to the quality
of the enhanced vocoded samples. Notice that the OMLSA and
RNN-DFT methods generate enhanced waveforms while RNN-
DFT generate a sequence of enhanced vocoded parameters. To
create vocoded speech of OMLSA and RNN-DFT we analysed
and resynthesised the waveforms using the TTS vocoder. To
generate vocoded speech of RNN-V we simply synthesised the
enhaced parameters.
4.6.1. Listening experiment design
To evaluate the samples we created a MUSHRA-style listening test.
The test contained 30 screens organised in two
bocks of 15 screens each: the ﬁrst block with the male voice
and the second with the female voice. The ﬁrst half of each
block is made of screens with vocoded speech samples while
the second half contain screens of synthetic speech. The ﬁrst
screen of each block was used to train participants to do the
task and familiarise them with the material. In each screen participants were asked to score the overall quality of a sample of
the same sentence from each method on a scale from 0 to 100.
We speciﬁcally asked listeners to rate overall quality considering both speech and background as some of the vocoded samples contained noise in the background. This is in accordance
with the methodology proposed in . A different sentence
is used across different screens. 42 different sentences for each
speech type (vocoded and synthetic) were used across six listeners. The sentences used for the vocoded speech were a subset of
the ones recorded by the Voice bank corpus while the sentences
used for synthesis were the Harvard sentences . The training screen was constructed always with the same sentence and it
was made of samples of vocoded speech. Natural clean speech
was also included in the test so that participants would have a
reference for good quality as well as checking if participants
did go through the material and score it as 100 as instructed.
We recruited 24 native English speakers to participate in this
evaluation.
4.6.2. Results
Figure 3 shows the boxplot of listeners responses in terms of the
rank order of systems for the female (top) and the male (bottom)
voice of vocoded (left) and synthetic (right) speech. The rank
order was obtained per screen and per listener according to the
scores given to each voice. The solid and dashed lines show median and mean values. To test signiﬁcant differences we used a
Mann-Whitney U test at a p-value of 0.01 with a Homl Bonferroni correction due to the large number of pairs to compare. The
pairs that were not found to be signiﬁcantly different from each
other are connected with straight horizontal lines that appear on
the top of each boxplot.
As expected natural speech ranked highest and noise ranked
lowest for all cases. RNN-DFT was rated higher among all enhancement strategies in all cases. The gap between clean and
RNN-DFT enhanced speech is smaller for the synthetic speech
style than for the vocoded speech. In fact for both genders the
synthetic voice trained with RNN-DFT enhanced speech was
not found to be signiﬁcantly different than the voice built with
clean speech. The increasing order of preference of the methods seem to be the same for vocoded and synthetic speech:
OMLSA, followed by RNN-V and RNN-DFT. The beneﬁt of
RNN-based methods is seen in both vocoded and synthetic
voices, while the OMLSA method improvements seems to decrease after TTS acoustic model training.
5. Discussion
We have found that the reconstruction process required in the
RNN-DFT method does not seem to negatively impact the extraction of TTS acoustic features from noisy data. However we
observed that the RNN-DFT method increases both MCEP and
BAP distortion more than the RNN-V method. The assumption
that phase can be reconstructed directly from the noisy speech
data may have caused an increase in distortion.
seems however to decrease V/UV and F0 errors when compared
to RNN-V. This is somewhat unexpected as the RNN-V approach directly enhances the F0 data. Both methods decreased
MCEP distortion for all noises tested, making the gap between
non-stationary and stationary noises smaller.
We argued in that enhancing the acoustic parameters
that are used for TTS model training should generate higher
quality synthetic voices but subjective scores showed that RNN-
DFT resulted in higher quality vocoded and synthetic speech
for both genders. The RNN-DFT enhanced synthetic voice was
in fact ranked as high as the voice built using clean data. We
believe that RNN-V did not work as well because enhancing
the F0 trajectory directly is quite challenging, as F0 extraction
errors can be substantial in some frames (doubling and halving
errors) while small in others.
6. Conclusion
We presented in this paper two different speech enhancement
methods to improve the quality of TTS voices trained with noisy
speech data. Both methods employ a recursive neural network
to map noisy acoustic features to clean features. In one method
we train an RNN with acoustic features that are used to train
TTS models, including fundamental frequency and Mel cepstral
coefﬁcients. In the other method the RNN is trained with parameters extracted from the magnitude spectrum, as is usually
done in conventional speech enhancement methods. For waveform reconstruction the phase information is directly obtained
from the original noise signal while the magnitude spectrum
is obtained using the output of the RNN. We have found that
although Mel cepstral distortion is higher the second method
was rated of a higher quality for both vocoded and synthetic
speech and for the female and male data. The synthetic voices
trained with data enhanced with this method were rated similar to voices trained with clean speech. In the future we would
like to investigate whether similar improvements would apply
to voices trained using DNNs and whether training an RNN directly with the magnitude spectrum could further improve results.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by EPSRC
through Programme Grant EP/I031022/1 (NST) and EP/J002526/1
(CAF) and by CREST from the Japan Science and Technology Agency
(uDialogue project). The full NST research data collection may be accessed at 
7. References
 H. Zen, K. Tokuda, and A. W. Black, “Statistical parametric
speech synthesis,” Speech Comm., vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1039–1064,
 J. Yamagishi, Z. Ling, and S. King, “Robustness of HMM-based
Speech Synthesis,” in Proc. Interspeech, Brisbane, Australia, Sep.
2008, pp. 581–584.
 J. Yamagishi, C. Veaux, S. King, and S. Renals, “Speech synthesis
technologies for individuals with vocal disabilities: Voice banking
and reconstruction,” J. of Acoust. Science and Tech., vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 1–5, 2012.
 Y. Hu and P. C. Loizou, “Subjective comparison of speech enhancement algorithms,” in Proc. ICASSP, vol. 1, May 2006, pp.
 Y. Wang and D. Wang, “A deep neural network for time-domain
signal reconstruction,” in Proc. ICASSP, April 2015, pp. 4390–
 Y. Xu, J. Du, L.-R. Dai, and C.-H. Lee, “A regression approach to
speech enhancement based on deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
on Audio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 7–
19, Jan 2015.
 K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix, A. Ogawa, and T. Nakatani, “Textinformed speech enhancement with deep neural networks,” in
Proc. Interspeech, Sep. 2015, pp. 1760–1764.
 F. Weninger, J. Hershey, J. Le Roux, and B. Schuller, “Discriminatively trained recurrent neural networks for single-channel speech
separation,” in Proc. GlobalSIP, Dec 2014, pp. 577–581.
 F. Weninger, H. Erdogan, S. Watanabe, E. Vincent, J. Roux, J. R.
Hershey, and B. Schuller, Proc. Int. Conf. Latent Variable Analysis and Signal Separation.
Springer International Publishing,
2015, ch. Speech Enhancement with LSTM Recurrent Neural
Networks and its Application to Noise-Robust ASR, pp. 91–99.
 T. Toda and K. Tokuda, “A speech parameter generation algorithm
considering global variance for HMM-based speech synthesis,”
IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. E90-D, no. 5, pp. 816–824, 2007.
 R. Karhila, U. Remes, and M. Kurimo, “Noise in HMM-Based
Speech Synthesis Adaptation: Analysis, Evaluation Methods and
Experiments,” J. Sel. Topics in Sig. Proc., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 285–
295, April 2014.
 C. Valentini-Botinhao, X. Wang, S. Takaki, and J. Yamagishi,
“Speech enhancement for a noise-robust text-to-speech synthesis system using deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Interspeech, (submitted) 2016.
 P. C. Loizou, Speech Enhancement: Theory and Practice, 1st ed.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, Inc., 2007.
 Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difﬁcult,” IEEE Trans. on Neural
Networks, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157–166, 1994.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” J.
Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 F. A. Gers, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Cummins, “Learning to forget:
Continual prediction with LSTM,” J. Neural computation, vol. 12,
no. 10, pp. 2451–2471, 2000.
 A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition
with deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2013, pp.
6645–6649.
 H. Sak, A. W. Senior, and F. Beaufays, “Long short-term memory
based recurrent neural network architectures for large vocabulary
speech recognition,” CoRR, vol. abs/1402.1128, 2014.
 S.-H. Chen, S.-H. Hwang, and Y.-R. Wang, “An RNN-based
prosodic information synthesizer for mandarin text-to-speech,”
Proc. ICASSP, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 226–239, 1998.
 Y. Fan, Y. Qian, F.-L. Xie, and F. K. Soong, “TTS synthesis with
bidirectional LSTM based recurrent neural networks.” in Proc. Interspeech, 2014, pp. 1964–1968.
 R. Fernandez, A. Rendel, B. Ramabhadran, and R. Hoory,
“Prosody contour prediction with long short-term memory, bidirectional, deep recurrent neural networks.” in Proc. Interspeech,
2014, pp. 2268–2272.
 H. Zen and H. Sak, “Unidirectional long short-term memory recurrent neural network with recurrent output layer for low-latency
speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICASSP. IEEE, 2015, pp. 4470–4474.
 S. Achanta, T. Godambe, and S. V. Gangashetty, “An investigation
of recurrent neural network architectures for statistical parametric
speech synthesis,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2015.
 C. Veaux, J. Yamagishi, and S. King, “The voice bank corpus: Design, collection and data analysis of a large regional accent speech
database,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Oriental COCOSDA, Nov 2013.
 J. Thiemann, N. Ito, and E. Vincent, “The diverse environments
multi-channel acoustic noise database: A database of multichannel environmental noise recordings,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 133,
no. 5, pp. 3591–3591, 2013.
 Objective measurement of active speech level ITU-T recommendation P.56, ITU Recommendation ITU-T, Geneva, Switzerland,
 H. Kawahara, I. Masuda-Katsuse, and A. Cheveign´e, “Restructuring speech representations using a pitch-adaptive time-frequency
smoothing and an instantaneous-frequency-based F0 extraction:
possible role of a repetitive structure in sounds,” Speech Comm.,
vol. 27, pp. 187–207, 1999.
 Speech signal processing toolkit: SPTK 3.4, Nagoya Institute of
Technology, 2010.
 D. Talkin, “A robust algorithm for pitch tracking,” Speech Coding
and Synthesis, pp. 495–518, 1995.
 F. Weninger, “Introducing CURRENNT: The Munich Open-
Source CUDA RecurREnt Neural Network Toolkit,” J. of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16, pp. 547–551, 2015.
 I. Cohen and B. Berdugo, “Speech enhancement for nonstationary noise environments,” Signal Processing, vol. 81, no. 11,
pp. 2403 – 2418, 2001.
 I. Cohen, “Noise spectrum estimation in adverse environments:
improved minima controlled recursive averaging,” IEEE Trans. on
Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 466–475, Sept
 J. Yamagishi, T. Kobayashi, Y. Nakano, K. Ogata, and J. Isogai, “Analysis of speaker adaptation algorithms for HMM-based
speech synthesis and a constrained SMAPLR adaptation algorithm,” IEEE Trans. on Audio, Speech and Language Processing,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 66 –83, 2009.
 R. Dall, C. Veaux, J. Yamagishi, and S. King, “Analysis of speaker
clustering strategies for HMM-based speech synthesis,” in Proc.
Interspeech, Portland, USA, Sep. 2012.
 K. Tokuda, T. Yoshimura, T. Masuko, T. Kobayashi, and T. Kitamura, “Speech parameter generation algorithms for HMM-based
speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICASSP, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2000, pp.
1315–1318.
 Method for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality level
of coding systems, ITU Recommendation ITU-R BS.1534-1, International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Assembly, Geneva, Switzerland, March 2003.
 IEEE, “IEEE recommended practice for speech quality measurement,” IEEE Trans. on Audio and Electroacoustics, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 225–246, 1969.