3D Slicer as an Image Computing Platform for the Quantitative
Imaging Network
Andriy Fedorov, PhD1, Reinhard Beichel, PhD2, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, PhD3, Julien
Finet, MS4, Jean-Christophe Fillion-Robin, MS4, Sonia Pujol, PhD1, Christian Bauer, PhD2,
Dominique Jennings, PhD3, Fiona Fennessy, MD, PhD1, Milan Sonka, PhD2, John Buatti,
MD2, Stephen Aylward, PhD4, James V. Miller, PhD5, Steve Pieper, PhD6, and Ron Kikinis,
1Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
2University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
3Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA
4Kitware Inc, Clifton Park, NY
5GE Research, Niskayuna, NY
6Isomics, Inc., Cambridge, MA
Quantitative analysis has tremendous but mostly unrealized potential in healthcare to support
objective and accurate interpretation of the clinical imaging. In 2008, the National Cancer Institute
began building the Quantitative Imaging Network (QIN) initiative with the goal of advancing
quantitative imaging in the context of personalized therapy and evaluation of treatment response.
Computerized analysis is an important component contributing to reproducibility and efficiency of
the quantitative imaging techniques. The success of quantitative imaging is contingent on robust
analysis methods and software tools to bring these methods from bench to bedside.
3D Slicer is a free open source software application for medical image computing. As a clinical
research tool, 3D Slicer is similar to a radiology workstation that supports versatile visualizations
but also provides advanced functionality such as automated segmentation and registration for a
variety of application domains. Unlike a typical radiology workstation, 3D Slicer is free and is not
tied to specific hardware. As a programming platform, 3D Slicer facilitates translation and
evaluation of the new quantitative methods by allowing the biomedical researcher to focus on the
implementation of the algorithm, and providing abstractions for the common tasks of data
communication, visualization and user interface development. Compared to other tools that
provide aspects of this functionality, 3D Slicer is fully open source and can be readily extended
and redistributed. In addition, 3D Slicer is designed to facilitate the development of new
functionality in the form of 3D Slicer extensions.
In this paper, we present an overview of 3D Slicer as a platform for prototyping, development and
evaluation of image analysis tools for clinical research applications. To illustrate the utility of the
platform in the scope of QIN, we discuss several use cases of 3D Slicer by the existing QIN teams,
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2012 November ; 30(9): 1323–1341. doi:10.1016/j.mri.2012.05.001.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
and we elaborate on the future directions that can further facilitate development and validation of
imaging biomarkers using 3D Slicer.
Introduction
Cancer is the leading cause of death in the developed world, and the second leading cause of
death in the developing countries. With the incidence of cancer rapidly increasing, there is
an immediate need for better understanding of this disease and for the development of the
targeted, personalized treatment approaches. Successful translation of such treatments from
the lab to the clinic is contingent on the availability of biomarkers – objective and testable
characteristics indicative of normal or pathologic processes that ideally should allow for
quantitative measurement of the response to therapy. In this regard, in vivo imaging
biomarkers are particularly promising, as they can be highly specific and minimally
invasive, providing both anatomical and functional understanding of the response patterns.
However, the potential of quantitative imaging remains largely underutilized. The Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) — the only imaging based biomarker
accepted by the U.S. FDA as a surrogate end point for clinical outcome in therapy — relies
primarily on the anatomical imaging of the lesion measured by its largest diameter.
Continuous advances in multi-modality 3D imaging technology and analysis, along with
improvements in computer science and bioinformatics, create an opportunity for a paradigm
shift in quantification of treatment response. To advance the role of imaging as a biomarker
of treatment, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) launched the Quantitative Imaging
Network (QIN) initiative. The goal of QIN is to form a community of interdisciplinary
teams engaged in the development of imaging-based biomarkers and their optimization in
the context of clinical trials. Research software platforms are essential in prototyping,
development and evaluation of novel algorithmic methods as a mechanism for discovering
image-based surrogate endpoints. Such platforms should also support integration of the
algorithmic advances into the clinical trial workflows. In this paper, we discuss the
capabilities and the utility of 3D Slicer (Slicer), as an enabling research platform for
quantitative image computing research.
3D Slicer is a free open source extensible software application for medical image computing
and visualization. Slicer emerged as a culmination of several independent projects that
focused separately on image visualization, surgical navigation and graphical user interface
(GUI). David Gering presented the initial prototype of the Slicer software in his MIT
Master’s thesis in 1999, based on the earlier experience of the research groups at MIT and
Surgical Planning Lab (SPL). Subsequently, Steve Pieper assumed the role of the Chief
Architect, commencing the work of transforming 3D Slicer into an industrial-strength
package. Since 1999 Slicer has been under continuous development at the SPL under the
leadership of Ron Kikinis. Today it is developed mostly by professional engineers in close
collaboration with algorithm developers and application domain scientists, with the
participation of Isomics Inc., Kitware Inc. and GE Global Research, and with significant
contributions from the growing Slicer community. Initially envisioned as a neurosurgical
guidance, visualization and analysis system, over the last decade Slicer has evolved into an
integrated platform that has been applied in a variety of clinical and pre-clinical research
applications, as well as for the analysis of non-medical images. Improvement and
maintenance of the software have been possible primarily through the support from the
National Institutes of Health (NIH). At the same time, its development has grown into a
community effort, as numerous groups and individual users not funded directly to develop
3D Slicer are continuously improving it by reporting software problems and contributing
solutions, suggesting new features and developing new tools. As described more fully
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
below, Slicer integrates a number of powerful open source projects into an end-user
application suitable for clinical researchers.
The breadth of functionality, extensibility, portability across platforms and non-restrictive
software license are some of the main features that differentiate Slicer from the commercial
and open source software tools and workstations that aim to cover similar aspects of
functionality. Numerous choices of radiology workstations and image analysis tools are
available from the commercial vendors. Some of the popular tools used in the clinic as well
as in research are AW Workstation (GE Healthcare), syngo.via (Siemens), PMOD (PMOD
Technologies Ltd, Zurich, Switzerland), Definiens (Definiens Inc., Parsippany, NJ),
MimVista (MIM Software Inc., Cleveland, OH). These packages provide users with a set of
analysis tools (some of which may be specifically approved by the FDA for certain clinical
tasks), compatibility with the clinical PACS systems and customer support. Such clinically
oriented systems are not always affordable by the academic researchers. Commercial
solutions are typically not extensible by the end user, are not oriented towards prototyping of
the new tools, and may require specialized hardware, limiting their applicability in projects
that involve development of new image analysis methods. In the research domain,
MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA) has traditionally been the “swiss army knife” of
scientific computing. Many researchers use MATLAB for initial prototyping and
experimentation, while some end user tools, such as SPM, are built on top of MATLAB.
Being a generic prototyping tool, MATLAB is not designed for medical applications and
thus lacks support for interface and display conventions common in clinical environments.
As a result, deployment of the developed tools for the use by clinical researchers requires
translation of the code into more generic languages to minimize dependencies and simplify
integration.
As opposed to the commercial workstations, 3D Slicer is meant to provide a research
platform that is freely available and does not require specialized equipment. Slicer’s use is
not constrained to a single processing task or research application. Its generality and
extensibility separates Slicer from such task-oriented packages as ITK-Snap (image
segmentation); DtiStudio (diffusion tensor analysis); FreeSurfer1, FSL and SPM
(neuroimaging applications). Several other tools, such as OsiriX, BioImage Suite2, MIPAV
and ImageJ3, are similar to Slicer in that they provide extensible development platforms for
biomedical imaging applications (for a comprehensive comparison of these tools we refer
the reader to the earlier surveys ). ImageJ is an extensible Java-based image processing
platform that has been applied to a variety of applications, including radiological image
processing, with the focus on two-dimensional analysis. MIPAV is a cross-platform Javabased package supported by NIH. OsiriX is an open-source Picture Archiving and
Communication System (PACS) workstation and DICOM viewer for Mac OS X that
provides advanced capabilities such as image fusion, volume rendering and image
annotation, and is extensible via a documented plugin mechanism. ClearCanvas is a
Windows-based DICOM workstation adopted by the caBIG project4. The TCGA version of
ClearCanvas workstation supports AIM model annotation capabilities, and is also
extensible. A notable aspect of both OsiriX and ClearCanvas is that these systems are made
available either in a free open source version or as commercial, FDA-cleared products. A
practical shortcoming is their dependency on specific operating systems (Mac OS X for
OsiriX, and MS Windows for ClearCanvas). Perhaps more importantly some of the
aforementioned packages that are similar in their intended purpose to 3D Slicer are distributed under restrictive open
source licenses that limit the ability of outside developers to redistribute parts of those
systems, in particular in commercial or other “closed source” scenarios. This can be a
practical constraint for QIN investigators collaborating with industry partners, as the
solutions developed on top of these packages cannot be directly incorporated into
commercial products. Another consideration is that critical functionality to work with
modern imaging scenarios may only be available in the commercial version of the package.
OsiriX and ClearCanvas, for example, do not support 64-bit processing architectures in their
royalty-free versions and this limits the maximum size of the image data the software can
3D Slicer does not have any components specific to a particular operating system. Binary
distributions are available for 32- or 64-bit versions of Windows, Mac OS X or Linux, and
the software can be compiled on other systems, such as Oracle’s Solaris. It is distributed
under a BSD-style license agreement allowing free distribution of derivative software for
academic and commercial use. Hence, image analysis tools developed within 3D Slicer can
be adopted directly by the industry collaborators. Since new technologies can only become
part of routine clinical care through their incorporation into FDA regulated medical
products, Slicer’s permissive software license furthers the overall goal of lowering the
barriers for translation of the successful research solutions into medical products. On the
other hand, Slicer is not an FDA-approved device and its license makes no claims about the
clinical applicability of the software. It is the sole responsibility of the user to comply with
appropriate safety and ethics guidelines, and any products incorporating Slicer technology
must be fully tested to comply with applicable laws and regulations. Under these
considerations, Slicer has been applied in a variety of projects under appropriate research
oversight. In this manuscript, we aim to introduce the capabilities of 3D Slicer as a software
platform for clinical imaging research, and outline its use in the context of biomarker
development for cancer treatment by several QIN sites.
In the remainder of this paper, we first present an overview of 3D Slicer by discussing its
architecture, main features and guiding development principles. Next we focus on the
capabilities of 3D Slicer viewed from the perspective of the clinical researcher. We follow
with the overview of the 3D Slicer platform from the standpoint of a biomedical engineer,
and discuss how Slicer can facilitate development of new software tools for clinical
research. To demonstrate how 3D Slicer is currently used by some of the existing teams of
QIN, we discuss the clinical research projects investigated at Brigham and Women’s
Hospital (BWH) (PI Fiona Fennessy), University of Iowa (PI John Buatti) and
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) (PI Bruce Rosen). We conclude with the summary
of our findings, discussing some of the features and functionalities that would further
improve applicability of 3D Slicer to biomarker development by the QIN investigators.
Overview of 3D Slicer
Computerized image analysis plays an increasing role in supporting clinical and research
needs. Promising methodologies that may lead to new imaging biomarkers often involve
custom image processing software. The role of software evolves over the different stages of
the imaging biomarker lifecycle. In the inception stage, promising methodological concepts
are identified and translated into early prototypes. Such early prototypes are often cobbled
together from parts of tools designed for other tasks. They are typically suitable for use by
engineers, for small pilot or phantom studies. Their purpose is to demonstrate that the task
can be done. The next step is to demonstrate that the task is worth doing. For this to happen,
the method has to be optimized and thoroughly validated outside the research lab. This step
requires a software tool that can be used reliably by trained clinical researchers, and can be
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
applied to a larger population of patients, possibly in a multi-site clinical trial. At this point,
the software must be robust and the interface intuitive. After establishing the value of a tool,
the next step is to translate the software and the biomarker into a clinical, FDA approved
One of the goals of 3D Slicer is to provide a common set of base functionality to facilitate
development and validation of the medical image computing methods for the “can it be
done?” and “is it worth doing?” steps of the imaging biomarker lifecycle. Understanding of
the imaging data by visualizing its different aspects, applying basic processing steps, and
displaying analysis results in context is critical at the initial stages. 3D Slicer is a powerful
visualization tool that allows exploration of the imaging datasets in two, three and four
dimensions. Slicer enables fusion of functional and anatomical data, and provides a variety
of generic and specialized tools for their processing and multimodal analysis. To ensure
robustness, it is often required that image processing methods are initialized manually. The
3D Slicer framework includes the components needed to meet such development needs (e.g.,
“seed” the image segmentation algorithm, provide initial pose for image registration, or
“steer” the processing based on the dynamically updated computation result).
The use of an image analysis tool in a clinical research environment introduces new
requirements. Support of the DICOM standard for communicating image data is commonly
required, as is a graphical user interface that is usable by a non-technical operator. Slicer
allows loading images in DICOM format from disk or directly from PACS. The Qt toolkit5
provides a cross-platform GUI front-end to Slicer that allows each processing module to
easily define custom user interfaces. Image analysis tools implemented as Slicer processing
modules can be developed in such a way that both interactive and batch execution is
possible. This is particularly valuable in situations when experiments have to be performed
on a large number of cases, or when certain parameters of the algorithm have to be
optimized.
Once a method is optimized and validated, it can potentially be developed into an FDAcleared clinical device. At this stage, it can be important that the implementation that was
developed in the earlier stages can be used without the need to re-implement the key
components. Slicer adopts a licensing model that does not place any restrictions on the use
of its source code in the derivative works. This aims to broaden the user community to
include both academic and industry partners and to simplify the transitioning of the research
tool into a commercial product.
The architecture of 3D Slicer follows a modular and layered approach, as shown in Fig. 1.
At the lower level of the architecture are the fundamental libraries provided by the operating
system that are not packaged with Slicer, such as OpenGL and hardware drivers that allow
efficient usage of the windowing and graphics resources of the host system. At the level
above, there are languages (primarily C++ and Python, but increasingly JavaScript) and
libraries that provide higher level functionality and abstractions. Some of the libraries used
by the application are Qt (cross-platform GUI framework), the DICOM Toolkit (DCMTK)6
(implements parts of DICOM standard and is used to interact with DICOM data and
DICOM services) and jqPlot7 (provides charting capabilities). All of the external
dependencies of 3D Slicer are cross-platform portable and are distributed under licenses
fully compatible with Slicer, which do not restrict their use in either commercial or open
source products.
5Qt cross-platform application and UI framework, 
6DCMTK – DICOM Toolkit, 
7jqPlot, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Some of the libraries contributing to the foundation of 3D Slicer are designed in close
collaboration and often share the same developer community. These libraries are distributed
as part of the NA-MIC Kit, a collection of the software tools supported in part by the
National Alliance for Medical Image Computing (NA-MIC) project. The tools and
interfaces provided by the NA-MIC Kit components are largely focused on the needs of the
developers of medical image computing applications. CMake8 enables cross-platform build
system configuration, packaging and testing of 3D Slicer and NA-MIC Kit libraries. CDash9
is a web-based server that organizes the results of software testing. The Visualization
Toolkit (VTK)10 provides the key building blocks for 3D computer graphics and
visualization. The Insight Toolkit (ITK)11 is a library developed specifically for the tasks
related to medical image registration and segmentation, and for implementing new image
analysis algorithms. The Common Toolkit (CTK)12 is a biomedical image computing
library with the focus on application-level DICOM support, plugin framework and
specialized GUI widgets.
3D Slicer itself consists of the lean application core, Slicer Modules, and Slicer Extensions.
The core implements the Slicer user interface, provides support for data input/output (IO),
visualization and developer interfaces that support extension of the application with new
plugins. Internally, Slicer uses a scene data structure to organize images, coordinate frames,
annotations, and maintain the application state. The XML-based Medical Reality Markup
Language (MRML) is used to serialize the content of the scene. Slicer modules are the
plugins that depend on the Slicer core to implement new functionality. Individual modules
can be independent, or can rely on other modules (for example, a module that provides
lesion segmentation functionality can depend on the volume rendering module to enable 3D
visualization of the anatomy and segmented structure). Unlike Slicer modules that are
packaged as part of Slicer distribution, Slicer extensions are external plugins installed “on
demand” by the user, akin to the web browser extensions. The extensions mechanism
enables sharing of the Slicer-based tools that cannot be included into the package due to
incompatible licenses, development timelines, or other constraints. It also provides a
“pathway” for integrating new functionality, since any extension that satisfies specific
requirements is a candidate to be included into the Slicer distribution. The requirements for
integration to the distribution include the following: a designated maintainer to serve as a
point of contact, a non-restrictive Slicer-compliant license, adherence to the Slicer coding
standards, availability of software tests and appropriate user-level documentation. We
emphasize that tools that do not satisfy these requirements can still be available to Slicer
users, clearly marked as Slicer extensions and accompanied by an appropriate disclaimer.
Since its inception in late 1990s, 3D Slicer has been evolving with major architectural,
functional and GUI redesigns occurring every 4–5 years. The current (fourth) generation of
Slicer was released in November 2011. The most notable improvements of the software as
compared to the previous (third) version are improved visualization performance, reengineered DICOM support, completely redesigned GUI and availability of the Python
development interfaces. With each major redesign, several policies are followed to ease the
transitioning of users and developers to the updated platform. The base and core modules are
released to the broader development community first, followed by the migration of the
specialized modules. For example, the migration strategy for the modules in the imageguided therapy (IGT) category is the most conservative due to the mission-critical nature of
8CMake: cross-platform build system, 
9CDash: software web-based testing server, 
10VTK: Visualization Toolkit, 
11ITK: Insight Toolkit, 
12CTK: The Common Toolkit, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
these applications. As such, the modules in this category are usually migrated after the base
of the new release is stable and thoroughly tested. Another policy has been to provide
backward compatibility to support reading of data produced using the earlier version.
Within each generation, new and updated releases of Slicer are prepared every 2 to 6
months. These releases include performance improvements, bug fixes and new functionality,
but no major changes to the base architecture or GUI. A release includes a tagged version of
the source code in the source code repository as well as binary installation packages for the
supported platforms (Windows, Mac OS X, Linux; 32-bit, 64-bit). Daily binary installation
packages are also prepared for the major platforms to track the current version of the source
code. These daily packages allow Slicer users to access the new functionality under
development. The Slicer software development process is collaborative and geographically
distributed, with over 80 authorized developers contributing source code through SVN and
Git revision control systems. To ensure the stability of the software, the source code is
compiled and tested on a daily basis on a variety of platform configurations. The testing
results are summarized and reported using a web-based centralized CDash dashboard. Users
and developers of 3D Slicer can also report issues on the open mailing lists or using webbased bug tracking system.
Documentation, training and user support are high priorities for the Slicer community.
Hands-on training sessions are organized regularly as part of on-going outreach initiatives at
major conferences, such as the annual RSNA, MICCAI and SPIE meetings, or in response to
request by host institutions at both national and international venues. Semiannual hands-on
week-long project weeks are open for participation to anyone interested in developing or
using Slicer tools, and are an ideal place to exchange ideas and experience. Remote learning
of 3D Slicer is supported by the online resources and community mailing lists. Focused
training materials that include sample datasets and step-by-step instructions are available for
basic Slicer operation as well as advanced workflows. Wiki-based web pages accompany
every module of the 3D Slicer providing reference documentation of functionality and usage
examples. User and developer community mailing lists have been active for the last 10
years, and currently include over 770 and 440 subscribers, respectively, providing a source
of Slicer expertise extending well beyond the community of the core Slicer developers.
Around 2,800 messages were exchanged on these Slicer mailing lists in 2011.
There are two major communities of Slicer users. First, there are medically-trained
researchers that apply the tools available in the 3D Slicer to novel clinical applications.
Second, there are biomedical engineers and computer scientists that use 3D Slicer as a
platform for development and delivery of their algorithmic work. In the next two sections,
we discuss the main capabilities provided by 3D Slicer from the standpoint of scientists who
are members of those two communities.
Clinical Research Platform
From the perspective of a clinical researcher, Slicer is an advanced image visualization and
analysis workstation, and it shares a lot of generic functionality with the commercially
available packages. Unlike most of the commercially available workstations, 3D Slicer is
not an FDA-cleared product, and its intended use is clinical research applications. In this
sense, Slicer is very different from its commercial counterparts, since it incorporates
experimental tools that cannot be packaged within the workstations used clinically.
3D Slicer is available in the form of binary packages that have platform-specific installers
for all major operating systems. These packages are self-contained, which means they
include all the dependency libraries and toolkits needed to use Slicer on a given platform.
This also makes it possible to run two or more versions of Slicer at the same time, since the
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
packages do not share any components. Slicer includes core functionality that covers
common needs for a variety of applications as well as task-specific modules. The main
application GUI provides a consistent interface for the software, simplifying the learning
process, since all modules follow the same conventions and share the same set of GUI
controls. The two major components of Slicer GUI are the layout-controlled data viewers
and the module GUI panel, as shown in Fig. 2.
Visualization elements and capabilities
3D Slicer visualization capabilities support various imaging modalities (e.g., CT, PET, MRI
and Ultrasound) and can be used for visualization of 2-, 3- and 4-dimensional datasets.
Support of 3-dimensional datasets (MRI, CT, PET) has enjoyed most attention based on the
substantial number of use cases and resulting in a large number of tools developed
specifically for this kind of data. Although support of the newer and less commonly applied
2- and 4-dimensional modalities is possible, it is a fertile ground for the future development.
Data visualization in Slicer is enabled by the 2D and 3D viewers. The 2D viewers allow
visualization of cross-sections from 3D or 4D image volumes, and support the associated
image operations such as: basic image manipulations (zoom, window/level, pan),
multiplanar reformat, crosshairs and synchronous pan/scroll for the linked viewers.
Advanced capabilities of 2D viewers enable display of various types of glyphs for
visualization of tensors and vector fields. Lookup tables (LUTs) support the mapping
between the image values and the colors displayed in 2D viewers (e.g., grayscale LUT is
typical for CT images, but color can be preferred for PET). Each 2D viewer supports three
image “layers”: the user can select “background” and “foreground” image volumes as well
as a “label” image volume (which can represent segmentations), and fuse the three layers by
adjusting transparency. 2D viewers also support a “Lightbox” mode, where multiple slices
from a volume are tiled within the viewer. The 3D viewers enable visualization of volume
data, such as triangulated surface models, fiber tracks, glyphs and volume renderings.
Augmented reality applications can utilize stereoscopic capabilities of the 3D viewers. Twoand three-dimensional elements can be combined in the 3D viewers to provide an integrated
visualization of the various data to the end user, as shown in various figures throughout this
manuscript. Coherent integration and visualization of multiple images and data types in 2D
and 3D viewers is achieved via a common, scanner-independent, patient-centered physical
space coordinate frame reference system. Spatial alignment of individual volumes can be
achieved by introducing hierarchies of rigid and deformable spatial transformations. These
transformations can be defined manually by the operator, or using the automated registration
tools. Finally, chart viewers, a relatively new feature under development, are available for
displaying plots.
A variety of image markup and annotations are supported. Following the convention used by
Rubin et al., we use the term image markup to refer to the graphical elements overlay, and
image annotation for the text-based information, both of which describe a certain finding in
a given image. The markup elements provided by the 3D Slicer (as of writing this) are
fiducials (points), uni-dimensional measurements (rulers), 3D box ROIs and 3D image raster
ROIs (“label maps”). It is important to note that all of the markup elements, with the
exception of label maps, are defined in the 3D coordinate system of Slicer as opposed to the
voxel coordinates of the image slice. Label maps store image segmentations that define how
individual voxels of the image map to certain classes (specific anatomies or pathologies). As
such, label maps are defined in the image space. Currently, each voxel can belong to only
one segmentation class, although an arbitrary number of label maps can be created for a
given image volume. Annotations can be associated with each markup element as free text.
Layouts allow customization of the number, type and configuration of the viewers to suit a
specific use case. The user can choose from the set of pre-configured layouts. Layout
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
configuration and content can also be manipulated by the Slicer modules. This capability is
similar to DICOM hanging protocols, although layouts tend to be selected and populated
with content manually. Since layouts are stored in the Slicer scene-graph, they can be
serialized and restored, complete with their content, from session to session. Of specific
interest to the QIN community, are the Slicer layouts referred to as “Compare” and
“Quantitative”. The Compare layouts allow exploration of longitudinal or multi-modality
image sequences by placing each volume in a separate viewer and coordinating the display
such that corresponding anatomy is displayed across all the viewers. Quantitative layouts
include chart viewers side by side with the 2D and/or 3D viewers.
Slicer follows a modular paradigm in delivering task-specific functionality to the user. Each
module is a feature-complete functional unit designed to serve a specific task. A variety of
modules designed for different research applications are included in the distribution of the
software. The modules are grouped according to the functionality they provide. The active
module can be selected by the operator using the Slicer main GUI, which will expose the
controls of the selected module in the Module GUI panel (e.g., see Fig. 2). A formatted webbased wiki page that describes its functionality, use-cases, GUI controls and includes
references to academic publications accompanies each module. We note that virtually all of
the processing done by the individual modules in Slicer is in the context of 3D volumetric
data. As a side-effect of this, generic Slicer tools may not be well suited for processing nonvolumetric data such as endoscopic video, free hand ultrasound, or conventional
radiographs, although customized Slicer-based tools for some of these tasks have been
developed.
Core modules of Slicer are those that support functionality applicable to a breadth of
applications, such as DICOM IO support (“DICOM” module), volume rendering (“Volume
Rendering” module) and the manipulation of spatial transformations for manual registration
(“Transforms” module). The other categories of modules include the following:
Filtering: tools for pre-processing and auxiliary operations on images. Functionality
includes arithmetic operations, Gaussian and anisotropic denoising filters and
intensity inhomogeneity bias field correction, among other tools.
Registration: rigid and non-rigid spatial alignment of the images. These modules
support point-, surface- and intensity-based registration. Individual intensity-based
registration modules implement algorithms that vary by the similarity metric used
(e.g., mutual information or cross-correlation) and flexibility of the transformation
parameterization (e.g., rigid, affine, B-spline and dense deformation fields are
supported).
Segmentation: tools that separate individual sub-regions in the dataset based on
certain features. Most of the tools in this category operate on single- or multichannel images, although a module for segmentation of triangular surfaces based
on curvature is also available. Image-based segmentation tools include both
interactive and automated methods. Techniques implemented include region-based
statistical methods, level sets, active learning and Expectation-Maximization multichannel segmentation. The Editor module contains a collection of tools for manual
and semi-automatic segmentation.
Surface models: tools for creating and manipulating triangulated surface models.
Such models can be constructed either from grayscale image volumes, or, more
typically, from the segmented label maps.
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Diffusion: modules designed specifically for processing Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) MRI. This category includes tools for diffusion I/O as well as techniques for
denoising, tractography, and clustering of fiber tracts.
Image Guided Therapy (IGT): modules that support applications in image-guided
therapy. The key functionality provided by the tools in this category is the
OpenIGTLink interface that enables exchange of data between Slicer and external
systems, such as robotic devices, MR scanners, and commercial image-guided
surgery platforms.
The collection of modules is continuously expanding as new functionality is contributed by
the community, and the modules are migrated from the previous releases of the software.
Data Formats and Organization
Support of the widely accepted data exchange standards and interfaces are critical for any
image computing tool to be useful in a clinical research environment. 3D Slicer supports
import, query, retrieve, and storage of clinical images using DICOM protocols and data
structures. These features allow data exchange with clinical systems such as scanners,
workstations, and PACS servers. Example use cases for DICOM networking include: (1)
setting up a scanner to route newly acquired images directly to a DICOM listener in Slicer to
support image guided therapy; (2) using Slicer to query and retrieve DICOM studies in a
departmental PACS to perform retrospective image analysis; and (3) sending derived (postprocessed) images to a PACS system to become part of the patient record. In all cases,
coordination with responsible clinical support staff is required to ensure that research use of
Slicer is authorized and has been tested to confirm that it will not interfere with ongoing
clinical care. Implementation of the import and export of DICOM RT structures user in
radiotherapy is currently under way.
As images are imported into Slicer, they are added to the Slicer scene that is used to
organize the individual data elements. While the user performs operations on the data or
reconfigures the visualization elements of the interface, the scene is used to keep track of the
application configuration. Scene views cache the complete state of the Slicer application,
including the configuration and content of the viewers, together with a screen capture of the
visualization elements and a textual description. Slicer scenes can contain multiple scene
views that emphasize or communicate different aspects of data or different stages of its
processing. Scenes can be stored on disk using the MRML format for sharing of the analysis
results and to facilitate reproducibility of the observation. As an example, a scene view can
correspond to a visualization that was used to prepare a certain figure in a report or
manuscript. Accompanied by the Slicer scene, version of the software used and input dataset
used to prepare it, such an article would provide a detailed provenance record, together with
the methods, parameters and visualization context.
In summary, 3D Slicer is a comprehensive application that can be used for various tasks
related to both the qualitative and quantitative exploration of the multimodal medical
imaging data received directly from the imaging equipment or clinical PACS. The supported
tasks include image overlay and fusion; annotation and quantitative measurement of lesion
dimensions and volumes; image filtering and preprocessing; automated registration of
images and segmentation of the individual structures. The MRML serialization format
facilitates reproducibility of the obtained results and their exchange across research groups.
However, research applications often have unmet needs that require development of new
image analysis tools. In the next section, we explain the basic concepts required for
implementing new functionality using Slicer platform.
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Research Development Platform
One of the main goals of 3D Slicer is to provide biomedical engineers, developers, and
applied scientists with the essential components for quick prototyping and efficient
development of biomedical image analysis tools. From the beginning, Slicer has been
designed to be open and extensible. As a platform, it establishes the interfaces and design
patterns for developing new functionality and integrating the existing components into new
tools. New functionality is introduced into Slicer in the form of modules and extensions. The
key user-level features of the application, such as DICOM interfaces, versatile visualization
mechanisms and processing tools, can also be accessed via the documented application
programming interfaces (APIs). This enables reuse of the existing component, thus reducing
development time and encouraging creation of consistent user interfaces.
Slicer Core Architecture
The core of Slicer follows object-oriented programming paradigm and is coded using C++
programming language. The APIs of the core classes are also exposed via Python wrapping
mechanisms. In the recent years, the Python programming language has become a popular
computing tool in the scientific community, in particular due to its broad applicability,
relative simplicity and the availability of powerful open source scientific tools and libraries
such as SciPy13. Python wrapping of the Slicer functionality makes it possible to develop
fully functional scripted modules, thereby allowing quick prototyping and simplifying the
development process. Such modules can leverage the existing functionality of both the
Slicer application and various Python-based scientific libraries.
The classes that implement the core of 3D Slicer are organized into three main groups based
on the functionality they provide, following the Model View Controller (MVC) design
pattern and rely on event communication and API calls for coordination. The main
components of the application core are the following, as shown in Fig. 3:
The Model is responsible for data organization and serialization, and is supported
by the Medical Reality Markup Language (MRML). MRML defines the hierarchies
of the data elements, and the APIs for accessing and serializing the individual
nodes. MRML support in the Slicer core is provided by the MRML library, which
is a key component of the Slicer architecture, but does not have any dependencies
on the other core components. This library is used by the Slicer core and plugins to
instantiate the MRML nodes and organize them into a coherent internal data
structure called the MRML scene. The MRML scene maintains the links between
the individual data items, their visualization and any other persistent state of the
application and modules. As an example, a MRML node can store the processing
parameters used by the algorithms implemented in the individual modules, or the
window/level settings used to visualize a specific image volume.
The View maintains the state of the visual elements of the application. The View
functionality is provided by the GUI and displayable manager classes of the Slicer
core. These classes maintain consistency between the internal MRML state
(Model), and the visual appearance of the Qt GUI data viewers of the application
(e.g., multiple slice reconstructions can exist, while pointing to the same underlying
image data structure). The updates to the GUI and visualization components of
Slicer trigger events that propagate via the corresponding GUI classes to the
“stateful” MRML nodes. Displayable managers maintain consistent visualization of
certain data elements in multiple views/viewers. For example, intersections of the
13SciPy: Scientific tools for Python, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
modeled diffusion tracts can be displayed in the 2D slice viewers in an anatomical
image overlay and as streamlines in the 3D viewers, both handled by the same
displayable manager.
The Controller, or Logic component encapsulates the processing/analysis
functionality of the application core. The logic does not depend on the existence of
GUI, but is fully aware of the MRML data structures. Communication between the
view and controller components happens indirectly through changes to the MRML
data structures. The logic classes use the MRML nodes for storing the computation
results. The view classes can register to receive event updates from the MRML
scene and the individual nodes, which in turn initiate updates of the visualization
The event-driven architecture of the Slicer core is complex in part due to the fact that the
application incorporates several libraries (Qt, VTK and MRML) that have their distinctive
event handling mechanisms. Recognizing that deep understanding of the application
internals has a steep learning curve, Slicer provides two approaches for introducing new
functionality as Slicer Execution Model (SEM) plugins or Slicer loadable modules. These
approaches differ primarily by the level of their integration with the application core and —
as a consequence — by the level of expertise in Slicer internals required from the developer.
The Slicer Execution Model (SEM) implements the simplest approach, as it does not require
any knowledge of the 3D Slicer architecture, and does not have dependencies on the Slicer
libraries or source code. SEM modules implement the task-specific Controller component of
the MVC design, while the View and Model elements are maintained by the main
application via the specialized SEM Module Manager (SEM-MM) core module, see Fig. 3.
SEM-MM also serves as a communication intermediary between the application core and
the SEM modules. The interface for this communication, defining the input/output data (e.g.,
images, transformations and points) and processing parameters that need to be specified by
the application user, is described using XML, based on the Slicer SEM XML schema. This
XML description is also used by SEM-MM to populate the GUI elements of the module
panel with widgets that control inputs, outputs and the processing parameters.
The SEM XML compliant communication interface is the only requirement imposed on the
SEM modules by the Slicer application. SEM modules can be implemented as independent
executable files, shared libraries or scripts (such as Python or MATLAB scripts) that via
SEM can leverage Slicer visualization and DICOM capabilities. Internally, they can use any
of the processing libraries, and do not need to have any dependencies on the components
distributed with 3D Slicer. SEM modules can also be distributed in the binary form, which
satisfies the needs of developers and communities that cannot share the source code of the
module, but are willing to make the tool available to the users. SEM modules are most
suited for implementing new functionality that does not require interaction, dynamic
visualization and reconfiguration of the Slicer interface. Examples of such modules included
in Slicer are image resamplers, filtering and automatic registration tools. Slicer SEM has
also been adopted as a mechanism for developing and integrating interoperable tools by
several projects independent from Slicer, such as GIMIAS14, BRAINS and NiPype. By
supporting the SEM, the aforementioned packages are able to directly incorporate Slicer
SEM modules into their framework.
14GIMIAS: Graphical Interface for Medical Image Analysis, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Compared to SEM plugins, Slicer loadable modules have complete access to the Slicer core
logic, GUI and MRML elements. Loadable modules are typically developed for interactive
tools, or for those applications that require new MRML data types, event handling or
customization of the main Slicer GUI. Loadable modules follow the same MVC design
pattern as the application core by introducing module-specific Logic, as well as GUI and
MRML classes. Logic classes are typically the most important component for the developers
of the new image analysis tools, as they include the core computation and the
implementation of the analysis algorithms. Such an implementation would usually (although
this is not a requirement) rely on the Insight Toolkit and VTK for constructing pipelines and
implementing lower level processing steps. The View elements allow the module to interact
with the operator to initialize the inputs and processing parameters, and any interactive
initialization of the algorithm (e.g., collect the initialization seed points placed in the 2D
slice viewer for a lesion segmentation tool). Examples of the interactive loadable modules
available in 3D Slicer are “EMSegmenter” that implements expectation maximization
multichannel segmentation algorithm and “Tractography fiducial seeding” that allows
visualization of reconstructed DTI tracts at a location defined interactively by the user. We
emphasize that both SEM plugins and loadable modules can be written in C++ or they can
be scripted using the Python language. In our experience, Python scripting can greatly
simplify and expedite implementation of the new functionality.
Investigators planning to develop new 3D Slicer functionality should also be aware of its
various research interfaces used for data communication. Although support of DICOM is
critical for the communication with the clinical systems and equipment, this format is not
always suitable for the needs of medical image analysis community since the data fields it
stores can contain patient-sensitive information and are often irrelevant for the image
processing tasks. Moreover, in several new or emerging applications there is no standard
that regulates how certain aspects of data that are critical for its accurate interpretation are
stored using DICOM. Or, when standards do exist, they are often not fully implemented or
are ignored in their entirety by vendors. As an example, vendor-specific private tags are still
commonly used to store acquisition information specific to Diffusion Weighted MRI, even
though a DICOM standard format exists. To address these limitations, Slicer uses custom
code (in particular, the IO mechanisms provided by ITK), to support several additional
formats, such as NRRD15, that are commonly adopted by the image analysis community.
These formats often provide a more concise and less ambiguous formatting of the imagespecific information. ITK IO is also used to store spatial transformations. Support of 3D
models IO, such as surfaces streamlines and polygonal data, is available via VTK and STL
formats. Finally, Slicer supports OpenIGTLink network communication interface that has
been widely used in the interventional applications to communicate with instrument
trackers, imaging and robotic devices.
Having reviewed the functionality and implementation of Slicer, we continue with the
specific use cases derived from the experience of the sites participating in QIN. Imaging
needs, body organs and clinical problems studied at each these sites are different.
Nevertheless, 3D Slicer was identified independently as a platform of choice to support the
needs of clinical researchers and biomedical engineers of the respective projects.
15NRRD: Nearly Raw Raster Data, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
QIN Use Cases
The objective of the Brigham and Women’s Hospital QIN site (PI Fiona Fennessy) is to
study MR analysis tools and algorithms for detection of prostate cancer and disease
recurrence, and as a guide for targeted prostate therapy. There is increasing evidence that
MRI can facilitate the detection and characterization of prostate cancer (PCa) through the
use of a combination of multi-parametric MRI (mpMRI) techniques (such as DWI and
dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI) in addition to the T2-weighted (T2w) MRI, used
routinely in the clinic. This functional aspect of MR imaging could contribute greatly to the
accuracy of tumor detection and localization, and potentially serve as a guide for focal
ablative therapy, or could non-invasively assess functional aspects of prostate tissue
microcirculation in response to neoadjuvant treatment. While mpMRI (DWI and DCE MRI
in particular) could potentially become imaging biomarkers of PCa, thorough evaluation of
the imaging and analysis methodologies are required for their mainstream adoption.
The focus of the BWH QIN effort is on optimization of the methods and software for
pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis of prostate DCE MRI, and on clinical validation of the
developed tools in the context of clinical trials for PCa treatment. This task requires software
tools that could enable clinical researchers to perform fusion and coherent visualization of
the individual MR parameters, including DCE MRI time series, calculation of the derived
metrics at the different stages of treatment and correlation of the various imaging-based
features with the histopathological properties of the tissue. Validation of the imaging-based
research tools necessitates preparation of organized reference imaging collections, with
lesions annotated by the expert radiologists and pathologists.
Development and evaluation of the proposed imaging based tools is distributed between the
BWH team (PI Dr. Fiona Fennessy) and a GE Global Research team, led by Dr. Sandeep
Gupta. The imaging and clinical expertise of the BWH site is utilized initially to prepare the
annotated MRI datasets that enable the GE collaborators to test and refine the DCE MRI PK
analysis techniques, with the analysis results communicated to the BWH team using
research image formats. 3D Slicer is used as the primary research platform for this project.
Its fusion capabilities are used for visualization of individual parameters from the prostate
mpMRI datasets, as shown in Fig. 4. Post-processing, registration and plotting functionality
of the application can support exploration of the quantitative parameters, arterial input
functions, PK model fits and their correlation with the imaging data. The Editor module is
used to provide expert radiologists with a convenient interface to contour the suspected
lesion site, based on the clinical information and the visual impression, for the subsequent
quantitative correlation with the imaging parameters. These tasks are important for the
investigation of the various imaging and processing aspects that can influence the PK
analysis. The existing image registration capabilities of 3D Slicer and its integration with the
Insight Toolkit provide a foundation for the development of the registration tools
customized for prostate mpMRI data. The SEM plugin mechanism is often used in
implementing such tools, since it supports batch execution for automated analysis of large
numbers of datasets. Via its support of open formats for data exchange, 3D Slicer enables
coordinated development of both closed-source commercial components by the GE
collaborators, and integration of the results derived using those tools within an open research
Of interest for the broader community, as part of the BWH QIN effort, the capabilities of the
Slicer software to handle time-resolved DCE MRI data are being expanded. Specialized
Slicer modules customized for the analysis of prostate mpMRI and their correlation with
pathology findings are under development. Finally, Slicer markup and annotation
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
infrastructure is being improved in a customized reporting module that will support
serialization of the annotations into interoperable formats, such as AIM and DICOM SR.
These novel tools will be publicly available as Slicer modules and extensions.
Response assessment to cancer therapy based on molecular imaging with PET/CT lacks an
accepted robust and accurate quantitative metric. The literature is rife with new and different
ways to analyze PET/CT image data, including variants of standardized uptake values
(SUV), various lesion-to-background approaches, volume measurement, and metabolic
tumor volume, but it is still unclear which of these approaches is best suited for response
assessment.
A major goal of the QIN project at the University of Iowa is to establish a publicly
accessible and large database of PET/CT images and associated analyses to serve as a test
bed for quantitative image analysis in the context of therapy response assessment in head
and neck (H&N) cancer. This will allow comparison of different approaches objectively by
correlating different metrics with outcomes, and ultimately, lead to optimized quantitative
image analysis methods, which will be utilized together with image quality assurance
measures to support clinical decision making in several clinical trials.
Slicer was selected as a platform for the integration and development of semi-automatic
medical image analysis tools, because it allows focusing on algorithm development while
utilizing Slicer included image import/export mechanisms, GUI (viewer), and other generalpurpose functions. Equally important, the newly developed image analysis methods and
approaches can be easily and directly shared with other researchers within and beyond the
QIN network.
Slicer with its developed specialized software extensions (loadable modules) was integrated
in a workflow management system, which handles data flow between a research PACS
implemented with XNAT16, the Slicer environment itself, and the Iowa QIN database,
serving multiple users and different quantitative image analysis tasks. Along the stated
paradigm, a Slicer module has been developed to assist in the task of measuring PET
imaging based quantitative indices in the tumor region. Although the standard package of
3D Slicer includes a module for PET standardized uptake value (SUV) quantification, the
region of interest for quantitative analysis must be specified manually. In contrast, the
module developed by the Iowa QIN team allows segmenting tumors or lymph nodes in a
highly automated fashion with low user interaction effort. Following the segmentation, a
diverse set of 2D and 3D indices of tumor uptake are calculated. For reproducibility
purposes, the module allows collecting and storing information (e.g., tumor location,
segmentation parameters, visualization settings) utilized by the operator in the process of
generating the quantitative indices.
Future work will focus on the development of 4D quantitative analysis approaches as well as
method validation on the H&N database. The existing functionality implemented using
previous generation of 3D Slicer (version 3) will be transitioned into the most recent release.
The implementation of the PET SUV quantification and segmentation approaches will be
shared with the QIN community for cross-validation and further improvement of the
methodology.
16XNAT: The extensible neuroimaging archiving toolkit, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The goal of the MGH QIN project is to develop quantitative imaging tools to facilitate
clinical decision making, particularly in the setting of therapeutic response in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM). The overall research goals are to use mechanistic imaging to understand
therapeutic response in GBM and thereby improve care and ultimately survival. Antiangiogenic agents such as bevacizumab have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of
recurrent GBM, and anti-VEGF therapies are used routinely in the clinical care of GBM
patients. However, these therapies come with considerable toxicity, and many patients do
not respond: the FDA cited a 26% objective response rate. This highlights the critical need
for biomarkers of response to therapy in brain tumors. Preliminary data indicate that
parametric analysis of multimodal imaging in these tumors provides clinically useful
quantitative information to evaluate the response of these therapies. Specifically, DCE MRI,
dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI (DSC MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging provide
clinically useful quantitative response information for GBM in the anti-VEGF treatment
setting. The different automated and semi-automated segmentation tools within 3D Slicer
assist in delineating the different regions of interest (ROIs) based on T1, T2 and FLAIR
imaging. These can include enhancing tumor, necrosis and edema as seen in Fig. 6. Patients
are imaged at a number of time-points and volumetric analysis based on these regions can be
used to assess tumor response (e.g., stable vs progression).
3D Slicer provides a number of state-of-the-art algorithms for rigid, affine and deformable
registration (in addition to manual registration). These algorithms can be selected and
optimized depending on the anatomical site (e.g., brain vs prostate), purpose (multimodal vs
longitudinal vs registering to an atlas), performance (speed vs accuracy vs robustness), and
level of interaction (e.g., use of fiducials or markers). The registration tools within Slicer are
utilized in a number of ways. Regions of interest delineated on T1w, T2w or FLAIR MRI
are registered to the other imaging modalities and associated parametric maps (e.g., Ktrans
maps from DCE, rCBV maps from DSC and ADC maps from DTI) as seen in Fig. 6. This
capability helps better understand the distribution of these parameters in the different
regions of the tumor and in different patients. These tools can also be used to register the
radiation therapy plans (CT-based) to the MR functional imaging, allowing exploration of
the site of recurrence with respect to dose field and study the phenomenon of radiation
necrosis. Registration algorithms and the change detection tools can be used to identify
regions of change in the tumor from longitudinal imaging.
There are a number of enhancements planned for 3D Slicer, both by the Slicer team as well
those being developed at the MGH site, that would have tremendous utility for the GBM
imaging research. The planned improvements of the 4D support tools and the ability to
conduct PK analysis in Slicer will help achieve better-integrated analysis workflows.
Currently, external resources are used to create the parametric maps and subsequently
import them into Slicer for registration with the anatomical volumes. The recently
introduced charting capabilities of Slicer can be used to extend the existing label statistics
tools to include histograms and graphs. The MGH investigators are also in the process of
developing an EM-based segmentation algorithm to allow automatic delineation of the
different regions within the tumor based on the multimodal imaging. The ability to create
and store annotations in AIM format will provide an easy, standardized mechanism to
exchange our results across the various members of the QIN, and to grade tumors or assess
response (e.g., using the McDonald or RANO criteria ).
Ultimately, the vision of the MGH QIN project is to have a fully integrated analytical
pipeline whereby each of the use-specific modules are customized for the GBM processing
workflow. Specifically, this could lead to a system that (1) queries and retrieves original
DICOM images (raw data) from a PACS server, (2) provides automated inter-anatomical
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
registration (e.g., T1-weighted, T2-weighted and FLAIR images) as well as 4D dynamic and
functional image registration (e.g., DCE, DSC, DTI, BOLD), (3) automatically segments
regions of interest encompassing the abnormalities on anatomical images, (4) launches 4D
analysis tools capable of creating parametric maps, and finally (5) extracts metrics and
displays relevant characteristics from joint analysis. Importantly, data provenance can be
systematically indexed through each process. Such an integrated pipeline will take raw
information from clinical imaging to biomarker measurement in an efficient and controlled
manner, ultimately facilitating accurate incorporation into a database. Moreover, given
Slicer’s tractability, new analytical methods can be readily incorporated into the pipeline,
thereby continuously improving our approaches to biomarker development and discovery.
Discussion
We presented three use cases of 3D Slicer that demonstrate how this research platform is
currently applied to study cancer in different organs using a variety of imaging modalities by
the existing QIN sites. Although the specific research goals of these groups are different,
they leverage generic capabilities of Slicer such as processing tools, multi-modal display,
image fusion and re-configurable GUI layouts. Common to the use cases is the need to
consistently organize and present a variety of imaging data, analysis steps, and results.
Augmentations of Slicer by site-specific methods and implemented as Slicer plugins are a
key for its usefulness for these groups. The developed plugins can be easily shared among
research groups, thus minimizing the need for duplication and facilitating reproducibility
and consensus building.
The specifics of the imaging modalities and studied organs create new requirements,
motivating the new developments underway and in the planning stages at BWH, Iowa,
MGH and collaborating sites. Research in acquisition and analysis of brain images have
arguably the longest history compared to the other body organs, resulting in a number of
widely used toolkits such as FSL, SPM and FreeSurfer. In contrast, image acquisition
protocols optimized for post-processing for other body organs are often still under
development, suffering from suboptimal resolution. Robust, community-supported toolkits
for post-processing are virtually non-existent for applications outside the brain or for the
image analysis of pathology-affected organs. As a result, it will be necessary to investigate
and develop new methods and tools. These tools and methods will also require careful
validation before being used in the context of the site-specific clinical trials. The use case
scenarios presented in this paper are good examples for this process.
There are several unmet needs that are common to all three QIN sites. Support of
standardized formats for interoperable exchange of image annotations is critical for the
biomarker development and validation. The BWH QIN site is currently augmenting the
Slicer annotation and reporting infrastructure. The objective is to provide basic support for
the AIM and DICOM SR formats. All of the three sites are involved in the analysis of 4D
imaging data, which means by using the common platform they may be able to avoid
duplication of the development efforts. Support of DICOM RT standard is currently limited
in Slicer, but is needed by several QIN sites, including MGH. In this area the QIN
community can benefit from the wider Slicer community, and specifically from the on-going
work by the Ontario Consortium for Adaptive Interventions in Radiation Oncology
(OCAIRO)17 in improving capabilities of 3D Slicer for radiotherapy applications. As part of
this effort, DICOM RT support in Slicer is being improved.
17SparKit: Software Platform and Adaptive Radiotherapy Kit, 
Fedorov et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
It should be emphasized that the QIN projects described in this manuscript are research
projects. 3D Slicer is intended for research use. It is not a medical product and is not
approved by the FDA or any other regulatory authority for routine clinical work. The
examples and results shown in this paper were obtained by trained investigators following
institutional guidelines for safe and ethical biomedical research. The licensing approach
adopted by 3D Slicer does not place any constraints on the use of its source code or
derivatives; but, of course, any use of the code must comply with laws, regulations, and
institutional policies. This is a particularly important consideration for the projects where
biomarker development efforts are shared between academic and industry partners, as is the
case for the BWH-GE QIN collaboration. Commercial vendors are welcome to extract any
needed components from Slicer for use in their products, or they can use Slicer as a
reference implementation for testing and comparison of their commercial implementation.
Regardless of the approach, there is no obligation to share the source code of their derived
system or pay royalties to the Slicer developers. At the same time, it is the sole
responsibility of commercial vendors to fully validate any products they offer for clinical
use, including any Slicer-derived features they may have incorporated.
In summary, our goal has been to present the capabilities of 3D Slicer as a platform for
research and development of new imaging based biomarkers. As we argue in this
manuscript, Slicer offers a wide range of features for versatile visualization, exploration and
quantitative analysis of imaging data. Collaborative development and validation of image
analysis tools is facilitated by Slicer through its use of open and documented formats for
communicating various data elements, such as images, coordinate frame transformations
produced by registration, segmentation masks and surface models. The platform provides an
extensible architecture for customization and development of plugins that are interoperable
across various platforms. Various training and support resources are available to the users
and developers to ease the learning curve. Naturally, this manuscript can only serve as a
brief summary and introduction to 3D Slicer capabilities. The interested reader is
encouraged to explore the various resources available from the home page of the 3D Slicer
project, 
Over the years, 3D Slicer has gained broad acceptance in the medical imaging research
community. It is a dynamic software that evolves together with the projects that use it in
new research applications, often giving back to the community in the form of new
contributions to the Slicer. The current capabilities of Slicer have resulted from numerous
projects conducted over the last 10 years of Slicer history. The Slicer platform ensured
continuity, interoperability, improvement and reproducibility of the earlier accomplishments
that are now available as a resource for the QIN community in further advancing the role of
imaging as a biomarker of cancer treatment.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all current and past users and developers of 3D Slicer for their contribution to this software.
The authors have been supported in part by the following NIH grants. BWH: U01CA151261, P41EB015898,
P41RR13218, U54EB005149 and 1R01CA111288. University of Iowa: U01-CA140206. GE: P41RR13218 and
U54EB005149. MGH: 1U01CA154601-01 and 4R00LM009889-03. We are grateful to the various agencies and
programs that funded support and development of 3D Slicer over the years.