CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 10, 394–405, Winter 2011
Active Learning Not Associated with Student Learning in a
Random Sample of College Biology Courses
T. M. Andrews,* M. J. Leonard,† C. A. Colgrove,† and S. T. Kalinowski*
*Department of Ecology and †Department of Education, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717-2880
Submitted July 25, 2011; Revised August 24, 2011; Accepted September 2, 2011
Monitoring Editor: Daniel J. Klionsky
Previous research has suggested that adding active learning to traditional college science lectures
substantially improves student learning. However, this research predominantly studied courses
taught by science education researchers, who are likely to have exceptional teaching expertise. The
present study investigated introductory biology courses randomly selected from a list of prominent
colleges and universities to include instructors representing a broader population. We examined the
relationship between active learning and student learning in the subject area of natural selection.
We found no association between student learning gains and the use of active-learning instruction.
Although active learning has the potential to substantially improve student learning, this research
suggests that active learning, as used by typical college biology instructors, is not associated with
greater learning gains. We contend that most instructors lack the rich and nuanced understanding of
teaching and learning that science education researchers have developed. Therefore, active learning
as designed and implemented by typical college biology instructors may superﬁcially resemble
active learning used by education researchers, but lacks the constructivist elements necessary for
improving learning.
INTRODUCTION
Students in introductory science courses often fail to learn
fundamental scientiﬁc concepts . For example, students leaving introductory biology courses often believe evolution is caused
by an animal’s desire to change. Similarly, students often
leave introductory physics courses believing heavy objects
fall faster than lighter ones. There is a consensus among education researchers that much of the difﬁculty students have
learning science can be attributed to the passive role students play during traditional lectures . Therefore, in the
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.11-07-0061
correspondence
(andrews.tessa@
gmail.com).
c⃝2011 T. M. Andrews et al. CBE—Life Sciences Education c⃝2011
The American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed
by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from
the author(s). It is available to the public under an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons
License ( 
“ASCB R⃝” and “The American Society for Cell Biology R⃝” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.
past decade, there have been a growing number of calls to
increase the amount of active learning in college science lectures .
Active learning is difﬁcult to deﬁne, but essentially occurs
when an instructor stops lecturing and students work on a
question or task designed to help them understand a concept.
A classic example of active learning is a think–pair–share
discussion, in which students think about a question posed
by the instructor, pair up with other students to discuss the
question, and share answers with the entire class.
Extensive research shows that lectures using active learning can be much more effective than traditional lectures that
use only direct instruction. For example, a seminal survey
of introductory physics classes at nine high schools and 13
colleges and universities showed that, on average, students
taught using active learning learned twice as much as students taught using direct instruction . A host
of quasi-experimental studies comparing student learning in
a lecture-based course with student learning in an activelearning version of the course found that adding active learning increased student learning. These studies established
that active learning could improve student learning across
Active Learning and Student Learning
a wide variety of science disciplines ,
including biology , physics , and chemistry . There have been so many
papers documenting this trend that it is now widely accepted
that students taught with active learning will learn substantially more than students taught the same material with direct
instruction.
However, a close review of the literature supporting the
effectiveness of active learning reveals a serious limitation:
Most of the active-learning courses studied to date were
taught by instructors who had science education research experience. However, a close review of the literature supporting
the effectiveness of active learning revels a serious limitation: Most of the active learning courses studied to date were
taught by instructors who had science education research experience . By science education research, we mean they
published papers on science education, received funding for
education research, or attended conferences on science education research. We expect education researchers to have a
rich and nuanced understanding of their ﬁeld. This expertise
may improve an instructor’s effectiveness in many ways, including his or her ability to use active learning . This limitation has been recognized , but the implications of this potential problem
have not been explored. In particular, we are concerned the
impressive learning gains documented in the active-learning
literature may not be representative of what typical instructors are likely to obtain.
The goal of this research was to address that gap by studying the relationship between the use of active-learning instruction and how much students learned about natural selection in a random sample of introductory college biology
courses from around the United States.
The goal of our sampling design was to infer results to introductory biology courses at major colleges and universities
throughout the United States. Thus, we began with a list of the
two largest public colleges and universities from each of the
50 states, plus a list of the 50 top-ranked colleges and universities from the U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges 2009
ranking; some institutions were on both lists. From this combined list of 144 institutions, we randomly selected 77. We
then contacted instructors at these institutions to ask them to
participate during one of three consecutive semesters in 2009
In each school, we sought out introductory biology courses
that taught natural selection and were designed for biology majors. To identify appropriate courses and course instructors, we used information gathered on institution websites and from biology department staff. We chose to survey
courses teaching natural selection, because 1) it is a mechanism of evolution and therefore a core concept in biology
 , 2) it is conceptually challenging for students to learn , and 3) well-developed instruments exist to measure conceptual understanding of natural selection
 . We contacted a total of 88 introductory biology instructors, sending at least three emails over the course
of a month and following up with at least one phone call.
We made a ﬁnal attempt 4 to 6 mo later to contact instructors
who did not respond to our initial queries.
Of the 88 instructors from 77 institutions we invited to participate in our study, 33 (38%) agreed to participate fully; these
instructors are hereafter referred to as “fully participating instructors.” These instructors taught 29 different courses at 28
institutions in 22 states. Two of these institutions were private
and 26 were public. Seven institutions were on the U.S. News
& World Report Best Colleges 2009 list. If an instructor declined
to participate in our study, we asked him or her to complete a
survey describing his or her course and teaching methods so
we could account for nonresponse bias. We were able to collect data from an additional 22 instructors, which represents
25% of the entire random sample of instructors and 44% of
the instructors who did not agree to fully participate in this
study. These instructors are hereafter referred to as “partially
participating instructors.” Compared with previous research
assessing the relationship between active-learning instruction and student learning gains, our sample is the largest
sample of instructors and institutions and the only sample
randomly selected from a broad population of college science
instructors.
Assessing Learning
In each fully participating course, we assessed how much
students learned about natural selection. We assessed learning by testing students near the beginning (pretest) and end
(posttest) of the term, using two instruments that measure
conceptual understanding of natural selection. First, we used
the Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection—Abbreviated
(CINS-abbr), a 10-question, multiple-choice test . The questions on this instrument are nearly identical to those on an
original concept inventory with well-established reliability
 . Each distracter, or wrong answer, was
designed to appeal to students who hold common misconceptions about natural selection. The content and face validity
of these questions has been established for both the original
CINS and the CINS-abbr . Second, students completed one openended question from a set of ﬁve questions developed by
Bishop and Anderson and later revised by Nehm and
Reilly to measure college biology majors’ understanding of natural selection. This set of open-ended questions
was designed to assess student understanding across different levels of Bloom’s taxonomy . We
used a question at Bloom’s “application” level, which tests a
student’s ability to apply knowledge to a novel question. This
set of questions tends to be more difﬁcult for students than
CINS questions . The question
we used, hereafter called the “cheetah question,” was:
Vol. 10, Winter 2011
T. M. Andrews et al.
Equations for calculating learning gains
Learning gain calculation
Deﬁnition of variable
Effect size (Cohen’s d for repeated measures)a
tp [2(1 – r)/(n)]1/2
tp = t statistic from Student’s paired t
r = correlation between pre/post
n = students completing pre/post
Average normalized gainb
(Post −Pre)/(10 −Pre)c
Post = mean course posttest score
Pre = mean course pretest score
Percent change
(Post −Pre)/Pre
Post = mean course posttest score
Pre = mean course pretest score
Raw change
Post = mean course posttest score
Pre = mean course pretest score
aSee Dunlap et al. .
bSee Hake .
cThis is the equation for the CINS-abbr. The cheetah question equation would be (Post-Pre)/(9 −Pre).
Cheetahs (large African cats) are able to run faster than
60 miles per hour when chasing prey. How would a
biologist explain how the ability to run fast evolved
in cheetahs, assuming their ancestors could run only
20 miles per hour?
To score student responses to the cheetah question, we
developed, piloted, reﬁned, and applied a coding rubric
(Supplemental Material 2). Biology experts (T.M.A. and
S.T.K.) designed the rubric after reviewing a rubric previously developed for the cheetah question . Our rubric gave more weight to three concepts we
felt were core concepts a student must understand in order
to understand natural selection: the existence of phenotypic
variation within a population, the heritability of that variation, and differential reproductive success among individuals. We gave less weight to three additional concepts we felt
were representative of more advanced understanding: the
causes of variation, a change in the distribution of individual traits within a population, and change taking place over
many generations. We designed this coding rubric to be sensitive to developing understanding, while allowing room for
students to demonstrate more advanced understanding. To
establish interrater reliability (IRR), two researchers (T.M.A.
and C.A.C.) independently scored a random sample of 210
responses. IRR was measured using Pearson’s correlation.
There was a strong correlation between the total essay score
awarded by the two researchers (r = 0.93, p < 0.0001). The researchers then independently scored the remaining responses
to the cheetah question using the coding rubric.
Due to the large number of students included in this study
(more than 8000), we scored a subsample of student responses
to the cheetah question from each course. We randomly selected ∼50 students from each course and scored responses
from students who completed both pre- and posttest cheetah
questions. The mean subsample size was 42 students (SD =
12). For analyses of learning gains on the cheetah question
described below, we excluded three courses whose subsample included fewer than 20 students and one course in which
pre- and posttest responses could not be matched by student.
Students completed the CINS-abbr and the cheetah question on paper or online. To test for differences between student performance on paper versus performance using online
instruments, we used independent samples t tests. We found
no signiﬁcant differences in mean test scores or learning gains
between courses using online testing and those using paper
testing (see full results in the Supplemental Material).
In some courses, students earned nominal course credit for
logging into the online test, but actually completing test questions was voluntary in all classes. To look for differences between test performance in courses in which students earned
credit and courses in which students did not, we again used
independent samples t tests. We found only one signiﬁcant
difference between courses in which students earned credit
and those in which students did not, and it was in the opposite direction than would be expected if awarding credit led to
increased participation or performance. Students in courses
in which credit was not awarded had signiﬁcantly higher
scores on the posttest CINS-abbr than students in courses
that awarded credit (p = 0.03; see full results in the Supplemental Material). Because awarding credit was not associated
with improved test performance or learning gains as would
be predicted, we did not include this as a variable in further
Calculating Learning Gains
To decide how best to calculate how much students learned
about natural selection, we examined the intercorrelations
among pre- and posttest scores and four possible calculations
of learning gains: effect size (Cohen’s d), average normalized
gain, percent change, and raw change (Table 1). The calculations of learning gains were highly intercorrelated (see the
Supplemental Material), with Pearson’s r ranging from 0.79–
0.99 (all p values < 0.001; p was calculated using the Holm-
Bonferonni method to account for error associated with multiple comparisons). Although average normalized gain is a
commonly used estimator of learning gains in research on active learning , it was strongly correlated with mean course
pretest scores on the CINS-abbr (r = 0.51, p = 0.012; Supplemental Material). This correlation means that courses with
high average pretest scores receive relatively higher normalized gains than courses with lower average pretest scores. Additionally, percent change was strongly negatively correlated
with pretest scores on the cheetah question (r = –0.62, p =
0.003; Supplemental Material), resulting in a bias in the other
direction. We ultimately chose to calculate learning gains using Cohen’s d for a repeated measures design (Dunlap et al.,
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Active Learning and Student Learning
Percent of instructors reporting how often they use speciﬁc active-learning exercises
More than once
per class (%)
Never (or almost
never) (%)
Activities in which students use data to answer
questions while working in small groups
Student discussions in pairs or small groups to answer a
Individual writing activities that require students to
evaluate their own thinkinga
Clicker questions that test conceptual understanding
Classroom-wide interactions that require students to
apply principles presented in class to a novel question
Other small group activities
an = 32; for all others n = 33.
1996). No calculation of learning gains is without problems,
so we also repeated the analyses described in Data Analysis,
using each of the four calculations of learning gains. If all
analyses produced similar results, we would feel conﬁdent
that the way we chose to quantify student learning was not
impacting our overall results.
Surveying Teaching Methods and Course Details
We gathered details on each course from the instructor and
the students. An online survey (Supplemental Material 3)
was used to gather data from fully participating instructors,
as well as partially participating instructors. The instructor
survey solicited information about the course, the instructor’s teaching experience and teaching methods, and the students’ backgrounds. We also surveyed students during the
posttest about their instructor’s teaching methods and their
perceptions of the course (Supplemental Material 4).
To corroborate self-report data from instructors, the instructor and his or her students answered an identical question
about the instructor’s use of active learning (Supplemental
Material 3, question 8; Supplemental Material 4, question 3).
Student reports of active learning agreed with instructor reports. Agreement between instructor responses and the most
common student response (i.e., the mode) in each course was
calculated using Cohen’s kappa, which indicated substantial agreement . Therefore,
we used instructor reports of active learning for all further
Previous research has typically categorized instructors’
methods as either “active learning” or “traditional lectures,”
but as active-learning methods have become more widely
used, this categorization no longer adequately captures
the variation among instructors’ teaching methods. We approached the problem of measuring an instructor’s use of
active learning by asking several questions and examining
the relationships among instructor responses to these questions. We asked instructors three questions about their use
of active learning in the lecture portion of their course. First,
we asked instructors to report how often they used speciﬁc
active-learning exercises (described in Table 2) previously
shown to be effective .
We then created a continuous variable describing an instructor’s weekly use of these active-learning exercises by summing the frequencies they reported for all six categories of
exercises. To do so, we assumed each course met three times
per week and counted “Once per week” as once per week,
“Once per class” as three times per week, and “More than
once per class” as six times per week. This variable may underestimate the use of active learning by excluding other exercises an instructor was using to promote active learning
and by limiting “More than once per week” to only six exercises per week, so we also asked instructors to report their
general use of any active learning by asking how often they
used exercises meeting Hake’s deﬁnition of interactive engagement (another commonly used term for active
learning):
activities designed at least in part to promote conceptual understanding through interactive engagement of
students in heads-on (always) and hands-on (usually)
activities which yield immediate feedback through discussion with peers and/or instructors.
Finally, we asked instructors how many active-learning exercises they used during the section of the course dedicated
to teaching natural selection. For all three questions, we described exercises instead of using common names (e.g., peer
instruction, think–pair–share), so instructors would not have
previous associations with the exercises described.
We found instructors’ reports of using speciﬁc activelearning exercises during the course were strongly correlated
with their reports of using active learning in teaching natural selection (r = 0.52, p = 0.002). We therefore chose to use
instructor reports about active learning use throughout the
course for further analyses. In contrast to our expectations, instructors provided more conservative estimates of their general use of any active learning 
than their estimates of their use of speciﬁc active-learning
exercises (Figure 1). For example, instructors who reported
using general active-learning methods just once per week reported a mean of 3.33 speciﬁc exercises per week. Ultimately,
we decided to quantify an instructor’s use of active learning
as the weekly frequency with which they used speciﬁc activelearning exercises, because this quantiﬁcation allowed us to
capture more variability among instructor methods. However, we also conducted statistical analyses with the more
general report of active learning to assure results remained
Vol. 10, Winter 2011
T. M. Andrews et al.
Comparison of instructor reports of their weekly use of speciﬁc active-learning exercises and instructor reports of their general
use of active-learning exercises as deﬁned by Hake . The line in the middle of the box represents the median weekly frequency of
active-learning use for instructors in the group. The top of the box represents data points in the 75th percentile and the bottom of the box
represents data points in the 25th percentile. The space within the box is called the interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers represent the lowest
and highest data points no more than 1.5 times the IQR above and below the box. Data points not included in this range are represented
as circles.
Data Analysis
We used data gathered from the instructor survey to compare
fully participating instructors with partially participating instructors to check for selection bias resulting from nonresponse. We looked for differences using independent samples t tests and Fisher’s exact tests. We found no differences
between the two groups of instructors, suggesting nonresponse did not cause a selection bias. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the mean number of speciﬁc activelearning exercises used per week, mean class size, mean
teaching experience, mean class time dedicated to teaching
natural selection, or mean attendance rates. Neither were
there differences in type of institution (public or private),
the list their institution came from (large public institutions
or most prestigious institutions), the instructor’s position, or
the frequency with which they used general active-learning
methods (see full results in the Supplemental Material).
To answer our question of interest—is active-learning instruction positively associated with student learning gains
in typical college biology courses?—we used general linear
regression models. We used one model with effect size of
learning on the CINS-abbr as the response variable and one
model with effect size of learning on the cheetah question
as the response variable. We used two models, because four
courses had insufﬁcient data to analyze learning gains on
the cheetah question, but had complete CINS-abbr data. Using two models allowed us to avoid unnecessarily excluding
these courses from all analyses. Additionally, we examined
linear regression models using other calculations of learning
gains, as well as a model that replaced the continuous weekly
frequency of speciﬁc active-learning exercises with the more
general categorical use of any active learning, to see if results
remained the same. We checked assumptions for our models
using QQ plots and plots of ﬁtted values versus residuals.
Assumptions were met for all linear regression models.
Many factors affect how much students learn in a course, so
we used data gathered from the instructor survey and student
survey to control for variation in learning gains due to factors other than the use of active learning. We included several
continuous control variables in our linear models, including
the number of years an instructor had taught college biology, hours of class time devoted to teaching natural selection,
proportion of students who attended class regularly, proportion of students who completed both the pre- and posttest,
and class size. Student responses to questions about how
difﬁcult they found the course compared with previous science courses and how interesting they found the course were
coded numerically and also included as continuous control
variables. Students chose from a Likert scale (Supplemental
Material 4), which we then coded from one to ﬁve, where one
corresponded to “Very uninteresting” and “Much less difﬁcult” and ﬁve corresponded to “Very interesting” and “Much
more difﬁcult.” We then calculated means for each course.
We used indicator variables to include categorical control
variables in our models. We included a factor accounting for
the presence or absence of nonmajors in a course. We also included a two-level factor for the instructor’s position: tenure
track or non-tenure track. Last, we included two factors to
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Active Learning and Student Learning
Instructor reports of the frequency with which they use
active-learning exercisesa
instructors
Percent of
instructors
More than once per class
Once per class
Once per week
Never (or almost never)
a As deﬁned by Hake .
describe whether the instructor addressed common student
misconceptions about natural selection: one for whether or
not an instructor reported “explaining to students why misconceptions are incorrect” and a second for whether or not
an instructor reported “using active-learning exercises and
otherwise making a substantial effort toward correcting misconceptions.”
We excluded data from one question on the instructor survey that was strongly intercorrelated with two other control
variables. The number of times an instructor had taught the
course was correlated with both the number of years an instructor had taught college biology (r = 0.50, p = 0.002) and
class size (r = 0.49, p = 0.004). Therefore, we excluded the
number of times an instructor had taught the course from
our models.
Our analysis produced four noteworthy results. First, instructors reported frequently using active-learning exercises
(Table 2). Thirty-nine percent (n = 13) of instructors reported
using four or more different activities (as described in Table 2)
on a weekly basis and only 6% (n = 2) reported using none
of these activities. Instructors reported using a mean of 8.03
(SD = 6.65) exercises per week, which would be equivalent
to about three clicker questions per class meeting. During
the portion of the course dedicated to teaching natural selection, instructors reported using a mean of 2.88 (SD = 1.43)
active-learning exercises. When asked to categorize the frequency with which they used general active-learning methods as deﬁned by Hake , 61% of instructors reported
using active learning at least once per class meeting (Table 3).
Introductory biology instructors’ reports of their use of active
learning in this study were similar to physics instructors’ reports of their use of research-based teaching methods (most
of which incorporate active learning); in a national survey
of college physics courses, 48.1% of instructors reported they
currently used at least one research-based method and 34.4%
reported using two or more .
Our second noteworthy result was that learning gains
in many of the courses were modest (Table 4). Effect sizes
(Cohen’s d) on the CINS-abbr ranged from −0.11–1.26 and
the mean effect size was 0.49 (SD = 0.31). Thirty-nine percent
(n = 13) of courses had an effect size lower than 0.42, which
corresponds to students answering only one more question
Descriptive statistics for course pre- and posttest scores on
the CINS-abbr and the cheetah question
CINS-abbr pretesta
CINS-abbr posttestb
Cheetah pretest
Cheetah posttest
a Out of 10.
b Out of nine.
(out of 10) correctly on the posttest than on the pretest.1 When
learning was calculated as average normalized gain, the mean
gain was 0.26 (SD = 0.17). On the cheetah question, learning
gains were even lower. Effect sizes ranged from −0.16–0.58.
The mean effect size was 0.15 (SD = 0.19) and the mean normalized gain for the cheetah question was 0.06 (SD = 0.08).
These remarkably low learning gains suggest students are not
learning to apply evolutionary knowledge to novel questions
in introductory biology courses.
Our third and most important result was that we did not
ﬁnd an association between the weekly frequency of activelearning exercises used in introductory biology courses and
how much students learned about natural selection (Figure 2
and Table 5). An instructor’s use of active learning was not
associated with learning gains on the CINS-abbr (p = 0.058)
or the cheetah question (p = 0.669), and the regression coefﬁcients for active learning in both models were negative,
although not statistically signiﬁcant (Table 5). When we calculated learning gains as average normalized gain, percent
change, or raw change, we obtained the same result (Figure 3
and Table 6; Supplemental Material). When we replaced the
weekly frequency of speciﬁc active-learning exercises with an
instructor’s more general use of any active-learning methods,
we again obtained the same result. No matter how we quantiﬁed these variables, or what control variables we included
in the analysis, we obtained the same result: Student learning was not positively related to how much active learning
instructors used.
Despite the absence of a positive relationship between active learning and student outcomes, our ﬁnal noteworthy result is that several variables were positively related to student
learning measured by the CINS-abbr (Table 5). Our analysis revealed the two misconception factors (“explaining why
misconceptions are incorrect” and “using active-learning exercises to make a substantial effort toward changing misconceptions”) were positively associated with learning gains on
the CINS-abbr (p = 0.045 and p = 0.048, respectively). This
ﬁnding corroborates previous papers suggesting that misconceptions must be confronted before students can learn natural
1A course average was calculated as the average number of points
(out of 10) scored on the pre- or posttest CINS-abbr. An effect size
can be calculated as the change in average score (Post −Pre) divided
by a pooled SD. The average pooled SD for the CINS-abbr was 2.39.
We divided the change in average score that interested us (a onepoint increase between pre- and posttest course averages) by the
average pooled SD for our sample. That calculation produced the
effect size corresponding to students across courses answering, on
average, one more question correctly on the posttest CINS-abbr than
they answered correctly on the pretest.
Vol. 10, Winter 2011
T. M. Andrews et al.
Relationship between learning gains (Cohen’s d) and the
number of active-learning exercises an instructor used per week.
The number of active-learning exercises per week was calculated
by summing the number of times per week instructors reported
using all of the exercises described in Table 2. (A) Learning gains
on the CINS-abbr (n = 33). (B) Learning gains on the cheetah
question (n = 29).
selection . Because
common misconceptions are used as distracters in CINS-abbr
questions, we would expect courses in which misconceptions
were directly targeted to have higher learning gains on this
instrument. That said, misconceptions seem to be the largest
barrier to understanding that students face when learning
natural selection ,
so a test that measures the extent to which students reject misconceptions is likely to be a reliable measure of their overall
understanding . Further research
will be necessary to determine the relationship between how
students learn natural selection and how an instructor addresses common misconceptions about natural selection.
In addition to the misconception factors, how difﬁcult students found a course relative to past science courses and how
interesting students found a course were also signiﬁcantly
positively associated with student learning on the CINS-abbr
(p = 0.040 and p = 0.021, respectively). The questions used
to gather student perception data provide insufﬁcient detail
to understand the complex relationships among instructor
behavior, student perceptions, and student learning. Nevertheless, these results suggest research that examines student
learning should not overlook the impact of students’ experiences in a course.
DISCUSSION
We have shown that even though instructors of introductory
college biology courses are using active learning, students in
many of their courses have learned very little about natural
selection. Notably, students in most courses were no more
successful in applying their knowledge of natural selection
to a novel question at the end of the course than they were at
the beginning of the course. The absence of a relationship between active learning and student learning is in stark contrast
to a large body of research supporting the effectiveness of active learning. We attribute this contrast to the fact that we
studied a different population of instructors. We randomly
sampled college biology faculty from a list of major universities. Therefore, instructors using active learning in our study
represent the range of science education expertise among introductory college biology instructors using these methods.
In contrast, most of the faculty using active learning in previous studies had backgrounds in science education research.
The expertise gained during research likely prepares these instructors to use active learning more effectively .
Speciﬁcally, it is possible that a thorough understanding
of, commitment to, and ability to execute a constructivist
approach to teaching are required to successfully use active
learning . Constructivism—the theory that students construct their own knowledge by incorporating new
ideas into an existing framework—likely permeates all aspects of education researchers’ instruction, including how
they use active learning. Without this expertise, the activelearning exercises an instructor uses may have superﬁcial
similarities to exercises described in the literature, but may
lack constructivist elements necessary for improving learning
 . For example, our results suggest that addressing
common student misconceptions may lead to higher learning
gains. Constructivist theory argues that individuals construct
new understanding based on what they already know and
believe , and what
students know and believe at the beginning of a course is
often scientiﬁcally inaccurate . Therefore, constructivist theory argues that we can expect students to retain
serious misconceptions if instruction is not speciﬁcally designed to elicit and address the prior knowledge students
bring to class.
A failure to address misconceptions is just one example
of how active-learning instruction may fall short. Instructors
may fail to achieve the potential of active learning in the design or implementation of exercises, or both. There are many
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Active Learning and Student Learning
Results of linear models examining the relationship between student learning gains (Cohen’s d) and active-learning instruction
Regression coefﬁcient [95% conﬁdence interval]
Linear model variable
CINS-abbr posttest and
CINS-abbr pretest model
Cheetah question model
−1.88 [−2.16, −1.62]*
0.098 [−1.729, 1.924]
Weekly active learning
−0.02 [−0.04, 0.00]
−0.000 [−0.024, 0.016]
Instructor position (tenure track)
−0.10 [−0.33, 0.13]
0.168 [−0.078, 0.414]
Students regularly attending (%)
−0.03 [−0.97, 0.91]
−0.459 [−1.740, 0.821]
Hours spent on natural selection
0.00 [−0.03, 0.03]
−0.011 [−0.036, 0.014]
Class size
0.00 [−0.00, 0.00]e
0.000 [−0.000, 0.000]e
Years of teaching experience
0.00 [−0.01, 0.01]
−0.005 [−0.014, 0.003]
Students pre/posttest (%)
0.06 [−0.47, 0.60]
0.298 [−0.263, 0.860]
Misconceptions (explained)a
0.23 [0.01, 0.45]*
0.194 [−0.036, 0.423]
Misconceptions (active learning and otherwise)b
0.25 [0.00, 0.50]*
−0.019 [−0.265, 0.227]
Course difﬁculty (student-rated)c
0.29 [0.20, 0.57]*
−0.003 [−0.292, 0.286]
Student interest in course
0.33 [0.06, 0.60]*
0.058 [−0.237, 0.352]
Nonmajors (absent)d
0.37 [−0.04, 0.77]
0.447 [−0.109, 1.004]
aTwo-level factor: Instructor did or did not explain why misconceptions are incorrect.
bTwo-level factor: Instructor did or did not use active-learning exercises and otherwise make a substantial effort toward correcting
misconceptions.
cRelative to past science courses the student had taken.
dTwo-level factor: Presence or absence of nonbiology majors in the course.
eNo results were exactly zero. These numbers are very small and equal zero when rounded.
* p < 0.05
possible ways that active-learning exercises could be poorly
designed. For example, questions used in an exercise may
only require students to recall information, when higherorder cognitive processing (e.g., application) is required to
fully grasp scientiﬁc concepts . Alternatively, questions posed to students could be poorly connected to other material in the course, such that students fail
to see important relationships among concepts .
It is also possible that the active-learning exercises used to
discuss fundamental theories may not be sufﬁciently interesting to students to motivate them to participate (Boekaerts,
Comparisons between the direction and signiﬁcance of the association between explanatory variables in the CINS-abbr linear
model and different calculations of learning gains as the response variable
Linear model coefﬁcient
Effect size
Average normalized gain
Percent change
Raw change
Weekly active learning
Instructor position (tenure track)
Students regularly attending (%)
Hours spent on natural selection
Class size
Years of teaching experience
Students pre/posttest (%)
Misconceptions (explained)a
Misconceptions (active learning
otherwise)b
Course difﬁculty (student-rated)c
Student interest in course
Nonmajors (absent)d
(−) indicates a negative association with learning in the model and (+) indicates a positive association with learning.
aTwo-level factor: Instructor did or did not explain why misconceptions are incorrect.
bTwo-level factor: Instructor did or did not use active-learning exercises and otherwise make a substantial effort toward correcting
misconceptions.
cRelative to past science courses the student had taken.
dTwo-level factor: Presence or absence of nonbiology majors in the course.
Vol. 10, Winter 2011
T. M. Andrews et al.
Relationship between four different calculations of learning gains on the CINS-abbr and the number of active-learning exercises an
instructor used per week. The CINS-abbr was scored out of 10 points, so a raw change of one is equivalent to earning one more point on the
posttest than on the pretest. Overall, these graphs are very similar; there is no evidence of a positive relationship between learning gains and
the use of active-learning instruction, no matter how we calculate learning gains.
On the other hand, regardless of how well an activelearning exercise is designed, an instructor must make many
implementation decisions that will ultimately affect the success of the exercise. For example, a think–pair–share discussion may not be effective if the instructor does not allow students enough time to think about a question . Or, an instructor may solicit only one answer from the class and therefore fail to expose the range
of ideas held by students. In addition, an instructor may
not ask students to predict the outcome of a demonstration
or thought experiment and therefore fail to make students
aware of their own erroneous ideas .
Furthermore, instructors may display any number of subtle behaviors or attitudes that inﬂuence the extent to which
students participate in active-learning exercises, and thereby
affect how much students learn . Similarly,
a national survey of teaching practices in college physics
courses found that 63.5% of instructors reported using think–
pair–share discussions, but 83% of the instructors who used
this method did not use it as suggested by researchers
 . Mounting evidence suggests
that somewhere in the communication between science education researchers and typical college science instructors,
elements of evidence-based methods and curricula crucial to
student learning are lost.
The results of this study have three implications for education researchers across science disciplines. First, we need to
build a better understanding of what makes active-learning
exercises effective by rigorously exploring which elements are
necessary and sufﬁcient to improve learning . Second, we need to develop active-learning exercises useful for
a broad population of instructors. Third, we need to identify
what training and ongoing support the general population of
college science faculty and future faculty need to be able to
effectively use active learning, taking into account obstacles
instructors will face, including individual, situational, and
institutional barriers to reform .
Our results also have two important implications for instructors. First, no one can assume that they are teaching
effectively just because they are using active learning. Therefore, instructors need to carefully assess the effectiveness
of their instruction to determine whether active learning is
reaching its potential. There are a growing number of reliable and valid multiple-choice and essay tests that assess
student knowledge . We recommend using these tests in a
pre/posttest design to assess the effectiveness of instruction,
as well as using formative assessments to monitor learning throughout instruction . Second, instructors should assume students enter science courses with preexisting ideas that impede learning and that are unlikely to change without instruction designed speciﬁcally for that purpose .
To replace students’ misconceptions with a scientiﬁcally accepted view of the world, instructors need to elicit misconceptions, create situations that challenge misconceptions, and
emphasize conceptual frameworks, rather than isolated facts
(Hewson et al., 1998; Tanner and Allen, 2005; Kalinowski et al.,
Our study revealed that active learning was not associated with student learning in a broad population of
introductory college biology courses. These results imply active learning is not a quick or easy ﬁx for the current deﬁciencies in undergraduate science education. Simply adding
clicker questions or a class discussion to a lecture is unlikely to
lead to large learning gains. Effectively using active learning
requires skills, expertise, and classroom norms that are fundamentally different from those used in traditional lectures.
Appreciably improving student learning in college science
courses throughout the United States will likely require reforming the way we prepare and support instructors and the
way we assess student learning in our classrooms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this study was provided by NSF-CCLI 0942109. We thank
the instructors and course coordinators who dedicated time to this
study: Theresa Theodose, Heather Henter, Brian Perry, Carla Hass,
Alan L. Baker, Clyde Herreid, Norris Armstrong, Farahad Dastoor,
Michael R. Tansey, Denise Woodward, Kristen Porter-Utley, Leana
Topper, Susan Piscopo, Rogene Schnell, Brent Ewers, John Longino,
Waheeda Khalfan, Denise Kind, Scott Freeman, Jon Sandridge, Rebekka Darner, Peter Houlihan, Jacob Krans, Wyatt Cross, Peter Dunn,
Don Waller, Scott Solomon, Benjamin Normark, Jason Flores, Teena
Michael, Drew Joseph, Dmitri Petrov, Dustin Rubenstein, and others who wish to remain anonymous. We also thank the students in
participating courses. Finally, we thank Tatiana Butler, Megan Higgs,
Scott Freeman, and two anonymous reviewers for assistance with research, analysis, and manuscript revision. This research was exempt
from the requirement of review by the Institutional Review Board,
no. SK082509-EX.