ORIGINAL PAPER
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
Luciano Floridi
Received: 25 August 2012 / Accepted: 4 November 2012 / Published online: 30 November 2012
 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2012
The phenomenon of distributed knowledge is well-known in epistemic
logic. In this paper, a similar phenomenon in ethics, somewhat neglected so far, is
investigated, namely distributed morality. The article explains the nature of distributed morality, as a feature of moral agency, and explores the implications of its
occurrence in advanced information societies. In the course of the analysis, the
concept of infraethics is introduced, in order to refer to the ensemble of moral
enablers, which, although morally neutral per se, can signiﬁcantly facilitate or
hinder both positive and negative moral behaviours.
Distributed morality  Information and communication technologies 
Information ethics  Infraethics  Moral enablers  Multiagent systems
Introduction
In recent years, the scope of the concept of ‘‘moral agent’’ has been expanded to
include both natural and legal persons . The debate is not entirely new , nor devoid of
controversial points . Its revival is due to the increasing pervasiveness
and autonomy of artiﬁcial agents and of hybrid multiagent systems , both in every day contexts and in business environments . In , I argued that
standard perspectives on ‘‘mindless morality’’—ethical issues involving artiﬁcial,
L. Floridi (&)
School of Humanities, University of Hertfordshire, de Havilland Campus, Hatﬁeld,
Hertfordshire AL10 9AB, UK
e-mail: 
Sci Eng Ethics 19:727–743
DOI 10.1007/s11948-012-9413-4
synthetic or hybrid agents, from companies to webbots—run the risk of remaining
unduly constrained by an anthropocentric conception of agency. More recently
 , I have shown how Business Ethics might be approached fruitfully
from an Information Ethics’ perspective that seeks to overcome such
anthropocentrism. In this paper, I shall develop and defend the view that limiting the
ethical discourse to individual agents hinders the development of a satisfactory
investigation of distributed morality. This research expands some of the conclusions
reached in my work on the foundations of information ethics .
I introduced the concept of distributed morality (DM) in , where I used it in order to refer to the macroscopic and growing phenomenon
of global moral actions and non-individual responsibilities, resulting from the
‘‘invisible hand’’ of systemic interactions among multiagent systems (comprising
several agents, not all necessarily human) at a local level. Insisting on the
necessarily human-based nature of the individual agents involved in any moral
analysis means undermining the possibility of understanding not only DM but also
another major transformation in contemporary ethics, the appearance of artiﬁcial
agents (AAs). These are sufﬁciently informed, ‘‘smart’’, autonomous artefacts, able
to perform morally relevant actions, independently of the humans who engineered
them, causing ‘‘artiﬁcial good’’ and ‘‘artiﬁcial evil’’ . AAs are most relevant here because they play an
important role in the dynamics of DM. They can be legitimate sources of im/moral
actions, so the ethical discourse should include the analysis of their design,
deployment, control, and behaviour, as part of a larger strategy to understand a
range of new ethical issues not only in Information and Computer Ethics (ICE) but
also in ethics in general, especially in the case of DM. As I anticipated, this is the
speciﬁc topic investigated in this paper, which builds on (Floridi forthcoming). The
following is a brief outline.
In ‘‘The Basic Idea of Distributed Morality’’ section, I introduce the basic idea of
DM, by relying on a comparison with the well-known phenomenon of distributed
knowledge in epistemic logic. I then explain the difference made by the occurrence
of DM by discussing the moral scenario before and after its introduction (‘‘The Old
Scenario without Distributed Morality’’ and ‘‘The New Scenario with Distributed
Morality’’ sections respectively). Next (‘‘Some Examples of Distributed Morality’’
section), I provide some elementary examples of DM that should help to illustrate
the phenomena in question more vividly and intuitively. In ‘‘The Big Challenge:
Harnessing the Power of DM’’ section, I argue that the biggest challenge posed by
DM concerns the possibility of harnessing its power in the right way. In
‘‘Distributed Morality and the enabling Infraethics’’ section, I outline a theory of
moral enablers that can facilitate the occurrence and dynamics of DM. This calls for
much more work on what I shall label infraethics. In the concluding section, I stress
that the scope and magnitude of the ethical issues that we are, and will be, facing is
such that it requires equally powerful multiagent systems (MAS)—capable of
dealing with them through the impact of their proper DM-based actions—as well as
infraethical environments that are friendly towards the sort of moral enablers that
can facilitate MAS’ distributed morality.
L. Floridi
The Basic Idea of Distributed Morality
There is a sense in which cases of distributed morality have always been with us.
Collective responsibility, for example—according to which a whole group of people is
held responsible for some of its members’ actions, even when the rest of the group has
had no involvement at all (not even passively) in such actions—is a rather familiar
concept in the Old Testament. The same applies to social or group actions and to (the
theory of) unintended consequences. However, if these and similar phenomena are
understood as being entirely reducible to the sum of (some) human, individual, and
already morally-loaded actions—and I agree with Narveson that they might—
then this is not what I will be concerned with in this article. As explained in the
introduction, in the following pages I intend to use ‘‘distributed morality’’ (DM) to
refer only to cases of moral actions that are the result of otherwise morally-neutral or at
least morally-negligible (more on this distinction below) interactions among agents
constituting a multiagent system, which might be human, artiﬁcial, or hybrid. A
comparison to a very elementary, classic case of distributed knowledge in epistemic
logic may help to clarify the basic idea.
Consider the case in which A knows only that [P _ Q], e.g. that ‘‘the car is in the
garage or Jill got it’’, whereas B only knows that : P, i.e. that ‘‘the car is not in the
garage’’. Neither A nor B knows that Q, only the supra-agent (with ‘‘supra’’ as in
‘‘supranational’’) C = AB knows that Q.1 It is the aggregation of A’s and B’s
epistemic states that leads to C knowing that Q. Now, suppose A causes a set of actions
{a1, …, an}, and B causes another set of actions {b1, …, bn} to the effect that the
supra-agent C causes a set of actions {c1, …, cn}. The question about ‘‘distributed
morality’’ is this: can ‘‘big’’ morally-loaded actions (in our example, C’s actions) be
the result of many, ‘‘small’’ morally-neutral or morally-negligible interactions (in our
example, A’s and B’s actions)? I hold the answer to be yes, and the rest of the paper is
dedicated to supporting and explaining it. A good step forward is to start from a
scenario in which there is no DM and then see what difference its introduction makes.
The Old Scenario Without Distributed Morality
Let us follow common practice and assume that, for every action a, a can be either
morally Evil (E(a)), Good (G(a)) or Neutral (N(a)). A moment of reﬂection shows
that, for the deontologist, it is quite easy to ﬁll up the grey oval (see Fig. 1),
representing the set of all actions that are morally neutral. This is because, as is well
known, morally good actions done out of a sense of convenience, or interest, or
inclination or any other heteronomous reason, to use Kant’s terminology, are
stripped of their positive moral value. Slightly more formally,2 let us represent the
1 More precisely, C is the agent that is perceived to know that Q at the level of abstraction at which we do
not have A and B as observables. On the method of levels of abstraction see Floridi .
2 For the logically-minded reader, these are not formulae but mere abbreviations. They could be
transformed into formulae by adopting a quantiﬁcation ranging over the domain of all actions occurring in
the system under observation, but this would be cumbersome and provide no further insights. The same
holds true for an analysis in terms of deontic logic.
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
deontologist’s evaluative tendency to demote actions from G(a) to N(a) with the
symbol ?, thus:
G(a) ? N(a)
Graphically, (i) is represented by the D-tendency in Fig. 1.
Following a similar reasoning, it is easier for the intentionalist to demote good to
neutral (‘‘great, but was not meant’’), as in (i), but also evil to neutral (‘‘sad, but was
not meant’’), so we have:
E(a) ? N(a)
Graphically, both (i) and (ii) are represented by the I-tendency in Fig. 1.
As for the consequentialist, it is quite difﬁcult to ensure that ultimately there is
any a that is neither E nor G, but N. This is so because all actions have
consequences and the latter inevitably have some moral value, so we have two
tendencies to promote actions:
N(a) ? G(a)
N(a) ? E(a)
Graphically, both (iii) and (iv) are represented by the C-tendency in Fig. 1.
Now, trend (i) is one of the traditionally counterintuitive aspects of Kantian
ethics, which requires a theory of praise in order to make (i) more palatable. Trend
(ii) might be welcome in many contexts of ‘‘mindful morality’’, where it grounds the
concepts of exculpation and forgiveness. Trends (iii) and (iv), in their full strength
and if left unmodiﬁed, lead to the unacceptable conclusion that there are really no
neutral actions at all, but only actions that are more or less (but never zero) morallyloaded, either positively or negatively. This is too implausible to be acceptable as it
is, for it would force us to consider as morally signiﬁcant a boundless number of
prima facie non-moral actions, from the way someone scratches her head to how she
Fig. 1 The old scenario without DM
L. Floridi
opens the door of a car. In order to rescue the consequentialist, we need to ringfence both (iii) and (iv).
An obvious safety measure is provided by the concept of the morally negligible
(the drop in the ocean effect, to oversimplify): many, if not most, actions are
actually neither morally good nor morally evil (they are not subject to either trends
described in (iii) and (iv)) because their actual effects are too small to be morally
signiﬁcant or because they mutually cancel each other. A spy scratching her head
might be intentionally decreeing the death of an individual, but that is an
extraordinary case. Likewise, you might open the door of a car in such a way, or in
such circumstances, that your action might count as morally commendable (perhaps
you helped someone in real difﬁculty) or disastrous (you wilfully triggered a bomb),
yet this too seems to be the exception rather than the rule. Finally, we often do and
not do things in such ways that the end result is still negligible.
In order to implement the plausible idea of morally negligible consequences, and
thus ground the possibility of morally neutral actions, let us introduce two moral
thresholds in our model: one makes it more difﬁcult to apply N(a) ? G(a), while
the other has the same function with respect to N(a) ? E(a). Now actions need to
be morally signiﬁcant in order to move from being neutral to being morally loaded.
More formally, the two arrows that graphically describe the C-tendency become
vectors: they have not only a direction but also a strength, which needs to be
sufﬁciently high in order to overcome the relevant threshold (Fig. 2).
Specifying how actions can be, or become, morally signiﬁcant—conversely,
establishing the right level at which the thresholds can be overcome—is a serious
difﬁculty, comparable to the problem of identifying individual utilities when single
rational agents need to make personal choices. It is certainly a major issue for the
consequentialist, who probably needs to deal with it more contextually than she
might be happy to admit initially. Such a difﬁculty is also what lies behind the
debate on rule consequentialism. Luckily, all this need not concern us here, since
our goal is to gain a better understanding of DM. For this purpose, it is interesting to
note that, once we model the applications of (iii) and (iv) as being constrained by
some thresholds the value of which can be left unspeciﬁed here, we obtain one more
new concept, that of moral inertia: most actions are morally neutral and tend to stay
that way either because of the two thresholds, if one is a consequentialist; or because
of the I-tendency, if one is an intentionalist; or because of the D-tendency, if one is a
deontologist. These are all the details we need from the old scenario. We shall now
use the concepts of morally negligible, moral threshold, and moral inertia in order to
introduce a new variable in our model, that of distributed morality, a task for the
next section.
The New Scenario with Distributed Morality
Recall that we wish to consider actions that might be performed by human, artiﬁcial
or hybrid multiagent systems, so that you and I, as well as artiﬁcial agents (e.g.
some kinds of webbots online), a corporation, an individual driving a car with the
help of a GPS, or a drone-network-pilot-command system, may all count as
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
potential sources of possibly morally-loaded actions. Because we are adopting such
a MAS-oriented approach, we cannot rely on a framework of moral evaluations
based on intentionality or motive-related analysis. After all, the MAS in question
might be totally mindless, so that any talk of beliefs, desires, intentions and
motivations would be merely metaphoric. Indeed, we are interested in adopting a
uniform, minimalistic level of abstraction such that even human
individuals might be treatable as mindless agents. The consequence is that we need
to evaluate actions not from a sender but rather from a receiver perspective: actions
(including MAS’, artiﬁcial and supra-agents’) are assessed on the basis of their
impact on the well-being of the environment at large and its inhabitants speciﬁcally.
With these adjustments in place, let us return to the three concepts introduced in the
previous section.
Because most actions are morally negligible, that is, because they remain below a
given moral threshold, it follows that possibly evil actions (the subset of neutral
actions labelled eEvil in Fig. 3) may be ineffective. From a receiver’s perspective,
this is another way of saying that environments can be morally resilient, or, to
paraphrase Paul of Tarsus (1 Corinthians 13), that goodness (understood as absence
of evil, hence including also neutrality) is fault-tolerant. An elementary example is
provided by speeding on the motorway: a potentially evil action fails to become
actually evil thanks to the resilience of the overall environment. The driver is
morally irresponsible not because of the effects of his action—we assume that his
reckless driving turned out to have no nasty consequences—but because of
his unwarranted reliance on the fault-tolerance of the rest of the system. This is why
his behaviour cannot be universalised3: the system can bear only so much pressure
before collapsing.
Fig. 2 The old scenario with moral thresholds and morally negligible actions
3 Universalization is an obvious factor that can help in such a strategy. By universalization I refer here to
the normative coordination of the possibly good, distributed actions of a multiagent system: agents
L. Floridi
At the same time, precisely because most actions are morally negligible and
remain below a given moral threshold, possibly good actions (the subset of neutral
actions labelled eGood in Fig. 3) can equally fail to be effective. Environments can
be morally inert: below a given threshold, possibly good actions never actually
make a (signiﬁcant, lasting or indeed any) difference, but remain neutral. In other
words, potential goodness can be too weak to become actual goodness. In this case,
some forms of charity provide a good example.
To summarise (Fig. 3), on the one hand, environments are morally inert or
morally fault-tolerant. On the other hand, many MAS’ actions often turn out to be
morally neutral, in the sense of having insufﬁcient strength to overcome the two
thresholds introduced in the previous section. This might be because
they are morally-unloaded (value-free, in a different vocabulary); or
they are insufﬁciently morally-loaded (have some moral value, but still fail to
overcome the threshold); or
they mutually off-set each other.
We have seen in ‘‘The Basic Idea of Distributed Morality’’ section that, unless A
and B interact properly, their distributed knowledge cannot emerge, for it is held
neither by A nor by B alone. Likewise, unless A and B interact properly, their
distributed action remains below the threshold of the morally negligible. The overall
result is that, in this new scenario, neutrality works as a powerful attractor and many
actions are simply unable to escape their neutral status. In many cases, it is only by
aggregating and merging individual courses of action that a moral difference is
made. Note that, at this stage, such difference could be for the best (moral goodness)
or for the worst (moral evil). Note4 also that the aggregation in question is not oneway. Some evils emerging from DM might be further aggregated to such actions as
Fig. 3 The new scenario of distributed morality
Footnote 3 continued
constituting a MAS ought to implement, optimise and coordinate their actions in such a way as to make
them converge on the achievement of a morally good output. There are of course several other ways of
understanding ethical universalization, see my reply to Stahl in Floridi .
4 I am grateful to Massimo Durante for having called my attention to this important point.
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
to generate morally good outcomes. Likewise, some morally good actions reached
through DM might be further aggregated in such a way as to cause evil. Clearly, in
all these cases, the correct management of DM is both a challenge and an
opportunity. Before discussing it, let me complete the description of DM by brieﬂy
presenting a few concrete illustrations.
Some Examples of Distributed Morality
A classic and well-known example of negative DM is represented by the tragedy of
the commons . However, since I have already analysed
its digital version insofar as it applies to the infosphere in ,
I shall not discuss it here, where I wish to focus instead on some examples of
positive DM. Just for the sake of illustrative simplicity, they are all based on
quantitative analyses, in terms of moral beneﬁts that can easily be quantiﬁed
economically. In each of the following cases, MAS’ actions, which are morally
negligible in themselves, give rise to aggregated morally good actions:
the shopping Samaritan: (RED);
plastic ﬁdelity: the Co-operative Bank;
the power of giving: JustGiving;
socially oriented capitalism: P2P lending.
Let’s have a look.
The Shopping Samaritan: (RED)
Perhaps the best way to present (RED) is by quoting the website of the project:
(RED) is a simple idea that transforms our incredible collective power as
consumers into a ﬁnancial force to help others in need.
Each time you buy a (RED) product or service, at no extra cost to you, the
company who makes that product will give up to ﬁfty-per cent of its proﬁt to buy
and distribute antiretroviral medicine to our brothers and sisters dying of AIDS in
Africa. Every dollar goes straight to Africa. Straight to the people who need it.
Straight to keeping them alive so that they can go on taking care of their families
and contribute socially and economically to their communities. […]
Since (RED)’s launch in 2006, over 5 million people have been impacted by HIV
and AIDS programs supported by your (RED) purchases. ( 
com/aboutred).
Partners in the program include American Express, Apple, Armani, Converse,
Dell, GAP, Motorola, Nike, Starbucks and many others.
Plastic Fidelity: The Co-operative Bank
Our next example of positive DM is represented by a customer loyalty scheme,
promoted by the Co-operative Bank in the UK. The bank offers a number of credit
L. Floridi
cards, linked to speciﬁc charities, including Amnesty International, Oxfam, and
Greenpeace. By using the card, the customer ensures that
the chosen charity receives £15 for every account opened;
a further £2.50 is received if the account is used within six months;
plus 25p for every £100 spent using the card and 25p for every £100 transferred
to the card.
These might seem drops in the ocean, but, for example, between 1994 (the year
the scheme was launched) and 2007 the Co-operative Bank’s Oxfam-afﬁliated
credit cards contributed £ 3 million towards Oxfam’s work around the world.5
The Power of Giving: JustGiving
It can be expensive to run charities. In the UK, their management and administration
typically represents between 5 and 13 % of their total expenditure.6 So a company
that provides online fundraising tools to enable the electronic management of
charitable donations, like JustGiving in the UK and its twin organisation FirstGiving
in the US, can make a huge difference. Not only can it facilitate the process of fund
raising and lower its costs, it can also provide visibility and support, as well as
suggestions and solutions for extra funding opportunities. Here is some evidence.
JustGiving provides its service for more than 5,000 UK registered charities
and 300,000 fundraising pages for users, collecting over £450 million. The
administrative function includes the automatic reclaiming of Gift Aid on all
donations from UK taxpayers. JustGiving’s stated goal is to ‘allow ordinary
people to raise extra ordinary amounts of money’. More than £450 million for
over 8000 member charities has been raised through JustGiving since its
launch. Charity Times claimed the company had ‘‘transformed the face of
donating in the UK’. ( 
In the ‘‘business of beneﬁcence’’ (Rockefeller) agents need to be frugal with their
wasteful consumption but generous with their fruitful interactions.
Socially-Oriented Capitalism: Peer-to-Peer Lending
Our last example concerns P2P lending, also known as social lending, person-toperson lending or community lending. This is lending online occurring between
individuals directly, without the intermediation of an institute (usually a bank). P2P
lending as a macroscopic phenomenon is really made possible only by the Internet,
the enabling technology. There are two models, each illustrating a case of DM:
in the marketplace model, online intermediaries, such as Prosper Loans
Marketplace in the US or Zopa in the UK, put in touch lenders and borrowers,
who go through an auction-like process to negotiate a loan;
5 Source: Oxfam, 
6 Source: CharityFacts, 
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
in the community model, lenders and borrowers are already acquainted with
each other, and online intermediaries such as Virgin Money US (formerly
CircleLending) only help them to formalise a personal loan.
In both models, we see distributed actions being aggregated to make a difference
in the life of the beneﬁciaries.
The Big Challenge: Harnessing the Power of DM
The previous examples show how actions that are morally negligible in themselves
may become morally signiﬁcant, if properly aggregated. At the end of ‘‘The New
Scenario with Distributed Morality’’ section, I mentioned that harnessing the power
of DM is a challenge but also an important opportunity. This is represented by the
possibility of strengthening environmental resilience and fault-tolerance, while
weakening inertia, so that possibly evil, but still neutral, actions are blocked below
the moral threshold, while possibly good, but still neutral, actions are enhanced
above the moral threshold. Such a twofold manoeuvre requires ethical policies of
aggregation of possibly good actions, so that the latter might reach the critical
mass necessary to make a positive difference to the targeted environment and its
inhabitants; as well as
fragmentation, so that possibly evil actions might be isolated, parcelled and
neutralised.
Such policies are socially furthered by
incentives and disincentives, which represent the political and legislative side of
the ethical discourse, and
technological mechanisms that work as ‘‘moral enablers’’.
Regarding (c), since the moral behaviour of large number of agents has always
been a concern, there is a long tradition of trial and error, social and political
thinking (under the label social or public choice theory), legislation, ethical norms
and mass behaviour (think of the phenomenon of ‘‘social pressure’’ or ‘‘peer
pressure’’) that can help signiﬁcantly in shaping and orienting DM in the right
direction. I shall not expand on this well-known point in this article, but it is
obviously of crucial importance.
Regarding (d), however, much work still needs to be done, for the following
reason. DM is made increasingly possible by multiagent systems, which in turn are
made increasingly possible by extended, pervasive and intensive interactions. These
interactions are increasingly enhanced, facilitated and multiplied by Information
and Communication Technologies (ICTs). And all these ‘‘increasingly’’ explain
why it is really only in advanced information societies that we can more readily and
frequently witness the occurrence of DM phenomena. ICTs are a most inﬂuential
enabling factor behind the emergence of DM, working as powerful moral enablers,
as I shall explain in some detail in the next section. Individuals are more and more
connected and interactive, so that the threshold between online and ofﬂine is being
L. Floridi
gradually erased and DM becomes progressively more important. For example, in
2011, 20.7 % of the European Union population accessed the internet, by a laptop,
while being away from both home and the ofﬁce7 (see Fig. 4), and that is because
our world is becoming our infosphere. We no longer login or logout, we are always
onlife. Nevertheless, ICTs as moral enablers are not (at least not yet) designed in
such a way as to meet the serious challenge posed by the correct management of
DM. At the risk of trivialising a much more complex issue by using an elementary
illustration, P2P technology, for example, can be used in order to aggregate neutral
actions and make them overcome either threshold in both directions, towards evil or
towards goodness. More controversially, the debate on network neutrality seems to be a case in which old prejudices against diversiﬁcation are
going to hinder the development of morally good, distributed dynamics.
It might be that some speciﬁc technologies will always maintain their dual
nature. Web 2.0 applications may be used to aggregate all sort of interests and
interactions, even the darkest ones. Very plausibly, at least part of the solution rests
in the intelligent synthesis between
a more profound and detailed understanding of the logical dynamics of DM and
hence new forms of civil education8;
better design of our technological moral aggregators—as argued for example by
Adam in her discussion of privacy in relation to DM, by Turilli in
Fig. 4 % of EU population accessing the internet, away from home or work
7 Source: Eurostat—Community survey on ICT usage in Households and by Individuals, http://
scoreboard.lod2.eu/index.php?scenario=2&indicators%5B%5D=i_iuport?IND_TOTAL?%25_ind
&countries%5B%5D=EU27#chart.
8 See for example LCD’07—Workshop on Logics and Collective Decision Making, Erasmus International
Institute MSH Nord-Pas-de-Calais, March 13–14, 2007, Lille, France.
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
terms of ethical protocols design, and by Cavoukian , Pagallo and Bassi
 , Pagallo , and Pagallo insofar as privacy might be
approached from a design perspective; and
improved ethical policies of incentives and disincentives.
Equally plausibly, it seems that part of the solution will also depend on the
development of social and technological infrastructures (also known as metatechnologies, more on this in the next section) that will foster the right sort of distributed
morality. This is the last point I wish to analyse in this article.
Distributed Morality and the Enabling Infraethics
There is a long and well-established tradition in ethics that seeks to identify, explain
and defend moral values, in order to develop and justify, on their basis, universal,
normative analyses of morally-loaded actions, and hence support reasonable, if
sometimes competing, interpretations of the morally good life and its achievability.
One crucial aspect, which seems to have been underemphasised by this tradition, is
the analysis, implementation, and furthering of the non-moral factors that can
facilitate morality and hinder immorality.
The idea may be quickly introduced by comparing it to a phenomenon well
known to economists and political scientists. When one speaks of a ‘failed state’,
one refers not only to the failure of a state-as-a-structure to fulﬁl its basic roles,
such as exercising control over its borders, collecting taxes, administering justice,
providing schooling, and so forth. One also refers to the collapse of a state-as-aninfrastructure or environment, which makes possible and fosters the right sort of
social interactions; that is, one may be referring to the collapse of (certainties about)
the rule of law and, of acceptable ways of dealing with economic transactions, of
default expectations about the protection of human rights, of a sense of political
community, of civilised dialogue among differently-minded people, of modes of
communication to reach peaceful resolutions of ethnic, religious, linguistic, or
cultural tensions, and so forth. All these expectations, attitudes, practices, in short
such an implicit ‘socio-behavioural infrastructure’, which one may take for granted,
provides a vital ingredient for the success of any complex society. It plays a crucial
role in socio-political contexts, comparable to the one that we are now accustomed
to attributing to physical infrastructures in economics. By analogy, it seems time to
acknowledge that the morally good behaviour of a whole population of agents is
also a matter of ‘ethical infrastructure’ or infraethics.9 This is to be understood not
as a kind of second-order ethical discourse or metaethics,10 but as a ﬁrst-order
framework of implicit expectations, attitudes, and practices that can facilitate and
promote morally good decisions and actions. Examples include trust, respect,
9 This is related to, but not to be confused with, what Jonsen and Butler meant by ‘infraethics’,
which they understood as a particular level of ethical enquiry concerning public ethics, see Daniels
 , p. 341.
10 For the non-philosopher, metaethics is the branch of philosophy that studies the nature of ethical
theories, properties, statements, attitudes, and evaluations.
L. Floridi
reliability, privacy, transparency, freedom of expression, openness, fair competition,
and so forth. I highlighted ‘also’ and ‘can’ above because it is important to
understand that such an infraethics is not necessarily morally good in itself. Any
successful complex society, be it the City of Man or the City of God, has an implicit
infraethics. Even a society in which the entire population consisted of angels, that is,
perfect moral agents, needs norms for collaboration, coordination, and cooperation.
Theoretically, that is, when one assumes that morally good values and the
infraethics that promotes them may be kept separate (an abstraction that never
occurs in reality but that facilitates our analysis here), a society in which the entire
population consisted of Nazi fanatics could rely on high levels of trust, respect,
reliability, privacy, transparency, and even freedom of expression, openness, and
fair competition. Clearly, what we want is not just the successful mechanism
provided by the right infraethics, but also the coherent combination between it and
morally good values, such as civil rights. To rely on an analogy: the best pipes may
improve the ﬂow but they do not improve the quality of the water, and water of the
highest quality is wasted if the pipes are rusty or leaky.
In sociology, economics, politics, and law studies increasing attention has been
paid in the last few decades to so-called enablers such as education, health, safety
and security, property rights and credit opportunities, clear legislation and reliable
implementation of the law, especially in developing countries. The lack of similar
studies about the need for, and the nature of, an infraethics is understandable, given
the troublesome history of human priorities, but it also seems to be time to redress it.
Within this general context, the speciﬁc point I wish to address, in relation to the
phenomenon of DM, may be clariﬁed rather simply by means of two questions.
Suppose we have a general view of what morally good is and of the sort of
distributed morality that might bring it about, then what exactly may facilitate the
implementation of the latter? And what exactly may hinder the sort of DM that
could bring about the morally evil? Of course, the two questions are as strictly
related as the two sides of the same coin. Indeed, they may be further simpliﬁed by
labelling the referent of the ‘‘what’’ in each of them as an infraethics (understood as
the ensamble of moral enablers) and then rephrase them thus: given a dynamic,
moral system in which DM plays a signiﬁcant role, what is the right infraethics that
can foster it?
An enquiry into the nature and logic of the right sort of infraethics, its
interactions and operations within a dynamic system, and its positive effects on DM
does not seek to uncover the morally good and evil, but rather presupposes a
satisfactory understanding of both. It addresses a different problem, namely what
sort of facilitating framework makes the morally good more likely to occur, and
then become more stable and permanent, i.e., to take root; and what sort of
hindering framework makes the morally evil more unlikely to occur or, when it has
occurred, to remain unstable and more transient, so to wash away more quickly and
easily. Now, investigations into ICTs, their personal, social and ethical impact, and
hence into ICE issues, have helped us, both historically and theoretically, to unveil
cases of moral facilitation and thus identify moral enablers to an unprecedented
extent and with a much higher level of clarity. Examples include information
availability and accessibility, trust online , information
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
transparency and openness , information privacy , and the relation
between forgetfulness and forgiveness.
Unsurprisingly, issues of moral facilitation that seem too complex to tackle if we
use a ﬁrst order logic become rather unproblematic once we adopt a second order
logic. Trust, for example, becomes very easily treatable if understood it as a second
order relation (and hence an enabler), rather than a ﬁrst order one .
However, the temptation of interpreting speciﬁc moral enablers, e.g. trust or
transparency, in terms of meta-values, that is, as if they were values qualifying other
values, should be resisted. I argued above that an infraethics is not a metaethics.
Logically speaking, a more fruitful way to represent speciﬁc moral enablers is by
relying on the apparatus of modal semantics, and to treat them as agents in
themselves, which operate between possible worlds (PWs). Such enabling agents,
when properly designed and regulated, can act as promoters and facilitators of the
morally good. At worst, they can prevent, neutralise, or at least limit the paths to
evil, that is, undesirable transitions from some PWs to other, morally worse PWs.
Or, (in the logical, inclusive sense of the disjunction), at best, they can foster,
enhance and consolidate desirable transitions from some PWs to other, morally
better PWs, the paths to goodness. The other temptation, to understand speciﬁc
moral enablers as infra-values, i.e. values that underpin other values and make them
possible, should also be resisted. On the contrary, moral enablers are better
understood as intra-components of the moral system, metaphorically comparable to
the lubricant of the moral machinery. They work at the same level as moral values,
neither below nor above them, as integral parts of the dynamic moral system, even if
they themselves are not moral values.
ICE has cast a powerful light on a less visible side of the ethical discourse, the rich
and fertile humus that provides nourishment and strength to the roots of moral
interactions. It follows that we have now the opportunity to understand that, in ethics,
moral facilitation is a much more inﬂuential, macroscopic and perhaps necessary
phenomenon—not merely limited to ICE contexts—than we suspected in the past, a
phenomenon that lies hidden behind the more visible scenes of many moral
interactions. No determinism is involved, but freedom may be exercised more fully
and in better directions if the right moral enablers are in place and work properly.
Recall the analogy with physical infrastructures: they can help the economy of a
country enormously, even if they do not determine the nature of the businesses in
question. Once again, this is not an entirely new phenomenon. Within our
information societies, moral enablers may often have an ICT nature, hence their
study and implementation may be best carried out by an Information Ethics, but they
do not need to be only ICT-based. To use the previous example, trust has always been
a moral enabler. The fact that only in recent years we have focused so much on its
ethical role is largely due to the impact of ICTs, which have worked as a magniﬁer.
Conclusion
Many more examples could be provided of cases of infraethical phenomena
that facilitate the emergence of DM and positive moral behaviours. Consider
L. Floridi
fourth-generation bikesharing, for instance. ‘‘The advances and shortcomings of
previous and existing bikesharing models have contributed to a growing body of
knowledge about this shared public transportation mode. Such experiences are making
way for an emerging fourth-generation bikesharing model or demand- responsive,
multimodal systems. These systems build on the third generation and emphasize
(a) ﬂexible, clean docking stations; (b) bicycle redistribution innovations; (c) smartcard integration with other transportation modes, such as public transit and carsharing;
and (d) technological advances including Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking,
touch screen kiosks, and electric bikes’’ . Clearly, it
is a whole ensemble of facilitators that need to be designed, coordinated and
implemented, for an infraethics to become possible, and such infraethics can make a
difference in terms of DM only if a sufﬁcient number of agents become involved.
Bikesharing is a healthy and environmentally good thing and a morally positive trend,
but it requires advanced ICT applications, no component of the system in itself would
make any difference, and if only a few users were to take advantage of it, the
environmental beneﬁts would be virtually null. As stressed above, the risk of misuse
and moral hazard are also never entirely absent: such bicycles, for example, could be
used to rob a bank or may initially lead to more trafﬁc-related accidents. Yet it seems
obvious that the advantages vastly overweight the risks.
The proper shaping and steering of DM through the design of the right sort of
infraethics appear to be an important challenge that will deserve much more
intellectual work, education, and political attention. In its scope and inﬂuence, DM
is a largely unprecedented phenomenon, which characterises advanced information
societies, not because it never did or could occur in the past—this would be of
course both factually and theoretically wrong—but because ICTs have just begun to
make DM a much more common, pragmatically inﬂuential, and epistemologically
salient phenomenon. Instances of DM that were ‘‘too weak’’ and sporadic in the past
to be worth much attention or ethical analysis are now playing an increasingly
important role in our lives, and will be more and more inﬂuential in the future.
The conclusion is that an information society is a better society if it can
implement an array of moral enablers, an infraethics that is, that can support and
facilitate the right sort of DM, while preventing the occurrence and strengthening of
moral hinderers. Agents (including, most importantly, the State) are better agents
insofar as they not only take advantage of, but also foster the right kind of moral
facilitation properly geared to the right kind of distributed morality. It is a
complicated scenario, but refusing to acknowledge it will not make it go away.
There are both practical and theoretical problems affecting the development of a
theory of distributed morality, of its moral enablers, and of their correct
implementation. One may need to consider, for example, the global nature of
information societies and the necessity to negotiate interactions with alternative,
pre-existing moral traditions . Likewise, consistency and partialordering in terms of priority among different instances of DM and several moral
enablers are certainly issues of crucial importance, as the debate between defenders
of information privacy and defenders of information transparency highlights.
Despite these difﬁculties, however, the study and actual development of DM and the
corresponding infraethics are challenges worth tackling. The nature of the ethical
Distributed Morality in an Information Society
issues facing humanity is increasing in scope, magnitude and seriousness. Big issues
call for big agents. We need powerful, multiagent systems that, by aggregating and
controlling their distributed actions, can cope ethically well with macroscopic,
global moral issues. DM is a new phenomenon whose importance will only grow
steadily. The sooner we learn how to harness its power explicitly the better.
Infraethical environments in which moral enablers can ﬂourish that support the right
sort of MAS and DM will be better equipped to deal with our uncertain future. They
may actually play a big role in how we solve some of the most pressing and
intractable, ethical problems at a global level.
Acknowledgments
Previous versions of this article were presented at (a) CEPE 2007—The Seventh
International Computer Ethics Conference ; (b) the International
Workshop on Moral Agency and Technical Artefacts, organised by the Netherlands Institute for Advanced
Study in the Humanities and Social Sciences ; (c) a research seminar, organised
by the Oxford Uehiro Centre and the Programme on the Ethics of the New Biosciences ; (d) the Internet Ethics Seminar, organised by the Oxford Internet Institute
 ; (e) a departmental seminar, organised by the Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford . I wish to thank all the participants to those meetings for
their feedback and, for their kind invitations and the opportunity to present and discuss this research,
Lawrence M. Hinman and Esther Aguilar in relation to (a); Peter Kroes, Henneke Filiz-Piekhaar, Jeroen
van den Hoven, Eline van der Ploeg, in relation to (b); Jo Armitage, Miriam Wood, and Julian Savulescu,
in relation to (c); Yorick Wilks, Matthew Carlos, and Karen Melham in relation to (d); and Alexandru
Baltag in relation to (e). David Davenport, Massimo Durante, Ugo Pagallo, and Judith Simon provided
some very useful comments on the penultimate version. I would also like to acknowledge the useful
comments by the two anonymous reviewers. Penny Driscoll skilfully copyedited the ﬁnal version.