An Evaluation of the Accuracy of Kernel Density Estimators for Home Range
D. Erran Seaman; Roger A. Powell
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7. , pp. 2075-2085.
Stable URL:
 
Ecology is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
 JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
 
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact .
 
Wed Feb 27 15:52:07 2008
Ecology, 77(7). 1996. pp. 2075-2085
0 1996 by the Ecological Society of America
AN EVALUATION OF THE ACCURACY OF KERNEL DENSITY
ESTIMATORS FOR HOME RANGE ANALYSIS1
D. ERRANSEAMAN^ AND ROGERA. POWELL
Department of zoo log)^, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7617 USA
Kernel density estimators are becoming more widely used, particularly as
home range estimators. Despite extensive interest in their theoretical properties, little em-
pirical research has been done to investigate their performance as home range estimators.
We used computer simulations to compare the area and shape of kernel density estimates
to the true area and shape of multimodal two-dimensional distributions. The fixed kernel
gave area estimates with very little bias when least squares cross validation was used to
select the smoothing parameter. The cross-validated fixed kernel also gave surface estimates
with the lowest error. The adaptive kernel overestimated the area of the distribution and
had higher error associated with its surface estimate.
Key words: kernel density estimation; nonparametric statistical methods; radio telemetry; spatial
analysis of home range; utilization distribution.
p, of its total utilization" the distribu-
or about distributions and overlap of taxa. Estimating
tion is two-dimensional, (2) observed utilization dis-
and analyzing two-dimensional distributions has been
tributions rarely conform to parametric models, and (3)
difficult, however, and development of methods has
observations are sequential locations of an individual
been hindered by the need for powerful computational
animal and often may not be independent observations
abilities.
of the true distribution .
Much of the interest in estimating two-dimensional
Alternate models of animal home ranges have also
distributions has come from researchers working on
been proposed. Loehle and Gautestad and Mys-
animal home ranges. Burt's verbal definition of home
terud have modeled animal movements as a
range is still widely accepted: " . . . that
multiscale random walk, and analyzed the pattern of
area traversed by the individual in its normal activities
locations as a fractal. This innovative approach may
of food gathering, mating, and caring for young. Oc-
provide new insights into animal movements. Never-
casional sallies outside the area, perhaps exploratory
theless, to generalize beyond the actual observed lo-
in nature, should not be considered as in part of the
cations it is necessary to estimate where the animal
home range." The need for performing statistical anal-
was in the times between observations. Furthermore,
yses of home ranges has led to more explicit definitions.
to relate the frequency of use to different habitat vari-
The term utilization distribution has been applied to
ables, it is necessary to estimate the frequency of use.
animal home ranges by several authors .
estimation.
Van Winkle defined it as "the two-dimen-
Many methods for estimating home ranges and uti-
sional relative frequency distribution for the points of
lization distributions have been developed. They have
location of an animal over a period of time." Thus, the
been thoroughly reviewed , and several of the most
range that describes the relative amount of time that
popular methods have been numerically compared
an animal spends in any place. Within such a frame-
through Monte Carlo simulations .
sub-region which accounts for a specified proportion,
Nonparametric statistical methods for estimating
probability densities have been available for several
Manuscript received 24 April 1995; revised 4 December
decades, and their properties have been well explored
1995; accepted 18 January 1996.
by statisticians . One of the best
Rangeland Ecosystem Science Center, Olympic Field Office,
600 E. Park Avenue, Port Angeles, Washington 98362-6798
known methods is the kernel density estimator, which
has been thoroughly described by Silverman .
D. ERRAN SEAMAN AND ROGER A. POWELL
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7
The kernel density estimator has the desirable qualities
of directly producing a density estimate, and being un-
influenced by effects of grid size and placement . Furthermore, because it is nonparamet-
ric, it has the potential to accurately estimate densities
of any shape, provided that the level of smoothing is
selected appropriately.
The kernel density estimator was introduced to ecol-
ogists as a home range estimator by Worton ,
and is becoming more widely used as computer im-
plementations of the method become available. In this
paper we briefly describe the methodology of the kernel
density estimator , and demonstrate its behavior when applied to
simulated home range datasets that have been generated
from distributions with known parameters.
Despite the strong interest statisticians have had in
their theoretical properties, kernel density estimators
had not been thoroughly tested as home range esti-
mators until recently . Worton 
performed simulations using the four data types of
Boulanger and White with known true areas.
He found that kernel estimators overestimated the 95%
home range area, and he applied a correction factor to
reduce the bias for the datasets he tested.
Naef-Daenzer provided limited tests of the
kernel density estimators in the context of home range
analysis. Naef-Daenzer determined that the
method was over-estimating home range size, and he
applied an arbitrary modification of the kernel esti-
mator (truncating the tails of the bivariate normal ker-
The kernel method can be used for density estimation
in any number of dimensions, though it will be com-
putationally slow for more than two dimensions. It is
a valuable tool for analyzing anything that may be dis-
tributed multimodally or non-normally. Observations
may be: sequential locations of an individual to study
home range and resource use; single locations of dif-
ferent individual organisms to study a species range;
or measurements of properties other than location (e.g.,
soil temperature and photosynthetic rate) that charac-
terize a population of interest.
The kernel density estimates form an ideal basis for
quantitative analysis. In the context of home range
analysis, the density at any location is an estimate of
the amount of time spent there. This information forms
a basis for ecological investigations of habitat use and
preference. The density also forms a basis for mea-
suring the overlap of individuals or species in terms of
area and intensity of use (volume). A simple measure
of only the area of overlap may be misleading if that
space is used with either higher or lower than average
intensity, whereas weighting area by usage can give a
more accurate estimate of the probability of interaction
between individuals .
In this study we tested kernel estimators, and com-
pared them to the harmonic mean that has performed
best of the other home range estimators tested . Such tests are needed because
several important aspects of kernel performance are
unexplored, and the estimator is becoming accepted
more widely without a thorough knowledge of how it
actually behaves. The main factors that we tested were
cross validation as a method for choosing bandwidth,
and adaptive vs. fixed bandwidth.
Our tests used Monte Carlo simulations and were
based on distributions that are mixtures of normal den-
sities; the resulting true density functions were mul-
timodal and irregular in shape, yet were based on para-
metric values, and thus the true area could be calcu-
lated. Previous tests have used simple distributions
with few variants. Since the accuracy of an estimator
depends on the true distribution it is estimating, it is
necessary to simulate distributions that more closely
resemble the real distributions that the estimator will
be used on. Our research compared estimates of home
range size and shape that result from the various kernel
methods and from the harmonic mean method. We
found that the cross-validated fixed kernel gave the best
results in almost all cases.
Kernel estimators
Intuitively, the kernel method consists of placing a
kernel (a probability density) over each observation
point in the sample. A regular rectangular grid is su-
perimposed on the data, and an estimate of the density
is obtained at each grid intersection, using information
from the entire sample. The estimated density at each
intersection is essentially the average of the densities
of all the kernels that overlap that point. Observations
that are close to a point of evaluation will contribute
more to the estimate than will ones that are far from
it. Thus, the density estimate will be high in areas with
many observations, and low in areas with few.
The kernel density estimator for bivariate data is
mathematically defined as
where n is the number of data points, h is the bandwidth
(see discussion in following paragraph), K is a kernel
density such as the one described below, x is a vector
of x,y coordinates describing the location where the
function is being evaluated, and X, is a series of vectors
whose coordinates describe the location of each ob-
servation i. Several kernels are available, and different
forms of the kernel give essentially equivalent results
 . All kernels have a volume that
integrates to 1. We used the biweight kernel K2 (Fig. l), which is defined as K2(x) =
( 3 / ~ ) ( 1- X ' X ) ~for x'x < 1, and K2(x) = 0 for x'x 2
1, where x'x is the distance from the evaluation point
to the observation point divided by the bandwidth h.
October 1996
ACCURACY OF KERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATORS
FIG. 1. Biweight kernel K,. The kernel is a probability
density; the volume under the curve integrates to 1.
Determining the width of the kernels is an important
and difficult issue in implementing a kernel density
estimator . This width is variously
termed "bandwidth,"
"smoothing
parameter,"
"window width." Narrow kernels allow nearby obser-
vations to have the greatest influence on the density
estimate; wide kernels allow more influence of distant
observations. Thus, narrow kernels reveal small-scale
detail of the data structure, and wide kernels reveal the
general shape of the distribution.
The optimal bandwidth has been determined analyt-
ically for standard multivariate normal distributions.
We will refer to this as the "reference bandwidth" (h,,,)
after Worton . For any number of dimensions of
data being analyzed, the bandwidth h,,, for each di-
mension i (i = 1 . . . d) is defined as h, = A~,n-l' .
Animal utilization distributions are seldom close to
standard bivariate normal; they frequently have mul-
tiple modes (centers of activity) with differing heights
and widths. Such distributions violate the assumption
of normality and result in the choice of too large a
bandwidth if the reference bandwidth is chosen. This
is because the reference bandwidth treats the distri-
bution as if it were a single unimodal normal and cre-
ates an estimate with the amount of smoothing that
would be appropriate for such a distribution. Nonethe-
less, this bandwidth presents a plausible initial choice.
Another method for choosing the bandwidth is the
process of least squares cross validation (LSCV). This
process examines various bandwidths, and selects the
one that gives a minimum score M,(h) for the estimated
error (the difference between the unknown true density
function and the kernel density estimate):
where K* = K(2)- 2K, and K(2)is a bivariate normal
density with variance of 2. Full details are given by
Silverman . This score function is an approximation of a jacknife estimator and essentially uses
subsets of the data to determine the bandwidth that
gives the lowest mean integrated squared error for the
density estimate.
We implemented cross validation with a numerical
routine that
minimized error by testing values for h to within 0.05
units of h. The score function is for the fixed kernel;
we used the resulting bandwidth as a basis for the adap-
tive kernel as well. Silverman presented a
definitional score function specifically for the adaptive
kernel, but a computationally useful form is not avail-
able. We did not implement the adaptive kernel score
function because of the mathematical difficulties, and
because Silverman stated that it is reason-
able to use the cross-validation result from the fixed
kernel form of the function.
Since the variances in the two dimensions may be
unequal, bandwidths were selected by the following
procedure. The data were standardized by dividing each
coordinate by the standard deviation of the observa-
tions for that dimension . Cross
validation was performed on the standardized data,
which allowed the program to select a single best band-
width for the dataset. We then created two bandwidths,
one for each dimension, by multiplying the selected
bandwidth by the standard deviation of each dimension
of the data. This allowed the amount of smoothing in
each dimension to respond to the amount of variation
in that dimension, effectively creating an asymmetri-
cally elongated kernel when the data are distributed in
an elongated distribution along the x or y axis. How-
ever, the kernel does not respond to diagonal elongation
that results from covariance between the x and y coordinates.
Cross validation was performed with a normal kernel
because the cross-validation score function is far sim-
pler for a normal kernel, but home range estimates were
made with the kernel K,, which is computationally fast-
er and has finite tails. The cross-validated bandwidth
was multiplied by 2.78 to convert it from a value for
a normal kernel to a value for the kernel K2 . In the adaptive kernel es-
timate, areas with low densities of observations receive
more smoothing, and areas with high densities receive
less smoothing. This technique uses any pilot band-
width to make an initial density estimate. Local band-
width factors A, are calculated for each observation,
and are later multiplied by the base bandwidth, causing
the kernel widths to vary at each observation . The local bandwidth is defined as A,
= Cf(X,)lg)-ll", where,f(X,) is the pilot fixed kernel den-
sity estimate, g is the geometric mean of the pilot den-
D. ERRAN SEAMAN AND ROGER A. POWELL
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7
TABLE1. An example of the parameters for simulated com-
plex home range that consists of a mixture of 10 normal
distributions.
f Component number.
sity estimates, and a is a sensitivity parameter with a
suggested value of 2.
Once the utilization distribution has been estimated,
the density is converted into a home range estimate.
Contours connecting areas of equal density can describe any usage area of the home range; for the present
analysis we defined the home range as the smallest area
containing 95% of the utilization distribution.
Harmonic mean estimator
The harmonic mean estimator has been presented in
detail by Dixon and Chapman . Briefly, it is the
mean of the inverse distances from any point to all
observations. This mean is then re-inverted to give the
final result. Evaluating the harmonic mean over a grid
gives an approximated surface that is "upside down";
it is low where observations are densest because the
mean distance to observations is low, and the surface
is high where observations are most dispersed because
the mean distance to observations is high.
We wrote our own program for making harmonic
mean estimates. It used the original data points, i.e.,
data points were not displaced to the centers of grid
squares . Harmonic means were
first calculated at the observations, then at grid points.
All grid points with harmonic mean values greater than
the largest value calculated at a data point were con-
sidered to be outside the home range . We converted harmonic means into a relative
frequency distribution by dividing the mean at each
grid point by the sum of the means in the home range.
The home range size was calculated as the area under
the lowest 95% of this utilization distribution .
Performance of the estimators
We used simulations to explore the accuracy and pre-
cision of kernel density estimates. Animal home ranges
were assumed to have utilization distributions that could
be mimicked by mixtures of bivariate normal distribu-
tions. Animal locations were simulated by choosing ran-
dom numbers for x,y coordinates from mixtures of nor-
mal distributions. The kernel estimators (using all com-
binations of reference and cross-validated bandwidth se-
lection, and fixed and adaptive bandwidths) were
compared to the harmonic mean estimator for the ability
to reproduce the original distribution.
Simulated data and comparisons
We performed two major sets of simulations. First
we repeated the tests of Boulanger and White 
to provide a basis for generalization to other home
range estimators that we did not test. Their data type
2 was chosen for the tests because it appeared to be
the most realistic approximation of animal home ranges
of the four data types they used. It is a mixture com-
posed of two elliptical normal distributions, which each
contribute equal proportions of observations to the
mixture. We used 100 replicate home ranges, each sam-
pled with 50 and again with 150 simulated locations.
Parameters of interest were the size and standard de-
viation of the estimated area.
The minimum area that contained 95% of the mixed-
frequency distribution was used for the comparisons;
this area was ~ 0 . 8 9 5
arbitrary units squared. Boulan-
ger and White mistakenly claimed the area to be 1.0
units squared because they did not calculate the effect
of overlap between the two ellipses in the mixture (G.
White, personal communication).
Second, we explored the behavior of the kernel es-
timator using mixtures of 5-15 bivariate normal dis-
tributions. The composite produced irregular utilization
distributions with several modes, much like actual an-
imal home ranges, and was intended to provide a more
realistic analysis of the performance of the kernel es-
timators as home range estimators. We randomly se-
lected from uniform distributions to get values of the
parameters that defined each normal distribution in a
mixture. Ranges of means were from 0 to 12, standard
deviations were from 0.5 to 7.5, and x,y covariances
(p) were from -1 to 1, mixing proportions were >O
and constrained to sum to 1. An example of the dis-
tribution parameters for a typical simulated complex
home range are given in Table 1. The number of modes
in a mixture is not necessarily equal to the number of
means because several means can combine to form a
We calculated the true density at all grid points, and
used these numbers as the basis of several comparisons.
The bivariate density for each normal distribution at
any given point (x,y) was calculated as
October 1996
ACCURACY OF KERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATORS
Estimated areas (arbitrary units) of
tour of two ellipse home ranges, 100 simulat
= 0.895 units. n = 50 or 150 locations per
Harmonic mean
Kernel, cross-validated
Kernel, reference bandwidth
The density for each normal was multiplied by its mix-
ing proportion, and the densities were summed over all
the component distributions for each evaluation point.
The "volume" for a grid point was the density at the
point multiplied by the area represented by the point
(the squared distance between points). The true area
was calculated as the minimum area containing 95%
of the volume of the mixture of normals.
As a check on the accuracy of our program, we cal-
culated and output the total volume of the density es-
timate, which should always equal exactly 1. Our grid
size varied between replicates, but was always suffi-
ciently fine to make the volume equal 1.00 to two dec-
imal places. If the grid is too coarse, or does not extend
over the entire area of the distribution, the volume will
not equal 1 and the results will be inaccurate. Without
knowing the volume it is difficult to determine that
there are errors.
The performance of an estimator will vary depending
on the distribution it is estimating. To investigate the
effect of different aspects of distribution shape on per-
formance, we simulated 15 shapes and generated 150
replicate samples of each shape. Each replicate home
range was tested with 50 and 150 simulated locations.
We compared the estimate of each replicate simu-
lated home range to the true area for that simulation,
and recorded the percentage difference. The mean and
standard deviation of the percentage differences de-
scribe the bias and precision of the estimators.
The fit of the surface of the estimated density func-
tion is an important feature of the performance of dif-
ferent estimators. We estimated the mean integrated
squared error (MISE) of different kernel estimates to
determine which best fit the true distribution. We de-
fined this estimate of error in terms of the difference
between the estimated and true density at each grid
point, summed over all grid points:
NUMBER OF SAMPLES
FIG.2. Mean (solid line) and standard deviation (dashed
line) of adaptive kernel home range size estimates as func-
tions of the number of replicate samples. Each sample con-
tains 150 observations.
MISE = -1 " [Ax) - f(x)I2
where n is the number of grid points, x is a vector of
the grid point coordinates, f is the estimated density at
the grid point, and f is the true density at the grid point
calculated by Eq. 3. A weakness of this definition is
that the estimate will change if the grid is extended
beyond the area of the distribution. This happens be-
cause n will increase while the density estimates do
not. Nevertheless, since we calculated this estimate of
error on the same grid for the four density estimation
methods for each replicate, it provides a useful com-
parison between the methods. This comparison cannot
be made for the harmonic mean since it does not pro-
duce a density estimate.
Field data and cross validation
Kernel estimators were also run on actual location
data from radio telemetry of black bears. The primary
purpose of this exercise was to determine whether sim-
ulation results were indicative of the behavior of cross
validation on real data. Radio telemetry data were col-
lected as part of an ongoing study of black bear in the
TABLE 3. Percentage bias of estimated areas of complex
simulated home ranges, 150 replicates of 15 home range
shapes. n = 50 or 150 observations per replicate.
Harmonic means
Kernel, cross-validated
Kernel, reference bandwidth
D. ERRAN SEAMAN AND ROGER A. POWELL
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7
FIG.3. Density contours of a complex simulated home range, (A) true density, (B) cross-validated fixed kernel estimate,
(C) cross-validated adaptive kernel estimate, (D) h,,, fixed kernel estimate, (E) h,,, adaptive kernel estimate, (F) harmonic
mean estimate. Contours represent 95, 72.5, 50, 27.5, and 5% of the volume of the home range estimate; data points mark
observation locations.
Pisgah Bear Sanctuary, Pisgah National Forest, North
Carolina .
Data sets for bears that were radio tracked from 1981
through 1990 were submitted to the kernel density es-
timator for cross validation. Telemetry observations at
winter den sites were excluded from this analysis.
There were 59.5 2 28.7 observations per home range
estimate (mean i 1 SD). Output consisted of the es-
timated contours of home ranges, the bandwidths (both
h,,, and h,,),
and the ratio between the cross-validated
bandwidth choice and the reference bandwidth choice.
The true size and shape of these ranges is not known,
so the performance of the estimator could not be an-
alyzed in this context.
Simulated data: two-ellipse home range
For these simulations the harmonic mean and the
cross-validated fixed kernel estimates had the lowest
bias and standard deviation (Table 2). Both methods
performed better with 150 observations per replicate
than with 50; smaller sample sizes led to larger over-
October 1996
ACCURACY OF KERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATORS
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5
HOME RANGE
TABLE4. Mean integrated squared error (MISE) for kernel
methods. Means are of 2250 replicates (15 home range
shapes with 150 replicates each); n = 50 or 150 observations per replicate.
LSCVt fixed
LSCV adaptive
6.2 X loz7
2.9 X lozy
h,,, fixed
9.9 X 1Ol0
h,,, adaptive
LSCV fixed
LSCV adaptive
1.4 X loiy
6.5 X loZ0
h,,, fixed
h,,, adaptive
2.4 x lo46
1.1 x lo4a
t LSCV = least squares cross validation.
HOME RANGE
FIG. 4. Mean bias of 150replicates for each
of 15 true home range shapes, estimated by (A)
cross-validated fixed kernel, (B) cross-validated
adaptive kernel, (C) h,,, fixed kernel, ( D ) h,,,
adaptive kernel, (E) harmonic mean.
TABLE5. Results of least squares cross validation (LSCV)
kernel estimation on five black bear home ranges.
Number of radio telemetry locations in the home range.
§ Estimated home range size (km2).
11 The LSCV bandwidth (km) for the x axis that was used
for this estimate.
¶The LSCV bandwidth (km) for the y axis that was used
for this estimate.
D. ERRAN SEAMAN AND ROGER A. POWELL
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7
FIG.5. Telemetry locations with fixed (A, C, E, G, I) and adaptive (B, D, F, H, J) kernel contours for five black bear
home ranges: bear 106 (A, B); bear 70 (C, D); bear 163 (E, F); bear 72 (G, H); bear 61 (I, J). Contours and symbols are as
in Fig. 3. Axis values are truncated UTM coordinates (km).
estimates of the home range size. Although Boulanger
and White used 1000 replicates, we judged 100
replicates to be adequate since means and standard de-
viations stabilized with far fewer than this number of
replicates (Fig. 2).
Simulated data: complex mixtures
The results of the estimation procedures are illus-
trated graphically with one simulated home range (Fig.
3). The parameters of the 10 normal distributions that
comprise this home range were presented earlier (Table
1). The numerical results for all replicates follow (Table
3). The cross-validated fixed (Fig. 3B) and adaptive
kernel (Fig. 3C) methods closely estimated the true
distribution (Fig. 3A) from which home ranges were
simulated, and produced smooth density estimates that
show no influence of the evaluation grid. The harmonic
mean (Fig. 3F) shows very irregular contours and local
minima that result from observations' falling particu-
larly close to evaluation points.
There were large differences in the accuracy of size
estimates between the various methods of estimation
(Table 3). Again, the most accurate kernel estimates
resulted from using cross validation and a fixed band-
width. These estimates also had the highest precision.
When the kernel bandwidth was chosen under the as-
October 1996
ACCURACY OF KERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATORS
sumption of standard normal data (i.e., the reference
choice) the density estimate was oversmoothed and re-
sulted in a large positive bias in home range size. The
harmonic mean had a larger positive bias for these
complex home range simulations than did the cross-
validated fixed kernel estimates; its standard deviation
was approximately the same as those of the cross val-
idated kernel estimators. The accuracy of each esti-
mator varied from one home range shape to another
The differences in mean integrated squared error be-
tween the various kernel methods were quite large (Ta-
ble 4). The cross-validated fixed kernel had the lowest
MISE, the adaptive estimates had extraordinarily high
Results from five black bears illustrate a range of
cross-validated kernel estimates (Table 5, Fig. 5). The
contours show the multimodal and often disjunct nature
of the home ranges that is typical for these bears, even
when sample sizes are large. The adaptive estimates
show the contracted inner contours and expanded outer
contours that result from this method. Since the true
home range cannot be known for free-ranging animals,
there is no way to determine the accuracy of these
estimates.
Continued.
The kernel method with cross validation produced
the most accurate estimates of simulated home ranges.
When performing density estimates on data that are
multimodal and non-normal, the cross-validated fixed
kernel appears to be the best method to use. This cor-
roborates Worton's conclusion that the fixed
kernel gives the least biased results, and that proper
selection of the smoothing parameter is very important.
Although we agree with Worton's conclusion
that the appropriate level of smoothing is the most im-
portant factor for obtaining accurate home range size
estimates, we make a contrasting conclusion that the
choice of whether to use fixed or adaptive kernel den-
sity estimation is also important.
We found that the fixed kernel performed better than
the harmonic mean estimator that Boulanger and White
 found to be the best of the well-known home
range estimators. Although they reported a lower bias
than we do for the harmonic mean estimator with the
two ellipse simulations, their bias estimate was incor-
rect due to their miscalculation of the true area of the
simulated distribution.
Naef-Daenzer concluded that kernel estima-
tors overestimate home ranges. Although he did not
explicitly describe the method for choosing the band-
D. ERRAN SEAMAN AND ROGER A. POWELL
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7
width, he apparently used the h,,, bandwidth. Thus, our
results for the h,,, bandwidth would substantially agree
with his conclusions.
It is interesting that the fixed kernel performed better
than the adaptive kernel in all of the tests. Adaptive
kernels have been expected to produce better estimates
than fixed kernels ; however,
their properties have not been thoroughly explored by
statisticians, nor have they been widely applied to real
data. This finding is particularly significant for some
readily available computer applications of kernel es-
timation, which primarily provide the adaptive kernel
estimate as output. It is possible that implementing the
cross validation equation designed for the adaptive ker-
nel would improve the adaptive
estimates, but this is hard to justify in view of the
excellent results of the fixed kernel and the mathe-
matical difficulties with implementing the adaptive
cross validation.
Choosing the smoothing parameter by fine-grained
least squares cross validation was essential for obtain-
ing accurate estimates. Many of the currently available
kernel home range programs do not provide such cross
validation. In addition, it is important to collect loca-
tion data with high precision because LSCV performs
quite badly with data that are rounded .
The differences in mean integrated squared error for
the different kernel methods were very large, and were
strikingly different from the expectation that the adap-
tive kernel would be the most accurate. Worton 
found lower MISE for adaptive kernels than for fixed
kernels tested on bivariate normal data. He measured
MISE at the observations themselves, whereas we mea-
sured it at the grid points. Apparently, adaptive kernels
give the best density estimate at the actual observation
locations, whereas fixed kernels give the best overall
surface estimate.
The implementation of any home range estimator
will have an important effect on the results. The def-
inition of the harmonic mean home range we used will make the area
estimate highly sensitive to outlying observations. An
outlying observation will have a high harmonic mean
value, and thus will force the inclusion of many grid
points. While it is possible to modify the definition and
the methodology of the harmonic mean estimator to
improve its accuracy, the necessity of doing so em-
phasizes the artificial and inappropriate nature of the
harmonic mean as a home range estimator. In contrast,
kernel estimators are well defined and tractable.
We attempted to create simulations that would rep-
resent reasonable animal home ranges. Nevertheless,
the simulated distributions we tested are not actual
home ranges, and the results are not strictly indicative
of how the estimators will perform on actual distri-
The kernel estimates of the black bear home ranges
reveal a range of shapes, sizes, and degrees of smooth-
ing. The amount of smoothing varies with the structural
irregularity of the data. We feel that the estimates are
reasonable representations of these animals' home
Our simulations were performed with 50 and 150
observations per replicate; animal home range studies
frequently obtain far fewer than 150 observations per
animal. Kernel-based estimates from small samples
will be poor at identifying fine structure and will over-
estimate home range size. This contrasts with other
home range estimation techniques (e.g., minimum con-
vex polygon) that show a positive correlation between
sample size and home range size . The more a home range deviates from a
smooth unimodal distribution, the larger sample size it
will require for accurate estimates.
The fact that the sample size and the data structure
affect the degree of smoothing can result in unexpected
patterns for LSCV kernel-based estimates of seasonal
vs. yearly home ranges. Adding tightly spaced obser-
vations (e.g., breeding season observations for a nest-
ing animal) to a group of more dispersed (e.g., non-
breeding season) observations can lead to a smaller
estimate for the annual home range than for the non-
breeding season home range. This is because the added
data from the breeding season causes LSCV to reduce
the amount of smoothing compared to that for the non-
breeding data alone. This effect can be prevented in
our program by specifying the same value for the an-
nual smoothing parameter as for the nonbreeding sea-
son, if desired.
We are most grateful to B. Silverman and D. Nychka for
explanations of the kernel estimation procedure. C. Brownie
provided suggestions for improving the simulations, J. Bald-
win provided explanations of the harmonic mean estimator
and comments on a draft of this manuscript. We are especially
grateful to B. Worton for a particularly thorough review. Two
anonymous reviewers provided valuable comments on a pre-
vious draft.
Ackerman, B. B., F. A. Leban, E. 0. Garton, and M. D.
Samuel. 1990. User's manual for program home range.
Second edition. Technical Report 15, Forestry, Wildlife and
Range Experiment Station. University of Idaho, Moscow,
Idaho, USA.
Boulanger, J. G., and G. C. White. 1990. A comparison of
home-range estimators using Monte Carlo simulation. Jour-
nal of Wildlife Management 54:310-315.
Bowman, A. W. 1985. A comparative study of some kernel-
based nonparametric density estimators. Journal of Statis-
tical Computing and Simulation 21:313-327.
Breiman, L., W. Meisel, and E. Purcell. 1977. Variable kernel
estimates of multivariate densities. Technometrics 19:135-
Burt, W. H. 1943. Territoriality and home range concepts as
applied to mammals. Journal of Mammalogy 24:346-352.
October 1996
ACCURACYOFKERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATORS
Calhoun, J. B., and J. U. Casby. 1958. Public Health Mono-
graph Number 55. U.S. Government Printing Office, Wash-
ington, D.C., USA.
Chiu, S. T. 1991. The effect of discretization error on band-
width selection for kernel density estimation. Biometrika
78:436-441.
Dixon, K. R., and J. A. Chapman. 1980. Harmonic mean
measure of animal activity areas. Ecology 61:1040-1044.
Epanechnikov, V. A. 1969. Nonparametric estimation of a
multidimensional probability density. Theoretical Proba-
bility Applications 14: 153-158.
Fryer, M. J. 1977. A review of some non-parametric methods
of density estimation. Journal of the Institute of Mathe-
matics Applications 20:335-354.
Gautestad, A. O., and I. Mysterud. 1993. Physical and bi-
ological mechanisms in animal movement processes. Jour-
nal of Applied Ecology 30:523-535.
Hayne, D. W. 1949. Calculation of size of home range. Jour-
nal of Mammalogy 30:l-18.
Horner, M. A,, and R. A. Powell. 1990. Internal structure of
home ranges of black bears and analyses of home range
overlap. Journal of Mammalogy 71:402-410.
Jennrich, R. I., and F. B. Turner. 1969. Measurement of non-
circular home range. Journal of Theoretical Biology 22:
Loehle, C. 1990. Home range: a fractal approach. Landscape
Ecology 5:39-52.
Naef-Daenzer, B. 1993. A new transmitter for small animals
and enhanced methods of home-range analysis. Journal of
Wildlife Management 57:680-689.
Powell, R. A. 1987. Black bear home range overlap in North
Carolina and the concept of home range applied to black
bears. International Conference on Bear Research and Man-
agement 7:235-242.
Powell, R. A., J. W. Zimmerman, D. E. Seaman, and J. F.
Gilliam. 1996. Demographic analyses of a hunted black
bear population with access to a refuge. Conservation Bi-
ology 10:224-234.
Press, W. H., B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T.
Vetterling. 1986. Numerical recipes. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Silverman, B. W. 1986. Density estimation for statistics and
data analysis. Chapman and Hall, London, UK.
Smith, A. T., and E S. Dobson. 1994. A technique for eval-
uation of spatial data using asymmetrical weighted overlap
values. Animal Behavior 48: 1285-1292.
Swihart, R. K., and N. A. Slade. 1985. Influence of sampling
interval on estimates of home range size. Journal of Wild-
life Management 49: 10 19-1025.
Van Winkle, W. 1975. Comparison of several probabilistic
home-range models. Journal of Wildlife Management 39:
White, G. C., and R. A. Garrott. 1990. Analysis of wildlife
radio-tracking data. Academic Press, San Diego, Califor-
Worton, B. J. 1987. A review of models of home range for
animal movement. Ecological Modelling 38:277-298.
. 1989a. Kernel methods for estimating the utilization
distribution in home-range studies. Ecology 70:164-168.
. 1989b. Optimal smoothing parameters for multi-
variate fixed and adaptive kernel methods. Journal of Sta-
tistical Computing and Simulation 32:45-57.
. 1995. Using Monte Carlo simulation to evaluate
kernel-based home range estimators. Journal of Wildlife
Management 59:794-800.
You have printed the following article:
An Evaluation of the Accuracy of Kernel Density Estimators for Home Range Analysis
D. Erran Seaman; Roger A. Powell
Ecology, Vol. 77, No. 7. , pp. 2075-2085.
Stable URL:
 
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.