Sparsiﬁcation and Separation of Deep Learning Layers
for Constrained Resource Inference on Wearables
Sourav Bhattacharya§ and Nicholas D. Lane§,†
§Nokia Bell Labs, †University College London
Deep learning has revolutionized the way sensor data are
analyzed and interpreted.
The accuracy gains these approaches o↵er make them attractive for the next generation of mobile, wearable and embedded sensory applications.
However, state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms
typically require a signiﬁcant amount of device and processor resources, even just for the inference stages that are
used to discriminate high-level classes from low-level data.
The limited availability of memory, computation, and energy on mobile and embedded platforms thus pose a significant challenge to the adoption of these powerful learning
techniques. In this paper, we propose SparseSep, a new approach that leverages the sparsiﬁcation of fully connected
layers and separation of convolutional kernels to reduce the
resource requirements of popular deep learning algorithms.
As a result, SparseSep allows large-scale DNNs and CNNs to
run eﬃciently on mobile and embedded hardware with only
minimal impact on inference accuracy. We experiment using
SparseSep across a variety of common processors such as the
Qualcomm Snapdragon 400, ARM Cortex M0 and M3, and
Nvidia Tegra K1, and show that it allows inference for various deep models to execute more eﬃciently; for example, on
average requiring 11.3 times less memory and running 13.3
times faster on these representative platforms.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies ! Machine learning; Neural networks; •Computer systems organization !
Embedded software;
Wearable computing; deep learning; sparse coding; weight
factorization
INTRODUCTION
Recognizing contextual signals and the everyday activity
of users from raw sensor data is a core enabler for mobile
and wearable applications. By monitoring user actions (via
speech, ambient audio, motion) and context using a variety
of sensing modalities, mobile developers are able to provide
both enhanced, and brand new, application features. While
sensor-related applications and systems are still maturing,
and are highly diverse, a notable characteristic is their reliance on making a wide-variety of sensor inferences.
Accurately extracting context and activity information from
noisy mobile sensor data remains an unsolved problem. Because the real world is highly complex, unpredictable and
constantly changing, it often causes confusion to the machine learning and signal processing algorithms used by mobile devices.
One of the most promising directions today
in overcoming such challenges is deep learning . Developments in this particular ﬁeld of machine learning have
caused the approaches and algorithms used in even mature
sensing tasks to be completely changed (e.g., speech and
face recognition). The study of deep learning usage for
mobile applications is in its early stages (e.g., ),
but with promising initial results.
While deep learning o↵ers important beneﬁts to robust modeling, its integration into mobiles and wearables is complicated by the sizable system resource requirements these algorithms introduce. Barriers exist in the form of memory, computation and energy; these collectively prevent most deep
models from executing directly on mobile hardware. Consequently, existing examples of deep learning for smartphones
(e.g., speech recognition) remain largely cloud-assisted. A
number of negative side-e↵ects of this: ﬁrst, inference execution becomes coupled to ﬂuctuating and unpredictable
network quality (e.g., latency, throughput); but more importantly it exposes users to privacy dangers as sensitive
data (e.g., audio) is processed o↵-device by a third party.
Allowing broader device-centric deep learning classiﬁcation
and prediction will need the development of brand-new techniques for optimized resource sensitive execution. Up to this
point, the machine learning community has made excellent
progress in training-time optimizations and is only now beginning to consider how these ideas transfer to inferencetime.
Currently, most knowledge of deep learning algorithm behavior on constrained devices is largely limited to
one-o↵task-speciﬁc experiences (e.g., ). These systems are limited however is providing examples and evidence
that local execution is feasible, although they do provide
some insights for ways forward. What is required however
is a deeper study of these issues with an aim towards the
development of techniques like o↵-line model optimization
and runtime execution environments to match the resources
(e.g., memory, computation and energy) present on edge devices like wearables and mobile phones.
In this work, we make an signiﬁcant progress into the development of such algorithms and software by developing
a sparse coding- and convolution kernel separation-based
approach to optimizing deep learning model layers.
framework – SparseSep – includes: (1) a compiler, Layer
Compression Compiler (LCC), in which unchanged deep models are inserted and then optimized; (2) a runtime framework, Sparse Inference Runtime (SIR), that is able to exploit
the transformation of the model and realize radical reductions in computation, energy and memory usage; and (3) a
separator, Convolution Separation Runtime (CSR), that signiﬁcantly reduces convolution operations. SparseSep techniques can allow a developer to adopt existing o↵-the-shelf
deep models and scale their processor behavior such as, acceptable accuracy reduction and device limits, e.g., memory
and necessary execution time.
The core concept of this work is the hypothesis that computational and space complexity of the deep learning models
can be signiﬁcantly improved through the sparse representation of key layers and separation of convolution layers. Deep
models often have millions of parameters spread throughout
a number of hidden layers that capture the robust representations of the data. By using theory from sparse dictionary
learning we investigate how the originally complex synaptic weight matrix can be captured in much smaller matrices that require less computational and memory resources.
Critically, such theory a↵ords the ability of these sparsiﬁed
layers to be faithful to the originals with theoretical bounds
on important aspects such as, reconstruction error. This is
the ﬁrst time this approach has been used.
Our experiments include both DNNs and CNNs, the most
popular forms of deep learning today. Tests span both audio classiﬁcation tasks (ambient scene analysis and speaker
identiﬁcation) that are common in the mobile sensing systems; along with image tasks (object recognition) seen in
mobile vision devices like Google Glass. We ﬁnd that across
a range of experiments and devices SparseSep can allow deep
models to execute using (on an average) only 26% of the original energy while only sacriﬁcing approximately up to 5% of
the accuracy of these models. Speciﬁc examples include the
Snapdragon 400 processor running a deep learning model for
speaker identiﬁcation with a 4.1 times improvement in execution time, and a 17.6 times reduction in memory. Furthermore, we benchmark this deep learning version of speaker
identiﬁcation and ﬁnd, as expected, that the deep model is
much more robust than models conventionally used (such
as random forests). Most important of all, we examine device restrictions found on other common processors like the
Cortex M3 equipped with 32 KB of RAM. Not surprisingly
we ﬁnd these processors can not support any form of deep
learning model tested (due to restrictions to computation
and/or memory) – until we apply the SparseSep process.
The key scientiﬁc contributions of this research are:
• We propose, for the ﬁrst time, a sparse coding-based
approach to the optimization of deep learning inference
execution. We propose the use of convolution kernel separation technique to minimize overall computations of
CNNs on resource constrained platforms.
• To our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to demonstrate
very deep learning models (many layer DNNs and CNNs)
executing on severely constrained wearable hardware with
acceptable levels of performance (energy eﬃciency, computation times).
• We design and implement a prototype that realizes our
approach to sparse dictionary learning and kernel separation into deep learning model representation and inference execution. We implement necessary runtime components for 4 embedded and mobile processor platforms.
• We experiment with four di↵erent CNN and DNN models under large audio and image datasets. We demonstrate gains of the order of 11.3⇥improvements in memory and 13.3⇥in execution time under multiple experiment conﬁgurations, while only su↵ering accuracy loss
Fully connected Layers
Pooling Layer
Convolution Layer
Convolution Layer
Figure 1: A CNN mixes convolutional and feed-forward layers
BACKGROUND
Popular deep learning architectures, such as Restricted Boltzmann Machines and Deep Belief Networks, share a common architecture. Often, they are collectively referred to as
Deep Neural Networks. Typically, a DNN contains a number of fully-connected layers, where each layer is composed
of a collection of nodes. Sensor measurements (e.g., audio,
images) are fed to the ﬁrst layer (the input layer). The ﬁnal layer, also known as the output layer, corresponds to
inference classes with nodes capturing individual inference
categories (e.g., music or cat). Layers in between the input
and the output layer are referred to as hidden layers. The
degree of inﬂuence of units between layers vary on a pairwise basis determined by a weight value. Together with the
synaptic connections and inherent non-linearity, the hidden
layers transform raw data applied to the input layer into the
prediction classes captured in the output layer.
DNN-based inferencing follows a feed-forward algorithm that
operates on sensor data segments in isolation. The algorithm
starts at the input layer and moves layer wise sequentially,
while updating the activation states of all nodes one by one.
The process ﬁnishes at the output layer when all nodes have
been updated. Finally, the inferred class is identiﬁed as the
class corresponding to the output layer node with the greatest state value.
CNNs are another popular class of deep models that share
architectural similarities to DNNs.
As presented in Figure 1, a CNN model contains one or more convolutional
layers, pooling or sub-sampling layers, and fully connected
layers (equivalent to those used in DNNs). The objective of
these layers is to extract simple representations from the input data, and then converting the representation into more
complex representations at much coarser resolutions within
the subsequent layers. For instance, ﬁrst convolutional ﬁlters (with small kernel width) are applied to the input data
to capture local data properties. Next, max or min pooling
is applied to make the representations invariant to translations. Pooling operations can also be seen as a form of dimensionality reduction. Lastly, fully connected layers (i.e.,
a DNN) help a CNN to make predictions.
A CNN follows a sequential approach, as in DNNs, to generate isolated prediction at a time. Often in CNN-based predictions, sensor data is ﬁrst vectorized into two dimensions.
Next, data is passed through a series of convolution, pooling
and non-linear layers. The purpose of the convolution and
pooling layers can be viewed as that of feature extractor before the fully connected layers are engaged. Inference then
proceeds exactly as previously described for DNNs until ultimately a classiﬁcation is reached.
Contrary to the shallow learning-based models, deep learning models are usually big an often contains more than million parameters. High parameter space improves the capacity of these models and they often outperform prior shallow
models in terms of model generalization performances. However, the accuracy gains come at the expense of high energy
and memory costs. Although, high end wearables containing GPU, e.g., NVIDIA Tegra K1, can eﬃciently run deep
models , the high resource demands make deep learning
models unattractive for low end wearables. In this paper we
explore sparse factorizations and convolutional kernel separations to optimize the resource demands of deep models,
while maintaining the functional properties of the models.
DESIGN AND OPERATION
Beginning with this section, and spanning the following two,
we detail the design and algorithms of SparseSep.
Design Goals
SparseSep is shaped on the following objectives.
• No Re-training.
The training of a large deep model is
the most time consuming and computationally demanding task. For example, a large model such as GoogleNet
is trained using thousands of CPU cores , which is
beyond the current capabilities of a single wearable device.
In this work, we mainly focus on the inference
cycle of a deep model and perform no training on the
resource-constrained devices. The training process also
requires a very large training dataset, often inaccessible
to the developers . Thus new techniques are needed
to compress popular cloud-scale deep learning models to
run on wearable and IoT grade hardware gracefully.
• No Cloud O✏oading.
As noted in §1, o✏oading
the execution of portions of deep models can result in
leaking sensitive sensor data. By keeping inference completely local, user and applications have greater privacy
protection as the data or any intermediate results never
leave the device.
• Target Low-resource Platforms.
Even high-end
mobile processors (such as the Tegra K1 ) still require
careful resource use, when executing deep learning models. But in this class of processors, the gap in resources
is closing. However, for low-energy highly portable wearable processors that lack GPUs or have only a few MBs
of RAM (e.g., ARM Cortex M3 ), local execution of
deep models remains impractical. For this reason, SparseSep turns to new ideas like the use of sparsiﬁcation of
weights and kernel separation, in search of the leaps in
resource eﬃciency required to make these low-end processors viable.
• Minimize Model Changes.
Deep models must undergo some degree of change to enable their operation
on wearable hardware. However, a core tenet of SparseSep is to minimize the extent of such modiﬁcations
and remain functionally faithful to the initial model architecture.
For this reason, we frame the problem as
one of deep model compression (originally formulated by
the machine learning community), where model layer arrangements remain unchanged and only per-layer connections are changed through the insertion of additional
summarizing layers. Thus, the degree of changes made
by SparseSep is a key metric that is minimized during
model processing.
• Adopt Principled Approaches.
Ad-hoc methods
to alter a deep model – such as ‘specializing’ a model to
recognize a smaller set of activities/contexts, or changing layer/unit parameters to generate a desired resource
consumption proﬁle – are dangerous as they violate the
domain experience of the modeling experts. Methods like
sparse coding and model compression are supported by theoretical analysis . Assessing if a model
can be altered solely by changes in the accuracy metric
can be dangerous and can potentially hurt, for example,
its ability to generalize.
We now brieﬂy outline the core approach of SparseSep to
optimize the architecture of large deep learning models so
that they meet the constraints of target wearable devices.
In §4 we provide the necessary theory and algorithms of this
process, but we begin here with the key ideas.
The inference pipeline of a deep learning model is dominated by a series of matrix computations, especially multiplications, and convolutions. Attempts have been made to
optimize the total number of computations by low-rank factorizing of the weight matrix or decomposing convolutional
kernels into separable ﬁlters in an ad-hoc manner.
weight factorization and kernel separation, however, require
modiﬁcation in the architecture of the model by inserting
a new layer and updating weight components (see §4.1 and
Although, counter-intuitive, the insertion of a new
layer only achieves computational eﬃciency under certain
conditions, which depends on, e.g., the size of the newly
inserted layer, the size of the original weight matrix, and
the size of convolutional kernels. In §4.1, §4.2 and §4.4 we
derive and show the conditions under which computational
and memory eﬃciencies can be achieved.
In this paper, we postulate that the computational and space
eﬃciency of the deep learning models can be further improved by adding sparsity constraints to the factorization
process. Accordingly, we propose a sparse dictionary learning approach to enforcing a sparse factorization of the weight
matrix (see §4.3). In §5.2 we show that under speciﬁc sparsity conditions the resource scalability of the proposed approach is signiﬁcantly better than existing approaches.
The weight factorization approach signiﬁcantly reduces the
memory footprint of both DNN and CNN models by optimizing the parameter space of the fully connected layers.
The factorization also helps to reduce the overall number of
operations needed and improves the inference time. However, the inference time improvement due to factorization
is much more pronounced for DNNs than CNNs.
primarily due to the fact that a major portion of the CNNbased inference time (often over 95%) is spent on performing
convolution operations , where the layer factorization
technique has no inﬂuence. To overcome this limitation, we
also propose a runtime convolution kernel separation technique that optimizes the convolution operations to reduce
overall inference time and energy expenditure of CNN models. Together with the weight factorization technique, the
convolution optimization reduces both memory and energy
footprints of cloud-scale CNNs. In §4.4 details of the runtime convolution optimization are provided.
Implementation and Operation
To examine the SparseSep techniques, we prototype three
software components: Layer Compression Compiler, Sparse
Inference Runtime and Convolution Separation Runtime;
these are brieﬂy described below, and shown in Figure 2.
Sparsiﬁed Deep Model
Runtime (SIR)
Convolution
Separation
Runtime (CSR)
Embedded / Mobile Device
Layer Compression
Compiler (LCC)
Original Deep Model
Figure 2: SparseSep Framework and Operation
Layer Compression Compiler (LCC). Prior to a deep
model being used on a wearable device, it is processed to
apply suﬃcient compression to satisfy device constraints.
No machine learning expertise is required, developers only
specify constraints of the target hardware to LCC including
the memory limits and computational constraints in terms
of execution time.
LCC automatically applies the sparse
coding-based factorizations described above throughout the
deep model. The objective is to determine a set of insertion
positions and compression degrees that match the required
resource constraints, while also minimizing any loss of accuracy. In §4, this procedure is described in detail as well as
how the search for the optimal conﬁguration of compression
layers is performed eﬃciently.
Sparse Inference Runtime (SIR). To maximize the beneﬁt of the model produced by LCC, modiﬁcations are required to the fully connected layers of DNNs/CNNs. First,
compaction layers are k-sparse and it requires a series of key
modiﬁcations to be made on the standard feed-forward style
inference approach across the modiﬁed model. The modiﬁcation heavily utilizes the inherent sparse structure of the
generated weight matrices to gain computational eﬃciency.
Second, to assist those platforms that are constrained by
memory severely, layers are executed one by one. For instance, only the matrices related to the speciﬁc two layers
being executed are loaded into the memory and computed
The decision to do this for a layer pair is taken by
the compiler and done conservatively if it is expected to introduce unwanted delays in the inference time due to the
overhead of additional load times.
Convolution Separation Runtime (CSR). To further
minimize the inference time of a CNN model, after modi-
ﬁed by the LCC, convolution layer modiﬁcations are needed.
The time constraint provided by a developer is again used
to select a set of convolutional layers and their compression
levels are determined to meet the overall resource goals. In
the case of severe memory unavailability, strategies similar
to SIR are employed (see §4.4). The goal here is to keep
the functional behavior of the modiﬁed model as close as
possible to the original unmodiﬁed model.
ALGORITHMIC FOUNDATIONS
The core components of SparseSep rely heavily on a number
of algorithms to select, compress, and optimize both fully
connected and convolution layers of deep models.
following we begin by brieﬂy explaining the computational
requirements of typical deep models (e.g., DNN and CNN).
We then provide intuitions for optimizations, describe in
detail the sparse weight factorization and the convolutional
separation approaches employed by SparseSep, and highlight
the necessary conditions and beneﬁts of the techniques on
memory footprint and computational eﬃciency.
Deep Model Computations
The inference task of DNNs can be summarized as a series
of matrix multiplications, vector additions and evaluations
of non-linear functions. For example, the output o of neural
network with a single hidden layer can be computed as:
o = SoftMax
b2 + W 2 · f(b1 + W 1 · x)
where x is the input vector, f(·) is the non-liner function
(e.g., sigmoid), bi is the bias vector and W i is the weight
matrix associated with layer i. The matrix operations can
be eﬃciently computed using, e.g., a GPU, while applying
new vectorization techniques . Development of computational optimization is complementary to the development of
eﬃcient hardware, as it often enables running a deep model
more eﬃciently on the new platform. However, GPUs are
seldom available on wearable platforms due to their large energy footprints. We address both memory and computation
optimization tasks for fully connected layers by drawing inspirations from the well-known matrix chain multiplication
problem .
In case of a CNN with one convolution, one pooling and one
hidden layer, the output o can be computed as:
o = SoftMax
b2 + W 2 · maxpool [M]
where, M is the feature map computed from the 2D input
where, c represents the index over channels and K is the set
of learnable convolution kernels.
Weight Factorization
In case of a fully connected layer, updating states of all nodes
requires evaluating the product:
where, xL 2 Rn is the state of nodes in the previous layer
and W L 2 Rm⇥n is the matrix representing all the connections between layer L and L + 1. Now, the basic idea
in decreasing the number of required computations is to replace the weight matrix W L with a product of two di↵erent
matrices, i.e.,
W L = U · V
where U 2 Rm⇥k, V 2 Rk⇥n, such that the total number
of computations needed to compute U · (V · xL) becomes
smaller than the original multiplication (see Equation 4). In
other words, computational eﬃciency can be achieved, when
the total number of multiplications in U ·(V ·xL) is smaller
than the number of multiplications in W L · xL, i.e.:
k · n · 1 + m · k · 1
Figure 3: Layer insertion to achieve computational eﬃciency
Hence, the above equation gives us a rule for selecting the dimensionality of U and V matrices to achieve computational
eﬃciency. The computational gain due to the factorization
of weight matrix W L can be easily implemented by ﬁrst removing the connections W L, followed by introducing a new
layer with k nodes1 and ﬁnally updating new connections
to the adjacent layers with weights V and U respectively.
Figure 3 illustrates the architectural modiﬁcations needed
to allow weight factorization-based optimizations.
Weight factorization also brings memory beneﬁts. For example, before any architectural modiﬁcations, the total number of parameters needed to compute xL+1 is m · n + m,
i.e., all the elements of matrix W L and the biases of layer
L + 1. Once the weight matrix is factorized and replaced,
n·k+k·m+m parameters are required for evaluating xL+1.
Interestingly, a decrease in model size can be achieved if the
following inequality holds:
n · k + k · m + m < m · n + m,
The above inequality simpliﬁes to the same requirement as
identiﬁed in Equation 7.
The space gain Sg due to layer
modiﬁcation can be deﬁned as:
n · k + k · m + m
Ideally, we seek a factorization resulting in Sg ≫1.
Weight Reconstruction
Note that, under loss-less factorization, i.e., no error in the
reconstruction of W L, the modiﬁed architecture of the deep
model stays functionally equivalent to the original. However,
often arbitrary factorizations of large matrices introduce reconstruction errors and thus the new constructed model deviates from the original model and a↵ects the oveall performance accuracy. Thus, care should be taken to keep the
reconstruction error (e.g., L2-norm) as small as possible, i.e.:
||W L −U · V ||2
Previously, optimization of DNN models have been attempted
using the well established Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
approach . Under SVD, the weight matrix can be ef-
ﬁciently factorized as:
m⇥n = Xm⇥m · ⌃m⇥n · N T
where, ⌃m⇥n is a rectangular diagonal matrix containing
singular values of W L
m⇥n as the diagonal elements. To gain
1We also set the bias of each node to 0 and no no-linearity
function is added.
computational eﬃciency the weight matrix can be approximated well by keeping k highest singular values, i.e.:
m⇥n ⇡Xm⇥k · ⌃k⇥k · N T
Now, the architecture of a fully connected layer of a deep
model can be modiﬁed by replacing W L with U = Xm⇥k
and V = ⌃k⇥k · N T
k⇥n (see Figure 3).
Sparse Coding-based Factorization
In the following, we propose a novel technique of improving
the memory and computational gains over the SVD-based
factorizations (for a given k). These gains are essential for
eﬃciently running deep models on low-end wearables. The
sparsity requirement also makes SparseSep novel from our
previously published DeepX system .
Dictionary Learning
The basic idea is to come up with a sparse factorization of
the weight matrix W L. In other words, if either of the U or
V matrices can be made sparse, further space savings can
be achieved. Furthermore, sparse matrix multiplication also
helps to improve overall computational time. In this work,
we introduce the use of sparse coding-based factorization
technique of fully connected layer weights to achieve very
low memory and computational footprint.
The sparse matrix factorization problem can be formulated
as a sparse dictionary learning problem, where a dictionary
i=1 (with βi 2 Rm) is learned from the weights
W L of a fully connected layer of a deep model using an unsupervised algorithm. Sparse coding approximates an input
wi 2 Rm, e.g., a column of W L, as a sparse linear combination of basis vectors β from the dictionary B ,
where, ai is a sparse vector, i.e., majority of its elements are
0. A large number of dictionary learning algorithms have
been proposed in the literature and in this paper we use the
K-SVD algorithm to learn a dictionary comprising of k
basis vectors. The K-SVD algorithm learns a dictionary by
solving the following minimization problem:
B,A ||W L −B · A||2
s.t. 8i ||ai||0 K
where A 2 Rk⇥n is the sparse code of the weight matrix
W L under the dictionary B 2 Rm⇥k and K is the sparsity
constraint factor, i.e., each signal is reconstructed with fewer
than K basis vectors. Once the dictionary B and the sparse
code A is learned, we obtain the sparse factorization of W L
W L ⇡B · A
Architecture Modiﬁcation
To gain computational and space eﬃciency, we interpose a
new layer similarly as described in §4.2, while setting U = B
= A (see Figure 3).
DNN and CNN models often have more than one fully connected layers and thus the
sparse factorization technique can be applied on all of these
layers to improve overall inference eﬃciency.
Quality of Code Book and Sparsity
The success of the sparse factorization of weights depends
on the quality of the learned dictionary, its reconstruction
quality and the sparsity of the generated code. However, as
in the case with the SVD approach, the dictionary learning
with sparsity constraint introduces reconstruction error and
the modiﬁed model deviates from the original model in the
parameter space.
Deviation in the parameter space often
adversely a↵ect the performance quality of the model and
thus care should be take to maintain the reconstruction error at low as possible. This can be achieved by introducing a
hyper parameter ↵ that assigns a greater importance in
minimizing the reconstruction error term than the sparsity
requirement as given in Equation 14.
In computer vision
and audio recognition tasks, often over-complete dictionaries are learned for resilient feature learning. However, in line
with our objective of achieving space and computational ef-
ﬁciency, we extract a compact representation of deep model
parameters by learning a small dictionary.
Memory Gain
One of the main advantages of making sparse factorization
of fully connected layers, over techniques using SVD, is its
ability to reduce memory footprint signiﬁcantly. For example, the space gain under sparse factorization becomes:
2 ⇤nnz(A) + k · m + m,
where, nnz(A) counts the number of non-zero elements in
matrix A. The factor 2 is used to take into account storage for indices2 of the non-zero elements of a sparse matrix. Thus, sparse factorization outperforms SVD in terms
of memory by a factor of:
n · k + k · m + m
2 ⇤nnz(A) + k · m + m
n · k −2 ⇤nnz(A)
2 ⇤nnz(A) + k · m + m
Thus, for nnz(A) < n · k/2, S⇤
Hence, we get a
rule for selecting the variable K in Equation 14 suitably to
reduce the bottle neck in memory.
Execution Pipeline
The main purpose of LCC is to bring sparse factorization as
an o✏ine tool for modifying large deep models. The feedforward architecture of DNN allows a unique opportunity
to apply a layer-wise partial inference scheme. Under this
approach, layers of a DNN are sequentially loaded in the
memory and their output is retained. Given the maximum
memory, we can estimate the number of nodes k to use in
the inserted layer for a pre-deﬁned sparsity amount, e.g.,
15%. In extreme cases, when two matrices can not simultaneously be loaded on the memory, simple tricks like divide
and conquer approach to matrix multiplication can be employed that only require partial portions of the matrices in
the memory. Partial multiplication of matrices, however, increases paging amount, which increases the overall inference
Contrary to the constraint on available memory, satisfying
a given limit on the accuracy degradation is non-trivial.
2In case of contiguous memory allocation, one index is
enough to identify elements in a matrix.
Algorithm 1 Satisfy Accuracy Constraint
1: Input: (i) M: a DNN/CNN, (ii) V: a validation dataset
and (iii) AT H:
max allowed degradation in accuracy
(e.g., 5%)
2: Output: (i)
M: an optimized DNN/CNN
3: FCLayer := ﬁndAllFCLayers(M)
4: for i := 1 : length(FCLayer) do
ku := getUpperBound(FCLayer[i].W )
an estimate for k using Equation 7
while True do
. Searching for suitable k in the
range (kl, ku) using binary search
kc :=updateBinarySerchParameter(kc, kl, ku)
U, V := sparseFactorize(FCLayer[i].W , kc)
newLayer := constructNewLayer(U, V )
M := replaceLayer(FCLayer[i], newLayer)
DA := getPerformanceDeviation( ˆ
if DA < AT H then
SaveModel( ˆ
17: Return readSavedModel()
This is because of the fact that there is no linear correlation between the reconstruction error and the model accuracy.
Little variations in the weights can force a number
of nodes to switch states, thereby potentially a↵ecting the
inference quality. To mitigate the problem we rely on a validation dataset provided along with the model and employ
a search strategy to satisfy the accuracy degradation limit.
Algorithm 1 provides an overview of the search procedure.
Given the model, validation dataset and accuracy degradation bound, the algorithm searches for sparse factorization
of one or more fully connected layers. For each layer, the
algorithm follows a binary search procedure to estimate a
suitable value for k and measures the accuracy degradation
after applying sparse factorization of the weight matrix and
replacing the layer as shown in Figure 3. If the accuracy
bound is satisﬁed, this sparse factorization is accepted and
the algorithm proceeds to the next fully connected layer.
Inference time of a DNN model, among other things, primarily depends on its parameter size and on the processing
capabilities of the hardware. We take opportunistic advantage of Algorithm 1 and log all values of k used in individual
layers (i.e., independent variables) and inference time (dependent variable) to build a simple regression model. The
regression model can predict the execution time given parametric setting of k values in each layers. If the time prediction is higher than the given time constraint, we neglect
saving the model. For example a simple conditional statement on time after line–14 in Algorithm 1 can be added to
satisfy the time constraint.
Convolution Kernel Separation
In addition to the large memory requirement, the other
bottleneck common in CNN-based inferencing (contrary to
DNNs) is the massive amount of convolution operations.
Weight factorization does not help to overcome this bottleneck. In the following we summarize techniques to mitigate
this challenge.
Convolution Complexity
The time complexity of convolving a single channel 2D-input
(H ⇥W) with a bank of N d ⇥d ﬁlters is O(Nd2HW). For
large input image stacks with C channels, the runtime can
be signiﬁcantly large , e.g., O(CNd2HW). One way to
reduce the time complexity is by reducing the redundancy
among di↵erent ﬁlters and ﬁlter channels . Although, approximation techniques using linear combination of a smaller
set of ﬁlters have been successfully attempted , in this
work we exploit separable ﬁlter property to reduce the overall convolution operations.
Separable Filters
Let K 2 RN⇥d⇥d⇥C be the set of convolutional kernels (4D),
here the goal is to ﬁnd an approximation ˆK, which can be
decomposed as :
where, the parameter K controls the rank of the horizontal
ﬁlter H 2 RN⇥1⇥d⇥K and the vertical ﬁlter V 2 RK⇥d⇥1⇥C.
Under this approximation scheme, the original convolution
task of a single 3D ﬁlter3 (indexed by n) becomes:
Architecture Modiﬁcation
Both H and V ﬁlters can be learned from the pre-trained
ﬁlter K. In this work we adopt a deterministic SVD-based
approximation algorithm, as given in , to estimate H, V.
Interestingly, Equation 20 shows that the overall convolution task can be broken down into two sets of convolutions.
First, the input x is convoluted with the vertical ﬁlter V to
produce an intermediate feature map Z.
Next, Z is convoluted with the horizontal ﬁlter H to generate the desired
Thus, the original convolution layer of the CNN
now can be replaced with two successive convolution layers
with ﬁlters V and H respectively.
Computational Gain
Under this separation, the overall time complexity becomes
O(CKdHW + KNdHW) or O(dK(N + C)HW). Now for
computational eﬃciency, the parameter K should be chosen
such that:
As described in §4.3, for keeping the functionality of the
modiﬁed model as close as the original model, the reconstruction error of the convolution ﬁlter should be very low,
||K −ˆK||2
3The 4D ﬁlter bank K can be viewed as a collection of N
3D ﬁlters.
Cores Speed
Cores Speed
Snapdragon
Table 1: Summary of the Hardware Platforms
Runtime Adaptation
As part of SparseSep, we developed a runtime framework
that dynamically selects convolution layers and their separation criteria to adapt the overall computations needed for
a CNN according to the current availability of computation
resources or constraints. The runtime adaptation approach
follows very closely the binary search procedure outlined in
Algorithm 1. Instead of the fully connected layers, the algorithm begins by constructing a list of available convolution
layers. An upper bound of the ﬁlter separation parameter
K is estimated using Equation 21. H and V ﬁlters are estimated for the selected separation parameter K as given
in . Next, the current convolution layer is now replaced
with two successive convolution layers with ﬁlters V and H
and the updated model performance is computed on the validation dataset. If the error criterion is satisﬁed, the modi-
ﬁcation is accepted and the procedure moves on to the next
convolution layer.
Runtime convolution operation optimization opens up new
opportunities for SparseSep to gracefully shape and control
resource consumption of both DNNs and CNNs on a large
variety of hardware platforms, which is not possible for systems like DeepX .
EVALUATION
In this section we systematically summarize results from a
number of experiments to highlight the main beneﬁts of the
sparse weight factorization and convolution separation techniques presented above. As the target wearable hardware
we consider four platforms: (i) Qualcomm Snapdragon 400
SoCs, (ii) Nvidia Tegra K1, (iii) ARM Cortex M0 and (iv)
ARM Cortex M3. Hardware speciﬁcations for the four platforms are summarized in Table 1.
Experimental Setup
In this paper we focus on audio inference as the representative wearable and mobile sensing tasks to infer the situational context of users’ surroundings. We train and deploy DNN models to recognize the ambient environment of
the user and to identify the speaker from voice recordings.
We apply our factorization technique to CNN models by
considering two state-of-the-art object recognition models:
AlexNet and VGG. However, do could not run the CNN
models on the ARM Cortex platforms for severe memory
limitations (allowing only 8 KB and 32 KB).
Audio Datasets
We consider two large publicly available audio datasets: (i)
LITIS Rouen Audio scene dataset and (ii) Automatic
Speaker Veriﬁcation Spooﬁng and Countermeasures Challenge Dataset .
The Audio Scene dataset, referred in this paper as the Ambient dataset, contains over 1500 minutes of audio scenes,
(a) Snapdragon 400
(b) Tegra K1
(c) Cortex M0
(d) Cortex M3
Figure 4: Hardware platforms: (a) Qualcomm Snapdragon 400 and (b) Nvidia Tegra K1 are used to evaluate the proposed scaling
beneﬁts of weight factorization and convolution separation techniques. Additionally, we use (c) ARM Cortex M0 and (d) M3 to evaluate
DNN performances.
which were captured using Samsung Galaxy S3 smartphones.
The dataset is composed of 19 di↵erent ambient scenes such
as, ‘plane’, ‘busy street’, ‘bus’, ‘cafe’, ‘student hall’ and
‘restaurant’.
Audio measurements were recorded with a
sampling frequency of 22.05 KHz and several 30 seconds
long audio ﬁles from each ambient environment are made
available.
The Audio Speaker Veriﬁcation dataset, referred in this paper as the Speaker dataset, contains speech recordings from
106 individuals (45 male and 61 female). In addition to the
clean voice recordings, the dataset also contains synthesized
data for conducting spooﬁng attacks, however, in this paper
we only focus on clean audio recordings from all 106 participants. Audio measurements were recorded with 16 KHz
sampling frequency. To maintain a near equal class distribution, we restrict the maximum duration of audio recording
to 15 minutes per user.
For the CNN models, we dowloaded pre-trained models from
the ca↵e zoo repository and we use the original test dataset
to measure the overall recognition performances of these
models. In Table 2 we summarize all deep models studied
in this work.
Deep Architecture Training
Small neural networks, e.g., models with a single hidden
layer, can be eﬃciently trained using the well known backpropagation algorithm . However, deep architectures, especially with many hidden layers, are diﬃcult to train and
development of eﬃcient training algorithms are an active
area of research in machine learning. Past years have seen
the development of unsupervised pre-training approaches for
better intialization of the layer weights.
In this work we
use denoising autoencoders to pre-train the weights of the
deep architecture and apply the back-propagation algorithm
to ﬁne tune architecture for classiﬁcation purposes. Before
training the audio models, we follow a sliding window approach, as described in , to extract 13 mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients (MFCC) from a measurement window of 25
milli seconds. The extracted MFCC features are then aggregated over a 5 second period to generate an input feature
dimension of 650, see for details. For both the dataset
we follow the same data pre-processing approach. Finally,
we train DNN models with two hidden layers (each having
1, 000 nodes) on both datasets and use early stopping criteria to avoid over-ﬁtting.
We evaluate the performances of the weight factorization
and convolution separation techniques, while executing DNNs
and CNNs, on Qualcomm Snapdragon 400 and Nvidia
Tegra . To highlight the beneﬁts of sparse factorization,
Parameters
Architecture
c:5ı; p:3‡; fc:3?
c:13ı; p:5‡; fc:3?
ıconvolution layers; ‡pooling layers; ?fully connected layers
Table 2: Representative Deep Models
we also perform experiments by running the DNN models
on ARM Cortex M0 and M3.
The Snapdragon 400 SoC is widely available in many
smartwaches, e.g., LG G smartwatch R . Figure 4a shows
a snapshot of the Snapdragon development board used in
our evaluations. Primarily designed for phones and tablets,
it contains 3 processors: a Krait 4-core 1.2 GHz CPU, an
Adreno 306 GPU and a 680 MHz Hexagon DSP. We ﬁnd
the CPU can address 1GB of RAM, but the DSP only 8MB.
All our experiments on Snapdragon were conducted using
its CPU only.
Although, not as popular as the Snapdragon, the Tegra
K1 (Figure 4b) provides extreme GPU performance, unseen in other mobile SoCs. The heart of this chip is the Kepler 192-core GPU, which is coupled with a 2.3 GHz 4-core
Cortex CPU and an extra low-power 5th core (LPC). The
K1 SoC is used in the Nexus 9, Google’s phone prototype
within Project Ara , and even high-end cars . It is
also used in IoT devices like the June Oven . Executing
code on the LPC requires the toggling of linux system calls,
while access to the GPU is available from CUDA drivers .
The ARM Cortex-M series are examples of ultra-low power
wearable platforms. The smallest of them all is Cortex M0,
which consumes 12.5 µW/MHz and support a memory size
of 8 KB (Figure 4c). The M3 variant (Figure 4d) of the cortex has double processing abilities (96 MHz) and support a
32 KB memory. These low-end micro-controllers often have
limited memory management capabilities.
In our experiments we could only use around 5.2 KB memory on Cortex
M0 and around 28 KB memory on Cortex M3. Availability
of a small memory requires frequent paging, while executing
a large model. The I/O capabilities of Cortex M0 was found
to be signiﬁcantly slower than Cortex M3. For prototyping,
we use MBED LPC11U24 and LPC1768 boards for
running experiments on Cortex M0 and M3 respectively.
Scalability Under Sparse Factorization
Next, we study the accuracy of modiﬁed DNN model and
its space requirements under factorization of fully connected
layer weights. Although, the principle of weight factorization can be simultaneously applied to all fully connected
(a) Ambient (DNN)
(b) Speaker (DNN)
(c) AlexNet (CNN)
Figure 5: Comparison of memory gains with reduced hidden layer nodes when using sparse coding- and SVD-based weight factorizations
for DNNs and CNNs. For simplicity of illustrations, factorization of one fully connected layer of all three models are considered. For all
the models, sparse factorization generated much smaller model compared to the SVD-based factorization.
(a) Ambient (DNN)
(b) Speaker (DNN)
(c) AlexNet (CNN)
Figure 6: Comparisons of recognition accuracy performances with reduced hidden layer nodes when using sparse coding- and SVD-based
weight factorizations for DNNs and CNNs. In our experiments we allow a maximum of 5% degradation in accuracy from the original
model performance. Sparse factorization maintains high accuracy, similar to SVD approach, but generates models with smaller memory
footprint. Similarly as above, we factorize only one layer.
layers of a DNN, for simplicity of understanding, we only
focus on one layer of the DNN and study the e↵ect of the
factorization.
Figure 5 illustrates the space or memory gain that can be
achieved over the original models (two DNNs and one CNN)
under sparse and SVD-based factorizations for various sizes
of the new inserted hidden layer. Note that, the high range
in Y-axis in both the ﬁgures indicate that the sparse codingbased approach provides a signiﬁcantly better scalability
over the SVD solution (see the insets). For example, the
smaller the number of nodes kept in the inserted hidden
layer, higher is the gain in memory. Additionally, the gain
also comes from the sparse matrix multiplications and in this
experiment we keep the sparsity level at 20%, while performing the dictionary-based weight factorization. Sparse coding
is seen to consistently maintain a superior gain over SVD.
Figure 5 also indicates that a larger value of nodes in the
inserted hidden layer can adversely increase the space requirement of the model, thus making it ineﬃcient. Finally,
the criterion for selecting a good value for k, as given in
Equation 7, can also be empirically understood from the
SVD looses memory gain when k retains around
80% of the hidden layer parameters. For a layer with 1, 000
nodes, a k value of 80% will results in less than 400 nodes
in the inserted new layer. From Equation 7 we empirically
650+1000 ⇡394, thus verifying the mathe-
Figure 7: Memory requirements of four original deep learning
models studied in the paper. Ambient and Speaker are two audiobased DNN models, whereas AgeNet and AlexNet are two imagebased CNN models.
matical intuition given earlier.
Seeing sparse factorization giving rise to a great memory
beneﬁts, we next study the e↵ect of factorization on model
performance. Figure 6 illustrates the accuracy performance
of the models (same two DNNs and one CNN as given in
Figure 5) under both types of weight factorizations. As indicated before, under faithful factorization of the model, i.e.,
W L = U ·V , the modiﬁed model would have the same functional properties, i.e., same accuracy. However, as we search
for small k the reconstructions starts to deviate signiﬁcantly
from W L and the model accuracy is observed to violate the
(a) Ambient (DNN)
(b) Speaker (DNN)
(c) AlexNet (CNN)
(d) VGG (CNN)
Figure 8: Energy-consumption and average inference time of di↵erent variants of the deep models on four di↵erent hardware platforms.
Figure 9: Memory requirements of the four deep models under
SVD- and sparse weight factorizations
accepted (pre-deﬁned) 5% tolerance level. Interestingly, for
majority of the chosen values of k, both sparse coding and
SVD exhibit accuracy very close to the original DNN. Thus,
the factorization approach can reduce memory footprint signiﬁcantly, while maintaining high accuracies.
Figure 7 illustrates the original (uncompressed) model sizes
for all the four DNN/CNN models considered in this work.
The two DNN models are much smaller in size and depth,
compared to the CNN models. However, after our factorizations the memory footprints of the models are highlighted
in Figure 9. To obtain an optimized model we execute Algorithm 1 with the models and allow an accuracy tolerance level of 5%, the algorithm performs factorization on
all fully connected layers of the model and generates a compact version of the model. This ﬁgure indicates the ability of
the Sparse factorization to achieve signiﬁcantly smaller and
equal functional models as provided by the SVD technique.
The memory is one of the main bottlenecks in low end platforms such as Cortex M series, and thus Sparse coding technique allows for a better tradeo↵solutions by signiﬁcantly
reducing the amount of required paging.
Although, we focussed mainly on the factorizations of DNN
layer weights, the basic idea applies to a subset of layers
within CNN models. For example, in addition to the convolution and pooling layers, often a CNN has one or more
fully connected layers, e.g., for classiﬁcation purposes. These
fully connected layers are ideal for sparse factorizations to
gain computational and memory eﬃciencies. Thus, as the
ﬁnal set of experiments we apply our proposed sparse factorization on the AlexNet model, which is a popular computer
vision (CNN) model trained for recognizing objects within
natural images. However, later we show that the main computational beneﬁts of CNN models arise mainly from the
separation of kernel approach.
Contrary to the model used for Ambient or Speaker identiﬁcation, the original AlexNet model is much larger, e.g.,
contains 61 million parameters , and requires a storage
space of 233 MB. When applied sparse factorization to its
ﬁrst fully connected layer only, memory requirement reduces
from 233 MB to below 100 MB. Figure 5c and 6c respectively
shows memory gain and accuracy deviations for various sizes
of the inserted hidden layer.
Runtime and Energy Performances
We now turn our attention to evaluating runtime and energy performances of sparsely factorized DNNs and CNNs
on the four wearable hardware platforms (Cortex M series
are only used to evaluate DNNs). For the CNN models we
also evaluate the performance of the convolution separation
approach on runtime and energy consumption.
To measure runtime and energy performances, we next run
the original, the factorized models, and the convolution separated models (incase of CNNs) on the four hardware platforms.
The results of the experiment are presented as a
tradeo↵study in Figure 8 for all four individual models.
Not only space scalability, the reduced number of parameters signiﬁcantly improves the running time of the sparse
model on all platforms (note the log scale on both the axes).
For both the ambient and speaker models (DNNs), the average4 inference time is observed to vary signiﬁcantly across
platforms. However, the e↵ects of factorizations of DNNs
are signiﬁcant on all platforms. Overall, the sparse factorization generating better running time over SVD. On both
Snapdragon and Tegra, the factorized DNNs runs under
one milli second, resulting in around 5 times faster inference than the unmodiﬁed model. Similarly to the running
time, sparse factorization helps to drop the average energy
consumptions signiﬁcantly on all platforms. For example, on
Cortex M0, the power consumption becomes one tength. On
Snapdragon 400, the optimized DNN model now consumes
only 56% of energy compared to the unmodiﬁed model.
Most interesting performance gains are observed for the CNN
models, while applying the convolution separation (CSR)
technique in conjunction with the weight factorization (LCC).
On both Snapdragon and Tegra, the VGG model is seen to
be beneﬁtted the most, as it contains signiﬁcantly high (13)
numbers of convolutional layers than AlexNet (see Table 2).
The overall running time of the optimized VGG model is
just over 1.5 sec on Snapdragon, which is around 2.7 times
faster (little below the theoretical upper limit of 3) than its
sparse weight factorized only variant.
Thus the techniques presented in the paper open up new opportunities to drastically reduce the memory footprint and
overall computational demands of state-of-the-art deep models. We believe that our work will make deep learning based
inference engine on wearable and IoT devices highly popular
and will help to redeﬁne mobile and IoT experiences.
DISCUSSION
We brieﬂy examine a range of key issues related to SparseSep, along with the limitations of our approach.
Broader Deep Learning Support.
Our approach has
been tested on the two most popular forms of deep learning –
4All inferences are repeated 1,000 times and we report their
averages in the ﬁgures.
DNNs and CNNs – which both include fully-connected feedforward layers. Any deep model that includes this layer type
will beneﬁt from sparse weight factorization of SparseSep.
Moreover, the convolution separation technique of SparseSep will allow further optimization of CNNs.
the mixture of layer types within a model will inﬂuence the
gains, for example, CNNs have more convolutional layers
than feed-forward layers, thus are beneﬁted the most from
SparseSep; however, feed-forward layers in CNNs account
typically for 80 to 90% of all the memory consumed making them an important target for memory-centric
optimizations. Extending the ideas of SparseSep to other
forms of deep learning, such as RNNs and LSTMs, remain
as important future work.
Hardware Portability.
To keep the usage of SparseSep
simple for developers we allow them to express constraints
to LCC in terms of accuracy, memory and execution time.
However, supporting execution time requires SparseSep to
estimate the performance of a speciﬁc deep model architecture (i.e., layers and node conﬁguration) on the target
hardware. SparseSep includes only a fairly simple estimation process based on data from hardware proﬁle process.
In our experiments, proﬁling hardware takes only around 30
minutes using an automated script that tests various model
architectures while the device is attached to a power monitor.
Hardware Accelerators.
Purpose-built hardware accelerators for deep learning are beginning to emerge .
While none of them are currently suitable for wearables yet;
more importantly, SparseSep will remain useful even when
accelerators become available due to the substantial savings
in resource usage o↵ered with only a minimal impact on accuracy. This will allow accelerators to execute even larger
models than currently possible.
Moreover, the reductions
in resources enabled by SparseSep will facilitate the design
of more energy eﬃcient deep learning accelerators, better
suited to wearables than today, because they can be built
with fewer computational and memory resources than previously possible.
RELATED WORK
We now overview work closely related to SparseSep, this includes results from the compressive sensing area, and e↵orts
to lower resources used by sensing algorithms.
Optimizing Mobile Sensing Algorithms.
The challenge to mobile resources of executing the algorithms necessary to extract context and user activities from sensor data
has been long recognized and studied. Approaches include
the development of sensing algorithm optimizations such as
short-circuiting sequences of processing or identifying eﬃcient sampling rates and duty cycles for sensors and algorithm components like . Work such as aims
to combine such optimizations along with careful usage of
energy eﬃcient hardware. Others take a stream view
and so applies stream oriented optimizations on the basis of
real dataﬂows arriving from sensors. approaches performance tuning by extending ideas of feature and model selection to consider device resources, and even cloud o✏oading
opportunities.
In sum, SparseSep is the most recent of this chain of work,
but di↵ers importantly in the fact that it is one of the few
to investigate deep learning speciﬁc methods exclusively –
this in turn allows SparseSep to highlight signiﬁcant opportunities for gains (such as memory and computation) that
only exist within such models.
It is likely that many of
the other techniques described could operate in combination with SparseSep given they frequently treat the learning
algorithm itself as a black-box. However, they may bring undesirable negative side-e↵ects such as higher levels of accuracy loss. More broadly, one could characterize the de-facto
approach to using deep learning in wearables and mobile
devices today as being based on cloud-based, and therefore
approaches like MAUI and those related to it are applicable. However, such approaches su↵er from problems including challenges to privacy protection when partitioning
deep models as highlighted in §1.
Deep Learning under Resource Constraints.
Examples of deep models designed speciﬁcally for wearable
constraints are still maturing.
A popular approach is for
experts to hand optimize speciﬁc deep models targeting a
speciﬁc device class (e.g., smartphone). This has been done
for machine translation , speaker identiﬁcation and
keyword spotting (i.e., a device constantly waiting for
a small number of speciﬁc phrases). Moderately-sized DNNs
designed speciﬁcally for constrained processors (like the DSP)
in smartphones have also be demonstrated for a range
of audio sensing tasks, as well as basic activity recognition
scenarios.
Discussions of the techniques used to optimize
these models are slowly now being reported . In contrast,
SparseSep enables automated optimization broadly applicable to deep model families (DNN and CNN). There is little
cost for SparseSep to be applied to new/revised models, or
when resources change (e.g., a new device is released).
Naturally, work is also increasing in the area of more systematic easily re-used techniques for lowering resource consumption in deep models. A common framework for these approaches is from the machine learning community and called
model compression that most often used at training time
(unlike SparseSep that is inference-time focused) to scale
to larger datasets or increase hardware utilization.
Techniques of this type vary in particular to the extent to which
the underlying model is altered. For example, actually
removes nodes and reshapes layers within the model while
 performs types of quantization of parameters within
layers. We design SparseSep towards minimizing the modiﬁcations made to the model and so adopt approaches that
insert new layers designed to optimize performance. SVDbased methods of this type are the current state of the art
(such as ) which SparseSep has numerous advantages as
detailed throughout this paper. focuses on how to partition deep learning models across di↵erent types of processors
(GPUs, CPUs, DSPs) found within an system-on-a-chip; it
uses an SVD-based model compression approach to allow a
partition of a model to ﬁt within the resources of a speciﬁc
processor (such as a DSP). SparseSep in contrast is agnostic to processor type, and complementary to in that its
performance could only improve if it incorporated ideas of
utilizing a spectrum of processors.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed SparseSep – a set of novel
techniques for optimizing large-scale deep learning models –
that allows deep models to function even under the extreme
system constraints presented by wearable hardware. Conceptually, SparseSep brings many of the recent advances in
sparse dictionary learning and convolution kernel separation
to how deep learning models are both represented and executed. The core innovation is an o↵-line method to sparsify
the internal feed-forward layers of both DNNs and CNNs,
and optimization of convolution ﬁlters of CNNs, that produces a highly compact model representation with only small
reductions in classiﬁcation accuracy. Such layer sparsity in
turn, enables SparseSep to re-invent the inference process
used in deep models and allow classiﬁcation to occur with
radically lower resources. We believe the leaps in deep learning inference eﬃciency that SparseSep provides will prove
to be a signiﬁcant enabler for the broader adoption of such
modeling techniques within mobile and IoT platforms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our Shepherd, Prof. Bhaskar Krishnamachari, for his valuable comments and time to improve
the overall quality of this paper. We also thank Ray Kearney from Nokia Bell labs, Dublin for helping us in building
the power monitoring tool for ARM Cortex boards.