This is the accepted manuscript made available via CHORUS. The article has been
published as:
Quantum Loop Topography for Machine Learning
Yi Zhang and Eun-Ah Kim
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 216401 — Published 22 May 2017
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.216401
Quantum Loop Topography for Machine Learning
Yi Zhang∗and Eun-Ah Kim†
Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA and
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA
 
Despite rapidly growing interest in harnessing machine learning in the study of quantum manybody systems, training neural networks to identify quantum phases is a nontrivial challenge. The
key challenge is in eﬃciently extracting essential information from the many-body Hamiltonian or
wave function and turning the information into an image that can be fed into a neural network.
When targeting topological phases, this task becomes particularly challenging as topological phases
are deﬁned in terms of non-local properties. Here we introduce quantum loop topography (QLT):
a procedure of constructing a multi-dimensional image from the “sample” Hamiltonian or wave
function by evaluating two-point operators that form loops at independent Monte Carlo steps.
The loop conﬁguration is guided by characteristic response for deﬁning the phase, which is Hall
conductivity for the cases at hand. Feeding QLT to a fully-connected neural network with a single
hidden layer, we demonstrate that the architecture can be eﬀectively trained to distinguish Chern
insulator and fractional Chern insulator from trivial insulators with high ﬁdelity. In addition to
establishing the ﬁrst case of obtaining a phase diagram with topological quantum phase transition
with machine learning, the perspective of bridging traditional condensed matter theory with machine
learning will be broadly valuable.
Introduction– Machine learning techniques have been
enabling neural networks to recognize and interpret big
data sets of images and speeches .
Through supervised training with a large set of data, neural networks
‘learn’ to recognize key features of a universal class.
Very recently, rapid and promising development has been
made from this perspective on numerical studies of condensed matter systems, including dynamical systems as well as classical and quantum systems undergoing
phase transitions .
Also established is the theory
connection to renormalization group .
successes in application of machine learning to symmetry broken phases may be attributed to the locality
of the deﬁning property of the target phases: the order
parameter ﬁeld. The snap-shots of order parameter con-
ﬁguration form images readily fed into neural networks
well-developed to recognize patterns in images.
Unfortunately many novel states cannot be detected
through a local order parameter. All topological phases
are intrinsically deﬁned in terms of non-local topological properties.
Not only many-body localized states
of growing interest ﬁt into this category, even a superconducting state ﬁts in here since the superconducting order parameter explicitly breaks particle number
conservation . In order for neural networks to learn
and recognize such phases, we need to supply them with
“images” that contain relevant non-local information.
Clearly information based on single site is insuﬃcient.
One approach to topological phase was to add complexity
to the neural network architecture and use layers of convolutional ﬁlters to detect local constraints in the presence of translational symmetry, targeting a single topological phase at a time .
Another approach was
to detect the topological edge states . In addition, ensemble of the Green’s function was used to detect chargeordered phases .
Here we introduce quantum loop topography (QLT): a
procedure that designs and selects the input data based
on the target phases of interest guided by relevant response functions.
We focus on the fermionic topological phases but the procedure can be generalized to other
situations that are not captured by purely local information, as all physically meaningful states are characterized by their response functions.
The subject of
topological phases of matter has grown with the appeal that topological properties are non-local and hence
more robust .
Ironically this attractive feature
makes it diﬃcult to detect and identify topological phases
even in numerics.
Importantly, detection of stronglycorrelated topological phases as fractional quantum Hall
states , fractional Chern insulators , quantum spin liquids requires arduous calculations of
topological entanglements entropies . On the other
hand, quantization is a natural theme of
topological states and one may wonder whether there is
an intelligent way to detect them due to the discreteness in deﬁning properties. In this letter we demonstrate
that QLT enables even a rather simple architecture consisting of a fully-connected neural network with a single
hidden layer to recognize Chern insulator and fractional
Chern insulator states and rapidly produce a phase diagram containing topological quantum phase transition
(TQPT). We then discuss insights into the eﬀectiveness
of QLT and future directions based on its versatility.
Quantum Loop Topography and our algorithm– The
procedure we dubbed QLT constructs an input image
from a given Hamiltonian or many-body wave function
that contains minimal but suﬃcient amount of non-local
information.
The response function that characterizes
the phase of interest determines the geometry of the loop
FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of our machine learning algorithm consisting of QLT and a neural network architecture.
QLT for each site j consists of 4 loops of linear dimension
d = 1. One loop of d = 3 is also shown for illustration. QLT
of d ≤dc form a D(dc)-dimensional vector for each site j,
e.g., D(1) = 4 on a square lattice.
objects that enter QLT. But instead of brute-force evaluation of the response functions, we use QLT obtained
from instances of Monte Carlo to train and utilize a network.
For Chern insulators, the relevant response function is
the Hall conductivity. Interestingly Kitaev pointed
4πiPjkPklPljS△jkl
for free fermion systems , where Pij ≡⟨c†
icj⟩is the
equal-time two-point correlation function between sites
i and j, S△jkl is the signed area of triangle jkl, and N
is the total number of sites. Taking hints from Eq. (1)
we use triangular loops to deﬁne QLT for Chern insulators. But instead of the full expectation value for twopoint correlation functions in Eq. (1) which are costly to
evaluate (requiring many instances of Monte Carlo walking down the Markov chain), we evaluate the bilinear
operator with a single Monte Carlo sample α deﬁning
α. Further we note that smaller triangles
dominate in a gapped system and keep the loops of linear
dimension d ≤dc, where dc is the cut-oﬀ.
Now we deﬁne QLT to be a quasi-two-dimensional “image” of D(dc)-dimensional vector of complex numbers assigned to each lattice site j. Each entry of this vector
is associated with a distinct triangle cornered at site j
which deﬁnes a chained product
˜Pjk|α ˜Pkl|β ˜Plj|γ
where k and l are two other sites of the particular triangle, and ˜P’s are evaluated at three independent Monte
Carlo steps without averaging over Markov chain. D(dc)
is the total number of triangles with d ≤dc assigned to
each site(see Fig. 1). This way, QLT can be systematically expanded to include longer-ranged correlations by
increasing cut-oﬀdc until convergence.
By construction QLT is quite versatile. Firstly, QLT
can be obtained for and mapped between diﬀerent lattice
geometry, which only enters through D(dc). Secondly,
the entire procedure takes place in real space without
need for diagonalization or ﬂux insertion and does not
depend on translational invariance. Hence QLT should
naturally accommodate heterogeneity, disorder and interaction. Finally, it is clear that the strategy underlying
QLT construction we have laid out can be generalized to
other novel phases such as Z2 topological order, quantum spin Hall insulator, or superconductivity . In the
rest of this paper we use Variational Monte Carlo(VMC),
without loss of generality, to build QLT by sampling the
many-body ground states of interest at randomly selected
Monte Carlo steps (see Supplemental Material).
Once QLT is obtained for a given model, we feed it to
a neural network(Fig. 1).
For this, we design a feedforward fully-connected neural network with only one
hidden layer consisting of n = 10 sigmoid neurons. The
network takes QLT as an input x and each neurons processes the input through independent weights and biases
w · x + b. After the sigmoid function, the outcome is fed
forward to be processed by the output neuron. The ﬁnal
output y corresponds to the neural network’s judgement
whether the input QLT is topological. We use cross entropy as the cost function with L2 regularization to avoid
over-training and a mini-batch size of 10 . For the rest
of this paper, we use randomly-mixed 20000 data samples
within the VMC Metropolis of the topological and trivial
phases as the training group. We reserve a separate group
of 4000 data samples (also half trivial and half topological) for validation purposes including learning speed control and termination .
Once the machine learning is
successful, the trained neural network can rapidly process QLT’s from diﬀerent parts of the phase space to
yield a phase diagram. In order to establish level of con-
ﬁdence on the trained network’s assessment of whether
the system is topological or not, we process 2000 QLT’s
at each point and take the ratio p of ‘topological’ output,
i.e., y > 0.5. When p is close to 1 for topological phase
and 0 for trivial phase, it indicates even a single QLT can
reliably land a trustworthy detection.
Topological quantum phase transition in a free fermion
model– We ﬁrst apply the QLT-based machine learning to
the TQPT between trivial insulator and Chern insulator.
Consider the following tight-binding model on a square
⃗r+ˆxc⃗r + [1 + (−1)y(1 −κ)]c†
+ (−1)y iκ
⃗r+ˆx+ˆyc⃗r + c†
⃗r+ˆx−ˆyc⃗r
where ⃗r = (x, y) (see Fig. 2) and 0 ≤κ ≤1 is a tuning
parameter. The κ = 1 limit is the π-ﬂux square lattice
FIG. 2. Model illustration of Eq. 3. The unit cell consists of
two sublattice sites A and B. Hopping strengths are diﬀerent
for horizontal and vertical bonds and staggered. The diagonal
hopping is iκ (−iκ) along (against) the arrow. The red arrows
denotes a triangle that deﬁnes the operators of our QLT.
model for a Chern insulator with Chern number C =
1 , while the κ = 0 limit amounts to decoupled twoleg ladders. H(κ) interpolates between Chern insulator
and trivial insulator with a TQPT at κ = 0.5. To see
this, Fourier transform the Hamiltonian to momentum
[2 cosky + 2i sin ky (1 −κ + κ sin kx)] c†
+2 coskx(c†
k,Ack,A −c†
k,Bck,B) + h.c.
where A and B label the two sublattices, and note
that in this two-band model with two Dirac points at
(±π/2, π/2), one of the Dirac masses changes sign across
Our complete knowledge of the phase diagram makes
Eq. 3 an ideal testing ground for our algorithm. Hence we
implement supervised machine learning using two deepin-phase models of κ = 1.0 (Chern insulator) and κ = 0.1
(trivial insulator) for training .
The system size is
12 × 12 lattice spacings unless noted otherwise.
we establish that indeed single-site-based inputs of the
fermion occupation conﬁgurations n(⃗r) = c†
⃗rc⃗r fail to
transmit the topological information to the neural network, as we expected. With n(⃗r) as inputs, the learning is
ineﬃcient, signaled by high yields in the cost function .
Moreover, as shown in Fig. 3, even after a long period
of training the neural network keeps incorrectly judging
the system to be a trivial insulator for all values of κ,
except for κ = 1.0 where the result returns > 80% ‘nontrivial’.
This indicates that the neural network unfortunately does not pick up the universal features about
the topological phase, but rather memorizes the details
of the speciﬁc model at κ = 1.0.
The contrast in the results based on QLT input is striking. Fig. 3 shows that the trained network’s assessment
configurations
FIG. 3. The ratio p of ‘topological’ response from the neural
network on the model in Eq. 3 over the parameter region κ ∈
[0.1, 1, 0]. The neural network is trained with κ = 0.1 for y = 0
and κ = 1 for y = 1. The green square symbols represent the
results using fermion occupation conﬁgurations as an input
data. Red dashed line marks the expected topological phase
transition at κ = 0.5. The inset: an enlarged view over the
critical region 0.4 ≤κ ≤0.6. dc = 2 for all.
achieves > 99.9% accuracy deep in either the topological phase or trivial phase even with dc = 2.
Moreover, even though we have provided the training group
with only large-gap models in both topological and trivial phases focusing on identifying phases , we ﬁnd a
non-analytical behavior in p as a function of κ at the
critical point [see Fig. 3 inset].
Generalizations– Next we consider a fractional Chern
insulator (FCI) as an example of strongly-correlated
topological phase.
Here the ν = 1/3 FCI is represented by a VMC wave function that is the free fermion
wave function of the model in Eq. 3 raised to the third
power .
Surprisingly the neural network trained on
non-interacting parent Chern insulator already serves as
a ‘poor man’s network’ (see the inset of Fig. 4). This
network recognizes that FCI phase is distinct from the
parent Chern insulator and hence it only gives p ∼0.01
‘nontrivial’ response for the FCI phase. Nevertheless it
also notices that FCI is a topologically distinct state from
the trivial insulator since p ∼0.01 is large enough to exclude statistical error. Once trained with the FCI wave
function at two reference points κ = 0.1 for trivial and
κ = 1.0 for FCI, the network once again detects FCI
phase with high accuracy [see Fig. 4].
Remarkably the network automatically recognizes
topological degeneracy. Even we train the network with
only one of the degenerate ground states in the topological phase (GS#1 in Fig. 4), it correctly assess topological nature of the two other ground states that are
related to GS#1 by ﬂux threading.
The network also
GS#1, L=12
GS#2, L=12
GS#3, L=12
GS#1, L=16
GS#2, L=16
GS#3, L=16
FIG. 4. Application to a ν = 1/3 FCI. The topological phase
transition in the parent Chern insulator at κ = 0.5 is marked
by a vertical red dashed line. The inset shows the results using
neural network trained with the parent free fermion model,
where p is calculated over 20000 samples for each κ to reduce
statistical error. The main panel shows the results using FCI
wave functions for both training (κ = 0.1 for trivial and κ =
1.0 for the FCI, ﬁrst ground state only) and testing (all three
degenerate ground states, see Supplemental Material). L =
16 data is shown in addition to L = 12 to help attribute the
diﬀerences between κc of the topological phase transitions to
the ﬁnite-size eﬀect. dc = 2 for all.
detects a TQPT at 0.67 ≤κc ≤0.77. The uncertainty
in the critical value κc is a ﬁnite-size eﬀect on the quasidegeneracy as is clear from the convergence upon increasing the system size. The fact that κc > 0.5 when the
single-particle gap closes at κ = 0.5 could raise concern
in light of the ﬁndings on single-particle Green’s function
based approaches . We note that single-particle
gap is a pre-requisite for the VMC wave function to represent a topological phase since only then partons may
be integrated out, hence the shift of κc > 0.5 is expected.
Nevertheless, the result is the ﬁrst report of the TQPT
providing the target, and calls for further study on the
critical point using independent measures such as manybody gap or the more established yet costly entanglement
entropy based approaches .
Finally, we demonstrate that we can train the network to learn the topological protection of the topological
phases, and show indiﬀerence to the microscopic details
such as lattice structure or impurities. The key to successful machine learning this celebrated feature is the diversity of the training inputs. Without diverse inputs,
the network looks for features that are speciﬁc to its
training set. For instance, the network trained only with
square lattice cannot recognize the topological phase in
the honeycomb lattice. But if we provide diverse input
taken from both the square lattice and the honeycomb
With training on lattice:
FIG. 5. The ratio p of ‘topologically nontrivial’ response from
the neural networks for the honeycomb lattice model (Supplemental Material) over the parameter region κ ∈[0.1, 1, 0].
The topological phase transition is at κ = 0.5 (vertical red
dashed line). The neural networks are trained using the Chern
insulators and trivial insulators only on the honeycomb lattice, only on the square lattice, and on both. The inset zooms
into the critical region 0.4 ≤κ ≤0.6. dc = 2 for all.
lattice systems, the network can be trained to recognize
topological phases on both lattices with little penalty on
accuracy (see Fig. 5).
We also note that the network
recognizes the diﬀerence between diﬀerent Chern numbers (e.g., C = −1 v.s. C = 1) as well as higher Chern
numbers (e.g., C = 2).
Conclusion– In summary, we have successfully implemented supervised machine learning for topological
phases by introducing QLT as an interface between traditional concept of response theory and a simple neural
Three major strengths of our QLT-based machine
learning approaches are 1) eﬃciency, 2) accuracy, and
3) versatility. Firstly, the network can be trained with
quasi-two-dimensional QLT in gapped phases. Furthermore since QLT bypasses the time-consuming process
of averaging over Markov chains, one can quickly scan
the phase space once the network is trained. Although
our focus was on the phases, we demonstrated that nonanalyticity in the ratio of non-trivial response allows us
to pinpoint the phase transition. Finally, as a real-space
based formalism that does not requires translational symmetry, or diagonalization or ﬂux insertion, QLT is quite
versatile.
Our approach can also be applied to systems with other
ﬁllings as well as higher dimensions. The fact that QLT
readily handles degenerate ground states adds to its versatility.
Moreover there is nothing restricting QLT to
VMC data. It can be applied to Hamiltonian-based quantum Monte Carlo samples as well as other rep-
resentations of many-body wave functions such as matrix product states and PEPS. Most importantly, the
procedure of deﬁning appropriate QLT guided by relevant response function we established here is readily expanded to other state of interest such as superconducting
state, quantum spin Hall insulator, and Z2 topological
order . Hence our construction opens door to applications of the machine learning to novel states of broad
Acknowledgements We thank E. Khatami, R. Melko,
T. Neupert and S. Trebst for insightful discussions. This
work was supported by the DOE under Award DE-
SC0010313. YZ acknowledges support through the Bethe
Postdoctoral Fellowship and E-AK acknowledges Simons
Fellow in Theoretical Physics Award #392182. Bulk of
this work was done at KITP supported by Grant No.
NSF PHY11-25915.
∗ 
† 
 Michael Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning
 .
 S. S. Schoenholz, E. D. Cubuk, D. M. Sussman, E. Kaxiras, and A. J. Liu, Nat Phys 12, 469 .
 M. H. Amin, E. Andriyash, J. Rolfe, B. Kulchytskyy,
and R. Melko, arXiv:1601.02036.
 G. Carleo and M. Troyer, arXiv:1606.02318.
 G. Torlai and R. G. Melko, (), arXiv:1606.02718.
 G. Torlai and R. G. Melko, (), arXiv:1610.04238.
 J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko, arXiv:1605.01735.
 L. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 94, 195105 .
 P. Broecker, J. Carrasquilla, R. G. Melko, and S. Trebst,
 
 K. Ch’ng, J. Carrasquilla, R. G. Melko, and E. Khatami,
 
 J. Liu, Y. Qi, Z. Y. Meng, and L. Fu, arXiv:1610.03137.
 L. Huang and L. Wang, arXiv:1610.02746.
 T. Ohtsuki and T. Ohtsuki, arXiv:1610.00462.
 C. B´eny, arXiv:1301.3124.
 P. Mehta and D. J. Schwab, arXiv:1410.3831.
 R. Nandkishore and D. A. Huse, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 6, 15 .
 D. J. Scalapino, S. R. White, and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev.
B 47, 7995 .
 A. Kitaev, Annals of Physics 303, 2 .
 S. Das Sarma, M. Freedman, and C. Nayak, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 94, 166802 .
 C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman,
S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083 .
 R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1395 .
 D. C. Tsui, H. L. Stormer,
and A. C. Gossard, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 48, 1559 .
 T. Neupert, L. Santos, C. Chamon, and C. Mudry, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 106, 236804 .
 N. Regnault and B. A. Bernevig, Phys. Rev. X 1, 021014
 V. Kalmeyer and R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59,
2095 .
 X.-G. Wen, International Journal of Modern Physics B
04, 239 .
 L. Balents, Nature 464, 199 .
 A. Kitaev and J. Preskill, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110404
 M. Levin and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110405
 K. v. Klitzing, G. Dorda,
and M. Pepper, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 45, 494 .
 A. W. W. Ludwig, M. P. A. Fisher, R. Shankar,
G. Grinstein, Phys. Rev. B 50, 7526 .
 F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2015 .
 M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045
 D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale,
M. den Nijs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 405 .
 A. Kitaev, Annals of Physics 321, 2 .
 Our alternative proof of Eq. (1) (see Supplemental Material) builds on adiabatic continuity protected by the
gap in the spectra without requiring the system be noninteracting.
 Y. Zhang, R. G. Melko, and E.-A. Kim, in preparation.
 The system becomes decoupled two-leg ladders at κ =
0.0, which is non-generic for a two-dimensional insulator
and we choose to avoid such specialty.
 See Supplemental Material for further discussion and details on the impact of training models and QLT cut-oﬀdc
on machine learning phases as well as phase transitions.
 Y. Zhang, T. Grover, and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. B
84, 075128 .
 T. C. Lang, A. M. Essin, V. Gurarie,
and S. Wessel,
Phys. Rev. B 87, 205101 .
 Y.-Y. He, H.-Q. Wu, Z. Y. Meng, and Z.-Y. Lu, Phys.
Rev. B 93, 195164 .
 Y. Zhang, T. Grover, A. Turner, M. Oshikawa,
A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. B 85, 235151 .
 Y. Zhang, T. Grover, and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. B
91, 035127 .