q-Space Novelty Detection with Variational
Autoencoders
Aleksei Vasilev 1, Vladimir Golkov 1, Marc Meissner 1, Ilona Lipp 2, Eleonora Sgarlata 2,3,
Valentina Tomassini 2,4, Derek K. Jones 2, Daniel Cremers 1
1 Computer Vision Group, Technical University of Munich, Germany
2 CUBRIC, Cardiff University, UK
3 Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
4 Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University, UK
{alex.vasilev, vladimir.golkov, marc.meissner, cremers}@tum.de,
 , {lippi, tomassiniv, jonesd27}@cardiff.ac.uk
In machine learning, novelty detection is the task of identifying novel unseen data.
During training, only samples from the normal class are available. Test samples are
classiﬁed as normal or abnormal by assignment of a novelty score. Here we propose
novelty detection methods based on training variational autoencoders (VAEs) on
normal data. Since abnormal samples are not used during training, we deﬁne
novelty metrics based on the (partially complementary) assumptions that the VAE
is less capable of reconstructing abnormal samples well; that abnormal samples
more strongly violate the VAE regularizer; and that abnormal samples differ from
normal samples not only in input-feature space, but also in the VAE latent space
and VAE output. These approaches, combined with various possibilities of using
(e.g. sampling) the probabilistic VAE to obtain scalar novelty scores, yield a large
family of methods. We apply these methods to magnetic resonance imaging,
namely to the detection of diffusion-space (q-space) abnormalities in diffusion
MRI scans of multiple sclerosis patients, i.e. to detect multiple sclerosis lesions
without using any lesion labels for training. Many of our methods outperform
previously proposed q-space novelty detection methods. We also evaluate the
proposed methods on the MNIST handwritten digits dataset and show that many of
them are able to outperform the state of the art.
Introduction
The purpose of novelty detection is to score how dissimilar each test sample is from a “normal”
training set. This problem can also be seen as “one-class classiﬁcation”, where the model is trained
to represent the normal class only. Application domains include medical diagnostic problems, fraud
detection, and failure detection in industrial systems.
Novelty detection techniques can be classiﬁed into probabilistic, distance-based, reconstruction-based,
domain-based, and information-theoretic . We here focus on the ﬁrst three categories.
The quality of novelty detection results depends on the algorithm and data distribution. Deep
generative neural networks can be applied to reveal internal structure of the data and learn a better
data representation. In this paper we design a set of novelty detection methods based on variational
autoencoders (VAEs). We apply them to directly detect abnormalities such as multiple sclerosis lesions
in diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (diffusion MRI). Non-deep novelty detection methods for
diffusion space (q-space) have been used to tackle this problem [4; 5], and achieved promising
AUC scores between 0.82 and 0.89 in multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation on various datasets.
 
We compare the proposed VAE-based novelty detection methods with the original q-space novelty
detection, and show that some of them are able to perform better.
Related work on novelty detection with generative models
With a dramatic increase of research in deep generative models during the last years, several new
methods for novelty detection were proposed. These methods try to learn the normal patterns in the
data using variational autoencoders, adversarial autoencoders , or generative adversarial networks
(GANs) .
In the VAE trained on a normal class only is used to detect abnormalities in the test data. The
novelty score of the test sample is computed in the following way: the encoder of the VAE infers the
distribution of the test sample in the latent space; several samples from this distribution are passed to
the stochastic decoder of the VAE to infer a number of distributions of the test sample in the original
feature space; these distributions are used to compute the average probability density value of the test
sample, which is used as a novelty score.
A novelty score metric based on the adversarial autoencoder network is proposed in . The model
is trained to match the posterior distribution of the normal data in a latent space with a chosen prior
distribution. The novelty metric in this case is based on the likelihood of the test sample according to
the prior: low likelihood indicates that the test sample unlikely belongs to the normal data class.
Another approach , uses a framework consisting of an autoencoder network and a network that
estimates a Gaussian mixture model of a normal class distribution in the latent space. For the test
sample, both the reconstruction error of the autoencoder and the likelihood of this sample according
to the estimated mixture model are used to deﬁne abnormality.
In [16; 17], a GAN is trained to learn the distribution of the normal data. During test time a search
over the latent space is performed to ﬁnd the closest generated sample to the test sample. Then this
closest generated sample is fed into the discriminator and the overall novelty score is computed as a
weighted sum of the discriminator loss and of the difference between the input and the generated
Another line of work tries to unify classiﬁcation and novelty detection into a single framework.
The main concept is to train a separate class-conditional generative model (VAE or GAN) for each
normal class in the training dataset. During test time, for each of these generative models a search
over latent space is performed to ﬁnd the distance between the test sample and the closest generated
sample. The minimal distance across all class-conditional generators is a novelty score. If this score
is below a certain threshold, then the test sample is classiﬁed with the class of the corresponding
class-conditional generator. One of the methods we employ utilizes this idea for novelty detection,
using only one generative model for all the normal data, see Section 2.2.3.
A GAN with a mixture generator is used for novelty detection in . In contrast to most novelty
detection approaches, here the model is trained on both normal and abnormal data.
Diffusion MRI
Diffusion MRI is a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technique that uses the diffusion of water
molecules to generate contrast in MR images. Since this diffusion is not free and affected by obstacles,
it can reveal microstructural details about the tissue. For each of several chosen diffusion-space
(q-space) coordinates, a diffusion-weighted 3D image is acquired.
Classical data processing in diffusion MRI Traditional diffusion MRI processing methods ﬁt
a handcrafted mathematical or physical model/representation to the measurements, and interpret
the estimated model parameters. However, these approaches have several limitations, since the
model-ﬁtting procedure is ill-conditioned, and interpreting its results requires prior knowledge about
how disease-related microstructural changes affect the model parameters.
Supervised and weakly-supervised deep learning in diffusion MRI Recent research shows that
deep learning can overcome said issues by learning a direct mapping between q-space measurements
and diseases [3; 6]. In deep learning terminology, each diffusion-weighted 3D image corresponding
to a certain q-space coordinate is treated as a “channel” of the overall multi-channel 3D volume.
For voxel-wise supervised learning, for example to reconstruct missing q-space measurements from
existing ones, or to predict handcrafted-model-based parameters more robustly and at a shorter scan
time, or to directly estimate tissue types and properties, a “voxels-to-voxels” convolutional network
can be used . It can consist purely of convolutional layers with ﬁlter size 1 ˆ 1 ˆ 1 if the risk
of spatial bias (overﬁtting) should be excluded . On the other hand, global supervised learning
(i.e. image-wise rather than voxel-wise prediction) and voxel-wise weakly-supervised learning can
be performed with a convolutional network that reduces spatial resolution using pooling and/or
fully-connected layers . However, supervised and weakly-supervised disease detection requires
disease-speciﬁc labels.
Novelty detection in diffusion MRI The aforementioned methods are complemented by q-space
novelty detection methods, which do not require disease-related labels [4; 5]. In this line of work,
each voxel is treated as a separate d-dimensional feature vector, where d is the number of measured
diffusion directions. Voxels from scans of healthy volunteers are used as a reference dataset, and
the Euclidean distance in feature space between the test datapoint and its nearest neighbor from
the reference dataset is used as novelty score. A high novelty score thus indicates that the voxel is
lesioned. This novelty score coincides with multiple sclerosis lesions at AUC scores between 0.82
and 0.89 on various datasets, and we use this method as a baseline to compare our methods with.
Our contributions
In this paper we show that the usage of a variational autoencoder can help to better understand the
normal patterns in the data and thus improve the quality of novelty detection. We further explore the
possibilities of applying novelty detection to diffusion MRI processing. The main contributions of
the paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose several new novelty detection methods in the VAE original and latent feature
spaces. These methods can be applied to different novelty detection tasks. Our code is
publicly available at 
• We adapt the VAE network to q-space novelty detection. We show that this solution can
beat the performance of the original q-space novelty detection algorithm.
VAE-based Novelty Detection Methods
A variatioal autoencoder is a deep neural network that models a relationship between a lowdimensional latent random variable z and a random variable x in the original data space. A VAE
consists of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder is trained to approximate the posterior distribution
qφpz|xq, where φ are the network parameters, learned with backpropagation during training. The
decoder performs the inverse task: it approximates the posterior distribution pθpx|zq, where θ are
learned parameters. In contrast to the traditional autoencoder, the VAE has a stochastic encoder
and decoder: their outputs for a given input are not the variables z and x, but the parameters of the
distributions of z and x.
The goal of the VAE is to learn a good approximation qφpz|xq of the intractable true posterior
pθpz|xq. The quality of the approximation can be evaluated with the Kullback–Leibler divergence:
qφpz|xq ∥pθpz|xq
. This divergence cannot be computed directly [8; 15], but it can be
minimized by maximizing the sum of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) on the marginal likelihood
of datapoints xi: ELBOi “ Eqφpz|xiqrlog pθpxi|zqs ´ DKL
qφpz|xiq ∥ppzq
, where ppzq is a prior
distribution of z which is usually chosen as a unit Gaussian. The loss function of the VAE is then:
Eqφpz|xiqrlog pθpxi|zqs ´ DKL
qφpz|xiq ∥ppzq
where the sum is calculated over all training data samples xi.
From the machine learning perspective, the ﬁrst term in Eq. (1) can be considered as a reconstruction
error forcing the model to reconstruct the input and the second term is a regularizer that prevents the
model from giving each input a representation in a different region of the latent space.
In our case we train the VAE model to capture normal data only. Thereby, the VAE learns distributions
of the normal dataset in latent and original feature space. Both of these distributions as well as their
combination can be used to deﬁne novelty score metrics, thus we split our methods into three main
Normal sample
Normal sample: reconstruction
Test sample
Test sample: reconstruction
Novelty metric
ܰ௣̅ሺ௤തሻି௣̅ሺ௤ത೤ሻ
ܰ௫ି௣̅ሺ௤ത೤ሻ
Figure 1: Proposed novelty detection methods for the simpliﬁed case of 1D original space x and 1D
latent space z of the VAE with only one normal sample y and one test sample xtest. Arrows measure
distances between points (õ) or distributions (ô). The scores Nx´¯pp¯qq and N¯pp¯qq quantify whether
the VAE reconstructs xtest badly; Nx´y, Nx´¯pp¯qyq and N¯pp¯qq´¯pp ¯
qyq measure how dissimilar xtest (or
its reconstruction “¯pp¯qq”) is from normal samples y (or their reconstruction “¯pp¯qyq”); Nq´qy and
N¯q´¯qy measure how dissimilar xtest is from y in latent space; NpY and NqY measure how likely xtest
belongs to the modeled distribution of normal data. In this illustration, methods that use stochastic
estimates “ˆq ” or “ˆp ” correspond to the methods using deterministic means “¯q ” or “¯p ”. For example,
Nx´¯pp¯qyq, Nx´¯ppˆqyq, Nx´ˆpp¯qyq, Nx´ˆppˆqyq all correspond to the same green arrow, but use distinct
estimation methods.
categories. Novelty detection methods in latent space and original feature space are illustrated in
Novelty in the latent space
The trained VAE maps each sample x to a distribution z in some lower-dimensional latent space.
This representation can be used to deﬁne several novelty metrics.
Novelty as VAE regularizer
The VAE loss function includes the following regularizer term: DKL
qφpz|xq ∥Np0, Iq
. This term
forces the model to map inputs closely to the unit Gaussian distribution Np0, Iq in the latent space.
Without this regularizer the model could learn to give each input a representation in a different region
of the latent space.
For the model trained on the normal class only, one could expect that abnormal samples will have
distributions in the latent space that diverge more from the unit Gaussian than normal samples. We
thus can use this term as a novelty score for test sample xtest:
NVAE-regpxtestq “ DKL
qφpz|xtestq ∥Np0, Iq
Distance-based approaches in latent space
The latent space of a VAE trained on the normal class can be considered an effective representation
of the distribution of normal data. Therefore, classical novelty detection approaches can be adapted
to be used in this space. The algorithm here is to construct the reference dataset by capturing normal
data in the latent space. The latent representation of each test sample should also be inferred. Then
we can use nearest neighbour analysis to ﬁnd the closest sample from the reference dataset to the test
sample in a latent space using some distance measure. The distance to this closest sample will be a
novelty score. A VAE maps each input point to a distribution (rather than a point) in latent space. We
propose two distance measures:
1. Euclidean distance between means of the distributions. This approach uses only information about the means of the approximated posterior in the latent space for both normal and
test datapoints. The novelty score in this case is computed as the distance between between
the mean of the latent-space distribution of the test datapoint and the closest latent-space
distribution mean of a normal sample:
N¯q´¯qypxtestq “ min
yPY }Erqφpz|xtestqs ´ Erqφpz|yqs}2
where the minimum is taken over all normal samples y from the normal dataset Y .
2. Bhattacharyya distance between distributions. The Bhattacharyya distance is a symmetric measure of dissimilarity of two probability distributions p and q. It is deﬁned as
DBpp, qq “ ´lnpBCpp, qqq, where BCpp, qq “
ppzqqpzq dz is the Bhattacharyya coef-
ﬁcient of distributions p and q. This approach utilizes information about the full learned
distributions, computing the amount of the overlap between them. The proposed novelty score is deﬁned as the Bhattacharyya distance between the latent-space distribution
qφpz|xtestq of the test sample and the most similar latent-space distribution qφpz|yq of a
normal sample:
Nq´qypxtestq “ min
yPY DBpqφpz|xtestq, qφpz|yqq.
Density-based approach in latent space
Another approach to novelty detection is to estimate the density of normal data in the latent space.
Each normal datapoint is represented as a Gaussian distribution in the VAE latent space. Thus
the distribution of the whole normal dataset can be estimated as an average of these Gaussians:
yPY qφpz|yq. Then, the novelty score for the test sample can be computed from the
density estimate qY of the normal dataset, evaluated at the mean of the latent distribution qφpz|xtestq
of the test sample (see also Fig. 1):
NqY pxtestq “ ´qY pErqφpz|xtestqsq.
Novelty in the original feature space
VAE reconstruction-based approaches
Like a traditional autoencoder network, a VAE is trained to reconstruct the input. If a VAE is trained
on the normal class only, one could expect that it learns how to reconstruct data from the normal class
well, but may not be particularly good at reconstructing unseen data, so the reconstruction error for
the unseen class should be higher. Thus, the reconstruction error can be used as a novelty score.
The encoder and decoder are both stochastic. For each of them, we can either draw samples, or
consider the mean. For the decoder it is also possible to consider the entire distribution and compute
the density value of the test sample. We propose six possible reconstruction-based novelty scores:
1. Deterministic reconstruction error: Use means of both the encoder qφpz|xq and the
decoder pθpx|zq to deterministically reconstruct the input and compute the reconstruction
Nx´¯pp¯qqpxtestq “
››xtest ´ E
x|Erqpz|xtestqs
2. Deterministic reconstruction likelihood: Compute log likelihood of the input given the
mean of the encoder:
N¯pp¯qqpxtestq “ ´log pθ
xtest|Erqpz|xtestqs
3. Encoder-stochastic reconstruction error: Use samples from the encoder and mean of the
decoder to compute several possible reconstructions of the input and calculate the average
reconstruction error:
Nx´¯ppˆqqpxtestq “
zi„qφpz|xtestq }xtest ´ Erpθpx|ziqs}2
4. Encoder-stochastic reconstruction likelihood: Compute several possible log likelihood
function values of the input given samples from the encoder:
N¯ppˆqqpxtestq “
zi„qφpz|xtestq ´ log pθpxtest|ziq.
5. Decoder-stochastic reconstruction error: Use mean of the encoder and samples from the
decoder to compute average reconstruction error:
Nx´ˆpp¯qqpxtestq “
xi„pθpx|Erqφpz|xtestqsq }xtest ´ xi}2
6. Fully-stochastic reconstruction error: Use samples from both the encoder and the decoder
and compute average reconstruction error:
Nx´ˆppˆqqpxtestq “
xi„pθpx|ziq
zi„qφpz|xtestq
}xtest ´ xi}2
The novelty score deﬁned in Eq. (9) is equal to “reconstruction probability” proposed by .
In metrics (8), (9), (10) and (11) the average operation can be replaced by the min operation, producing
four more novelty metrics.
Distance- and density-based approaches
In addition to reconstruction-based approaches, it is possible to apply distance- and density-based
approaches described in Sections 2.1.2 and 2.1.3 to the distributions produced by the decoder of the
VAE. Therefore we can get three more novelty metrics:
N¯pp¯qq´¯pp¯qyqpxtestq “ min
x|Erqφpz|xtestqs
loooooooooooooomoooooooooooooon
Deterministic reconstruction of xtest
x|Erqφpz|yqs
loooooooooooomoooooooooooon
Deterministic reconstruction of y
Npp¯qq´pp¯qyqpxtestq “ min
x|Erqφpz|xtestqs
x|Erqφpz|yqs
Npp¯qY qpxtestq “ ´pY pErpθpx|Erqφpz|xtestqsqsq,
where pY pxq “
yPY pθpx|Erqφpz|yqsq is the average of the distributions reconstructed from
the normal-class samples in the original feature space.
Metrics in Eqs. (12) and (14) can also be computed using the original test sample instead of its
deterministic reconstruction produced by the VAE. Thus, two additional novelty scores are possible:
Nx´¯pp¯qyqpxtestq “ min
›››xtest ´ E
x|Erqφpz|yqs
Npp¯qY qpxqpxtestq “ ´pY pxtestq.
It is also possible to apply the Euclidean distance-based approach to the reconstructed test sample
and original (not reconstructed) normal datapoints:
N¯pp¯qq´ypxtestq “ min
x|Erqφpz|xtestq ´ ys
Distance to the closest generated sample
A VAE is a generative model. Trained on a normal class only, one could expect that it will not be
able to generate the datapoints that do not belong to the normal class. Thus a novelty score can be
computed as a distance between an input and the closest sample that the VAE decoder is able to
produce from any latent vector z:
Nx´ˆppxtestq “ min
}xtest ´ Erpθpx|zqs}2
This is an optimization problem over the latent space. It can be solved using a non-linear optimization
method such as L-BFGS . The encoder of the VAE with xtest as an input can be used to get an
initial value for z for optimization.
If the bottleneck of the VAE is not narrow enough, the VAE may still be able to reconstruct abnormal
data. However, the values of z for abnormal datapoints might be far from the unit Gaussian, since the
VAE loss includes the term DKL
qφpz|xq ∥Np0, Iq
, and is trained on the normal data only. Thus
the optimization can also be performed not over the whole latent space, but within some boundaries,
deﬁning a new novelty score metric Nx´ˆpb. During the experiments, we found that the best results
are achieved with r´10, 10s boundaries for each of the dimensions of the latent space.
Table 1: AUC scores of multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation for different q-space novelty detection methods. Many of our methods are at par with or outperform (marked in bold) the original
method Nx´y.
AUC scores
Baseline (Nx´y)
N¯pp¯qq´¯pp¯qyq
Nx´¯pp¯qyq
Npp¯qY qpxq
Novelty as additive inverse of highest generated likelihood
Another possibility is to not use Euclidean distance between the test sample and deterministic encoder
output, but to compute the density value of pθpxtest|zq. The novelty score in this case is equal to
Nˆppxtestq “ min
´log pθpxtest|zq.
In comparison to the N¯ppˆqq metric (Eq. (9)), where z is sampled from the approximated posterior
qφpz|xtestq, here z can take any value, or be restricted to lie within some boundaries for the same
reasons as for the Nx´ˆp score, Eq. (18).
Novelty as full VAE loss
If the VAE is trained on the “normal” class only, its loss function (Eq. (1)) can be considered as a
novelty metric itself. From a machine learning perspective, novel data that were not available during
training will cause a high value of the model’s loss function. From a probabilistic perspective, the
VAE loss function value from datapoint xi is a reverse of the lower bound of the marginal probability
ppxiq of this datapoint [8; 15]. Novel datapoints have a low probability according to the model trained
on a “normal” class and thus high loss value. Thus we propose a novelty metric:
N´ELBOpxtestq “ LVAE “ ´Eqφpz|xtestqrlog pθpxtest|zqs ` DKL
qφpz|xtestq ∥Np0, Iq
Like in the original VAE training algorithm , the Monte Carlo estimate of Eqφpz|xtestq should be
computed. We also propose to use several samples from the probabilistic decoder qφpz|xtestq and
deﬁne another novelty metric:
ELBOpxtestq “
z„qφpz|xtestqrlog pθpxtest|zqs ` DKL
qφpz|xtestq ∥Np0, Iq
Experiments
In this section we evaluate the proposed novelty detection methods on multiple sclerosis lesion
detection in diffusion MRI and on the MNIST dataset. For both experiments we used an autoencoder
Ground Truth ↑/ ROC ↓
False positive rate
True positive rate
Nx−y 0.859
N¯q−¯qy 0.893
Nq−qy 0.888
Novelty score
Novelty score
Novelty score
Relative frequency
Figure 2: Feasibility of q-space novelty detection for multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation. Top
row: manual lesion segmentation; novelty scores using the baseline method Nx´y and two VAE
latent space distance-based novelty detection methods N¯q´¯qy and Nq´qy. Bottom row: ROC for
one scan measuring coincidence of novelty detection with human-marked labels (proposed methods
outperform the baseline); normalized histogram of the novelty score for lesion and non-lesion voxels
for the methods above (many lesion voxels have considerably higher novelty scores than healthy
voxels). In other words, disease-related microstructural tissue changes are detected in a data-driven
way, without any prior knowledge about them.
with a bottleneck. We split the normal dataset into a training and validation set and used early stopping
to prevent overﬁtting. We used the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic
as the quality metric because it quantiﬁes the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of novelty detection across all
possible decision thresholds, is robust to class imbalance, and is the most common accuracy metric
for novelty detection in literature.
Experimental setup for q-space novelty detection
As the “normal” data to train the model for diffusion MRI, we used 26 diffusion MRI scans of
healthy volunteers that were split into 20 training and 6 validation scans. Each scan has six b “ 0
images and 40 uniformly distributed diffusion directions (bmax “ 1200s{mm2, SE-EPI, voxel size
1.8mm ˆ 1.8mm ˆ 2.4mm, matrix 128 ˆ 128, 57 slices, TE “ 94.5ms, TR “ 16s, distortioncorrected with elastix and upsampled to 256 ˆ 256 ˆ 172). Using machine learning nomenclature,
we refer to these 46 volumes (six b “ 0 and 40 diffusion-weighted volumes) as channels or voxel-wise
features. Test data consisted of three multiple sclerosis patients diffusion MRI scans with the same
scan parameters as for healthy volunteers. Note that every voxel (rather than every scan) is a sample.
Hence, the test set contains more than 5 million brain voxels in total, 55 thousand of which are
lesion (abnormal) voxels. To validate the results of proposed methods we used multiple sclerosis
lesion labels created by human raters using additional structural T2-weighted scans. We compared
the performance of proposed novelty detection algorithms with the distance-based q-space novelty
detection algorithm [4; 5] (described in Section 1.2).
In order to avoid potential discrepancies in image intensity across scans, each scan was divided
by its mean intensity. In addition, to prevent some channels from dominating over others, feature
scaling was performed, i.e. each channel was divided by the channel-wise mean taken across all
scans. Each voxel in the diffusion MRI scan was considered as a separate data sample. Thus the
local neighborhood information was ignored and only q-space measurements were used to perform
“voxel-to-voxel” inference. Trained in this way, the VAE is able to produce the latent space and the
original feature space distributions of the input data sample.
For each of the novelty metrics described in Section 2, we performed a hyperparameter search varying
the dimensionality of the latent space, the depth of the architecture and the number of hidden layers
to ﬁnd the model that achieves the highest AUC score. Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001 and
Table 2: The architecture used for novelty detection on the MNIST dataset; dim z refers to the
dimensionality of the latent space.
Network Part
Layer Type
Filter Size
Dimensions
Convolutional
Convolutional
Latent Space
Convolutional
Transp. Conv.
Convolutional
batch size of 32768 voxels was used during training. Three different models with the following number
of input/hidden/output features per layer were selected: 46 ´ 64 ´ 32 ´ 16 ´ 8 ´ 16 ´ 32 ´ 64 ´ 46;
46 ´ 128 ´ 64 ´ 32 ´ 16 ´ 32 ´ 64 ´ 128 ´ 46; 46 ´ 128 ´ 64 ´ 48 ´ 24 ´ 48 ´ 64 ´ 128 ´ 46.
Here 46 is the number of input/output features of the autoencoder. Results are shown in Table 1; these
three models can be distinguished by the ‘dim z’ column (the dimensionality of the latent space: 8,
16, or 24). Some of the produced multiple sclerosis lesions segmentations together with the ground
truth and the segmentation produced by the baseline are shown in Figure 2.
Experimental setup for the MNIST dataset
We consider one of the MNIST handwritten digits as novel and train on the remaining ones. 80 %
of the normal data represents the training data. The test data consists of the remaining 20 % of the
normal data as well as all of the novel data. With 10 possible novelty classes/digits, this results in 10
different experiments.
We found that a relatively shallow network consisting of convolutional/upconvolutional and maxpooling layers performed best. The architecture is given in Table 2. All convolutional layers have a
ﬁlter size of 3 ˆ 3 and a stride of 1 ˆ 1. Inputs to the convolutional layers are zero-padded to preserve
the image size. We used an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10´5 and a batch size of 64. For
each possible novelty digit, we compare the performance of our proposed methods with linear PCA,
PCA with a Gaussian kernel (kPCA) and a VAE-based state-of-the-art approach . The results
of the best-performing methods are shown in Table 3.
Discussion
For the diffusion MRI dataset, most of the proposed methods show a good performance. More
speciﬁcally, the method based on Euclidean distance in latent space (Nq´qy and N¯q´¯qy) outperforms
the method based on Euclidean distance in the original data space (Nx´y; see also Figure 2), despite
the fact that the model was not trained on abnormal data. This happens on one hand due to the fact
that the VAE has a regularizer that keeps the latent representation of the normal data tightly clustered
around the unit Gaussian, but at the same time, abnormal data that was not used during training can
be mapped in a completely different region of the latent space (which is conﬁrmed by the fact that
NVAE-reg also produces meaningful novelty scores); and on the other hand due to the fact that the
trained VAE simply happens to map abnormal data to slightly different latent-space regions.
Reconstruction-based methods also perform well, since the reconstruction of abnormal data (of
which the model has not seen any during training) can be very imprecise. However, in order to be
able to reconstruct the normal data, a VAE should have a sufﬁcient number of latent dimensions to
avoid signiﬁcant information loss. The results of the methods Nx´ˆp and Nx´ˆpb show the generative
ability of the VAE. High AUC scores prove that the model is able to generate only the normal data
it used during training. However, to achieve this ability, the bottleneck of the VAE (in contrast to
reconstruction-based methods) should be narrow enough, otherwise the model may also be able to
Table 3: AUC scores for selected novelty detection methods on the MNIST dataset for all novelty
classes/digits. Many of our methods outperform (marked in bold) the state of the art.
AUC scores for novelty digits:
An&Cho 
N¯pp¯qq´¯pp¯qyq
Npp¯qq´pp¯qyq
generate some “random” data that may be very close to the abnormal data in the original feature
space. Finally, the VAE loss itself as the inverse of the lower bound of the likelihood of the data
sample is a good novelty metric: abnormal data (none of which were used during training) will have
low likelihood according to the model and thus high novelty score.
For the MNIST dataset, the methods showcase a greater variance in performance. Again, the
distance-based methods applied to the latent space (N¯q´¯qy, Nq´qy) yield the best results, followed
by the methods applied to the output-feature space (N¯pp¯qq´¯pp¯qyq, Npp¯qq´pp¯qyq). All of them clearly
surpass the performance of existing approaches. The VAE reconstructions of images are often blurry,
which may explain the worse results of the reconstruction-based methods ( see Nx´¯pp¯qq in Table 3)
for some novelty digits. The VAE regularizer (NVAE-reg) does not prove to be a sufﬁcient novelty
metric for most novelty digits.
Conclusions
In this work, we presented a set of novelty detection algorithms that utilize the ability of variational
autoencoders to reveal the internal structure of the normal class data. We found that high novelty
scores produced by our methods coincide with multiple sclerosis lesions in diffusion MRI data, and
many of our methods outperform the baseline q-space novelty detection method. Additionally, we
evaluated the methods on the MNIST dataset, where we were able to surpass other state-of-the-art
approaches.
Interestingly, performance on novelty digit 1 was considerably worse than on the other digits both for
previous methods and for out methods. As noted by , this likely is due to the fact that the more
complex digits consist of similar, ‘1’-like structures that are implicitly learned by the VAE, in spite of
it not encountering any novel data during training. We conclude that all methods are prone to failure
if novel features have (partially) been learned from normal data.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the ERC Consolidator Grant “3DReloaded”.