International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Volume 10, Number 1.
ISSN: 1492-3831
February – 2009
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A
Review of Open Access Literature
Cathy S. Cavanaugh
University of Florida, USA
Michael K. Barbour
Wayne State University, USA
TA Consulting, Illinois, USA
The literature related to online learning programs for K-12 students dates to the mid-1990s and
builds upon a century of research and practice from K-12 distance education. While K-12 online
learning programs have evolved and grown over the past decade, the amount of published
research on virtual schooling practice and policy is limited. The current literature includes
practitioner reports and experimental and quasi-experimental studies, both published and
unpublished. This paper reviews open access literature in K-12 online learning and reports on a
structured content analysis of the documents. Themes in the literature include steady growth and
a focus on the benefits, challenges, and broad effectiveness of K-12 online learning. In addition,
newly developed standards for K-12 online learning are emerging in descriptions of effective
practices.
Introduction
In North America and other industrialized countries, distance education for elementary and
secondary students is seen as a solution to several educational problems, including crowded
schools, a shortage of secondary courses for remedial or accelerated students, a lack of access to
qualified teachers in a local school, and the challenge to accommodate students who need to learn
at a pace or in a place different from a school classroom . In less
industrialized nations, K-12 online education is seen as a social and economic development
strategy . Thus, it is clear why K-12 distance education programs are
developing rapidly around the world and why growth in K-12 online course enrollments has
outstripped that of other educational formats in recent years . A
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
fundamental challenge in this relatively new educational field for program developers, managers,
and instructors is locating guidance from successful practice and from research and literature.
Online learning is a form of distance education whose central defining characteristic is the
separation of teacher and learner . Watson, Winograd, and Kalmon defined
online learning as “education in which instruction and content are delivered primarily via the
Internet” (p. 95). Many K-12 online learning programs in North American are referred to as
virtual schools. Clark defined a virtual school as "an educational organization that offers
K-12 courses through Internet- or Web-based methods” (p. 1). The literature related to online
learning programs for K-12 students began to grow in the mid-1990s, building upon a century of
research and practice from K-12 distance education .
Although K-12 online learning programs have evolved and grown over the past decade, there is a
limited amount of published research on virtual schooling practice .
The current literature includes practitioner reports and experimental and quasi-experimental
studies, both published and unpublished.
The authors reviewed the existing open access literature in K-12 online learning and report on a
structured content analysis of selected documents. Previous reviews of the research on K-12
online learning have used both qualitative and quantitative methods . These reviews were limited to
dozens of studies and reports, compared to recent reviews of the literature on adult online
learning, which included hundreds of studies . As an example of
the growth in the published literature in K-12 online learning, of 226 publications that were
reviewed for this paper and published since 1997, 29 were published during the first three years
of that period and 69 were published since 2006.
The findings of the previous reviews were limited to generalizations about broad effectiveness
because insufficient data were available to substantiate analysis of factors that contributed to
effectiveness. However, the picture is changing as data from the first ten years of virtual
schooling have become available. This paper moves beyond the blanket endorsements of the
effectiveness of virtual schooling to examine the themes that are prevalent in the open access
documents published online from 1997 to July 2008. Examining these themes revealed the
emphases in virtual schooling research as well as the needs for future study.
Literature Review
To date, the amount of research evidence in refereed journal publications and papers from
refereed conferences in the field of virtual schooling is limited . Much of the published literature is based upon the personal experiences of those
involved in the practice of virtual schooling; as well, much of the research is available only in
unpublished masters’ theses and doctoral dissertations. In many ways, this is indicative of the
foundational descriptive work that often precedes experimentation in any scientific field. In other
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
words, it is important to know how students in virtual schools engage in their learning in this
environment prior to conducting any rigorous examination of virtual schooling.
Expanding upon his definition of a virtual school, Clark indicated that there were different
types of virtual schools, which he categorized in seven ways (see Table 1).
Clark’s Seven Categories of Virtual Schools
Description
State-sanctioned, statelevel
Virtual schools operating on a state-wide level, such as the Florida
Virtual School
College and universitybased
Independent university high schools or university-sponsored
delivery of courses to K-12 students, such as the University of
California College Prep Online (UCCP).
Consortium
regionally-based
Virtual schools operated by a group of schools or school districts,
such as the Virtual High School (VHS)
Local education agencybased
Virtual schools operated by a single school or school district, such
as the Gwinnett County Online Campus.
Virtual charter schools
Virtual schools created under the charter school legislation in many
states, such as Connections Academy, also commonly known as
cyberschools.
Private virtual schools
Virtual schools that are operated in the same manner as a brick and
mortar private school, such as the Christa McAuliffe Academy.
For-profit providers of
curricula, content, tools
and infrastructure
Companies that act as vendors for the delivery of courses or the use
of course materials, such as APEX Learning.
Watson, Winograd, and Kalmon offered a slightly different classification consisting of
five types of virtual school, which were summarized by Rice in Table 2.
Watson, Winograd, and Kalmon’s Five Categories of Virtual Schools (p. 427)
Description
supplemental
Students take individual courses but are enrolled in a physical
school or cyber school within the state. These programs are
authorized by the state and overseen by state education governing
District-level
Are typically operated by autonomous districts and are typically
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
supplemental programs
not tracked by state agencies.
Single-district
Provide an alternative to the traditional face-to-face school
environment and are offered by individual districts for students
within that district.
Multi-district
Are operated within individual school districts but enroll students
from other school districts within the state. This represents the
largest growth sector in K-12 online learning.
Cyber charters
Are chartered within a single district but can draw students from
across the state.
Barker, Wendel, and Richmond provided a similar but more exclusive definition of a
virtual school as “one that offers the mandated provincial instructional program to students
through web-based means (i.e., computer-mediated and online via the Internet” (p. 2). In the full
description, Barker et al. stated that a virtual school was one where students were enrolled fulltime in the virtual environment. According to this definition, most statewide virtual schools (such
as the Florida Virtual School (FLVS)) and the longstanding Virtual High School Global
Consortium (VHS) only provided virtual schooling opportunities, but were not virtual schools.
Within the literature, Clark’s definition has been generally accepted.
It should be understood that there is a great deal of variety in the different types of virtual schools
that currently operate in North America, and virtual schooling is primarily a North American
phenomenon . Powell and
Patrick found that while many other countries operate some form of Web-based or online
curricular support program for students and teachers (e.g., a SchoolNet such as the one found at
 and some even offer Web-based or online distance education
programs, of the 30 countries surveyed, only Canada and the United States operate entities that
can be classified as virtual schools. In fact, Australian Glenn Russell is one of the few scholars
outside of North America who has written about virtual schooling .
Barbour and Reeves have classifed virtual schooling literature as outlining the benefits of
virtual schooling or describing the difficulties or challenges of virtual schooling. They argued that
the benefits could be divided into five main areas: expanding educational access, providing high
quality learning opportunities, improving student outcomes and skills, allowing for educational
choice, and achieving administrative efficiency (see Table 3).
Benefits of Virtual Schooling 
Selected References
Higher levels of motivation
Kellogg and Politoski 
Expanding educational access
Berge & Clark ; Cavanaugh ;
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
Freedman, Darrow, Watson, & Lorenzo ;
Fulton ; Hernandez ; Kellogg &
Politoski ; Zucker 
high-quality
opportunities
Berge & Clark ; Butz ; Elbaum &
Tinker ; Fulton ; Kaplan-Leiserson
 ; Kellogg & Politoski ; Thomas ; Tinker & Haavind 
Improving student outcomes and skills
Berge & Clark ; Zucker & Kozma 
Allowing for educational choice
Baker, Bouras, Hartwig, & McNair ; Berge
& Clark ; Butz ; Fulton ;
Hassell & Terrell 
Administrative efficiency
Keeler ; Russo ; Vail 
However, whether these benefits are realized through virtual schooling remains in doubt in the
minds of some critics, and the research to support these conjectures is limited.
Along with the benefits, there were a number of challenges associated with virtual schooling.
Barbour and Reeves described these challenges as the high start-up costs associated with virtual
schools, access issues surrounding the digital divide, the approval or accreditation of virtual
schools, and student readiness and retention issues (see Table 4).
Challenges of Virtual Schooling 
Selected References
High start-up costs associated with virtual
Cavalluzzo ; Morris 
Access issues surrounding the digital
Hernandez 
Approval or accreditation of virtual
Berge & Clark 
Student readiness issues and retention
Ballas & Belyk ; Barker & Wendel ;
Berge and Clark ; Bigbie & McCarroll
 ; Cavanaugh, Gillan, Bosnick, Hess, & Scott
 ; Clark, Lewis, Oyer, & Schreiber ;
Espinoza, Dove, Zucker, & Kozma ;
Haughey & Muirhead ; Kozma, Zucker, &
Espinoza ; McLeod, Hughes, Brown, Choi,
& Maeda ; Zucker & Kozma 
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
The literature that reports research on virtual schooling tends to fall into one of two categories:
research into the effectiveness of virtual schooling and student readiness and retention issues (those
studies listed in Table 4 under the heading “Student readiness issues and retention issues”). Over
the past decade, several studies have shown that the only students who were typically successful
in online learning environments were those who had independent orientations towards learning,
who were highly motivated by intrinsic sources, and who had strong time management, literacy,
and technology skills . These characteristics are consistent with traits that are
typically associated with adult learners. The problem with this focus is that adults learn
differently from children and adolescents i. This supposition has led to the call for more research into
the factors that account for K-12 student success in online learning.
Methodology
Qualitative metasynthesis involves synthesizing literature to provide an overall perspective on a
given topic or issue . The authors used a
type of metasynthesis called template analysis, which entailed designing a template for the coding
of the literature . For our metasynthesis, the literature about K-12 virtual education
was collected from systematic searches of refereed conference proceedings, refereed journals,
dissertation indexes, and reports in the education press. A significant portion of the research and
reporting on K-12 distance education hadbeen conducted by public and private research centers
(e.g., the North Central Regional Educational Laboratory or the Appalachian Technology in
Education Consortium), which required the authors to search the World-Wide Web using the
Google® search engine and Google® Scholar. Search terms included but were not limited to the
following: virtual school, cyberschool, K-12 online learning and distance education, web-based
learning, and e-learning. Our analysis was based on both the general literature on virtual
schooling and the research on virtual schooling.
A systematic review of the literature in K-12 online learning provides a history of this new field
of inquiry as well as a context for decision-making. Content analysis of the documents, such as
metasynthesis, reveals the values and needs that dominate a field in its early stages . Content analysis is also used to study distance education at the level of the
course, across programs, and within the literature. Recent studies have analyzed the content of
titles, authors, and abstracts of distance education articles .
This metasynthesis commenced with a description of the literature base and its purposes.
Template construction afforded both a classification of the literature and its meanings and
messages. The categories for the template were drawn from current emphases within the field.
The broad themes were the models of virtual schooling (seven categories), the roles of
professionals in virtual schools (seven categories), benefits and challenges of virtual schooling
(ten categories), adopted standards for virtual school courses (six categories), and adopted
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
standards for virtual school teaching (thirteen categories). Documents were coded according to
whether they address each category. This coding matrix was consistent with the broad to narrow
classification used in template analysis. The categories revealed patterns of an emerging and
maturing field of educational study. An inductive process was applied to the categories to draw
inferences about the body of literature and about practice in the field .
From an initial sample of over 500 literature sources, 226 documents met the inclusion criteria of
relating directly to K-12 online learning and being openly Internet-accessible. The documents
included refereed journal articles and conference papers, books and chapters, evaluation reports,
dissertations, and online publications. The decision to use only open access documents was made
for two reasons. The initial search of literature revealed that individuals outside of the academy
authored the majority of documents; thus, the authors may not have regular or free access to
subscription-based publications. Also, because the authors were interested in presenting this
paper to the practitioner community, we wanted to ensure that this audience was able to access
the documents on which our metasynthesis was based. An additional consideration in reviewing
the literature of a rapidly-changing field like K-12 online learning was to account for effective
practices that emerged from practitioners and evaluators before they were studied and published
by the researcher community. Although the literature describing K-12 distance education reached
back to the 1930s, the first uses of online learning and virtual schooling only began to appear in
1997. The pace of research and other documentation of K-12 online learning rose steadily from
1997 through 2008 across all document types. Each document was reviewed by two of the three
coders. The individual coder used an MS Excel spreadsheet to indicate the presence or absence of
a particular theme in the document. After the three coders completed their coding, the
spreadsheets were compiled. There was 85% inter-coder agreement. The emergent categories and
inferences from this body of work follow.
The results of our metasynthesis were organized according to the five thematic areas that we
identified in the methodology. The first theme of analysis that we considered was the type of
virtual school. We utilized an inclusive combination of Clark's and Watson et al.’s 
categories to account for all identified and accepted categories of virtual schools.
Percentage of Literature about Different Types of Virtual Schools
Type of Virtual School
Percent of Literature
University
Consortium, multi-district
Single-district, LEA
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
For-profit provider
The literature reflected a great deal of variety in the types of virtual schools that operated in North
America; there was likewise a sizeable quantity of literature about each category of virtual
schools. A smaller percentage of literature focused upon university, private, and for-profit
provider virtual schools, which we attributed to the fact that these categories of virtual schools
make up a smaller percentage of the virtual school community. The higher percentage of
statewide and consortium/multi-district virtual schools was likely related to the fact that these two
forms of virtual schooling were among the first to appear in North America and have a history
established over the past decade.
As of fall 2007, only eight US states had neither multi-district full-time nor multi-district
supplemental virtual school programs . Since then, Wyoming has
announced plans to implement a state virtual school, and several other states have expanded their
virtual school. The lines between public and private virtual schools has blurred as public online
schools choose to become franchises for private course vendors. Virtual schooling has also been
growing in Canada as more rural districts in Western Canada and more districts throughout the
populous province of Ontario become involved in consortium like the Ontario Learning
Consortium (see . The literature
has not yet addressed the relative efficacy of teacher-developed, school-developed, and vendordeveloped courses.
The second theme we analyzed was the professional role addressed in the document’s findings
and/or recommendations: instructors, support staff (tutors, technical support, guidance, media
specialists, etc.), administrative/management, or course designer/developer. These categories
originated in the virtual school professional preparation and development spectrum and continua
developed for Professional Development for Virtual Schooling and Online Learning (available at
 ).
Percentage of Literature about Various Levels of Impact
Level of impact
Percent of Literature
Site facilitator
Administrator
Guidance counselor
Technology coordinator
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
Library media specialist
As noted earlier, the literature about virtual schooling largely focused upon descriptive work that
often precedes experimentation in most new fields. The high percentage of literature related to the
roles of teachers and administrators supports this belief, as much of this literature concentrated on
the practice of virtual schooling and its implementation within the K-12 context. Indeed, the
success of any school hinges on the educators who are in direct contact with students and on the
administrators who support them . Other support personnel including
media specialists and site facilitators are pivotal to the success of schools but have a less central role . Therefore the roles of
teachers and administrators received the majority of the scrutiny, while the impact of other
professionals was just beginning to be explored.
The third thematic area pertained to the benefits and challenges that had been identified by
Barbour and Reeves in their review of the literature.
Percentage of Literature about Various Benefits and Challenges
Benefit or Challenge
Percent of Literature
Motivation
Expanding educational access
High quality learning opportunity
Improving student outcomes and skills
Educational choice
Administrative efficiency
Start-up costs
Access issues
Approval/accreditation
Student readiness/retention
Based upon this analysis, much of the literature about the benefits of virtual schooling was
focused upon the promise of virtual schooling and its initial rationale for implementation (i.e., the
ability to expand access to educational opportunities to students in a variety of jurisdictions or the
opportunity to provide high quality learning through virtual schooling). On the other hand, the
literature related to the challenges of virtual schooling was focused upon largely administrative
issues (i.e., the high start-up costs associated with virtual schools, access issues surrounding the
digital divide).
The promise of virtual schooling as the focus of the benefits-related literature was noteworthy
because the literature about the advantages of online learning generally was mixed. For example,
there was no agreement in the education community or the public that online learning provides
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
high quality learning experiences at any level. Reeves concluded that there is almost no
evidence to support the claim that instructors who adopt new and emerging technologies also
adopt new pedagogy. Further, Herrington, Reeves, and Oliver concluded that commercial
course management systems restrict most instructors to the delivery of information rather than to
the provision of engaging, authentic learning experiences. So although virtual schools may
facilitate better instruction than the traditional classroom, there is no guarantee that this will
The fourth theme corresponded with NACOL’s National Standards for Quality Online Courses
(available
 
es%202007.pdf ). Rather than using the individual standards as variables, we chose to code the
standard areas. For example, the standard area of content included the following specific
standards: clear and measurable objectives; alignment with content standards; alignment with
required assessments; sufficient rigor, breadth, depth; integrated ICT skills; clear, complete
overview and syllabus; requirements consistent with goals; information about communication
with instructor; copyright issues addressed; clear expectations regarding academic integrity,
netiquette; clear privacy policies; instructor resources included; and assignment and assessment
keys included. We coded whether the document addresses the following online course standard
areas: content, design, assessment, technology, management, and/or 21st century skills. While it
may be revealing to explore the presence of each individual standard in the literature, the body of
literature appeared too limited for such examination at this time.
Percentage of Literature about Online Course Standard Areas
Online Course Standard Area
Percent of Literature
Assessment
Technology
Management
21st century skills
Unlike the majority of themes we analyzed, this theme had a considerable percentage of literature
distributed across each of the categories. The amount of literature concentrated on the technology
standard area was clearly dominant, understandably so for an educational enterprise mediated
entirely by technology. Apart from technology, approximately one half of the literature touched
upon the standard areas related to course content and design. The lower percentage for the 21st
century skills standard area may be related to the fact that the Partnership for 21st Century Skills
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
(see ) only began in 2004, which reflected approximately the
final four years of the twelve year time frame considered in our analysis.
Across virtual schools, course-level decisions are not made in uniform ways or in ways that
resemble such decision-making in physical schools. A continuum of course development
responsibility is evident in virtual schooling. At one end, teachers and/or designers make all
content and design decisions at the school level. At the other end, vendors make all content and
design decisions, and the role of the schools is to purchase and distribute courses to students.
Schools select their level of involvement in course development based on personnel, funding,
time, and other factors .
The final thematic area corresponded with NACOL’s National Standards for Quality Online
(available
 
ng.pdf ). As with the previous theme, we coded for the broad standard topic and not the individual
standards within each area.
Percentage of Literature about Online Teaching Standards
Online Teaching Standard
Percent of Literature
Teaching A-Credentials
Teaching B-Tech Skills
Teaching C-Strategies-active
Teaching D-Leadership, feedback
Teaching E-Legal, ethical, safety
Teaching F-Experiential OLL
Teaching G-Special Needs
Teaching H-OL Assessment
Teaching I-Goals & Standards
Teaching J-Data in Instruction
Teaching K-Frequent assessment
Teaching L-Collaborate w/colleagues
Teaching M-Media & materials for education
The most frequently referenced teaching standards in the literature related to the core behaviors of
online student-teacher interaction: use of active learning strategies and feedback to students.
These standards were followed in frequency by the three that are related to policy and
compliance: goals and standards, addressing the needs of all learners, and teaching credentials.
The next group of three standards addressed materials and technology, followed by two standards
that addressed professional behavior: collaboration with colleagues and use of data to drive
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
instruction. Providing frequent meaningful feedback to students and preparing active learning
experiences were accepted as critical elements in both distance and face-to-face teaching
 , so it was no surprise that they figure prominently in the
literature about virtual schools.
Conclusions and Implications
To date, the literature on virtual schooling has concentrated upon first defining and then
describing the benefits and the challenges of K-12 online learning. The research in the field in the
earlier years focused on the effectiveness of virtual schooling by comparing it to
traditional schooling and issues surrounding student readiness for and retention in virtual
schooling. In recent years , the growing body of literature shifted to a refined
description of practice and outcomes in virtual schools. Our analysis of the open access literature
indicated that a majority of that literature focused on statewide and consortium/multi-district
virtual schools, the roles of teachers and administrators, the promise of virtual schooling and its
initial rationale for implementation, administrative challenges, the technology utilized, and
interaction with students.
However, the amount of empirical research was still limited. Based on the limited research
included in our metasynthesis and in our review of the literature for the preparation of this
manuscript, we have identified areas for future research. The first area is to establish best
practices for online teaching strategies. Dipietro et al. was one of the few studies that
examined effective asynchronous teaching strategies in virtual schooling . Some of the literature provided personal accounts of strategies that teachers at the
FLVS and the VHS find useful , but there has not been
systematic research into the best practices of virtual school teaching strategies, particularly
asynchronous teaching strategies .
The second area is to improve upon the identification of characteristics that are necessary for
adolescents to be successful in online learning environments and to provide remediation for
students who are lacking these characteristics. The range of students enrolling in online learning
opportunities is expanding . Yet the ability of
virtual schools to support a broad range of student abilities appears to be limited. After describing
the promising results associated with the use of the Educational Success Prediction Instrument
(ESPRI), Roblyer stated that the next step in this line of inquiry is to create materials to
assist in the remediation of those students whose ESPRI results indicated potential for problems.
Rice also suggested that researchers need to continue the research into and development of
prediction tools, such as the ESPRI.
The third area concerns how virtual school and brick-and-mortar school personnel can encourage
more interaction between in-school and online classmates. Interaction was one of the key
components to create a learning community for virtual school students . Research
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark
into the field of learning communities in online learning environments has been growing over the
past decade . However, like the literature on distance education
and online learning in general, the research into online learning communities is almost
exclusively focused upon adult populations (including all of the references cited above). There is
a shortage of research exploring the development of K-12 online learning communities.
Finally, the fourth area is to examine the quality of student learning experiences in virtual school
environments, especially those of lower performing students. As stated earlier, the range of
students enrolling in online learning opportunities is expanding. Scherer indicated that as
the range of students with new and different needs expands, research is required to ensure that
online learning is a realistic and accessible opportunity. Research studies investigating the online
learning experience for lower performing students will assist personnel to design appropriate
supports as this particular population of students continues to grow within virtual schools.
Research and Practice in K-12 Online Learning: A Review of Open Access Literature
Cavanaugh, Barbour, and Clark