ERNIE: Enhanced Representation through Knowledge Integration
Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Yukun Li, Shikun Feng
Xuyi Chen, Han Zhang, Xin Tian, Danxiang Zhu, Hao Tian, Hua Wu
Baidu Inc.
{sunyu02,wangshuohuan,liyukun01,fengshikun01,tianhao,wu hua}@baidu.com
We present a novel language representation
model enhanced by knowledge called ERNIE
(Enhanced Representation through kNowledge IntEgration).
Inspired by the masking strategy of BERT ,
ERNIE is designed to learn language representation enhanced by knowledge masking strategies, which includes entity-level masking and
phrase-level masking.
Entity-level strategy
masks entities which are usually composed of
multiple words. Phrase-level strategy masks
the whole phrase which is composed of several
words standing together as a conceptual unit.
Experimental results show that ERNIE outperforms other baseline methods, achieving new
state-of-the-art results on ﬁve Chinese natural language processing tasks including natural language inference, semantic similarity,
named entity recognition, sentiment analysis
and question answering. We also demonstrate
that ERNIE has more powerful knowledge inference capacity on a cloze test.
Introduction
Language representation pre-training has been shown
effective for improving many natural language
processing tasks such as named entity recognition,
sentiment analysis, and question answering.
order to get reliable word representation, neural
language models are designed to learn word cooccurrence and then obtain word embedding with
unsupervised learning. The methods in Word2Vec
 and Glove represent words as vectors, where
similar words have similar word representations.
These word representations provide an initialization for the word vectors in other deep learning
models. Recently, lots of works such as Cove , Elmo , GPT
 and BERT improved word representation via different
strategies, which has been shown to be more effective for down-stream natural language processing
The vast majority of these studies model the
representations by predicting the missing word
only through the contexts. These works do not
consider the prior knowledge in the sentence. For
example, In the sentence ” Harry Potter is a series
of fantasy novels written by J. K. Rowling”. Harry
Potter is a novel name and J. K. Rowling is the
writer. It is easy for the model to predict the missing word of the entity Harry Potter by word collocations inside this entity without the help of long
contexts. The model cannot predict Harry Potter according to the relationship between Harry
Potter and J. K. Rowling.
It is intuitive that if
the model learns more about prior knowledge, the
model can obtain more reliable language representation.
In this paper, we propose a model called ERNIE
(enhanced representation through knowledge integration) by using knowledge masking strategies.
In addition to basic masking strategy, we use two
kinds of knowledge strategies: phrase-level strategy and entity-level strategy. We take a phrase
or a entity as one unit, which is usually composed of several words. All of the words in the
same unit are masked during word representation training, instead of only one word or character being masked. In this way, the prior knowledge of phrases and entities are implicitly learned
during the training procedure. Instead of adding
the knowledge embedding directly, ERNIE implicitly learned the information about knowledge
and longer semantic dependency, such as the relationship between entities, the property of a entity and the type of a event, to guide word embedding learning. This can make the model have
better generalization and adaptability.
 
In order to reduce the training cost of the model,
ERNIE is pre-trained on heterogeneous Chinese
data, and then applied to 5 Chinese NLP tasks.
ERNIE advances the state-of-the-art results on all
of these tasks. An additional experiment on the
cloze test shows that ERNIE has better knowledge inference capacity over other strong baseline
Our Contribution are as follows:
(1) We introduce a new learning processing of
language model which masking the units such as
phrases and entities in order to implicitly learn
both syntactic and semantic information from
these units.
(2) ERNIE signiﬁcantly outperforms the previous state-of-the art methods on various Chinese
natural language processing tasks.
(3) We released the codes of ERNIE and
pre-trained
 
LARK/tree/develop/ERNIE .
Related Work
Context-independent Representation
Representation of words as continuous vectors has
a long history.
A very popular model architecture for estimating neural network language model
(NNLM) was proposed in ,
where a feed forward neural network with a linear
projection layer and a non-linear hidden layer was
used to learn the word vector representation.
It is effective to learn general language representation by using a large number of unlabeled
data to pretrain a language model.
Traditional
methods focused on context-independent word
embedding. Methods such as Word2Vec and Glove 
take a large corpus of text as inputs and produces a
word vectors, typically in several hundred dimensions.
They generate a single word embedding
representation for each word in the vocabulary.
Context-aware Representation
However, a word can have completely different
senses or meanings in the contexts. Skip-thought
 proposed a approach for unsupervised learning of a generic, distributed sentence encoder. Cove show
that adding these context vectors improves performance over using only unsupervised word and
character vectors on a wide variety of common
NLP tasks. ULMFit 
proposed an effective transfer learning method
that can be applied to any task in NLP. ELMo
 generalizes traditional word
embedding research along a different dimension.
They propose to extract context-sensitive features
from a language model. The GPT enhanced the context-sensitive embedding
by adapting the Transformer.
BERT uses two different
pretraining tasks for language modeling. BERT
randomly masks a certain percentage of words in
the sentences and learn to predict those masked
words. Moreover, BERT learn to predict whether
two sentences are adjacent.
This task tries to
model the relationship between two sentences
which is not captured by traditional language
models. Consequently, this particular pretraining
scheme helps BERT to outperform state-of-the-art
techniques by a large margin on various key NLP
datasets such as GLUE and
SQUAD and so on.
Some other researchers try to add more information based on these models.
MT-DNN combine pre-training learning and
multi-task learning to improve the performances
over several different tasks in GLUE . GPT-2 adds task information into the pre-training process and adapt
their model to zero-shot tasks. XLM adds language embedding to the
pre-training process which achieved better results
in cross-lingual tasks.
Heterogeneous Data
Semantic encoder pre-trained on heterogeneous
unsupervised data can improve the transfer learning performance. Universal sentence encoder adopts heterogeneous training data
drawn from Wikipedia, web news, web QA pages
and discussion forum.
Sentence encoder based on response prediction beneﬁts from query-response pair data drawn from
Reddit conversation. XLM introduce parallel corpus to BERT, which is
trained jointly with masked language model task.
With transformer model pre-trained on heterogeneous data, XLM shows great performance gain
on supervise/unsupervised MT task and classiﬁcation task.
Transformer
Transformer
Figure 1: The different masking strategy between BERT and ERNIE
We introduce ERNIE and its detailed implementation in this section. We ﬁrst describe the model’s
transformer encoder,and then introduce the knowledge integration method in Section 3.2. The comparisons between BERT and ERNIE are shown visually in Figure 1.
Transformer Encoder
ERNIE use multi-layer Transformer as basic encoder like previous pretraning model such as GPT, BERT and XLM.
The Transformer can capture the contextual information for each token in the sentence via selfattention, and generates a sequence of contextual
embeddings.
For Chinese corpus, we add spaces around every character in the CJK Unicode range and use
the WordPiece to tokenize Chinese sentences. For a given token, its input representation is constructed by summing the corresponding token, segment and position embeddings. The ﬁrst token of every sequence is the special classiﬁcation embedding([CLS]).
Knowledge Integration
we use prior knowledge to enhance our pretrained
language model. Instead of adding the knowledge
embedding directly, we proposed a multi-stage
knowledge masking strategy to integrate phrase
and entity level knowledge into the Language representation. The different masking level of a sentence is described in Figure 2.
Basic-Level Masking
The ﬁrst learning stage is to use basic level masking, It treat a sentence as a sequence of basic
Language unit, for English, the basic language
unit is word, and for Chinese, the basic language
unit is Chinese Character. In the training process,
We randomly mask 15 percents of basic language
units, and using other basic units in the sentence as
inputs, and train a transformer to predict the mask
units. Based on basic level mask, we can obtain a
basic word representation. Because it is trained on
a random mask of basic semantic units, high level
semantic knowledge is hard to be fully modeled.
Phrase-Level Masking
The second stage is to employ phrase-level masking. Phrase is a small group of words or characters
together acting as a conceptual unit. For English,
we use lexical analysis and chunking tools to get
the boundary of phrases in the sentences, and use
some language dependent segmentation tools to
get the word/phrase information in other language
such as Chinese. In phrase-level mask stage, we
also use basic language units as training input, unlike random basic units mask, this time we randomly select a few phrases in the sentence, mask
and predict all the basic units in the same phrase.
At this stage, phrase information is encoded into
the word embedding.
Entity-Level Masking
The third stage is entity-level masking.
entities contain persons, locations, organizations,
products, etc., which can be denoted with a proper
Basic-level Masking
Phrase-level Masking
Entity-level Masking
British author
Harry Potter
Harry Potter
[mask] [mask] [mask]
Figure 2: Different masking level of a sentence
name. It can be abstract or have a physical existence. Usually entities contain important information in the sentences. As in the phrase masking
stage, we ﬁrst analyze the named entities in a sentence, and then mask and predict all slots in the
entities. After three stage learninga word representation enhanced by richer semantic information
is obtained.
Experiments
ERNIE was chosen to have the same model size
as BERT-base for comparison purposes. ERNIE
uses 12 encoder layers, 768 hidden units and 12
attention heads.
Heterogeneous Corpus Pre-training
ERNIE adopts Heterogeneous corpus for pretraining. Following , we draw the
mixed corpus Chinese Wikepedia, Baidu Baike,
Baidu news and Baidu Tieba. The number of sentences are 21M, 51M, 47M, 54M. respectively.
Baidu Baike contains encyclopedia articles written in formal languages, which is used as a strong
basis for language modeling. Baidu news provides
the latest information about movie names, actor
names, football team names, etc. Baidu Tieba is
an open discussion forum like Reddits, where each
post can be regarded as a dialogue thread. Tieba
corpus is used in our DLM task, which will be discussed in the next section.
We perform traditional-to-simpliﬁed conversion
on the Chinese characters, and upper-to-lower
conversion on English letters. We use a shared
vocabulary of 17,964 unicode characters for our
Dialogue data is important for semantic representation, since the corresponding query semantics of
the same replies are often similar. ERNIE models the Query-Response dialogue structure on the
DLM (Dialogue Language Model) task. As shown
in ﬁgure 3, our method introduces dialogue embedding to identify the roles in the dialogue, which
is different from that of universal sentence encoder . ERNIE’s Dialogue embedding plays the same roles as token type embedding in BERT, except that ERNIE can also represent multi-turn conversations (e.g. QRQ, QRR,
QQR, where Q and R stands for ”Query” and ”Response” respectively). Like MLM in BERT, masks
are applied to enforce the model to predict missing
words conditioned on both query and response.
What’s more, we generate fake samples by replacing the query or the response with a randomly selected sentence. The model is designed to judge
whether the multi-turn conversation is real or fake.
The DLM task helps ERNIE to learn the implicit relationship in dialogues, which also enhances the model’s ability to learn semantic representation. The model architecture of DLM task
is compatible with that of the MLM task, thus it is
pre-trained alternatively with the MLM task.
Experiments on Chinese NLP Tasks
ERNIE is applied to 5 Chinese NLP tasks, including natural language inference, semantic similarity, named entity recognition, sentiment analysis,
and question answering.
Natural Language Inference
The Cross-lingual Natural Language Inference
(XNLI) corpus is a crowdsourced collection for the MultiNLI corpus. The
pairs are annotated with textual entailment and
translated into 14 languages including Chinese.
The labels contains contradiction, neutral and entailment. We follow the Chinese experiments in
BERT .
Semantic Similarity
The Large-scale Chinese Question Matching Corpus (LCQMC) aims at identifying whether two sentences have the same intention. Each pair of sentences in the dataset is associated with a binary label indicating whether the
two sentences share the same intention, and the
task can be formalized as predicting a binary label.
Response Loss
Transformer
Figure 3: Dialogue Language Model. Source sentence: [cls] How [mask] are you [sep] 8 . [sep] Where is your
[mask] ? [sep]. Target sentence (words the predict): old, 8, hometown)
Name Entity Recognition
The MSRA-NER dataset is designed for named
entity recognition, which is published by Microsoft Research Asia. The entities contains several types including person name, place name, organization name and so on. This task can be seen
as a sequence labeling task.
Sentiment Analysis
ChnSentiCorp (Song-bo) is a dataset which aims
at judging the sentiment of a sentence.
It includes comments in several domains such as hotels, books and electronic computers. the goal of
this task is to judge whether the sentence is positive or negative.
Retrieval Question Answering
The goal of NLPCC-DBQA dataset is to select
answers of the corresponding questions.
evaluation methods on this dataset include MRR
 and F1 score.
Experiment results
The test results on 5 Chinese NLP tasks are presented in Table 1. It can be seen that ERNIE outperforms BERT on all tasks, creating new stateof-the-art results on these Chinese NLP tasks. For
the XNLI, MSRA-NER, ChnSentiCorp and nlpccdbqa tasks, ERNIE obtains more than 1% absolute accuracy improvement over BERT. The gain
of ERNIE is attributed to its knowledge integration strategy.
Ablation Studies
To better understand ERNIE, we perform ablation
experiments over every strategy of ERNIE in this
Effect of Knowledge Masking
Strategies
We sample 10% training data from the whole corpus to verify the effectiveness of the knowledge
masking strategy. Results are presented in Table
2. We can see that adding phrase-level mask to
the baseline word-level mask can improve the performance of the model. Based on this, we add
the entity-level masking strategythe performance
of the model is further improved. In addition. The
results also show that with 10 times larger size of
the pre-training dataset, 0.8% performance gain is
achieved on XNLI test set.
Effect of DLM
Ablation study is also performed on the DLM task.
we use 10% of all training corpus with different
proportions to illustrate the contributions of DLM
task on XNLI develop set. we pre-train ERNIE
from scratch on these datasets, and report average result on XNLI task from 5 random restart of
ﬁne-tuning. Detail experiment setting and develop
set result is presented in Table 3, We can see that
0.7%/1.0% of improvement in develop/test accuracy is achieved on this DLM task.
Cloze Test
To verify ERNIE’s knowledge learning ability, We
use several Cloze test samples to
examine the model. In the experiment, the name
entity is removed from the paragraphs and the
model need to infer what it is. Some cases are
show in Figure 4. We compared the predictions of
BERT and ERNIE.
In case 1, BERT try to copy the name appeared
in the context while ERNIE remembers the knowl-
Table 1: Results on 5 major Chinese NLP tasks
79.9 (+1.8)
78.4 (+1.2)
89.7 (+0.9)
87.4 (+0.4)
95.0 (+1.0)
93.8 (+1.2)
ChnSentiCorp
95.2 (+0.6)
95.4 (+1.1)
nlpcc-dbqa
95.0 (+0.3)
95.1 (+0.5)
82.3 (+1.6)
82.7 (+1.9)
Table 2: XNLI performance with different masking strategy and dataset size
pre-train dataset size
mask strategy
dev Accuracy
test Accuracy
10% of all
word-level(chinese character)
10% of all
word-level&phrase-level
10% of all
word-level&phrase-leve&entity-level
word-level&phrase-level&entity-level
Table 3: XNLI ﬁnetuning performance with DLM
corpus proportion(10% of all training data)
dev Accuracy
test Accuracy
Baike(100%)
Baike(84%) / news(16%)
Baike(71.2%)/ news(13%)/ forum Dialogue(15.7%)
Predict by ERNIE
Predict by BERT
2006年9月，________与张柏芝结婚，两人婚后育有两儿子——大儿子Lucas谢振
轩，小儿子Quintus谢振南；
In September 2006, _____ married Cecilia Cheung. They had two sons,
the older one is Zhenxuan Xie and the younger one is Zhennan Xie.
Tingfeng Xie
Zhenxuan Xie
Tingfeng Xie
戊戌变法，又称百日维新，是________ 、梁启超等维新派人士通过光绪帝进行
的一场资产阶级改良。
The Reform Movement of 1898, also known as the Hundred-Day Reform,
was a bourgeois reform carried out by the reformists such as ____
and Qichao Liang through Emperor Guangxu.
Youwei Kang
Shichang Sun
Youwei Kang
高血糖则是由于________分泌缺陷或其生物作用受损，或两者兼有引起。糖尿病
时长期存在的高血糖，导致各种组织，特别是眼、肾、心脏、血管、神经的慢
Hyperglycemia is caused by defective ______ secretion or impaired
biological function, or both. Long-term hyperglycemia in diabetes
leads to chronic damage and dysfunction of various tissues,
especially eyes, kidneys, heart, blood vessels and nerves.
(Not a word in
澳大利亚是一个高度发达的资本主义国家，首都为________。作为南半球经济最
发达的国家和全球第12大经济体、全球第四大农产品出口国，其也是多种矿产
出口量全球第一的国家。
Australia is a highly developed capitalist country with _______ as
its capital. As the most developed country in the Southern
Hemisphere, the 12th largest economy in the world and the fourth
largest exporter of agricultural products in the world, it is also
the world's largest exporter of various minerals.
(Not a city name)
(the capital
Australia)
________是中国神魔小说的经典之作，达到了古代长篇浪漫主义小说的巅峰，与
《三国演义》《水浒传》《红楼梦》并称为中国古典四大名著。
___________is a classic novel of Chinese gods and demons, which
reaching the peak of ancient Romantic novels. It is also known as
the four classical works of China with Romance of the Three
Kingdoms, Water Margin and Dream of Red Mansions.
The Journey to
(Not a word in
The Journey
to the West
相对论是关于时空和引力的理论，主要由________创立。
Relativity is a theory about space-time and gravity, which was
founded by _________.
(Not a word in
Figure 4: Cloze test
edge about relationship mentioned in the article.
In cases 2 and Case 5, BERT can successfully
learn the patterns according to the contexts, therefore correctly predicting the named entity type but
failing to ﬁll in the slot with the correct entity.
on the contrary, ERNIE can ﬁll in the slots with
the correct entities. In cases 3, 4, 6, BERT ﬁlls
in the slots with several characters related to sentences, but it is hard to predict the semantic concept. ERNIE predicts correct entities except case
4. Although ERNIE predicts the wrong entity in
Case 4, it can correctly predict the semantic type
and ﬁlls in the slot with one of an Australian city.
In summary, these cases show that ERNIE performs better in context-based knowledge reasoning.
Conclusion
In this paper, we presents a novel method to integrate knowledge into pre-training language model.
Experiments on 5 Chinese language processing
tasks show that our method outperforms BERT
over all of these tasks. We also conﬁrmed that both
the knowledge integration and pre-training on heterogeneous data enable the model to obtain better
language representation.
In future we will integrate other types of knowledge into semantic representation models, such as
using syntactic parsing or weak supervised signals
from other tasks. In addition We will also validate
this idea in other languages.