Syracuse University
Syracuse University
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science -
Technical Reports
College of Engineering and Computer Science
Forecasting the Behavior of Multivariate Time Series using Neural
Forecasting the Behavior of Multivariate Time Series using Neural
Kanad Charkraborty
Kishan Mehrotra
Syracuse University, 
Chilukuri K. Mohan
Syracuse University, 
Sanjay Ranka
Syracuse University
Follow this and additional works at: 
Part of the Computer Sciences Commons
Recommended Citation
Recommended Citation
Charkraborty, Kanad; Mehrotra, Kishan; Mohan, Chilukuri K.; and Ranka, Sanjay, "Forecasting the Behavior
of Multivariate Time Series using Neural Networks" . Electrical Engineering and Computer Science -
Technical Reports. 81.
 
This Report is brought to you for free and open access by the College of Engineering and Computer Science at
SURFACE. It has been accepted for inclusion in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science - Technical Reports by
an authorized administrator of SURFACE. For more information, please contact .
SU-CIS-90-36
Forecasting the Behavior of Multivariate
Time Series using Neural Networks
Kanad Charkraborty, Kishan Mehrotra, Chilukuri K. Mohan, San jay Ranka
November 1990
School of Computer and Information Science
Suite 4-116
Center for Science and Technology
Syracuse, New York 13244-4100
(315) 443-2368
SU-CIS-90-36
Forecasting the Behavior of Multivariate
Time Series using Neural Networks
K. Charkraborty, K. Mehrotra, C. Mohan, and S. Ranka
November 1990
School of Computer and Information Science
Syracuse University
Suite 4-116, Center for Science and Technology
Syracuse, New York 13244-4100
Forecasting the Behavior of Multivariate Time
Series using Neural Networks
Kanad Chakraborty, Kishan Mehrotra, Chilukuri K. Mohan, Sanjay Ranka
4-116 Center for Science and Technology,
School of Computer and Information Science,
Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244-4100
315-443-2368
(e-mail : kanad/kishan/mohan/ )
December 4, 1990
This paper presents a neural network approach to multivariate time-series analysis.
Real world observations of flour prices in three cities have been used as a benchmark in our
experiments. Feedforward connectionist networks have been designed to model flour prices
over the period from August 1972 to November 1980 for the cities of Buffalo, Minneapolis,
and Kansas City. Remarkable success has been achieved in training the networks to learn
the price curve for each of these cities, and thereby to make accurate price predictions.
Our results show that the neural network approach leads to better predictions than the
autoregressive moving average(ARMA) model of Tiao and Tsay [TiTs 89]. Our method
is not problem-specific, and can be applied to other problems in the fields of dynamical
system modeling, recognition, prediction and control.
Key words and phrases: Neural networks, Multivariate time series, Autoregressive moving average models, Prediction.
Introduction
Predicting the future is the prime motivation behind the search for laws that explain certain
phenomena. As observed by Weigend et al. [WAHR 90], it hinges on two types of knowledge: knowledge of underlying laws, a very powerful and accurate means of prediction, and
the discovery of strong empirical regularities in observations of a given system. However,
there are problems with both approaches- discovery of laws underlying the behavior of a
system is often a difficult task, and empirical regularities or periodicities are not always
evident, and can often be masked by noise.
Multivariate time-series analysis is an important statistical tool to study the behavior of
time dependent data, and forecast future values depending on the history of variations in the
data. A time-series is a sequence of values measured over time, in discrete or continuous
time units. By studying many related variables together than by studying just one, a
better understanding is often obtained. A multivariate time-series consists of sequences
of values of several contemporaneous variables changing with time. An important case is
when the variables being measured are significantly correlated, e.g., when similar attributes
are being measured at different geographic locations. In forecasting new values for each
variable, better prediction capabilities are available if variations in the other variables are
also taken into account. Robust forecasting must rely on all available correlations and
empirical interdependencies among different temporal sequences.
Many past time-series analysis techniques assume linear relationships among variables
[BoJe 70]. But in the real world, temporal variations in data do not exhibit simple regularities, and are difficult to analyze and predict accurately. Linear recurrence relations
and their combinations for describing the behavior of such data are often found to be inadequate. It seems necessary, therefore, that non-linear models be used for the analysis of
real-world temporal data. But formulation of reasonable non-linear models is an extremely
difficult task, because of simplifications made in the modeling stage, e.g., omitting parameters which are unknown or which do not seem to affect the observed data directly. Also,
the relationships between known parameters and observed values can only be hypothesized,
with no simple laws governing their mutual behavior. Hence we resort to a 'neural network' approach for non-linear modeling of multivariate time series; in earlier work, we have
successfully used this approach in analyzing univariate time series [LMMR 90].
Neural networks belong to the class of data-driven approaches, as opposed to modeldriven approaches. The analysis depends on available data, with little rationalization about
possible interactions. Relationships between variables, models, laws and predictions are
constructed post-facto after building a machine whose behavior simulates the data being
studied. The process of constructing such a machine based on available data is addressed
by certain general-purpose algorithms like 'back-propagation' [RuHW 86].
In this paper, we use neural networks to predict future values of possibly noisy multivariate time series based on past histories. The particular data analyzed are monthly
flour prices for Buffalo, Minneapolis and Kansas City over a period of a hundred months.
For impartial evaluation of the prediction performance of the approach, data for different
periods are used in the 'training' (modeling) and 'testing' (prediction) phases. The performance exceeded expectations, and the root mean squared errors (in prediction) obtained using
this approach are better than those obtained from the statistical model by at least an order
of magnitude. We expect such results to be obtained in other applications as well, since
no specific domain knowledge or expertise was used to tune the performance of the neural
Section 2 presents the architecture of the neural network used for our analysis, the
experiments performed, and the training paradigm used. In section 3, a traditional 'autoregressive moving average' (ARMA) model of statistical prediction has been described,
and its performance compared in section 4 with the network performance. Discussion and
concluding remarks then follow.
Methodology
Neural Networks
(Artificial) Neural networks are computing systems containing many simple non-linear computing units or nodes interconnected by links. In a 'feedforward' network, the units can
be partitioned into layers, with links from each unit in the kth layer being directed (only)
to each unit in the (k + l)th layer. Inputs from the environment enter the first layer, and
outputs from the network are manifested at the last layer. A d - n - 1 network, shown in
Figure 1, refers to a network with d inputs, n units in the intermediate 'hidden' layer, and
one unit in the output layer [WAHR 90]. A weight or 'connection strength' is associated
with each link, and a network 'learns' or is trained by modifying these weights, thereby
modifying the network function which maps inputs to outputs.
We use such d - n - 1 networks to learn and then predict the behavior of multivariate
Output Layer
Hidden Layer
Input Layer
Figure 1: A feedforward neural net with one hidden layer
time series. The hidden and output nodes realize non-linear functions of the form
where wi's denote real-valued weights of edges incident on a node,() denotes the adjustable
'threshold' for that node, and m denotes the number of inputs to the node from the previous
Experiments
In our experiments, we have analyzed a trivariate time series Xr = {(xt, Yt, Zt) : t =
1, 2, ... , T}, where T ranges upto 100. The data used are logarithms of the indices of
monthly flour prices for Buffalo (xt), Minneapolis (Yt) and Kansas City (zt), over the period
from August 1972 to November 1980, obtained from [TiTs 89]. In all cases, we train the
network over a certain part of our data, and once training is completed, "test" the network
over the remaining data- i.e. make the network predict the socalled "future" values.
Both one-lag and multi-lag output predictions are done for the given models. In one-lag
prediction, we forecast flour prices of each year based on actual past values only. In multilag prediction, on the other hand, we append the predicted values to our input database
and use these values also to predict future values. For instance, if the network is used to
predict a value n 6 from observed input data i1, ... is, then the next network prediction n7
is made using inputs i2, ... , is, n6 , and the subsequent network prediction ns is made using
inputs i3, i4, is, n6 , n7 • With one-lag prediction, on the other hand, the prediction at the
eighth instant is made using only the actual input data values i3, i4, is, i6, i7. The following
three sets of experiments were performed in this study.
1. Separate Modeling : Each univariate time series XT = {xt : t = 1, 2, ... , T}, YT =
{Yt : t = 1, 2, ... , T}, and ZT = {zt : t = 1, 2, ... , T}, was analyzed separately,
without utilizing their interdependencies. For example, only the values of x11 ... , Xk
were used to predict Xk+I·
A separate neural network was used for each of the
three series, as illustrated in Figure 2 and trained with about 90 input data values,
ranging from August 1972 to January 1980. The training phase is followed by output
prediction for the next ten time points using the
weights and thresholds generated during training. These predictions were compared
with the test data set to judge the performance of the network. Experiments were
performed with 2-2-1, 4-4-1, 6-6-1 and 8-8-1 networks. The learning and prediction
capabilities of the networks were found to be poor, and consequently, the separate
modeling and prediction approach was abandoned in favor of combined modeling,
described below.
2. Combined Modeling : We obtained vastly improved performance using (for each series) information from all series, instead of treating each series in isolation. This is
illustrated in Figure 3, in which Xt+l is shown as being learned/predicted using six
preceding values from all the three series. Similar diagrams can be drawn for the Yt+I
and Zt+l also. For instance, previous x,y and z values were used in predicting a new
z value. Furthermore, for the data studied, there was an implicit ordering between
the three series: Xt values were available before Yt values, and Yt values were available
before Zt values, and (naturally) all these were available before Xt+I values. So in
the neural network corresponding to each series, inputs reflected the past histories of
that series as well as the others. For instance, in the d - n - 1 feedforward network
used to predict Yt, if d = 5, the chosen input values would be Xt, Zt-1, Yt-h Xt-h Zt-2·
As in the previous case, the training set consisted of the first 90 items of trivariate
data, and the results shown in Figures 4 through 21 compare performance of an 8-8-1
network with that of a classical autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model. In
all the graphs shown, the y-axis is labeled "LFPI", an abbreviation for "Logarithms
of monthly Flour Price Indices".
3. Single Modeling : Success of the above experiments suggested the use of one single
neural network (with only one set of weights) to learn all three series together, as
shown in Figure 22. The trivariate series was reformulated as a (longer) univariate
time series { xb Yt, Zt, x2, y2, z2, ... }, and the generic name { ut} was given to this series. Here, the training set consisted of the first 270 observations of the reformulated
series. However, this model performed poorly with respect to both training and prediction, and was consequently rejected. The poor performance in this case indicates
that the superposition of three time series is much more difficult to learn than a single
one. Perhaps the reason is that in using the same set of weights to predict all three
series, there is an implicit erroneous assumption that all three series are expected to
fit the same model.
zt-1-Q~>o -- zt
Figure 2: Separate Architectures Schema
Output Layer
Hidden Layer
Input Layer
Figure 3: Combined Architectures Schema
Time(months)
Figure 4: Combined Network Modeling: Buffalo (training)
Time( months)
Figure 5: ARMA Modeling: Buffalo (90 months)
Time( months)
Figure 6: Combined Network Modeling: Minneapolis (training)
Time( months)
Figure 7: ARMA Modeling: Minneapolis (90 months)
Time( months)
Figure 8: Combined Network Modeling: Kansas City (training)
Time( months)
Figure 9: ARMA Modeling: Kansas City (90 months)
"target" -
'network" -
Time( months)
Figure 10: Network Prediction, one-lag (Buffalo)
"target" -
Time( months)
Figure 11: ARMA Prediction, one-lag (Buffalo)
5.2 f-1--.
"target" -
"network" -
Time( months)
Figure 12: Network Prediction, multi-lag (Buffalo)
"target" -
Time( months)
Figure 13: ARMA Prediction, multi-lag (Buffalo)
5.2 r-.....
"target" -
"network"-
Time( months)
Figure 14: Network Prediction, one-lag (Minneapolis)
"target" -
Time( months)
Figure 15: ARMA Prediction, one-lag (Minneapolis)
"target" -
"network" -
Time( months)
Figure 16: Network Prediction, multi-lag (Minneapolis)
Time( months)
Figure 17: ARMA Prediction, multi-lag (Minneapolis)
"target" -
"network"-
Time( months)
Figure 18: Network Prediction, one-lag (Kansas City)
"target" -
Time( months)
Figure 19: ARMA Prediction, one-lag (Kansas City)
"target" -
"network"-
Time( months)
Figure 20: Network Prediction, multi-lag (Kansas City)
"target" -
Time( months)
Figure 21: ARMA Prediction, multi-lag (Kansas City)
Procedure for '!raining the Networks
We used the error back-propagation algorithm of Rumelhart et al. [RuHW 86] to train
the networks, with the goal of minimizing the mean squared deviation between the desired
target values and network outputs, averaged over all the training inputs. In each step
in the training phase, a d-tuple (recent history) of normalized flour-prices, is presented
Output Layer
Hidden Layer
Input Layer
Figure 22: Single Architecture
to the network. The network is asked to predict the next value in the time sequence
for the chosen city. The error between the value predicted (by the network) and the
value actually observed (known data) is then measured and propagated backwards along
the feedforward connections. The weights of links between units are modified to various
extents, using a technique which apportions 'blame' for the error to various nodes and links,
as prescribed by the back-propagation algorithm. If the mean squared error exceeds some
small predetermined value, a new 'epoch' (cycle of presentations of all training inputs) is
started after termination of the current epoch.
The parameters of the back-propagation algorithm are the 'learning rate' and 'momentum', which roughly describe the relative importance given to the current and past errorvalues in modifying connection strengths. For better performance in our experiments, we
found that it was best to use a small learning rate in training the network. In all training
cases we chose a learning rate of 0.3, and an associated momentum term of 0.6. The number
of epochs varied between 25000 to 50000 in all cases.
Statistical Model
As shown in [TiTs 89], the autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model of prediction involves computation of the overall order of the temporal process with the help of normalized
criterion and root tables, followed by estimation of unknown parameters. For this example,
it was found that a trivariate ARMA(1,1) model or AR(2) model would be appropriate for
the data. Subsequently, Tiao and Tsay [TiTs 89] obtained the model described below.
First, each trivariate input vector has to be transformed by premultiplication with a
3 x 3 matrix T, called the transformation matrix. The transformed data conforms to a
trivariate ARMA(1,1) model of the form
where the transformed series Yt = Tzt is a 3 x 1 (trivariate) column vector, B represents the
usual backshift operator, and the 3 x 1 column vectors at comprise the error components
of the model. The matrix coefficients (I- ~ 1 B) and (I- E>1B) represent the autoregressive
and moving average components respectively. The estimated values of the 3 x 3 matrices
~ll E>1, and the 3 x 1 vector c are given in [TiTs 89].
In the trivariate ARMA model, the mean squared errors are obtained from the trivariate
at's, after premultiplying each such vector, fort = 1, 2 ... by the inverse of the transformation matrix T. The manner of computing the at vectors is as follows. We initialize a1 to
zero, and then, by using known values of Yt, at, compute Yt+l by the recipe of the model,
for t = 1, 2 ... 89. The error vector at is obtained at each step by taking the difference
between the computed and the actual values of Yt, for t = 2, 3 ... 90. One-lag prediction
is merely a continuation of the above process fort= 91,92 ... , and multi-lag prediction is
performed in a similar fashion but without considering the contribution of the at vectors
for t = 91,92 ... to the model, because these can be computed only by using both actual
and predicted data, and we are not permitted to use the former.
Analysis of Experimental Results
The mean squared errors for three different sets of experiments are listed in Table 1. The
values correspond respectively to the mean squared errors observed for (a) the first 90
trivariate data items, which correspond to the training data for the combined modeling
networks, (b) one-lag, and (c) multi-lag predictions of the combined modeling network and
ARMA models. The mean squared errors for the ARMA model are generally several orders
of magnitude larger than those of the networks. Table 2 gives the respective coefficients of
variation. The mean values of the data we worked with, viz. natural logarithms of monthly
flour price indices for Buffalo, Minneapolis and Kansas City, were 5.021, 4.997 and 5.027
respectively.
The performance of the neural networks did not vary much for different choices of input
sizes in the training and prediction phases of our experiments, and so the following results
are fairly representative. Also, experiments showed that perturbing the choice of initial
random weights of the network did not make any significant difference to the performance
of the networks in learning the time series. The vastly improved performance of combined
modeling over separate modeling, the results for which did not deserve mention in this
paper, suggests the existence of high positive correlations between the temporal patterns
for the three cities.
Table 1: Mean-Squared Errors x 103
Network Modeling/Prediction
ARMA Modeling/Prediction
Training One-lag Multi-lag
Training One-lag Multi-lag
Minneapolis
Kansas City
Table 2· Coefficients of Variation x 103
Network Modeling/Prediction
ARMA Modeling/Prediction
Training One-lag Multi-lag
Training One-lag Multi-lag
Minneapolis
Kansas City
Discussion
Most statistical models for learning and predicting time series are based only on linear
recurrences. Though computationally inexpensive, such functions do not often accurately
represent temporal variations. Nonlinear functions, on the other hand, are more useful for
tracing temporal sequences. This is probably the main reason for the significantly better
performance of the neural network approach (with nonlinearities at each node) as compared
to statistical modeling.
In any non-trivial time series, new values depend not only on the immediately prior
value, but also on many preceding values. Using too few inputs can result in inadequate
modeling, whereas too many inputs can excessively complicate the model. In the context
of neural networks, too many inputs would imply slower training and slower convergence,
and may in fact worsen the generalization capabilities (applicability to test cases) of the
network. Weigend et al. [WAHR 90] have given a rule of thumb for determining the number
of weights in the network as a function of the number of training samples. But this rule
was found to be too restrictive for the data set of 100 patterns we worked with, and hence
had to be disregarded.
Different types of connectionist models have been proposed for learning temporal variations of data. It has generally been held in the past that recurrent networks are more
suitable for learning temporal data. There were two reasons why recurrent networks were
not used for modeling the trivariate data on flour-prices- we observed experimentally that
unfolding them into simple feedforward networks would cause worse training and output
predictions than single hidden layer feedforward nets; the network would become inherently slower because of much greater amount of computation involved. It may be noted
in passing that an unfolded version of a recurrent network is an approximation of it and
implementing an exact recurrent network is a computationally expensive task. The main
reason for this is that the units in hidden layers must be made to iterate among themselves
till their outputs converge, and there is no way of knowing a priori how many iterations
it would take before all the hidden units have stable outputs. Simple feedforward nets are
much less computationally intensive and give good performance in less time.
A potential objection to the claim of improved pedormance using the neural network
approach, in comparison to the statistical approach, is that neural networks are more
complex and have many more parameters (weights and thresholds): would a more complex
statistical model pedorm equally well? The answer is essentially methodological. Often,
the real-world phenomena being modeled are so complex that it is impossible to theorize
and generate statistical models. A large investment of experts' domain-specific research
studies must precede the formulation of an adequate model for each separate phenomenon.
When a large number of parameters are involved, it is difficult to predict data even when the
laws which govern their behavior are known, e.g., in the gravitational interactions between
a large number of bodies. With neural networks, on the contrary, an essentially similar
architecture can be quickly modified and trained for a variety of different phenomena. The
procedure is data-driven rather than model-driven and gives good results in many cases
despite the unavailability of a good theory /model underlying the observed phenomenon.
We now evaluate the neural network approach with respect to the following criteria for
a good model suggested in the literature [Harv 89]:
1. Parsimony: The neural network does contain a large number of parameters and is
hence not parsimonious. However, the method of training does not impose any external biases, and networks started with different random weights successfully converged
to approximate the time series very well.
2. Data coherence: The neural network model provides a very good fit with the data,
as shown by the low mean-squared-error values for the training samples.
3. Consistency with prior knowledge: No explicit theory was constructed using the neural
networks, hence this criterion is largely irrelevant. In the best neural network model,
the assumption that flour prices become known in a fixed order ( Xt, Y1, Zt, x2, •.. ) is
consistent with the information that the data are available slightly earlier for some
cities than for others.
4. Data admissibility: The values in a time series predicted by the neural networks are
always close to the immediately preceding values, and do not violate any obvious
definitional or reasonable constraints.
5. Structural stability: The neural networks satisfy this criterion, because they give a
good fit for test data, which are outside the set of training samples.
6. Encompassing: The results obtained using the neural networks are better than those
obtained using the alternative ARMA models. However, no theory is directly suggested by the neural networks developed so far. The design of forecasting models
utilizing the parameters of the trained neural networks is currently under way.
Conclusions
We have presented a neural network approach to multivariate time-series analysis. In our
experiments, real world observations of flour prices in three cities have been used to train
and test the predictive power of feedforward neural networks. Remarkable success has been
achieved in training the networks to learn the price curve for each of these cities, and thereby
to make accurate price predictions. Our results show that the neural network approach leads
to better predictions than a well-known autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model
[TiTs 89]. We obtained a very close fit during the training phase, and the networks we
developed consistently outperformed statistical models during the prediction phase. Our
methodology is not problem specific, and can be applied to other problems in the fields of
dynamical system modeling, recognition, prediction and control.
We are currently exploring the combination of statistical and neural approaches for
time-series analyses. We expect that model-based statistical preprocessing can further
improve the performance or help in obtaining faster convergence of neural networks in the
task of time series predictions.