Edinburgh Research Explorer
Learning to Compare: Relation Network for Few-Shot Learning
Citation for published version:
Sung, F, Yang, Y, Zhang, L, Xiang, T, Torr, PHS & Hospedales, TM 2018, Learning to Compare: Relation
Network for Few-Shot Learning. in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, pp. 1199-1208, Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States, 18/06/18. 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1109/CVPR.2018.00131
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
 
2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Learning to Compare: Relation Network for Few-Shot Learning
Flood Sung
Yongxin Yang3
Tao Xiang1
Philip H.S. Torr2
Timothy M. Hospedales3
1Queen Mary University of London
2University of Oxford
3The University of Edinburgh
 
 
{lz, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk
{yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk
We present a conceptually simple, ﬂexible, and general
framework for few-shot learning, where a classiﬁer must
learn to recognise new classes given only few examples from
each. Our method, called the Relation Network (RN), is
trained end-to-end from scratch. During meta-learning, it
learns to learn a deep distance metric to compare a small
number of images within episodes, each of which is designed to simulate the few-shot setting. Once trained, a RN
is able to classify images of new classes by computing relation scores between query images and the few examples of
each new class without further updating the network. Besides providing improved performance on few-shot learning, our framework is easily extended to zero-shot learning.
Extensive experiments on ﬁve benchmarks demonstrate that
our simple approach provides a uniﬁed and effective approach for both of these two tasks.
1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved great success in visual recognition tasks . However, these supervised learning models need large amounts of labelled data
and many iterations to train their large number of parameters. This severely limits their scalability to new classes due
to annotation cost, but more fundamentally limits their applicability to newly emerging (eg. new consumer devices)
or rare (eg. rare animals) categories where numerous annotated images may simply never exist. In contrast, humans
are very good at recognising objects with very little direct
supervision, or none at all i.e., few-shot or zero-shot
 learning. For example, children have no problem generalising the concept of “zebra” from a single picture in
a book, or hearing its description as looking like a stripy
horse. Motivated by the failure of conventional deep learning methods to work well on one or few examples per class,
and inspired by the few- and zero-shot learning ability of
humans, there has been a recent resurgence of interest in
machine one/few-shot and
zero-shot learning.
Few-shot learning aims to recognise novel visual categories from very few labelled examples. The availability
of only one or very few examples challenges the standard
‘ﬁne-tuning’ practice in deep learning . Data augmentation and regularisation techniques can alleviate overﬁtting in such a limited-data regime, but they do not solve
it. Therefore contemporary approaches to few-shot learning
often decompose training into an auxiliary meta learning
phase where transferrable knowledge is learned in the form
of good initial conditions , embeddings or optimisation strategies . The target few-shot learning problem is then learned by ﬁne-tuning with the learned optimisation strategy or computed in a feed-forward pass
 without updating network weights. Zero-shot
learning also suffers from a related challenge. Recognisers
are trained by a single example in the form of a class description (c.f., single exemplar image in one-shot), making
data insufﬁciency for gradient-based learning a challenge.
While promising, most existing few-shot learning approaches either require complex inference mechanisms , complex recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures
 , or ﬁne-tuning the target problem . Our
approach is most related to others that aim to train an effective metric for one-shot learning . Where they
focus on the learning of the transferrable embedding and
pre-deﬁne a ﬁxed metric (e.g., as Euclidean ), we further aim to learn a transferrable deep metric for comparing
the relation between images (few-shot learning), or between
images and class descriptions (zero-shot learning). By expressing the inductive bias of a deeper solution (multiple
non-linear learned stages at both embedding and relation
modules), we make it easier to learn a generalisable solution to the problem.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a two-branch Relation Network
(RN) that performs few-shot recognition by learning to
compare query images against few-shot labeled sample images. First an embedding module generates representations
of the query and training images. Then these embeddings
are compared by a relation module that determines if they
are from matching categories or not. Deﬁning an episodebased strategy inspired by , the embedding and relation modules are meta-learned end-to-end to support fewshot learning. This can be seen as extending the strategy
of to include a learnable non-linear comparator,
instead of a ﬁxed linear comparator.
Our approach outperforms prior approaches, while being simpler (no RNNs
 ) and faster (no ﬁne-tuning ). Our proposed strategy also directly generalises to zero-shot learning. In this case the sample branch embeds a single-shot
category description rather than a single exemplar training
image, and the relation module learns to compare query image and category description embeddings.
Overall our contribution is to provide a clean framework
that elegantly encompasses both few and zero-shot learning. Our evaluation on four benchmarks show that it provides compelling performance across the board while being
simpler and faster than the alternatives.
2. Related Work
The study of one or few-shot object recognition has been
of interest for some time .
Earlier work on few-shot
learning tended to involve generative models with complex
iterative inference strategies . With the success of
discriminative deep learning-based approaches in the datarich many-shot setting , there has been a surge
of interest in generalising such deep learning approaches to
the few-shot learning setting. Many of these approaches use
a meta-learning or learning-to-learn strategy in the sense
that they extract some transferrable knowledge from a set
of auxiliary tasks (meta-learning, learning-to-learn), which
then helps them to learn the target few-shot problem well
without suffering from the overﬁtting that might be expected when applying deep models to sparse data problems.
Learning to Fine-Tune
The successful MAML approach
 aimed to meta-learn an initial condition (set of neural
network weights) that is good for ﬁne-tuning on few-shot
The strategy here is to search for the weight
conﬁguration of a given neural network such that it can
be effectively ﬁne-tuned on a sparse data problem within
a few gradient-descent update steps. Many distinct target
problems are sampled from a multiple task training set; the
base neural network model is then ﬁne-tuned to solve each
of them, and the success at each target problem after ﬁnetuning drives updates in the base model – thus driving the
production of an easy to ﬁne-tune initial condition. The
few-shot optimisation approach goes further in metalearning not only a good initial condition but an LSTMbased optimizer that is trained to be speciﬁcally effective for
ﬁne-tuning. However both of these approaches suffer from
the need to ﬁne-tune on the target problem. In contrast, our
approach solves target problems in an entirely feed-forward
manner with no model updates required, making it more
convenient for low-latency or low-power applications.
RNN Memory Based
Another category of approaches
leverage recurrent neural networks with memories .
Here the idea is typically that an RNN iterates over an examples of given problem and accumulates the knowledge
required to solve that problem in its hidden activations, or
external memory. New examples can be classiﬁed, for example by comparing them to historic information stored in
the memory. So ‘learning’ a single target problem can occur in unrolling the RNN, while learning-to-learn means
training the weights of the RNN by learning many distinct
problems. While appealing, these architectures face issues
in ensuring that they reliably store all the, potentially long
term, historical information of relevance without forgetting.
In our approach we avoid the complexity of recurrent networks, and the issues involved in ensuring the adequacy of
their memory. Instead our learning-to-learn approach is de-
ﬁned entirely with simple and fast feed forward CNNs.
Embedding and Metric Learning Approaches
prior approaches entail some complexity when learning the
target few-shot problem.
Another category of approach
aims to learn a set of projection functions that take query
and sample images from the target problem and classify
them in a feed forward manner . One approach
is to parameterise the weights of a feed-forward classiﬁer
in terms of the sample set . The meta-learning here is
to train the auxiliary parameterisation net that learns how
to paramaterise a given feed-forward classiﬁcation problem
in terms of a few-shot sample set. Metric-learning based
approaches aim to learn a set of projection functions such
that when represented in this embedding, images are easy
to recognise using simple nearest neighbour or linear classi-
ﬁers . In this case the meta-learned transferrable
knowledge are the projection functions and the target problem is a simple feed-forward computation.
The most related methodologies to ours are the prototypical networks of and the siamese networks of .
These approaches focus on learning embeddings that transform the data such that it can be recognised with a ﬁxed
nearest-neighbour or linear classiﬁer. In contrast, our framework further deﬁnes a relation classiﬁer
CNN, in the style of (While focuses on
reasoning about relation between two objects in a same image which is to address a different problem.). Compared
to , this can be seen as providing a learnable rather
than ﬁxed metric, or non-linear rather than linear classiﬁer.
Compared to we beneﬁt from an episodic training strategy with an end-to-end manner from scratch, and compared
to we avoid the complexity of set-to-set RNN embedding of the sample-set, and simply rely on pooling .
Zero-Shot Learning
Our approach is designed for fewshot learning, but elegantly spans the space into zero-shot
learning (ZSL) by modifying the sample branch to input a
single category description rather than single training image. When applied to ZSL our architecture is related to
methods that learn to align images and category embeddings and perform recognition by predicting if an image
and category embedding pair match . Similarly to the case with the prior metric-based few-shot approaches, most of these apply a ﬁxed manually deﬁned similarity metric or linear classiﬁer after combining the image
and category embedding. In contrast, we again beneﬁt from
a deeper end-to-end architecture including a learned nonlinear metric in the form of our learned convolutional relation network; as well as from an episode-based training
3. Methodology
3.1. Problem Deﬁnition
We consider the task of few-shot classiﬁer learning. Formally, we have three datasets: a training set, a support set,
and a testing set. The support set and testing set share the
same label space, but the training set has its own label space
that is disjoint with support/testing set. If the support set
contains K labelled examples for each of C unique classes,
the target few-shot problem is called C-way K-shot.
With the support set only, we can in principle train a classiﬁer to assign a class label ˆy to each sample ˆx in the test
set. However, due to the lack of labelled samples in the support set, the performance of such a classiﬁer is usually not
satisfactory. Therefore we aim to perform meta-learning on
the training set, in order to extract transferrable knowledge
that will allow us to perform better few-shot learning on the
support set and thus classify the test set more successfully.
An effective way to exploit the training set is to mimic
the few-shot learning setting via episode based training, as
proposed in . In each training iteration, an episode is
formed by randomly selecting C classes from the training
set with K labelled samples from each of the C classes to
act as the sample set S = {(xi, yi)}m
i=1 (m = K × C), as
well as a fraction of the remainder of those C classes’ samples to serve as the query set Q = {(xj, yj)}n
j=1. This sample/query set split is designed to simulate the support/test set
that will be encountered at test time. A model trained from
sample/query set can be further ﬁne-tuned using the support
set, if desired. In this work we adopt such an episode-based
training strategy. In our few-shot experiments (see Section
4.1) we consider one-shot (K = 1, Figure 1) and ﬁve-shot
(K = 5) settings. We also address the K = 0 zero-shot
learning case as explained in Section 3.3.
3.2. Model
Our Relation Network (RN) consists of two
modules: an embedding module fϕ and a relation module
gφ, as illustrated in Figure 1. Samples xj in the query set Q,
and samples xi in the sample set S are fed through the embedding module fϕ, which produces feature maps fϕ(xi)
and fϕ(xj). The feature maps fϕ(xi) and fϕ(xj) are combined with operator C(fϕ(xi), fϕ(xj)). In this work we assume C(·, ·) to be concatenation of feature maps in depth,
although other choices are possible.
The combined feature map of the sample and query are
fed into the relation module gφ, which eventually produces
a scalar in range of 0 to 1 representing the similarity between xi and xj, which is called relation score. Thus, in
the C-way one-shot setting, we generate C relation scores
ri,j for the relation between one query input xj and training
sample set examples xi,
ri,j = gφ(C(fϕ(xi), fϕ(xj))),
i = 1, 2, . . . , C
For K-shot where K > 1, we element-wise sum
over the embedding module outputs of all samples from
each training class to form this class’ feature map. This
pooled class-level feature map is combined with the query
image feature map as above. Thus, the number of relation
scores for one query is always C in both one-shot or fewshot setting.
Objective function
We use mean square error (MSE)
loss (Eq. (2)) to train our model, regressing the relation
score ri,j to the ground truth: matched pairs have similarity
1 and the mismatched pair have similarity 0.
ϕ, φ ←argmin
(ri,j −1(yi == yj))2
The choice of MSE is somewhat non-standard.
problem may seem to be a classiﬁcation problem with a label space {0, 1}. However conceptually we are predicting
relation scores, which can be considered a regression problem despite that for ground-truth we can only automatically
generate {0, 1} targets.
3.3. Zero-shot Learning
Zero-shot learning is analogous to one-shot learning in
that one datum is given to deﬁne each class to recognise.
However instead of being given a support set with one-shot
image for each of C training classes, it contains a semantic
class embedding vector vc for each. Modifying our framework to deal with the zero-shot case is straightforward: as
a different modality of semantic vectors is used for the support set (e.g. attribute vectors instead of images), we use a
Feature maps concatenation
relation module
embedding module
Figure 1: Relation Network architecture for a 5-way 1-shot problem with one query example.
second heterogeneous embedding module fϕ2 besides the
embedding module fϕ1 used for the image query set. Then
the relation net gφ is applied as before. Therefore, the relation score for each query input xj will be:
ri,j = gφ(C(fϕ1(vc), fϕ2(xj))),
i = 1, 2, . . . , C
The objective function for zero-shot learning is the same
as that for few-shot learning.
3.4. Network Architecture
As most few-shot learning models utilise four convolutional blocks for embedding module , we follow the
same architecture setting for fair comparison, see Figure 2.
More concretely, each convolutional block contains a 64-
ﬁlter 3 × 3 convolution, a batch normalisation and a ReLU
nonlinearity layer respectively. The ﬁrst two blocks also
contain a 2 × 2 max-pooling layer while the latter two do
not. We do so because we need the output feature maps
for further convolutional layers in the relation module. The
relation module consists of two convolutional blocks and
two fully-connected layers. Each of convolutional block
is a 3 × 3 convolution with 64 ﬁlters followed by batch
normalisation, ReLU non-linearity and 2 × 2 max-pooling.
The output size of last max pooling layer is H = 64 and
H = 64 ∗3 ∗3 = 576 for Omniglot and miniImageNet
respectively. The two fully-connected layers are 8 and 1
dimensional, respectively. All fully-connected layers are
ReLU except the output layer is Sigmoid in order to generate relation scores in a reasonable range for all versions
of our network architecture.
The zero-shot learning architecture is shown in Figure 3.
In this architecture, the DNN subnet is an existing network
(e.g., Inception or ResNet) pretrained on ImageNet.
4. Experiments
We evaluate our approach on two related tasks: few-shot
classiﬁcation on Omniglot and miniImagenet, and zeroshot classiﬁcation on Animals with Attributes (AwA) and
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB). All the experiments
are implemented based on PyTorch .
4.1. Few-shot Recognition
Few-shot learning in all experiments uses
Adam with initial learning rate 10−3 , annealed by half
for every 100,000 episodes. All our models are end-to-end
trained from scratch with no additional dataset.
We compare against various state of the art
baselines for few-shot recognition, including neural statistician , Matching Nets with and without ﬁne-tuning ,
MANN , Siamese Nets with Memory , Convolutional Siamese Nets , MAML , Meta Nets , Prototypical Nets and Meta-Learner LSTM .
Omniglot contains 1623 characters (classes)
from 50 different alphabets. Each class contains 20 samples
drawn by different people. Following , we augment new classes through 90◦, 180◦and 270◦rotations of
existing data and use 1200 original classes plus rotations for
training and remaining 423 classes plus rotations for testing.
All input images are resized to 28 × 28.
Besides the K sample images, the 5-way 1shot contains 19 query images, the 5-way 5-shot has 15
query images, the 20-way 1-shot has 10 query images and
the 20-way 5-shot has 5 query images for each of the C
sampled classes in each training episode. This means for
feature concatenation
2X2 max-pool
batch norm
3X3 conv, 64 filters
(a) Convolutional Block
2X2 max-pool
Convolutional Block
2X2 max-pool
2X2 max-pool
FC ReLU, HX8
relation score
FC Sigmoid, 8X1
(b) RN for few-shot learning
Convolutional Block
Convolutional Block
Convolutional Block
Convolutional Block
Convolutional Block
Figure 2: Relation Network architecture for few-shot learning (b)
which is composed of elements including convolutional block (a).
example that there are 19 × 5 + 1 × 5 = 100 images in
one training episode/mini-batch for the 5-way 1-shot experiments.
Following , we computed few-shot classiﬁcation accuracies on Omniglot by averaging over 1000 randomly generated episodes from the testing set. For the 1shot and 5-shot experiments, we batch one and ﬁve query
images per class respectively for evaluation during testing.
The results are shown in Table 1. We achieved state-of-theart performance under all experiments setting with higher
averaged accuracies and lower standard deviations, except
5-way 5-shot where our model is 0.1% lower in accuracy
than . This is despite that many alternatives have signiﬁcantly more complicated machinery , or ﬁne-tune
on the target problem , while we do not.
miniImageNet
The miniImagenet dataset, originally proposed
by , consists of 60,000 colour images with 100 classes,
each having 600 examples. We followed the split introduced by , with 64, 16, and 20 classes for training, validation and testing, respectively. The 16 validation classes
is used for monitoring generalisation performance only.
Following the standard setting adopted by most
existing few-shot learning work, we conducted 5 way 1-shot
and 5-shot classiﬁcation. Beside the K sample images, the
weight decay
feature concatenation
weight decay
relation score
FC4 Sigmoid
Figure 3: Relation Network architecture for zero-shot learning.
5-way 1-shot contains 15 query images, and the 5-way 5shot has 10 query images for each of the C sampled classes
in each training episode. This means for example that there
are 15×5+1×5 = 80 images in one training episode/minibatch for 5-way 1-shot experiments. We resize input images
to 84 × 84. Our model is trained end-to-end from scratch,
with random initialisation, and no additional training set.
Following , we batch 15 query images per
class in each episode for evaluation in both 1-shot and 5shot scenarios and the few-shot classiﬁcation accuracies
are computed by averaging over 600 randomly generated
episodes from the test set.
From Table 2, we can see that our model achieved stateof-the-art performance on 5-way 1-shot settings and competitive results on 5-way 5-shot. However, the 1-shot result
reported by prototypical networks reqired to be trained
on 30-way 15 queries per training episode, and 5-shot result was trained on 20-way 15 queries per training episode.
When trained with 5-way 15 query per training episode,
 only got 46.14 ± 0.77% for 1-shot evaluation, clearly
weaker than ours. In contrast, all our models are trained
on 5-way, 1 query for 1-shot and 5 queries for 5-shot per
training episode, with much less training queries than .
4.2. Zero-shot Recognition
Datasets and settings
We follow two ZSL settings: the
old setting and the new GBU setting provided by for
training/test splits. Under the old setting, adopted by most
existing ZSL works before , some of the test classes
also appear in the ImageNet 1K classes, which have been
used to pretrain the image embedding network, thus violating the zero-shot assumption. In contrast, the new GBU
setting ensures that none of the test classes of the datasets
appear in the ImageNet 1K classes. Under both settings, the
5-way Acc.
20-way Acc.
CONVOLUTIONAL SIAMESE NETS 
CONVOLUTIONAL SIAMESE NETS 
MATCHING NETS 
MATCHING NETS 
SIAMESE NETS WITH MEMORY 
NEURAL STATISTICIAN 
META NETS 
PROTOTYPICAL NETS 
98.7 ± 0.4%
99.9 ± 0.1%
95.8 ± 0.3%
98.9 ± 0.2%
RELATION NET
99.6 ± 0.2%
99.8± 0.1%
97.6 ± 0.2%
99.1± 0.1%
Table 1: Omniglot few-shot classiﬁcation. Results are accuracies averaged over 1000 test episodes and with 95% conﬁdence intervals
where reported. The best-performing method is highlighted, along with others whose conﬁdence intervals overlap. ‘-’: not reported.
5-way Acc.
MATCHING NETS 
43.56 ± 0.84%
55.31 ± 0.73%
META NETS 
49.21 ± 0.96%
META-LEARN LSTM 
43.44 ± 0.77%
60.60 ± 0.71%
48.70 ± 1.84%
63.11 ± 0.92%
PROTOTYPICAL NETS 
49.42 ± 0.78%
68.20 ± 0.66%
RELATION NET
50.44 ± 0.82%
65.32 ± 0.70%
Table 2: Few-shot classiﬁcation accuracies on miniImagenet. All
accuracy results are averaged over 600 test episodes and are reported with 95% conﬁdence intervals, same as . For each task,
the best-performing method is highlighted, along with any others
whose conﬁdence intervals overlap. ‘-’: not reported.
test set can comprise only the unseen class samples (conventional test set setting) or a mixture of seen and unseen class
samples. The latter, termed generalised zero-shot learning
(GZSL), is more realistic in practice.
Two widely used ZSL benchmarks are selected for the
old setting: AwA (Animals with Attributes) consists
of 30,745 images of 50 classes of animals. It has a ﬁxed
split for evaluation with 40 training classes and 10 test
classes. CUB contains 11,788 images of 200 bird species with 150 seen
classes and 50 disjoint unseen classes. Three datasets 
are selected for GBU setting: AwA1, AwA2 and CUB. The
newly released AwA2 consists of 37,322 images of 50
classes which is an extension of AwA while AwA1 is same
as AwA but under the GBU setting.
Semantic representation
For AwA, we use the continuous 85-dimension class-level attribute vector from ,
which has been used by all recent works. For CUB, a continuous 312-dimension class-level attribute vector is used.
Implementation details
Two different embedding modules are used for the two input modalities in zero-shot
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we use Inception-
V2 as the query image embedding DNN in the
old and conventional setting and ResNet101 for the
GBU and generalised setting, taking the top pooling units
as image embedding with dimension D = 1024 and 2048
respectively. This DNN is pre-trained on ILSVRC 2012
1K classiﬁcation without ﬁne-tuning, as in recent deep ZSL
works . A MLP network is used for embedding semantic attribute vectors. The size of hidden layer
FC1 (Figure 3) is set to 1024 and 1200 for AwA and CUB
respectively, and the output size FC2 is set to the same dimension as the image embedding for both datasets. For the
relation module, the image and semantic embeddings are
concatenated before being fed into MLPs with hidden layer
FC3 size 400 and 1200 for AwA and CUB, respectively.
We add weight decay (L2 regularisation) in FC1 & 2 as
there is a hubness problem in cross-modal mapping for
ZSL which can be best solved by mapping the semantic feature vector to the visual feature space with regularisation.
After that, FC3 & 4 (relation module) are used to compute
the relation between the semantic representation (in the visual feature space) and the visual representation. Since the
hubness problem does not existing in this step, no L2 regularisation/weight decay is needed. All the ZSL models are
trained with weight decay 10−5 in the embedding network.
The learning rate is initialised to 10−5 with Adam and
then annealed by half every 200,000 iterations.
Results under the old setting
The conventional evaluation for ZSL followed by the majority of prior work is to
assume that the test data all comes from unseen classes. We
evaluate this setting ﬁrst. We compare 15 alternative approaches in Table 3. With only the attribute vector used as
the sample class embedding, our model achieves competitive result on AwA and state-of-the-art performance on the
more challenging CUB dataset, outperforming the most related alternative prototypical networks by a big margin.
Note that only inductive methods are considered. Some re-
10-way 0-shot
50-way 0-shot
ESZSL 
SSE-RELU 
SYNC-STRUCT 
SEC-ML 
PROTO. NETS 
DEVISE 
SOCHER et al. 
MTMDL 
BA et al. 
DS-SJE 
50.4/ 56.8
RELATION NET
Table 3: Zero-shot classiﬁcation accuracy (%) comparison on AwA and
CUB (hit@1 accuracy over all samples) under the old and conventional
setting. SS: semantic space; A: attribute space; W: semantic word vector
space; D: sentence description (only available for CUB). F: how the visual feature space is computed; For non-deep models: FO if overfeat 
is used; FG for GoogLeNet ; and FV for VGG net . For neural network based methods, all use Inception-V2 (GoogLeNet with batch
normalisation) as the DNN image imbedding subnet, indicated as
cent methods are tranductive in that they use all
test data at once for model training, which gives them a big
advantage at the cost of making a very strong assumption
that may not be met in practical applications, so we do not
compare with them here.
Results under the GBU setting
We follow the evaluation setting of . We compare our model with 11 alternative ZSL models in Table 4. The 10 shallow models results
are from and the result of the state-of-the-art method
DEM is from the authors’ GitHub page1. We can see
that on AwA2 and CUB, Our model is particularly strong
under the more realistic GZSL setting measured using the
harmonic mean (H) metric. While on AwA1, our method is
only outperformed by DEM .
5. Why does Relation Network Work?
5.1. Relationship to existing models
Related prior few-shot work uses ﬁxed pre-speciﬁed distance metrics such as Euclidean or cosine distance to perform classiﬁcation . These studies can be seen as
distance metric learning, but where all the learning occurs in
the feature embedding, and a ﬁxed metric is used given the
learned embedding. Also related are conventional metric
learning approaches that focus on learning a shallow
(linear) Mahalanobis metric for a ﬁxed feature representa-
1 
DeepEmbeddingModel_ZSL
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Relation Network
(c) Metric Learning
(d) Metric + Embedding
Figure 4: An example relation learnable by Relation Network and
not by non-linear embedding + metric learning.
tion. In contrast to prior work’s ﬁxed metric or ﬁxed features and shallow learned metric, Relation Network can be
seen as both learning a deep embedding and learning a deep
non-linear metric (similarity function)2. These are mutually
tuned end-to-end to support each other in few short learning.
Why might this be particularly useful? By using a ﬂexible function approximator to learn similarity, we learn a
good metric in a data driven way and do not have to manually choose the right metric (Euclidean, cosine, Mahalanobis). Fixed metrics like assume that features
are solely compared element-wise, and the most related 
assumes linear separability after the embedding. These are
thus critically dependent on the efﬁcacy of the learned embedding network, and hence limited by the extent to which
the embedding networks generate inadequately discriminative representations. In contrast, by deep learning a nonlinear similarity metric jointly with the embedding, Relation
Network can better identify matching/mismatching pairs.
5.2. Visualisation
To illustrate the previous point about adequacy of learned
input embeddings, we show a synthetic example where existing approaches deﬁnitely fail and our Relation Network
can succeed due to using a deep relation module. Assuming
2D query and sample input embeddings to a relation module, Fig. 4(a) shows the space of 2D sample inputs for a
ﬁxed 2D query input. Each sample input (pixel) is colored
according to whether it matches the ﬁxed query or not. This
2Our architecture does not guarantee the self-similarity and symmetry
properties of a formal similarity function. But empirically we ﬁnd these
properties hold numerically for a trained Relation Network.
CONSE 
DEVISE 
LATEM 
ESZSL 
RELATION NET
Table 4: Comparative results under the GBU setting. Under the conventional ZSL setting, the performance is evaluated using per-class
average Top-1 (T1) accuracy (%), and under GZSL, it is measured using u = T1 on unseen classes, s = T1 on seen classes, and H =
harmonic mean.
represents a case where the output of the embedding modules is not discriminative enough for trivial (Euclidean NN)
comparison between query and sample set. In Fig. 4(c) we
attempt to learn matching via a Mahalanobis metric learning relation module, and we can see the result is inadequate.
In Fig. 4(d) we learn a further 2-hidden layer MLP embedding of query and sample inputs as well as the subsequent
Mahalanobis metric, which is also not adequate. Only by
learning the full deep relation module for similarity can we
solve this problem in Fig. 4(b).
In a real problem the difﬁculty of comparing embeddings
may not be this extreme, but it can still be challenging. We
qualitatively illustrate the challenge of matching two example Omniglot query images (embeddings projected to 2D,
Figure 5(left)) by showing an analogous plot of real sample
images colored by match (cyan) or mismatch (magenta) to
two example queries (yellow). Under standard assumptions
 the cyan matching samples should be nearest neighbours to the yellow query image with some metric
(Euclidean, Cosine, Mahalanobis). But we can see that the
match relation is more complex than this. In Figure 5(right),
we instead plot the same two example queries in terms of a
2D PCA representation of each query-sample pair, as represented by the relation module’s penultimate layer. We can
see that the relation network has mapped the data into a
space where the (mis)matched pairs are linearly separable.
6. Conclusion
We proposed a simple method called the Relation Network for few-shot and zero-shot learning. Relation network
learns an embedding and a deep non-linear distance metric
for comparing query and sample items. Training the network end-to-end with episodic training tunes the embedding
and distance metric for effective few-shot learning. This ap-
Figure 5: Example Omniglot few-shot problem visualisations.
Left: Matched (cyan) and mismatched (magenta) sample embeddings for a given query (yellow) are not straightforward to differentiate. Right: Matched (yellow) and mismatched (magenta)
relation module pair representations are linearly separable.
proach is far simpler and more efﬁcient than recent few-shot
meta-learning approaches, and produces state-of-the-art results. It further proves effective at both conventional and
generalised zero-shot settings.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the
ERC grant ERC-2012-AdG 321162-HELIOS, EPSRC
EP/M013774/1,
EPSRC/MURI
EP/N019474/1, EPSRC grant EP/R026173/1, and the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program (grant agreement no.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation
with the donation of the Titan Xp GPU and the ES-
PRC funded Tier 2 facility, JADE used for this research.