Compound Treatments and Transportability of Causal Inference
Miguel A. Hernána,b and Tyler J. VanderWeelea,c
aDepartment of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
bHarvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA
cDepartment of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
Ill-defined causal questions present serious problems for observational studies—problems that are
largely unappreciated. This paper extends the usual counterfactual framework to consider causal
questions about compound treatments for which there are many possible implementations (for
example, “prevention of obesity”). We describe the causal effect of compound treatments and their
identifiability conditions, with a special emphasis on the consistency condition. We then discuss
the challenges of using the estimated effect of a compound treatment in one study population to
inform decisions in the same population and in other populations. These challenges arise because
the causal effect of compound treatments depends on the distribution of the versions of treatment
in the population. Such causal effects can be unpredictable when the versions of treatment are
unknown. We discuss how such issues of “transportability” are related to the consistency
condition in causal inference. With more carefully framed questions, the results of epidemiologic
studies can be of greater value to decision-makers.
Criticisms of observational analyses are usually focused on confounding and other biases,
and less often on the adequacy of the questions asked by those analyses. Yet all of us
conducting observational studies occasionally report answers to questions that are, if closely
examined, of questionable interest for decision-making. An example of such questions is:
“How many excess deaths are attributable to obesity each year in my country?”
The relevance of questions for decision-making is intimately linked to the definition of
treatment, the existence of multiple versions of treatment, and the consistency of the
potential or counterfactual outcomes. Such consistency has traditionally been a central issue
in philosophical discussions about causality.1 To ensure relevant causal questions, some
authors have proposed restricting causal inferences to treatments for which a hypothetical
intervention can be unambiguously specified. This idea is encapsulated in the adage “no
causation without manipulation.”2 More recently several authors—statisticians,
epidemiologists, and computer scientists—have continued the discussion on the implications
of ill-defined causal questions (T. J. VanderWeele and M. A. Hernán, unpublished data).3–11
Copyright © 2011 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Correspondence: Miguel Hernán, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115. .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
 
Epidemiology. 2011 May ; 22(3): 368–377. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e3182109296.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
This paper proposes a framework for causal questions about treatments with multiple
versions, which we refer to as compound treatments. We adopt the perspective of a decisionmaker (eg, physician, patient, public health officer, policy-maker) who needs to make a
decision based on observational data, rather than a philosopher interested in causality, or a
scientist interested in explaining the world.11 We start by defining compound treatments
with multiple versions in both randomized experiments and observational studies. We then
review identification of causal effects under multiple versions of treatment, with a special
focus on the consistency condition. We describe the challenges that arise when trying to use
the effect of a compound treatment estimated in a population to make decisions in another
population, both when the versions of treatment are known and when they are unknown. We
conclude with a discussion of how such issues of “transportability” are related to the
consistency condition in causal inference. For simplicity, we assume no measurement error.
COMPOUND TREATMENTS IN RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENTS
Consider a randomized experiment to estimate the causal effect of a dichotomous non–timevarying treatment A on the 5-year risk of death Y (1: dead, 0: alive). All individuals adhered
to the assigned treatment throughout the entire follow-up. Let
be individual i’s potential
or counterfactual outcome under treatment value a. The average causal effect of treatment A
on outcome Y is defined as βA = E [Ya] − [Ya′], where a and a′ are the 2 values that
treatment A can take. For example, suppose that A represents aspirin dose and that
individuals are assigned to either a daily tablet of 150 mg of aspirin plus some particular
combination of inactive ingredients (A = 1), or a tablet that is identical except it contains no
aspirin (A = 0), then the average causal effect of aspirin that compares A = 1 with A = 0 is
βA = E [Ya=1] − E [Ya=0]. As another example, suppose that treatment A represents daily
duration of exercise, and that individuals are assigned to exercise either 60 minutes or 10
minutes per day, then the average causal effect of exercise that compares A = 60 with A =
10 is βA = E [Ya=60] − E [Ya=10].
The causal graph in Figure 1 represents a randomized experiment with treatment A. The
graph does not include any common causes of the treatment A and the outcome Y because
exchangeability is expected when treatment is randomized. Therefore, E [Ya] = E [Y|A = a],
and the average causal effect βA = E [Ya] − E [Ya′] is unbiasedly estimated without any
adjustment for covariates.
Now suppose investigators are interested in estimating the effect of treatment R, and hence
they randomly assigned individuals to either R = 1: “exercise at least 30 minutes daily,” or R
= 0: “exercise less than 30 minutes daily.” Individuals are free to choose the actual duration
of exercise as long as it is consistent with their assignment. Thus, the duration of daily
exercise will take a range of values from 30 to, say, 180 minutes in group R = 1, and from 0
to 29 in group R = 0. Each of the possible durations 30, 31, 31 … minutes can be viewed as
a different version of the treatment R = 1, and similarly each of the possible durations 0, 1,
2, … 29 minutes can be viewed as a different version of the treatment R = 0. More formally,
let Ai(r) be the version of treatment R = r that individual i received. A(r) takes values in
r) = {[1, …, n(r)]}. In our example,
1) is the set {30, 31, 32…} (with
appropriate offset by starting at 30 rather than 1) indicating all possible durations of exercise
greater than or equal to 30 minutes, and
0) is the set {0, 1, 2…, 29} including all durations
of less than 30 minutes. We refer to R as a compound treatment because multiple values a(r)
can be mapped onto a single value R = r. Another example of compound treatment arises in
randomized experiments with imperfect adherence to treatment: the intention-to-treat effect
βR of treatment assignment R depends on the patterns of adherence to R (the versions of
treatment).
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The causal graph in Figure 2 represents a randomized experiment with a compound
treatment R and versions of treatment A (refer to the Appendix for a formal definition of A
in this context). The graph does not include any common causes of the treatment R and the
outcome Y because R is randomized. However, the graph includes common causes U of the
versions A and the outcome Y because the versions A are not randomly assigned. For
example, the actual duration of exercise A(1) chosen by those assigned to R = 1 may depend
on whether they have a history of heart disease L, which is the result of severe
atherosclerosis U. Yet the average causal effect βR = E [Yr] − E [Yr′] is consistently
estimated without any adjustment for covariates L because E [Yr] = E [Y|R = r].
The classification of treatments as either simple or compound is not straightforward. For
example, we characterized 150 mg of aspirin as a simple treatment A, but suppose others
argue that 150 mg of aspirin should be considered a compound treatment R because there
are multiple versions of the 150-mg aspirin treatment. Two of these versions are (i) taking
150 mg of aspirin while holding the tablet with your left hand and (ii) taking 150 mg of
aspirin while holding the tablet with your right hand. Arguably those 2 versions of treatment
are irrelevant for the outcome because the hand with which the aspirin tablet is held will not
affect an individual’s survival. In this setting, we would make the assumption of treatmentvariation irrelevance9 for outcome Y (formally described below).
There may be multiple versions of treatment R but the variations may be irrelevant for the
outcome Y under study (treatment variation may be relevant for other outcomes). Under the
assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance, compound treatments R can be safely viewed
as simple treatments A. The assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance is often implicit
in the interpretation of real data analyses, as all treatments are compound if one considers
versions of treatment that are not relevant for the outcome of interest.
COMPOUND TREATMENTS IN OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES
Consider an observational study to estimate the causal effect of a simple dichotomous non–
time-varying treatment A on the 5-year risk of death Y (1: dead, 0: alive). We use the terms
“treatment” and “exposure” interchangeably. As for the randomized experiment in the
previous section, the treatment A may be taking a tablet of 150 mg of aspirin plus some
particular combination of inactive ingredients (A = 1) versus taking a tablet that is identical
except it contains no aspirin (A = 0), or it may be daily duration of exercise in a study
population in which individuals exercise either 60 (A = 1) or 10 (A = 0) minutes per day.
The average causal effect of treatment A on outcome Y is again defined as βA = E [Ya] − E
The causal graph in Figure 3 represents an observational study with a treatment A. The
graph includes possibly unmeasured common causes U of the treatment A and the outcome
Y because exchangeability is not guaranteed in observational studies. The graph also
includes measured confounders L that are sufficient to block all backdoor paths between
treatment A and outcome Y. That is, the graph represents a setting with exchangeability, or
no unmeasured confounding, conditional on L. Under the conditions of exchangeability,
positivity, and consistency (formally described in Appendix B), it is well known that βA is
consistently estimated via the standardized risk E [Ya] = ∑l E [Y|A = a, L = l] Pr (L = l) for
Our latter example concerning exercise is, of course, artificial because one would not expect
duration of exercise to be a dichotomous variable in a realistic study population. Rather,
duration of daily exercise will take a range of values from 0 to, say, 180 minutes. Now
suppose the investigators observe the daily minutes of exercise for each individual but
decide to define a categorical variable R with 2 levels for the analysis. Individuals who exercise longer than 30 minutes are
classified as R = 1, and the others as R = 0. As in the randomized experiment described
above, there are multiple versions of treatment A(r) within both categories R = 1 and R = 0.
Thus, when observational data are analyzed by defining categorical variables R for a
continuous treatment, the variable R becomes a compound treatment. The decision to
categorize the treatment variable is often made when the data are collected (eg, by asking
participants to classify themselves in one of several categories rather than asking them their
actual duration of exercise). The average causal effect of R on outcome Y is again defined as
βR = E [Yr] − E [Yr′].
The graph in Figure 4 represents an observational study with a compound treatment R. In
this graph, we assume that the actual duration of exercise A is the result of many decisions
(to exercise more than 0 minutes, more than 5 minutes, more than 10 minutes …), one of
which (to exercise more than 30 minutes) is represented as the variable R in the graph. The
graph includes an arrow from the confounders L to the decision R, and an additional set of
confounders W to represent factors that affect both the decision R and the actual duration of
exercise. Because the variables L and W are sufficient to block all backdoor paths between
treatment R and outcome Y (including the path R ← W → A → Y), the graph represents a
setting with exchangeability, or no unmeasured confounding, conditional on {L, W}. Under
exchangeability, positivity, and consistency (Appendix B), âR is consistently estimated via
the standardized risk
In observational studies, one can never guarantee exchangeability given L for simple
treatments A, or {L, W} for compound treatments R. As a result, causal inference from
observational data is controversial.
The notation E [Yr] hides the fact that the magnitude of βR depends on the versions of
treatment A(r). In the next paragraph, we rewrite βR in a mathematically equivalent way that
makes this dependence transparent. To do so, we need to expand our notation. First, let
denote the counterfactual version of treatment R = r that subject i would receive if he
received treatment level r. For example,
indicates that individual i would exercise
43 minutes if he exercised at least 30 minutes. Second, let
denote individual i’s
counterfactual outcome if he received treatment value r by version a(r). For example, the
counterfactual outcome
indicates that individual i would die if he exercised
at least 30 minutes by exercising 37 minutes. Finally, let
denote individual i’s
counterfactual outcome if he received treatment value r under the version of treatment r that
he would receive if he received treatment value r. For example,
indicates that
individual i would not die if he exercised at least 30 minutes by exercising for as long as he
would if he exercised at least 30 minutes.
With this expanded notation, the average causal effect of the compound treatment R on the
outcome Y is defined as βR = E [Yr=1, A1(1)] − E [Yr = 0, A0(0)]. This expanded notation
clearly shows that the causal effect of the compound treatment R depends on the particular
versions of treatment present in the population. It also helps clarify the consistency
assumption for compound treatments R, as described in the next section.
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
THE CONSISTENCY CONDITION FOR COMPOUND TREATMENTS
For a simple treatment A, the consistency condition is stated as
when Ai = a for all a
and i. That is, consistency simply means that the death status for every treated individual in
the study equals his death status if he had received treatment, and the death status for every
untreated individual in the study equals his death status if he had remained untreated. This
statement seems obviously true.
For a compound treatment R, the consistency assumption for R effectively reduces to the
consistency assumption for a simple treatment when the assumption of treatment-variation
irrelevance9 for outcome Y holds, ie, when
Let us now consider the case in which the version of treatment is actually relevant to the
outcome under consideration, that is, the condition of treatment-variation irrelevance does
not hold. Then we may still articulate a consistency assumption as follows9: For individuals
with Ri = r, we let Ai(r) denote the version of treatment Ri = r, actually received by
individual i; for individuals with Ri ≠ r, we define Ai(r) = 0 so that Ai(r) ∈ {0} ∪
consistency assumption would then require for all i,
That is, the death status for every individual in the study who received a particular version of
treatment R = r (eg, 37 minutes of daily exercise) equals his death status if he had received
that particular version of treatment. This statement is true by definition of version of
treatment if we, in fact, define the counterfactual
for individual i with Ri = r and Ai(r)
= a(r) as individual i’s outcome that he actually had under actual treatment r and actual
version a(r).
Suppose, for example, that the causal effect of exercising 37 minutes per day varies
depending on whether an individual makes a spontaneous decision to exercise, or whether
he is coerced to exercise. Then the definition of version of treatment A(r) could be expanded
to include both the duration of exercise and the reason to exercise (spontaneous decision or
coercion). Under this definition of versions of treatment, we can define counterfactuals so
that consistency holds irrespective of the reason why individuals in our study exercised.
Note that often observational studies collect data on treatments that have been spontaneously
chosen by individuals, whereas counterfactuals are often defined in terms of interventions
that may involve some degree of coercion or another form of influence. In such settings with
counterfactuals defined by specific interventions, the consistency statement then essentially
assumes treatment-variation irrelevance.9 We return to this point in the discussion.
The consistency condition links the observed data to the counterfactual outcomes. In the
absence of consistency, one would not know which counterfactual contrast is being
estimated by the data. That is, one would not know which causal effect βR, if any, is being
estimated, and thus it would be difficult to justify the use of the effect estimates for any sort
of decision making. However, by definition, one can assume that some form of the
consistency condition always holds regardless of whether the treatment is simple or
compound and regardless of whether the version of treatment is relevant to the outcome of
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Therefore, if exchangeability and positivity also hold, we will be able to validly estimate the
average causal effect βR from observational data collected in a particular population. A
question that then arises is whether βR will vary across populations.
TRANSPORTABILITY OF THE CAUSAL EFFECT OF COMPOUND
TREATMENTS
Causal effects estimated in one population (the study population) are often intended for use
in making decisions in another population (the target population). Suppose we have
correctly estimated the average causal effect βR of compound treatment R in our study
population, but we want to know the average causal effect of compound treatment R in a
different target population. Can we say that the effect in the target population is the same as
in the study population? That is, can we “transport”— or extrapolate or generalize—the
effect from one population to the other? This is a question of external validity. The answer
to this question depends on the characteristics of both populations. Specifically,
transportability of effects from one population to another may be justified if the following
characteristics are similar between the 2 populations:
Effect modification: The effect of treatment may differ across individuals with
different susceptibility to the outcome. For example, if women are more susceptible
to the effects of exercise than men, we say that sex is an effect modifier for
exercise. The distribution of effect modifiers in a population will generally affect
the magnitude of the causal effect of treatment in that population. Discussions
about transportability of causal effects are often restricted to effect modification.
Interference: In many settings, treating one individual may indirectly affect the
treatment level of other individuals in the population. For example, a socially and
physically active individual may convince his friends to exercise with him, and thus
an intervention on that individual may be more effective than an intervention on a
socially isolated individual. The distribution of contact patterns among individuals
may affect the magnitude of the causal effect in a population. The relevance of this
interference for transportability of effects is increasingly being recognized.12–15
Versions of the compound treatment: To see why the versions of treatment may
affect transportability, suppose that all individuals who exercise at least 30 minutes/
day do so for 60 minutes/day in the first population and for 31 minutes/day in the
second one. Then, if the duration of exercise is relevant to the outcome of interest,
the effect of exercising at least 30 minutes/day versus less than 30 minutes/day will
generally differ between the 2 populations, even if their distributions of effect
modifiers and interference patterns are identical.
The causal effect of a compound treatment R depends on the distribution of versions A(r) of
treatment R in the study population. The mean counterfactual outcome under treatment level
R = r, E [Yr, Ar (r)], in a particular population can be interpreted as the mean counterfactual
outcome under a treatment regimen in which subjects with covariate values L = l, W = w are
assigned to version A(r) = a(r) with probability Pr [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w]. Thus, the average
causal effect of the compound treatment (or regimen) R will differ between 2 populations
with a different set of probabilities Pr [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w]. That is, the effect of exercising at
least 30 minutes/day in the study population may be inappropriate to make decisions about
public health policy in the target population, even if the distribution of effect modifiers and
interference patterns are identical between the 2 populations.
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
WHEN THE VERSIONS OF THE COMPOUND TREATMENT ARE KNOWN
There is one potential solution to the transportability problem. One could collect data on the
version of treatment A(r) received by each individual in the study population, and then
choose a set of probabilities Pr* [A(r) = a(r)|R = r, L = l, W = w] to estimate the average
causal effect of compound treatment R under the relevant distribution of versions of
treatment. Specifically, the counterfactual mean of the outcome under the regimen R in the
study population is (T. J. VanderWeele and M. A. Hernán, unpublished data)
In the above equation, one could replace the probabilities Pr [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w] from the
study population by the set of probabilities Pr* [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w] from the target population
to estimate the effect of the compound treatment R in the target population, as long as all the
versions of treatment present in the target population are also present in the study
population, that is, Pr [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w] > 0 with probability 1 for all A(r) in the target
population. Alternatively, one can choose the probabilities Pr* [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w] to
represent those under an intervention of interest. For example, if a public health program to
encourage at least 30 minutes of daily exercise is hypothesized to result in 60% of the
population exercising 30 minutes, 20% exercising 40 minutes, etc, these probabilities can be
used in the above expression to estimate the effect of the program. Policy makers could
estimate the effect under different hypothesized distributions of duration of exercise as a sort
of sensitivity analysis. As discussed in Appendix A, the same relation between versions of
treatment in an observational setting and as implemented in a specific policy holds even if it
is thought that the variable R is just an investigator-created deterministic function of
duration of exercise A and thus A should precede R as shown in Figure 5.
Unfortunately, reconciling different distributions of version of treatments across populations
is not always straightforward. Besides the possibility that some versions of treatment may
not exist in both populations, there are 2 main obstacles to implement a strategy based on
replacing the set of probabilities Pr [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w] with Pr* [A(r) = a(r)|r, l, w].
First, there may be too many versions A(r) of compound treatment R. Take the treatment
“exercise at least 30 min/d.” We have so far made the oversimplifying assumption that all
relevant versions of this treatment can be put in one-to-one correspondence with an indexing
discrete variable, that is, the duration of daily exercise in minutes. However, it is likely that
the type (eg, swimming, biking, running) and intensity (mild, moderate, strenuous) of
exercise are also relevant to the outcome. The number of versions of treatment increases
substantially when one considers all possible combinations of duration, type, and intensity
of exercise. Even more versions of treatment can be defined if one considers weekly
patterns, equipment, time of day, degree of coercion, etc. One obvious problem is the
difficulty of enumerating all versions of treatment, which would be necessary to adopt the
above strategy to transport effect estimates. Unless one is willing to make the assumption of
treatment-variation irrelevance for many of these versions (eg, same effect under different
degrees of coercion, time of day, etc), the transportability of causal inferences will be
impractical.
Second, the versions of treatment may be unmeasured or unknown. The next section
discusses the consequences of this problem for the transportability and identification of
causal effects. It could be argued that this problem might not occur for the versions of the
treatment “exercise at least 30 minutes daily” because, as many as they may be, the versions
could all be enumerated by experts in the field. Therefore, in the next section, we switch to
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
another example of a common treatment (or exposure) in epidemiology: change in body
WHEN THE VERSIONS OF THE COMPOUND TREATMENT ARE UNKNOWN
A debate exists on how many deaths would be prevented every year in the United States if
overweight (defined as a body mass index [BMI] between 25 and 30) and obesity (defined
as BMI >30) were eliminated. That is, the debate revolves around the effect βR of the
compound treatment R, ie, “BMI >25” (1: yes, 0: no). Epidemiologic studies try to estimate
βR, and thus the number of excess deaths attributable to overweight and obesity, by
comparing the mortality risk in people at different levels of BMI. Suppose a study conducted
in a random sample of the US population estimated that 100,000 deaths/year are attributable
to R = 1; that is, 100,000 deaths would be avoided (or, rather, postponed) under an
intervention that eliminates overweight and obesity. The question is: what intervention is
Many versions of R = 1 (ie, BMI >25) are present in the US population, including any
combination of low physical activity, high caloric intake, no cigarette smoking, low basal
metabolic rate, certain genetic factors and gastrointestinal bacteria, lack of bariatric surgery,
and many others, including those yet unknown. Some of the versions whose existence is
known, such as genetic factors, are poorly understood. Thus, the estimate of 100,000 excess
deaths due to R = 1 estimates the effect of a treatment regimen R that assigns each
individual to one of the multiple—and possibly unknown—versions A(r) of treatment R in
the US population, with a probability that may depend on the individual’s characteristics L
and W. Since the versions of treatment are partly unknown, we can neither enumerate them
nor describe their distribution. It follows that we do not know which causal effect βR is
being estimated and thus the estimate of excess deaths is not necessarily meaningful for
public policy.
Specifically, suppose a policy-maker wishes to know the expected effect of an obesity
prevention program if it were nationally implemented in the United States. The prevention
program under consideration would eliminate low physical activity and high caloric intake,
but would not affect any other factors such as an individual’s basal metabolic rate (which is
tightly controlled by genetic and other factors). Can the effect estimate from our study
population be directly translated into the effect of the proposed prevention program? Not in
general. Though the distribution of effect modifiers and the interference patterns in our
study population are expected to equal those in the US population (because our study
population is a representative sample of the US population), our effect estimate corresponds
to a treatment regimen that is different from the treatment regimen considered under the
obesity prevention program. For example, consider a(r = 0) = “very high basal metabolic
rate,” a version of the treatment r = 0 or “BMI ≤25.” For this version Pr [A(0) = a(0)|R = 0,
l, w] >0 in the regimen operating in our study population, but Pr* [A(0) = a(0)|R = 0, l, w] =
0 in the regimen considered under the obesity prevention program. Thus the actual number
of deaths avoided by the intervention could be, say, 30,000 if the exercise/diet regimen is
less effective than some regimes operating in the population; alternatively it could be
300,000 if more effective. The use of the estimate from observational data to predict the
magnitude of the effect of the prevention program would be justified only under the
assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance for all versions of treatment.
Another problem arises when the versions A(r) of treatment R are unknown. The
identification of the average causal effect of compound treatment R requires exchangeability
and positivity, in addition to consistency. Exchangeability holds if the covariates contain a
sufficient set of variables to control for confounding. The choice of the covariates needs to
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
be guided by subject matter knowledge.16 However, if the versions of treatment for
compound treatment R are not explicitly defined, the identification and measurement of the
relevant covariates becomes a daunting task. For example, suppose genetic polymorphism b
is one of the versions of treatment R, and genetic polymorphism c is a cause of R that shares
a common cause with b. How can an investigator know whether to? adjust for c, not
knowing that b is one of the versions of treatment R By not providing a full characterization
of the versions of treatment, one is not only estimating a vague causal effect but also
reducing the likelihood of estimating a vague causal effect without bias. Moreover, suppose
that investigators happened to measure and adjust for c (even though they did not know that
b was a version of treatment), and that c is in strong linkage disequilibrium with b. Then it is
possible that the positivity condition will not hold because the probability of having c is 0
for those lacking b.
Thus, unknown versions of treatment imply the impossibility of evaluating the
exchangeability and positivity conditions.7 Though collecting information on the versions of
treatment is not necessary to estimate the effect of the compound treatment R in the study
population (see previous section), this information is necessary to transport the effect to
other populations or to evaluate the effect of well defined intervention programs. We cannot
use our expert knowledge to identify and measure confounders for versions of treatment if
we do not know what the versions of treatment are.
DISCUSSION
This article continues a recent thread of papers, initiated by Robins and Greenland,3 on the
implications of ill-defined counterfactuals for causal inference. Hernán5 related the issue to
the existence of multiple versions of treatment, and expressed concern about overreliance on
sophisticated statistical methods for causal inference in the absence of well-defined causal
questions. Later Hernán and Taubman7 extended the discussion on multiple versions of
treatment and explicitly linked ill-defined causal questions to departures from the
consistency condition. Using the epidemiologic exposure “obesity” as an example, they
described the causal question that epidemiologists implicitly ask when estimating the causal
effect of obesity, and concluded that such a question is not guaranteed to be relevant for
public health decision-making. They argued further that asking such causal question makes
it difficult to appropriately measure and adjust for all confounders. The link between
consistency and multiple versions of treatment was further explored by Cole and Frangakis,8
and by VanderWeele,9 who provided a formal definition of consistency in the presence of
multiple versions of treatment. Joffe et al17 considered the estimation of effects of a
compound treatment under the assumption of treatment-variation irrelevance.
All the above authors seem to agree that caution is needed when multiple (relevant) versions
A(r) of treatment R exist because, in this setting, the counterfactual outcomes Yr = Yr, Ar(r)
are vaguely defined. This logically entails the concern that consistency cannot be taken for
granted in observational studies. Other authors, however, do not share this view.
van der Laan et al6 acknowledge the existence of multiple versions of treatment and the
impossibility of enumerating them, but conclude that “formally, the existence of the
counterfactuals is a nonissue” and that the parameter βR is “a very interesting one […]
without concern as to well-defined outcomes for the given levels of treatment.”
Pearl10 argues that the consistency condition is a mathematical theorem that always holds
true, regardless of the definition of treatment, as long as the causal model is correct.
Specifically, his causal model is a nonparametric structural equation model represented by a
causal directed acyclic graph. To Pearl, consistency is not a condition that might always
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
hold true by definition of counterfactual outcomes and versions of treatments (as in our
exposition above), but rather the logical consequence of using that particular causal model.
He also emphasizes that the discussion on whether the consistency condition should be
referred to as a “theorem” or an “assumption” depends on the causal framework; it is a
theorem under the causal directed acyclic graph framework but generally an assumption
under the potential outcomes framework. He also argues that the distinction goes beyond
semantics, because “theorem conveys to practitioners the comfortable presence of a solid
science behind their practice and the assurance that this science can be relied upon for
guidance despite its dealing with ideal mathematical objects.” Pearl goes further in declaring
that the consistency condition holds true for any variables in the causal model, including any
covariates L and W.
Thus, a debate has ensued as to whether the consistency condition should be considered as
(i) an assumption that one needs to evaluate; (ii) an axiom, something to be taken for
granted, that requires no further evaluation; or (iii) a theorem that follows directly from the
causal model. We claim that all 3 positions are valid, albeit from different standpoints.
The identification of the average causal effect βR of compound treatment R requires the
compound consistency condition
, when Ri = r and Ai(r) = a(r)
for all individuals i. Interestingly, when the version Ai(r) of treatment R = r that individual i
receives is unknown, the consistency condition cannot be articulated for individual i. When
faced with this logical problem, at least 3 responses are possible corresponding to how one
interprets the consistency assumption.
First, one could argue that the consistency condition can be well characterized only under
the assumptions that all version of treatments A(r) are known. That is, consistency is a
substantive assumption that needs to be evaluated.
Second, one could argue that knowing the particular versions A(r) is irrelevant: the
consistency condition will hold for individual i by definition, whether we do or do not know
his version of treatment, for some unspecified version of treatment Ai(r). Thus, consistency
is an axiom related to the definition of counterfactual outcomes. This response is
problematic, that is, if one renounces the task of characterizing the versions of treatment,
one is automatically waiving the right to characterize the causal effect βR that is being
estimated. If one does not know the distribution of versions of treatments that corresponds to
the causal effect that has been estimated, then one does not know whether a well-defined
intervention program will have an effect that bears much resemblance to the estimate that
had been obtained (even if the exchangeability, consistency, and positivity assumptions
hold). Under this second perspective, the consistency condition may never be strictly
violated in observational studies but, in the presence of unknown multiple versions of
treatment, the consistency condition is used to estimate the effect βR of a treatment regimen
R that (i) is population-specific and undefined and (ii) may not be possible to implement in
Third, under a nonparametric structural equation model, consistency is logically inferred
from the properties of the model. Thus, consistency is a theorem, though one for which its
application requires that the nonparametric structural equation model represented on a causal
diagram be correct. This third response is closely related to the first response: the
specification of a causal diagram representing a nonparametric structural equation model
that adequately captures the different versions of treatment requires an adequate
characterization of the versions of treatment. Consistency is guaranteed from the causal
diagram if the causal diagram is a correct model, but unless the causal diagram incorporates
the various versions of treatment, the causal diagram may not be correct.
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Although all 3 perspectives are to some extent valid, we believe that investigators will be
best served by the first perspective, which is the most relevant for policy- and decisionmaking. However, irrespective of how one interprets the consistency condition, if
inadequate attention is given to evaluating the condition or to explicitly modeling versions
of treatment on a causal diagram, one runs the risk of making causal inferences that cannot
appropriately inform decision making. Actionable effect estimates require knowledge of
versions of treatment.
The problems discussed in this paper apply to many common epidemiologic exposures that
can be conceptualized as having multiple relevant versions. Some examples, in addition to
physical activity and body weight, are nutrients, biomarkers, and socioeconomic status.
Again, the simple-compound dichotomy is artificial: few, if any, epidemiologic exposures
are truly simple treatments with no relevant versions. However, the vagueness in the
definition of causal effects is more tolerable for some treatments (eg, 150 mg/day of aspirin)
than for others (eg, BMI >25).
For simplicity, throughout this paper we have ignored that most treatments are time-varying.
Causal inference for time-varying treatments requires the consideration of additional issues
such as the timing of the intervention and the fact that the version of treatment at time t may
be a strong confounder for the compound treatment at subsequent times. In fact, under the
ordering of variables represented in Figure 4, At(r) measured at time t can be viewed as part
of Lt+1 for all practical purposes. Taubman et al18 considered threshold and representative
treatment regimes that differ only with respect to the probabilities Pr [At(r) = a(r)|R = r, Lt =
l]. Cain et al19 considered dynamic treatment regimes that differ only with respect to the
probability of treatment initiation Pr [At(r) = a(r)|R = r, Lt = l] during a fixed time period
after certain threshold is reached. Robins et al20 and Hernán et al21 provided formulations of
versions of treatment that include the patterns of observation and measurement.
VanderWeele and Vansteelandt22 discuss the consistency assumption in the context of direct
and indirect effects with treatment variables at different times in which the second treatment
variable is taken as the mediator.
In summary, investigators conducting observational studies are typically, and rightly,
concerned about confounding, measurement error, and selection bias. But the emphasis on
these potential biases often obscures a central issue in causal inference: the specification of
the causal question. In the absence of a well-defined question, one does not know which
causal effect, if any, is being estimated, and thus it becomes harder to justify the use of the
resulting effect estimate for decision-making.
Acknowledgments
We thank Stephen Gilman, Sonia Hernández-Díaz, and Marshall Joffe for helpful comments.
Supported by NIH grants HL080644, AI073127, and HD060696.
APPENDIX A: DIRECTED ACYCLIC GRAPHS WITH COMPOUND
TREATMENTS
Recall Ai(r) denotes the version of treatment R = r that individual i received and is in some
denotes the counterfactual version of treatment R = r that subject i would
receive if he received treatment level r; also
denotes individual i’s counterfactual
outcome if he received treatment value r by version a(r), so that
denotes individual
i’s counterfactual outcome if he received treatment value r under the version of treatment r
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
that he would receive if he received treatment value r. This notation presupposes that, for a
subject with Ri = r, the counterfactuals
, with r* ≠ r, are well defined, and that for a
subject with Ri = r and Ai(r) = a(r) ∈
r), (i) the counterfactual outcomes
with a′(r)
≠ a(r), and (ii) the counterfactual outcomes
with r* ≠ r, a(r*) ∈
r*) are well
In Figures 2, 4, we define Ai = (I [Ai(r) = a(r)]: r ∈ R, a(r) ∈
r)) as a ∑r n(r)-dimensional
vector of indicators (ie, dichotomous variables) I [Ai(r) = a(r)] for each version a(r) of each
level r of compound treatment R. For individual i, all the entries in vector Ai are 0, except
the entry corresponding to the version Ai(r) = a(r) that individual i actually received. This
definition of A implies that the causal effect of R on Y is entirely mediated through the
actual versions of treatment A, ie, that there is no direct arrow from the compound treatment
R to the outcome Y.
The following example helps describe the difference between the definition of A as a simple
treatment in Figures 1, 3, and as a vector of versions of treatment in Figures 2, 4. Consider
again the randomized trial in which patients are assigned to either R = 1 “exercise at least 30
minutes daily” or R = 0 “exercise less than 30 minutes daily.” Because the assignment
cannot be blinded, it is possible that many participants assigned to R = 1 feel less guilty
about eating large quantities of food and therefore increase their caloric intake beyond their
increased caloric expenditure. If A stands for the duration of daily exercise, we would say
that R has a direct effect on Y that is not mediated by A, and would add a direct arrow from
R to Y to the causal graph. However, if as in Figures 2, 4, A stands for the versions of
treatment R, one of those versions would include “increased caloric intake because of being
assigned to R = 1;” and thus, we add no direct arrow from R to Y.
Figure 4 does not always represent the appropriate temporal relation between the compound
treatment R and the versions of treatment A in observational studies. For example, the value
of BMI may be viewed as the result of the action of different factors (eg, genes, diet,
exercise, intestinal flora, etc) that define the versions of treatment, which would imply that
the versions A should precede R in the causal graph. Figure 5 depicts this setting in which
the direction of the arrow from R to A is reversed and, because R is fully determined by A,
there are no direct arrows from any nodes other than A into R. That is, R and A do not share
any common causes W.
The choice between Figure 4 and Figure 5 is not always obvious in observational studies.
For example, we decided to use Figure 4 to depict the dichotomous treatment R, with R = 1
being “exercise at least 30 minutes,” and R = 0 being “no more than 30 minutes.” Our
rationale for this choice was that the actual duration of exercise A can be thought of as the
result of many decisions (to exercise more than 0 minutes, more than 5 minutes, more than
10 minutes, etc), one of which (to exercise more than 30 minutes) is represented as the
variable R in the graph. Under this conceptualization, R precedes A as shown in Figure 4.
However, one could also argue that the variable R is just an investigator-created
deterministic function of duration of exercise A; and thus, A should precede R as shown in
It can, however, be shown (T. J. VanderWeele and M. A. Hernán, unpublished data) that
under Figure 5, the same comments hold regarding the relation between what is estimated in
an observational study and the effect one would expect from a particular intervention.
Specifically, the effect estimate in an observational study comparing R = 1 and R = 0,
adjusted for L, in Figure 5, can be interpreted as a comparison in a randomized trial in
which, within strata of covariates L = l, individuals in one arm are randomly assigned a
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
“version of treatment” A from the observed distribution of A in the population among those
with R = 1 and L = l, and individuals in the other arm are randomly assigned a “version of
treatment” A from the observed distribution of A in the population among those with R = 0
and L = l.
Nevertheless, several points concerning interpretation merit attention. First, no adjustment
for W is necessary because no common causes W exist in Figure 5. Second, the average
causal effect of R itself on outcome Y, βR = E [Yr] − E [Yr′], is by definition null, because
there is no causal pathway from R to Y in Figure 5. The lack of direct effect of R on Y (ie,
no direct arrow from R to Y) is common to Figures 4, 5; but in Figure 4, a non-null average
causal effect of R will exist if the versions A have an effect on the outcome, ie, through the
pathway R → A → Y. In contrast, in Figure 5, R has a null average causal effect even if the
versions A have an effect on the outcome, ie, the pathway R ← A → Y does not represent
an effect of R mediated through A. As a consequence, the estimate β̂R under Figure 5 is not
really quantifying the average causal effect of R (which is by definition null) but rather the
association between R and Y that is mediated through their common cause A. As noted in
the previous paragraph, this effect estimate β̂R in Figure 5 can be interpreted as an estimate
of what would have been observed in the randomized trial described above (T. J.
VanderWeele and M. A. Hernán, unpublished data). Third, in this setting, R acts as a
mismeasured form of the truly causal variable A, as discussed by Hernán and Cole.23 Thus
Figure 5 is an even stronger reminder that one needs to characterize the versions of
treatment before giving a causal interpretation to associations estimated from observational
APPENDIX B: IDENTIFIABILITY ASSUMPTIONS
It is well known that, for a simple treatment A, the average causal effect βA is consistently
estimated via the standardized risk E [Ya] = ∑l E [Y|A = a, L = l] Pr (L = l) when the
following identifiability conditions hold for all a,
where L is a vector of (discrete) covariates. If L contains continuous covariates, then E [Ya]
= ∫l E [Y|A = a, L = l] dFL(l).
For a compound treatment R with multiple (relevant) versions A(r), VanderWeele and
Hernán12 show that the average causal effect βR is consistently estimated via the
standardized risk
when the following identifiability conditions hold for all r and a,
Hernán and VanderWeele
Epidemiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
For all individuals i,
when Ri = r and Ai(r) = a(r) (compound
consistency) where L and W are 2 vectors of measured covariates with W denoting variables
that only affect treatment and version and not the outcome directly.
Note that only the consistency condition needs further elaboration for compound treatments
compared with simple treatments. The exchangeability and positivity conditions for a
compound treatment R are identical to the exchangeability and positivity conditions for a
simple treatment A, respectively, with A replaced by R, a by r, and L by (L, W).
For simplicity, and without loss of generality, we restricted our discussion to discrete
covariates. Also note that the above standardized risks can also be expressed as inverse
probability weighted risks.