Information-Flow Analysis of
Android Applications in DroidSafe
Michael I. Gordon∗, Deokhwan Kim∗, Jeff Perkins∗, Limei Gilham†, Nguyen Nguyen‡, and Martin Rinard∗
∗Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 , , , 
†Kestrel Institute
 
‡UWIN Software, LLC
 
Abstract—We present DroidSafe, a static information ﬂow
analysis tool that reports potential leaks of sensitive information
in Android applications. DroidSafe combines a comprehensive,
accurate, and precise model of the Android runtime with static
analysis design decisions that enable the DroidSafe analyses to
scale to analyze this model. This combination is enabled by
accurate analysis stubs, a technique that enables the effective
analysis of code whose complete semantics lies outside the scope
of Java, and by a combination of analyses that together can
statically resolve communication targets identiﬁed by dynamically
constructed values such as strings and class designators.
Our experimental results demonstrate that 1) DroidSafe
achieves unprecedented precision and accuracy for Android
information ﬂow analysis (as measured on a standard previously
published set of benchmark applications) and 2) DroidSafe detects
all malicious information ﬂow leaks inserted into 24 real-world
Android applications by three independent, hostile Red-Team
organizations. The previous state-of-the art analysis, in contrast,
detects less than 10% of these malicious ﬂows.
INTRODUCTION
Sensitive information leaks, as implemented by malicious
or misused code (such as advertising libraries) in Android
applications, constitute one of the most prominent security
threats to the Android ecosystem . Android currently
supports a coarse-grain information security model in which
users grant applications the right to access sensitive information . This model has been less than successful at eliminating information leaks , in part because many applications
need to legitimately access sensitive information, but only for
a speciﬁc limited purpose — for example, an application may
legitimately need to access location information, but only with
the right to send the information to authorized mapping servers.
Motivated by this problem, researchers have developed a
variety of systems that are designed to analyze or explore the
information ﬂows in Android applications. Dynamic analysis
frameworks execute instrumented versions of Android applications and observe behaviors . Potential downsides of
this approach include missed information ﬂows that are not
exercised during testing and, in some cases, the ability of
the malicious application to detect the testing and modify its
behavior to avoid exercising the malicious ﬂow . They also
suffer from denial-of-service attacks if malware is activated
during application execution and the application is killed or
functionality is disabled.
Static analysis frameworks attempt to analyze the application before it executes to discover all potential sensitive
ﬂows . Standard issues that complicate the construction
of such systems are the challenges of 1) scaling to large
applications and 2) maintaining precision in the analysis such
that it does not report too many ﬂows that do not actually
exist in the application. One particularly prominent issue with
developing static analyses for Android applications is the size,
richness, and complexity of the Android API and runtime,
which typically comprises multiple millions of lines of code
implemented in multiple programming languages. Because
sensitive ﬂows are often generated by complex interactions
between the Android application, API, and runtime, any static
analysis must work with an accurate model of this runtime to
produce acceptably accurate results.
Accuracy is critical for a static analysis seeking to calculate security properties of an application; any inaccuracies
in the execution model provide a motivated attacker with the
opportunity to insert malicious ﬂows that will not be captured
by an analysis. Also, imprecision in a model could lead to
results that are unusable due to too many false positives;
another target for a motivated attacker. To the best of our
knowledge, the difﬁculty of obtaining an acceptably accurate
and precise Android model has signiﬁcantly limited the ability
of previous systems to successfully detect the full range of
malicious information ﬂows in Android applications.
We present a new system, DroidSafe, for accurately and
precisely analyzing sensitive explicit information ﬂows in
large, real-world Android applications. DroidSafe tracks information ﬂows from sources (Android API calls that inject
sensitive information) to sinks (Android API calls that may
leak information). We evaluate DroidSafe on 24 complete real-
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the ﬁrst-named author
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the
paper was prepared within the scope of employment.
NDSS ’15, 8-11 February 2015, San Diego, CA, USA
Copyright 2015 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-38-X
 
world Android applications that, as part of the DARPA Automated Program Analysis for Cybersecurity (APAC) program,
have been augmented with malicious information ﬂow leaks
by three hostile Red Team organizations. The goal of these
organizations was to develop information leaks that would
either evade detection by static analysis tools or overwhelm
static analysis tools into producing unacceptable results (by, for
example, manipulating the tool into reporting an overwhelming
number of false positive ﬂows). DroidSafe accurately detects
all of the 69 malicious ﬂows in these applications (while
reporting a manageable total number of ﬂows). A current stateof-the-art Android information-ﬂow analysis system, Flow-
Droid + IccTA , in contrast, detects only 6 of the 69
malicious ﬂows, and has a larger ratio of total ﬂows reported
to true malicious ﬂows reported.
Additionally, we evaluate DroidSafe on DROIDBENCH, a
suite of 94 Android information-ﬂow benchmarks from the
developers of FlowDroid and IccTA, and report the highest
accuracy (most actual ﬂows reported) and highest precision
(fewest false positive ﬂows reported) for this benchmark
suite to date, 94.3% and 87.6% respectively. DroidSafe fails
to report only the implicit ﬂows in DROIDBENCH. Finally,
we evaluate DroidSafe on a suite of 40 Android explicit
information-ﬂow benchmarks developed by us to add coverage
to DROIDBENCH; DroidSafe achieves 100% accuracy and
precision for the suite, compared to FlowDroid + IccTA’s
34.9% accuracy and 79.0% precision.
One advantage of working with applications that contain
known inserted malicious ﬂows is the ability to characterize
the accuracy of our analysis (i.e., measure how many malicious
ﬂows DroidSafe was able to detect). As these results illustrate,
DroidSafe implements an analysis of unprecedented accuracy
and precision. To the best of our knowledge, DroidSafe provides the ﬁrst usable information-ﬂow analysis for Android
applications .
The Android Model and Analysis Co-design
Given the extensive and complex interactions between the
Android execution environment and Android applications, an
accurate and precise information-ﬂow analysis for Android applications requires a comprehensive and accurate model of the
Android environment. To obtain such a model, we started with
the Android Open Source Project (AOSP) implementation,
which contains a Java implementation of much of the Android
environment. The goal was to maximize accuracy and precision
by directly analyzing as comprehensive a model of Android as
As we worked with AOSP, it quickly became apparent
that the size and complexity of the Android environment
made it necessary to develop the model and the analysis
together as an integrated whole, with the design decisions in
the model and the analysis working together synergistically to
enable an effective solution to the Android static information-
ﬂow analysis problem. The result is the ﬁrst accurate and
precise model of the Android environment and the ﬁrst analysis
capable of analyzing such a model.
Accurate Analysis Stubs: While the AOSP provides an
accurate and precise model for much of Android, it is missing
critical parts of the Android runtime. And for good reason —
it is currently not practical to implement much of the Android
runtime in Java. We therefore developed a novel technique,
accurate analysis stubs, to enable the effective analysis of code
whose full semantics lies outside the scope of AOSP. Each stub
is written in Java and only incompletely models the runtime
behavior of the modeled code. But the semantics of the stub
is complete for the abstractions that the analysis deploys (in
this case points-to and information-ﬂow analyses). Examples
of semantics missing in the AOSP and added via accurate
analysis stubs include native methods; event callback initiation
with accurate context; component life-cycle events; and hidden
state maintained by the Android runtime and accessible to the
application only via the Android API.
Accurate analysis stubs simplify the development of the
analysis — they eliminate any need to develop a library of
method summaries written in a different speciﬁcation language , any need to conservatively hard code policies
within the analysis that attempt to compensate for the missing
semantics , or any need to analyze code written in multiple
languages. They also simplify the development of the model
— they enable the developers of the model to work ﬂexibly
and efﬁciently within the familiar implementation language.
And they support the use of sophisticated language features
such as inheritance, polymorphic code reuse, exceptions, and
threads, all of which promote effective engineering of stubs
that accurately and precisely model key aspects of the Android
environment.
In addition to code, accurate analysis stubs also support the
use of Java objects to model otherwise hidden state maintained
by the Android runtime. Examples of such state include
Android Activity saved state, the global Application
object, Intent, Parcel, shared preferences, and the ﬁle
system. Accurate analysis stubs enable DroidSafe to be the
ﬁrst analysis to accurately model these key Android features.
The AOSP implementation overlaid with our accurate analysis stubs represents our model of the Android API and runtime. We call this model the Android Device Implementation
(ADI). Each application is analyzed in the context of the ADI,
approximately 1.3 MLOC. For the information-ﬂow analysis,
we manually identiﬁed and classiﬁed 4,051 sensitive source
methods and 2,116 sensitive sink methods in the Android API.
Scalable, Precise Points-To Analysis: Both our Android
model and Android applications heavily use sophisticated
language features (such as inheritance and polymorphic code
reuse) that are known to signiﬁcantly complicate static program analyses. To preserve acceptable precision, DroidSafe
therefore deploys a modern global object-sensitive pointsto analysis speciﬁcally designed to analyze code that uses
such features . DroidSafe further enhances scalability by
identifying classes that are not relevant to the information ﬂow
and eliminating object sensitivity for instances of these classes.
This Android-speciﬁc optimization enables our global pointsto analysis to achieve a context depth greater than what was
achieved in prior work , delivering a precise analysis
appropriately tailored for solving Android information-ﬂow
Flow-Insensitive
ﬂowinsensitive information-ﬂow analysis. Many interactions between Android applications and the Android environment
are mediated by asynchronous callbacks. Because our Droid-
implementation
ﬂow-insensitive
information-ﬂow analyses, it accurately considers all possible
runtime event orderings that asynchronous callbacks can trigger. Developers of ﬂow sensitive analyses, in contrast, have had
difﬁculty obtaining a model that correctly exposes all of these
event orderings to a ﬂow sensitive analysis (see Section VIII).
Because the analysis does not consider all event orderings, it
may miss sensitive ﬂows.
Critically, ﬂow insensitivity also enables the analysis to
scale to analyze an accurate and precise Android model and
therefore to accurately and precisely track information ﬂows
through the Android environment. Scalability issues restrict
ﬂow-sensitive analyses to signiﬁcantly less accurate and precise Android models characterized by imprecise conservative
ﬂow summaries and/or blanket policies for Android API methods . Our results show that the ability to analyze an
accurate and precise model more than makes up for any loss
of precision caused by ﬂow insensitivity (see Section VIII).
Static Communication Target Resolution: Information ﬂows
in Android apps may involve inter-component (between application components) and inter-application (between separate
installed apps) communication; communication targets are
identiﬁed by dynamically constructed values (such as String,
Uri, and class designators) packaged in an Intent object.
To precisely analyze such ﬂows, DroidSafe combines 1) accurate analysis stubs, 2) a internal representation of all deﬁned
IntentFilter registrations, 3) an analysis of operations that
construct strings; this analysis delivers regular expressions that
accurately summarize the strings that the application will construct when it runs, 4) a novel points-to analysis that precisely
tracks Strings, and 5) algorithms that rewrite the DroidSafe
intermediate representation to directly invoke resolved targets.
Because DroidSafe works with a comprehensive model of
the Android environment, it supports precise resolution of
communication targets whose identiﬁcation (typically via an
Intent) involves signiﬁcant interactions with the Android
These techniques enable DroidSafe to precisely analyze
calls that start Activity components; start, stop, and bind
Service components; invoke RPC calls on Service components; send and receive Service messages; broadcast
messages to BroadcastReceiver components; and perform operations on ContentProvider components (shared
databases). For Intent-based resolution, DroidSafe incorporates IntentFilter registrations deﬁned both in the Android
manifest and those deﬁned programmatically in app code. We
are aware of no other analysis that can provide comparable
or even usable levels of accuracy or precision for all of these
critical Android communication mechanisms.
Contributions
This paper identiﬁes and implements, for the ﬁrst time, an
effective point in the overall Android information-ﬂow design
space. Our overarching contribution is the identiﬁcation of this
design point and the resulting DroidSafe implementation. We
attribute the ability of DroidSafe to operate at this design point
to: 1) the identiﬁcation of a set of techniques that work well
together, 2) new implementations of known program analysis
techniques that enable DroidSafe to deliver an analysis of
unprecedented scalability, accuracy, and robustness, 3) a set
of new mechanisms that enable these techniques to work
together to provide a comprehensive, accurate, and precise
information-ﬂow analysis for Android applications, and 4)
signiﬁcant engineering effort that delivers a comprehensive
model of the Android runtime. Speciﬁc contributions include:
• Accurate Analysis Stubs: A novel technique that enables
the rapid and accurate development of semantics missing from a source code base. Each stub is written in
the language of the implementation of the API model,
simplifying analysis. Stubs augment the implementation
with semantics possibly incomplete for the full runtime
behavior, but complete for the analysis abstractions.
• Android Device Implementation: A comprehensive and
precise model of the Android API and runtime system
implemented in Java that accurately captures the semantics
of life-cycle events, callback context, external resources,
and inter-component communication. The core of the ADI
includes 550 manually-veriﬁed Android API classes which
cover over 98% of API calls in deployed Android applications. The ADI currently models Android 4.4.3, because
updating the model for Android updates is not overly
burdensome. Independent analysis tools can readily employ
this model.
• Static Analysis Design Decisions: Our analysis occupies
a new design point for information-ﬂow analysis of Android: deep object sensitivity and ﬂow insensitivity. Flow
insensistivity enables DroidSafe to accurately consider all
possible event orderings. It also enables DroidSafe to scale
to analyze an accurate and precise model of the Android
environment, which is critical for the overall success of
DroidSafe. Any loss of precision due to ﬂow-insensitivity
is more than compensated for by the analysis’s ability to
scale to analyze our accurate and precise Android model.
• Static Communication Target Resolution: A comprehensive and precise model of inter-component communication
resolution in Android that links data ﬂows between sender
and target. DroidSafe includes a global Intent and Uri
value resolution analysis, IntentFilter reasoning, and
coverage of all common forms of communication. To our
knowledge it is the most complete such model to date.
• Experimental Evaluation: An evaluation demonstrating
that 1) DroidSafe achieves unprecedented precision and
accuracy for the information-ﬂow analysis of Android and
2) DroidSafe can detect malicious sensitive information
leaks inserted by sophisticated, independent hostile organizations, where a current state-of-the-art information-ﬂow
analysis largely fails.
• Full Implementation: A full open-source implementation
of DroidSafe and our ADI available upon request.
BACKGROUND AND PROBLEM
Android applications are implemented in Java on top
of the Android API. The implementation of an application
speciﬁes handlers for the dynamic events that may occur during
the execution of the application. Thus, Android applications
are dynamic and event-driven by nature. Applications have
multiple entry points, and interact heavily with the Android
API via utility and resource access classes. The package for
an Android application represents an incomplete program; the
source package alone is not appropriate for analysis without
an accompanying model of the Android API and runtime
semantics to exercise all possible semantics in the application.
The Android API version 4.4.3 includes over 3,500 classes
visible to an application developer. Analyzing the complete
source code for the API is exceedingly difﬁcult because it
is implemented over multiple languages and some of the
implementation is device-speciﬁc. Thus, static analysis frameworks rely on modeling the Android API semantics. Manually
producing summaries for all of the application-visible methods
of the Android API is daunting task that is potentially error
prone. For a high-precision analysis, it is also exceedingly dif-
ﬁcult to model all semantics of the implementation regarding
memory allocation, data ﬂows, and aliasing. A blanket policy
for generating ﬂows for all API methods would risk being too
imprecise and inaccurate.
A. Event Dispatch and Ordering
An accurate model of the event dispatch and ordering must
represent all valid event orderings so that a static analysis can
accurately capture possible runtime behavior. Otherwise, an
attacker can hide ﬂows in semantics not covered by the model.
Android applications are composed of multiple components,
each implementing one of four classes: Activity, Service,
BroadcastReceiver, and ContentProvider. Each of these
components has its own life-cycle deﬁned with events for
which a callback implementation can be provided. For example, Figure 1(a) provides an example of a single Activity that
deﬁnes two life-cycle events. These events have the potential
to run in many orders, and they are not called directly in
application code. There exists a leak of sensitive information
in one possible ordering, if onCreate is dispatched after
onStop. This is possible if the activity is placed in the
background by user interaction, and not reclaimed by the
system before it is reactivated by the user.
In addition to life-cycle state orderings, components can
have different launching modes that specify whether a single
object should handle all activations or if a separate object is
spawned for each activation. Thus memory could be shared
across separate activations of a component.
B. Callback Context
An Android application deﬁnes callback handler methods
that are called for dynamically-dispatched runtime events.
Many event handler methods include arguments passed by the
runtime to the application for processing. These arguments
are generated by the runtime and could include data from
the application (including tainted data), depending on the
execution sequence prior to the event. We call the arguments
to a callback handler its callback context. Figure 1(b) gives
example of a ﬂow through callback context. This example
employs an Activity’s ability to save state when it is paused,
and restore that state when resumed. An accurate model must
represent these possible ﬂow connections (of which there are
possibly thousands). Policies such as injecting taint for all
callback handler arguments or connecting callback argument
ﬂows conservatively risk generating an overwhelming number
of false positives (see Section VIII).
C. Inter-component Communication (ICC)
The Android framework relies heavily on inter-component
communication (ICC) to allow individual components to be
independent and to better manage resources. Components initiate and connect to other components via android.content
.Intent objects (which can themselves contain a payload).
The resolution of Intent destination is complex . An
Intent can specify a class explicitly, or implicitly allow the
Android system to select a destination based on a Uri and
string ﬁelds. Components register for implicit Intent delivery
programmatically or via their application’s XML manifest.
Service components additionally allow one to send and receive
messages and perform remote procedure calls.
An accurate model of Android must represent the possible
ﬂows via ICC mechanisms. Figure 1(c) gives an example of
three components that communicate via Intent objects and
Service messages. In the example, there is a ﬂow through
ICC from ICCSource through ICCService to ICCSink. In
addition to representing the communication, a model must
consider all possible orderings of component activations.
A blanket conservative policy to deliver Intent objects
and messages to all possible targets may not be acceptable
because applications are typically constructed of many components. However, statically calculating the destination of each
Intent requires resolution of Intent values such as Uri
strings and action strings, and reasoning about components’
implicit IntentFilter registration.
THREAT MODEL AND LIMITATIONS
In our scenario the application developer (or re-packager) is
malicious. This attacker seeks to exﬁltrate sensitive data from
a mobile device to her servers or to an area on the device that
is unprotected so that a colluding application can perform the
exﬁltration.
Our deﬁnition of sensitive data includes unique device ID,
sensor data (location, acceleration, etc.), ﬁle data, image data
and meta-data, email and SMS messages, passwords, network
trafﬁc, and screen-shots. All of these data items are retrieved
or stored via the Android API; we deﬁne sources of sensitive
data as ﬂows initiated from calls to Android API methods that
we have identiﬁed (see Section IV).
The attacking developer intentionally routes sensitive data
to a destination (on or off the device) that is not authorized
by the user. We deﬁne sinks as Android API calls that may
exﬁltrate data beyond the application boundaries. Sinks include
network, NFC, ﬁle system, email or SMS message, or directly
to a colluding application via ICC or RPC. All of these
sinks are guarded by the Android API. Sinks are identiﬁed
as described in Section IV.
DroidSafe protects against explicit sensitive information
exﬁltration by tracking sensitive source to sink ﬂows present in
the application. DroidSafe analyzes an applications before it is
placed on an app store or before device install. Not every ﬂow
reported by DroidSafe is malicious; maliciousness depends on
the intent of the developer and the security policies of the user
or organization. Thus, the user or a trusted entity reviews the
information ﬂows for malicious leaks.
public class CallbackContext extends Activity {!
String urlPath = "";!
protected void onCreate(Bundle savedState) {!
if (savedState != null) {!
urlPath = savedState.getDouble("LAT") + "";!
Intent intent = new Intent(Intent.ACTION_VIEW);!
intent.setData(Uri.parse(" " !
+ urlPath));!
startActivity(intent); //sink, on 2nd activation!
//.... Other events !
public void onSaveInstanceState(Bundle state) {!
Location loc = <get location> // source
savedState.putDouble("LAT”, loc.getLatitude());!
super.onSaveInstanceState(state);!
(b) Callback context example: Green arrow
shows end-to-end flow.
(a) Event ordering example: Green arrow shows end-to-end flow.
public class EventOrder extends Activity {!
String urlPath = "";!
protected void onCreate(Bundle savedInstanceState) {!
Intent intent = new Intent(Intent.ACTION_VIEW);!
intent.setData(Uri.parse(" " + !
urlPath));!
startActivity(intent); //sink, if onCreate called !
! //after onStop()!
//.... Other events !
protected void onStop() {!
Location loc = <get location> //source!
urlPath = loc.getLatitude() + "";!
public class ICCSource extends Activity {!
Messenger mService = null;!
private ServiceConnection sc = new ServiceConnection() {!
public void onServiceConnected(ComponentName cN, !
IBinder iB) {!
mService = new Messenger(iB);!
public void onServiceDisconnected(ComponentName cN) { !
mService = null; !
protected void onCreate(Bundle savedState) {!
Intent intent = new Intent("ICCServiceAction");!
bindService(intent, sc,!
Context.BIND_AUTO_CREATE);!
public void buttonClick(View v) {!
double lat =<get location>.getLatitude(); //source !
Message msg = Message.obtain(null, 0, lat, 0);!
mService.send(msg);!
public class ICCSink extends Activity {!
double data = 0.0;!
protected void onCreate(Bundle savedState) {!
Intent intent = getIntent();!
data = intent.getDoubleExtra("DATA", 0.0);!
public void buttonClick(View v) {!
Log.v("ICCSink", data + ""); //sink, leak of location!
// IntentFilter defined in manifest to accept !
// action = "ICCServiceAction" !
public class ICCService extends Service {!
final Messenger mMessenger = !
new Messenger(new IncomingHandler());!
class IncomingHandler extends Handler {!
public void handleMessage(Message msg) {!
double data = msg.arg1; //tainted!
Intent intent = new Intent(ICCService.this, !
ICCSink.class);!
intent.putExtra("DATA", data);!
startActivity(intent);!
public IBinder onBind(Intent intent) {!
return mMessenger.getBinder();!
(c) Android ICC Example: ICCSource sends message with tainted data to ICCService. ICCService forward data to ICCSink.
Intermediate flows shown in grey arrows.
Examples of the challenges present in the static information ﬂow analysis of Android applications.
A. Limitations
We assume the device has not been rooted, and dynamic
code loading is not present in the application. We do not aspire
to detect leaks of sensitive data via side channels or implicit
ﬂows . Our trusted computing base on a device is the Linux
kernel and libraries, the Android framework, and the Dalvik
DroidSafe’s reporting is deﬁned by the source and sink
calls identiﬁed in the Android API. An attacker could exﬁltrate
API-injected information that is not considered sensitive by
DroidSafe, or via a call that is not considered a sink; and it
would not be reported.
Our analysis does not have a fully sound handling of
Java native methods, dynamic class loading, and reﬂection.
However, we compensate for these idioms with aggressive
best-effort policies and analyses. Our analysis has a blanket
ﬂow policy for native methods of an Android application, but
an application could inject a sensitive ﬂow in a native method,
and DroidSafe would not report it. We attempt to aggressively
resolve reﬂection targets in a fashion similar to and ,
but if a reﬂected invoke cannot be resolved, we inject a special
REFLECTION taint on the method’s arguments and return
value (injected by DroidSafe). Thus we could miss a ﬂow
injected in an unresolved reﬂected call.
Finally, we intend the DroidSafe ADI to accurately reﬂect
the runtime semantics of Android with respect to the information ﬂow and points-to information. While we believe we
largely cover the semantics, given the size of the Android
runtime and API we acknowledge that there may be some
methods whose semantics the current ADI does not fully
reﬂect. Different versions exist of Android, and we analyze
an application in the context of Android 4.4.3.
DROIDSAFE’S ANDROID DEVICE IMPLEMENTATION
To our knowledge, our model of Android represents the
most complete, accurate, and precise Android execution model
suitable for static analysis. We accurately and precisely model
complexities such as callback context, life-cycle events, data
ﬂows, heap object instantiations, native methods, and aliasing.
Our Android model is expressed in a single language, standard
Java, matching the source language of Android applications,
and is appropriate for many existing analysis techniques.
One could think of our Android model as a software implementation of an Android device; along with the application
and harness. Thus we call our model the Android Device
Implementation (ADI).
The ADI is a simpliﬁed (thus easier to analyze) model of
the actual Android system that, with respect to our analysis,
represents a best-effort over approximation of the possible
behaviors of the real system. The combination of an application, our ADI core, our harness, the semantic transformations
for ICC (see Section VI), and resources (unique for each
application), creates a closed application for analysis of an
Android application.
A. ADI Core
We seeded our ADI with the Java implementation of the
Android API available from the Android Open Source Project
(AOSP) , version 4.0.3, along with additional open-source
libraries upon which the AOSP implementation depends. This
created a code base with no missing dependencies that could
be compiled. This code base was approximately 1.3 MLOC,
however it was missing substantial portions of the semantics
of the Android API and runtime such as native methods, event
ﬁrings, callback initiation, and component life-cycle events.
Furthermore, many commonly used classes included Java
implementations that present difﬁculties for a static analysis.
We therefore developed a novel technique, accurate analysis stubs, to enable the effective analysis of code whose full
semantics lies outside the scope of AOSP. Each stub is written
in Java and only incompletely models the runtime behavior of
the modeled code. But the semantics of the stub is complete for
the abstractions that the analysis deploys (in this case points-to
and information-ﬂow analyses).
We added accurate analysis stubs for 3,176 native methods
to model the data ﬂow, object instantiation and aliasing of the
missing native code. This was accomplished through a combination of automated and manual means, though all methods
were reviewed manually. We developed concrete implementations of 45 classes for which concrete implementations are left
to closed-source, commercial libraries.
We simpliﬁed the implementation of 117 classes in the Java
standard library and Android library to increase precision and
decrease analysis time. Examples include container classes,
component classes, I/O classes, primitive wrapper classes,
strings, and threading classes. We attempted to faithfully
maintain the semantics of the original code with respect to
its contract with an Android application and a ﬂow-insensitive
analysis. The base AOSP plus our additions and modiﬁcations
enable our ADI to accurately and precisely track ﬂows through
B. Event and Callback Dispatch
We created a runtime implementation hooked into the API
implementation that models component creation, shared and
saved state, life-cycle event ﬁring and argument context, and
callback event ﬁring and argument context.
For callback handlers, we implement the callback registration method to invoke the application’s callback handler
method with the appropriate arguments. For example, Android
deﬁnes the ability for a component to register to be notiﬁed
if a database has changed, and handle this change in a given
method in a new thread. The application will deﬁne a callback
handler object, and register this to be notiﬁed of database
changes. The ADI implements this registration method via
a stub that creates the thread directly, and calls the callback
method on the registered database. Since our analysis is ﬂow
insensitive and our harness is wrapped in a loop (see below),
DroidSafe considers all event orderings even though the stub
API method invokes the callback handler method directly from
the callback registration method (with the appropriate context).
For arguments to callback handlers that are generated by
the runtime system, our model creates a new object and passes
it to the registered callback handler in the app. For example,
to model a key press, our runtime system will create a new
object to represent the key press, and call the callback handler
with this object on each component.
We developed a separate package for implementing component creation and life-cycle event modeling. This package contains stubs for registration methods for each Android component type: Activity, Service, BroadcastReceiver, and
ContentProvider. The harness (discussed below) instantiates each application component and passes the component
object to the appropriate registration method. The registration
methods model shared preferences, saved state, global context classes, and device conﬁguration. This context is passed
accurately to the life-cycle events of components.
Since our runtime system makes explicit calls to all lifecycle events of each component, a ﬂow-insensitive analysis
can capture the ﬂow between the two life-cycle events in the
component in Figure 1(a). Also, since we accurately model
saved state through the API and back into a callback handler,
our model enables an analysis to report the ﬂow in Figure 1(b).
C. Identifying and Classifying Sources and Sinks
We manually identiﬁed 4,051 sensitive source methods and
2,116 sensitive sink methods in the Android API. We also
classiﬁed each source and sink with a high-level classiﬁcation
(e.g., location, device ID, ﬁle, network, and database) so that
analysis results can be grouped for veriﬁcation or consumption
by a human. For example, a ﬂow reported by the tool might
be: “Location data can ﬂow to the network.”
Initially, we tested SuSi, a tool that automatically identi-
ﬁes sink and source methods in the Android API . The
automatically identiﬁed sources and sinks were incomplete.
We compared our identiﬁcations of sources and sinks with the
results of SuSi.1 and found that SuSi is missing hundreds of
important sources. For example, SuSi did not identify 53%
of source calls as “sensitive sources” and 32% of sink calls
as “sinks” for the malicious ﬂows in the APAC malicious
applications (see Section VIII). These missing sources and
sinks indicate the challenge of automatic identiﬁcation.
D. ADI Coverage and Keeping Current with Android Updates
The core of our model includes 550 commonly-used Android API implementation classes. We manually reviewed,
added accurate analysis stubs, and veriﬁed these 550 classes.
For veriﬁcation, we manually conﬁrmed that the class implementation is not missing semantics for data ﬂow, object
instantiation, and aliasing; and that event callbacks deﬁned
in the classes are called explicitly by our model (with the
proper context). For classes not in our core set, we still
maintain high accuracy because we analyze the actual Java
implementation (with accurate analysis stubs), however we
may experience a higher level of imprecision for these classes
if their implementation is complex.
To measure the coverage of the ADI, we acquired a list of
Android API method call frequencies accumulated over 95,910
Android applications downloaded from the Google Play Store.
This list reports the number of invoke expressions to each
Android API method over all the applications. Calls to the
core 550 veriﬁed classes account for 98.1% of the total calls
over these applications.
1We used the source and sink lists for Android 4.2 in the SuSi public
repository under the directory SourceSinkLists/Android 4.2/
SourcesSinks.
We initially seeded the ADI with the AOSP version 4.0.3,
and veriﬁed the core based on this version. We have since
upgraded our model to Android 4.4.3. This process included
reviewing changes to classes in our core 550 classes between
these versions; and accounting for and verifying any changes in
the ADI. This process required one person-week of work, for
an experienced Java and Android developer. For the update, the
rest of the ADI classes were copied over from AOSP 4.4.3, and
accurate analysis stubs were created for native methods. This
process required another person-week. We expect the update
process for our ADI to continue to be relatively fast since
there are few changes to the core of Android between version
updates; historically new implementation has been contained
in new packages.
E. Harness
Each analyzed application must be hooked into the ADI
via a harness. In its ﬁrst pass, DroidSafe generates this harness
method automatically. DroidSafe scans the application source
code for all classes that subclass one of Android’s four component types. It instantiates objects in the harness for all such
classes found. We cannot rely solely on the Android manifest
for the complete list of components, since the manifest is
required to list only components that are exported and available
to other applications. We represent each component with a
single heap object to account for the complexities of the
Android component memory model (see Section II-A). In our
harness, each instantiated component object is passed to the
appropriate runtime method to exercise all of its life-cycle
events. The harness method is wrapped in a loop; the loop
is present to capture all possible orderings for callbacks that
are called in the harness.
Though details are beyond the scope of this paper, the
harness also includes instantiation of GUI objects deﬁned
in XML resources (including programmatically setting their
attributes, and registering event handlers, such as onClick), and
the incorporation of String values deﬁned in XML resources.
OBJECT-SENSITIVE POINTS-TO ANALYSIS
Points-to analysis (PTA) is a foundational static program
analysis that computes a static abstraction of all the heap
locations that a pointer (reference) variable may point to during
program execution. In addition to the points-to relation, pointsto analysis also constructs a call graph as modern languages require points-to results to calculate targets for dynamic dispatch
and functional lambda calculations. Our goal was to employ
much of the AOSP Android API implementation without modiﬁcation, and achieve precise results for our client analyses.
However, as with many static analyses there is a trade-off
between scalability and precision; appropriate control-ﬂow and
data-ﬂow abstractions must be chosen to avoid intractability
and to calculate acceptably precise results.
Let us consider the difﬁculties of analyzing complex Java
code with precision. Figure 2 lists simpliﬁed ADI source code
for two commonly used classes in the Android API: android
.os.Bundle and java.util.HashMap. Bundle allocates a
HashMap. The example also provides relevant code for two
Android activities that each create a Bundle and store values
to their Bundle; Activity1 puts non-sensitive data in its
package android.os;!
public class Bundle ... {!
private Map<String,Object> mMap = !
!new HashMap<String,Object>();!
public void put(String k, Object v) {!
mMap.put(k,v);!
public Object get(String k) {!
return mMap.get(k);!
package java.util;!
public class HashMap<K,V>... {!
private Entry[] table = new Entry[size];!
public void put(K key, V value) {!
table[index] = new Entry<K,V>(key, value); !
public V get(Object key) {!
e = table[indexFor(hash, table.length)];!
return e;!
public class Activity2 extends Activity {!
double sensitive = location.getLatitude(); //source!
Bundle bundle2 = new Bundle(); !
bundle2.put("data", sensitive);!
sink(bundle2); //flow of sensitive -> sink!
public class Activity1 extends Activity {!
Bundle bundle1 = new Bundle(); !
bundle1.put("data", <notSensitive>);!
sink(bundle1); //not a sensitive flow!
Android Device Implementation (ADI)
Android Application Source Code
Example source code for our ADI and two Activity objects illustrating the challenges of points-to and information ﬂow analysis.
Bundle while Activity2 puts sensitive data in its Bundle.
Consider the difﬁculty presented to an analysis given this code.
To precisely separate the two Bundle objects created ( N
S⃝), a PTA must separate multiple levels of allocations started
at each Bundle allocation (Bundle allocates a HashMap, H
which allocates an array to store entries, T⃝). In other words,
an analysis must be able separate analysis facts between the
array of entries created in the two HashMaps objects of the
two Bundle objects in this code. Otherwise, sensitive data put
in one Bundle is conﬂated with data that can be retrieved from
the other Bundle, decreasing precision.
Our PTA algorithm is based on a whole-program, ﬂowinsensitive, subset-based foundation for Java on which
we have added context sensitivity. Context sensitivity is a
general approach where a PTA is able to separate analysis
facts for a method m that arise at multiple call sites of m.
There are multiple choices for context, and the DroidSafe
PTA implements object sensitivity. Accumulating evidence
demonstrates that object sensitivity is the best choice for
object-oriented languages .
Object sensitivity is notoriously difﬁcult to understand and
implement . Here we give the reader an intuitive description of object sensitivity and its scalability challenges. For a
rigorous description of object sensitivity see (note that our
PTA implements a 3Full+2Heap analysis modiﬁed as described
below). An object-sensitive analysis uses object allocation sites
(new expressions in Java) as context elements. In our analysis,
a heap object, o, is represented by the allocation site of o, plus
the allocation site of the object that allocated o, and so on,
to a parameterized depth, k. For a given method, our analysis
is able to separate facts depending on the heap object of the
receiver on which the method is called.
Considering again the example in Figure 2, our analysis is
able to separate analysis facts calculated for the array table of
two HashMap objects allocated from the two Bundle objects.
When the Bundle objects are created on line 3 and line
4 of Activity1 and Activity2, respectively, a series of
allocations is performed via constructors. The object-sensitive
heap abstraction will have two separate elements representing
the two table arrays, with context being their allocation
Where a ←b denotes “a allocated in b”.
The new expression on line 3 of Activity1 creates a
heap object ⟨S⃝⟩, and the cascading allocations from the
constructors of Bundle and HashMap create ⟨H
⃝←S⃝⟩, respectively.
When the Bundle.put(...) method of Activity2 is
called (line 5), the method context (receiver) for the call is
⟨S⃝⟩, this triggers a call to HashMap.put(...) (line 7 of
HashMap) with context ⟨H
⃝←S⃝⟩. In this context, the pointsto set result for the reference to the ﬁeld table on line 7 of
HashMap is the array object ⟨T⃝←H
⃝←S⃝⟩. Any elements
placed in this array via the assignment of line 7 will only be
reﬂected in this array heap object.
Thus, for the example, our PTA is able to separate analysis
facts between the two Bundle objects in the two Activities via
deep object-sensitivity. For this example, the analysis requires
a heap context depth of 3 (to distinguish ⟨T⃝←H
from ⟨T⃝←H
Object sensitivity has powerful precision but scalability
presents a challenge. Our example requires a depth of 3, and
other commonly used classes require deeper depths, e.g., in
the AOSP implementation, Intent allocates a Bundle (that
allocates a HashMap...) requiring a depth of 4 to disambiguate
the items placed in the Bundle of two Intent objects. We
tested other whole-program object-sensitive frameworks, but
found they could not scale to the required context depth 
or did not maintain program information required for our
client .
To solve this scalability challenge, our points-to analysis
implementation operates on the pointer assignment graph
(PAG) representation of the program , an explicit representation of the program. In the past, while explicit implementations provided the fastest running times, they would typically
exhaust main memory for large programs . However,
today, with the large and increasing size of available main
memory, we found that an explicit implementation can now
scale to large programs.
Furthermore, our implementation is ﬂexible and parameterized. This ﬂexibility enables us to implement a series of client
analysis-speciﬁc and Android-speciﬁc optimizations of our
object-sensitive points to analysis. Without our optimizations 3
of the 24 APAC applications (see Section VIII) could not ﬁnish
analysis in DroidSafe given a limit of 64GB of heap memory.
With optimizations, all applications now run in under 34GB of
heap memory. The optimizations provide a savings of 5.1x in
total analysis time. We highlight the important optimizations
A. Selectively Applying Context
Typically, a points-to analysis keeps the same base context
depth for all allocated objects. Initially, we tried this policy, at
a depth of 3, for the applications in our APAC suite. However,
our analysis would fail on 3 of our APAC applications because
it exhausted 64GB of allocated heap memory. Instead we
implement a targeted approach: we add context for an abstract
heap location at the minimum depth that is required to achieve
precision for one of our client analyses. The depth of context
on abstract heap objects varies from 0 to 4. The context depth
is calculated based on the following.
By analyzing a suite of 211 Android applications for which
we had source, we learned which API classes from our ADI
could be analyzed content-insensitively without signiﬁcant loss
of precision for clients of the PTA. We performed our points-to
analysis on our suite, and determined API classes that could
never reach (via a series of local or ﬁeld references) a String
value our Intent resolution analysis was tracking, and could
never reach a value that was tainted with sensitive information
ﬂow (across all Android applications in our suite).
This set, S, contains 1489 Android API classes. Most of
these classes are Android GUI objects and libraries through
which sensitive data should never ﬂow. For all c ∈S, our
clients analyses will calculate the same results regardless of
whether an object of c in the heap abstraction of our PTA has
context or not (for the 211 Android applications analyzed).
This set represents 26% of the total classes of our ADI. We
extrapolate that context-insensitivity analyzing the classes of
S in our will give us an acceptable loss of precision across all
Android applications.
We modiﬁed our PTA to never attach context to an allocation of or a method call on an object of a class in S. This means
that for a method m called on c ∈S, the information-ﬂow
analysis analyzes m without context, conﬂating the analysis
results of all calls to m on objects of c. For information-ﬂow
analysis, this relaxation means that, in m, if a sensitive taint
ﬂows to a ﬁeld f of an object of a class c, the taint will
(imprecisely) ﬂow to f for all heap objects of class c.
Conversely with a maximum context depth of 3, our pointsto analysis is unable to disambiguate many important analysis
facts. For example, we could not disambiguate the Bundle
between separate Intent objects (as discussed above). To
address this issue, we automatically increase the context depth
to 4 for all heap objects of Array type. In the example of
Figure 2, this means that the array object allocated at line
3 of HashMap has a depth of 4, giving it enough context to
disambiguate the Intent object that allocated the Bundle that
allocated the HashMap that allocated the array. This general
strategy works across containers in the Java and Android API
IMPROVING THE PRECISION OF ICC MODELING
Inter-component communication (ICC) is common in Android applications and must be modeled both accurately and
precisely. However, the AOSP implementation of ICC-related
classes is incomplete (relying on native methods for target
resolution and payload delivery). To achieve precision, we
implement our own model of ICC via accurate analysis stubs,
aggressively resolve dynamic program values, and transform
application code to increase precision.
Intent objects describe ICC destinations. Values involved
in the resolution include both java.lang.String and java
.lang.Class objects. We resolve these values statically to
guide precision-enhancing transformations. Our ADI provides
us with an accurate and precise model for resolution analysis
of values involved in Intent resolution.
Strings are an essential base value type of many of the
Intent ﬁelds. To resolve string values given the myriad operations performed on strings, we employ the JSA String Analyzer
(JSA) . JSA is a ﬂow-sensitive and context-insensitive
static analysis that includes a model of common operations
on Java’s String type. For a given String reference, the
analysis computes a multi-level automaton representing all
possible string values. As a ﬁrst pass, we run JSA (on only the
application source) to resolve values for string references that
are arguments to Android API calls. We convert each resolved
automaton to a regular expression that represents the possible
values of the string value.
After JSA is run, we replace resolved string values in the
application code with constants representing their computed
regular expression, and perform a pass of our points-to analysis
such that these values can be propagated globally. We run our
points-to analysis and store the results of this analysis for
all string references in the program, such that later we can
query the resolved regular expressions representing values for
all string references in application code.
A. Resolving Explicit Intent Destinations
Explicit Intent objects are initiated with the destination
component’s fully-qualiﬁed class name or class constant object. Before the PTA is run, each class constant passed to a
Source Method
Target Method Call Injected
Context: void send*Broadcast(Intent, ...) [6 variants]
BroadcastReceiver: void onReceive(Intent)
Activity: void startActivit*(Intent, ...) [6 variants]
Activity: void setIntent(Intent)
Context: void bindService(Intent, Connection)
Service: void droidSafeOnBind(Intent, Connection)
Context: void startService(Intent)
Service: void onStartCommant(Intent, ...)
ContentResolver: insert, query, delete, update
ContentProvider: insert, query, delete, update
DroidSafe’s ICC source to target methods transformations.
method of Intent is converted into a component name string
constant representing the class. To determine the destinations
of an Intent object in our abstract heap, we query the pointsto information for the ﬁelds of component name. If all of the
strings objects in the points-to set are constants, we consider
the Intent object resolved.
B. Resolving Implicit Intent Destinations
Implicit Intent objects are Intent objects for which
a component name is not speciﬁed; in our analysis these
are Intent objects for which the component name ﬁeld
is null. Implicit Intent objects do not directly reference
a destination but instead leave it to the Android system to
deliver them to the appropriate destination(s). A component
registers as a destination of implicit Intent objects by declaring IntentFilter elements in the manifest or programmatically installing IntentFilter objects on components.
IntentFilter registrations specify string constants that the
component will accept for the action, category, data type,
and uniform resource identiﬁer (Uri) ﬁelds of a dispatched
Intent. We parse the Android manifest, and keep a map
of implicit Intent registrations, i.e., for each component
the implicit Intent ﬁeld values it accepts. We also support updating this map with programmatic registrations for
BroadcastReceiver objects, by modeling IntentFilter.
An implicit Intent object in our abstract heap is resolved
if our PTA concludes that the points-to set for one of the action,
category, data type, or Uri ﬁelds reference only constants (or
is empty).
For a resolved implicit Intent, i, we build i’s list of inapp targets by comparing to each component’s intent ﬁlter. For
component c, we test the action, category, data type, and Uri
ﬁelds in sequence. For each ﬁeld, if i’s ﬁeld is unresolved,
then the test passes. If the ﬁeld of i is resolved, then if any
of its string constants are in the set of strings accepts by c’s
intent ﬁeld for the ﬁeld, then it is a match. All ﬁelds of i have
to pass the test against the respective ﬁelds of c’s intent ﬁlter
for i to be able to target c.
There is additional complexity for programmatic intent
ﬁlters, as DroidSafe may not be able to resolve all ﬁelds of an
intent ﬁlter to constants. An intent ﬁlter ﬁeld that cannot be
resolved matches the respective ﬁeld for all Intents.
C. Transforming ICC calls to Improve Precision
ICC initiation calls are methods that pass an Intent to
Android’s runtime system to perform inter-component communication or binding. Our strategy for improving precision
for ICC is to transform ICC initiation calls into appropriate
method calls at the destination(s), thus linking the data ﬂows
between source and destination.
Figure 3 presents a list of the most common ICC initiation
calls, and the linkage calls that are inserted by DroidSafe to
improve precision and accuracy. For example, for an invoke of
startActivity(Intent), we transform this call into calls
of the destination activities’ setIntent(Intent), linking
the source and targets. Thus when a target Activity calls
getIntent(), all Intent objects that could possibly be sent
to the Activity are calculated by our PTA (we update the PTA
result after all ICC transformations are completed).
For ICC initiation calls on resolved Intent objects, we
link the ICC initiation call to only the destination components that are speciﬁed by the Intent. This is achieved
by calling the appropriate linkage method on the heap object allocated in our harness for the destination component.
For unresolved Intent objects, we insert linkage calls to
all components of the appropriate type. For example, a
startActivity(Intent) call with an unresolved Intent
is delivered to all Activity components.
D. Android Services
Android Service components require additional sophistication because in addition to Intent-mediating communication,
messaging and RPCs can be performed. We illustrate our
Service transformations via the examples in Figure 1(c). In this
example, the Activity ICCSource binds and sends a messages
to the Service ICCService. The important steps performed by
DroidSafe to resolve this ﬂow are as follows:
1) Our manifest parser maps the Intent action string “ICC-
ServiceAction” to ICCService.
2) DroidSafe resolves the Intent object on line 15 as an
Implicit Intent with action string “ICCServiceAction”.
Consulting the implicit IntentFilter registration map,
we see the Intent’s destination is ICCService.
3) The call to bindService(...) on line 16 is transformed to a linkage call to the harness object representing
ICCService. This linkage call is a new method we deﬁne
in our ADI for Service, droidSafeOnBind(Intent,
ServiceConnection). The linkage method performs the
following (some details omitted):
ICCService’s
receiver’s)
onBind(Intent)
object. The ADI model for android.os.Messenger
.getBinder() creates a Binder that references the
Messenger object which created it.
onServiceConnected(ComponentName,
Binder) on the passed ServiceConnection object,
android.os.Binder
ICCService’s onBind() method.
With the linkage methods called, the Binder object used
to create the Messenger in ICCSource line 7 is con-
nected to the IncomingHandler of line 8 of ICCService.
The method android.os.Messenger.send(Message) has
a stub to call the handleMessage(Message) method of
its Handler object. Thus, the call mService.send(msg)
on line 23 of ICCSource will deliver the message to
the handleMessage(Message) method of ICCService’s
Messenger object.
This is just one example of binding and message communication in Android that we support. The DroidSafe ICC model
supports precision increasing transformations for common
forms of ICC, and handles uncommon cases conservatively.
INFORMATION-FLOW ANALYSIS
information-ﬂow
overapproximation of all the memory states that occur during
the execution of a program. The analysis is designed as a
forward data-ﬂow analysis. For each type of statement, we
deﬁne a transfer function in terms of how it changes the state
of memory.
We divide memory into four separate areas that store local
variables, instance ﬁelds, static ﬁelds, and arrays, reﬂecting the
semantics of the Java programming language:
Local × Instance × Static × Array
Ctx × Var →InfoVal
Loc × Field →InfoVal
Class × Field →InfoVal
Loc →InfoVal
AllocSitek
Each of the memory areas is modeled as a function
whose codomain consists of a set of information values. An
information value is a tuple of the type of information and the
source code location where the information was ﬁrst injected.
Our analysis can identify not only the kind of information
being exﬁltrated but the code location of the source.
In the local variable area, Local, each method’s local variables are parameterized by their calling contexts (i.e. the heap
location of a receiver object), so the precision of the analysis
does not decrease when a method is called in various contexts.
In other words, our information-ﬂow analysis analyzes local
variables in a ﬂow-insensitive and object-sensitive fashion.
The instance ﬁeld area, Instance, is a function that takes
as its arguments an abstract heap location and an instance
ﬁeld. The return value is information values that ﬂow into
the instance ﬁeld of objects at the heap location. Note that an
abstract heap location consists of a series of allocation sites
(see Section V). This area corresponds to what is colloquially
called “context-sensitive (or object-sensitive) heap” or “heap
cloning” in the literature . Each static ﬁeld of each class
has an entry in the static ﬁeld area, Static. Unlike the memory
area for instance ﬁelds, the static ﬁeld area is not parameterized
by heap locations because, in Java, all objects of each class
share the static ﬁelds of the class.
The analysis collects all information values that are assigned to the elements of an array and stores the result at
a single heap location of the array area, Array. That is, we
analyze arrays in an array-index-insensitive fashion.
information
appropriate memory area when a source API method is invoked
from application code. More speciﬁcally, for the statement
r = o.source(a) where r is of primitive type, the analysis
puts an information value into an entry in the local variable
area that corresponds to the r variable in the current calling
context; the stored information value consists of the statement’s
location and the type of information associated with the
source method. If r is a reference, the information value
is stored in the special taint ﬁeld of an instance that r refers
to in the current calling context.
For each o.sink(a, ...) statement that invokes a sink
method, DroidSafe reports the information values for accessed
memory addresses in the sink. For each argument (and the
receiver o), DroidSafe reports all the information values that
are attached to memory addresses (and their taint ﬁeld) read
during the execution of the body of the sink method (among
memory addresses reachable from the argument).
In Figure 2, the analysis injects an information value into
the sensitive variable when Location.getLatitude(),
a source API method, is invoked (line 3 of Activity2).
The information value consists of the line number and the
type of information (for this case, a user’s location). For the
invocation of Bundle.put() method (line 5 of Activity2),
the transfer functions of the statements in the body of Bundle
.put() convey the information value from the sensitive
variable to the value ﬁeld of an Entry object whose heap
location is ⟨E⃝←
S⃝⟩. At the call to a sink API
method (line 7 of Activity2), the analysis reports 1) a user’s
location information is reachable from the bundle2 argument,
2) the information was generated ﬁrst at line 3, and 3) whether
the body of the sink method actually uses the information by
reading the Entry.value ﬁeld. On the other hand, for the call
to a sink API method in Activity1 (line 6 of Activity1),
the analysis correctly reports that a user’s location information
is not reachable from the bundle1 argument. That is, even
though the Entity objects in Activity1 and Activity2
are both created at the same program location E⃝, the analysis
properly distinguishes information ﬂows into them because
each of them has its own heap location (⟨E⃝←H
⃝←S⃝⟩, respectively).
EVALUATION
This section presents experimental results that characterize
the effectiveness of DroidSafe’s information-ﬂow analysis. Our
results indicate:
1) DroidSafe achieves both higher precision and accuracy than
FlowDroid + IccTA a current state-of-the-art Android information-ﬂow analysis. and demonstrate
that FlowDroid + IccTA achieve both higher precision and
accuracy than commercially available tools such as IBM’s
AppScan Source (which was speciﬁcally designed to
analyze Android apps) and HP’s FortifySCA .
2) DroidSafe successfully reports all malicious leaks of sensitive information in a suite of malicious Android applications developed by independent, motivated, and sophisticated attackers from three hostile Red Team organizations.
3) DroidSafe successfully scales to analyze large Android
applications analyzed in the context of our ADI.
Parse Manifest
Build IntentFilter Map
Application APK or Source
Parse & Incorporate
GUI/String Resources
Build Harness
String Analysis (JSA)
ICC Transformation
Information Flow
Full Precision PTA
(Including call graph)
Android Device
Implementation (ADI)
Phases of the DroidSafe Tool. Double lines denote an update of the
PTA result is calculated for the next phase.
Missed Flows
Explicit / Implicit
DROIDBENCH results for DroidSafe and FlowDroid.
A. Methodology
DroidSafe is developed on top of the Soot Java Analysis
Framework . We implemented our object-sensitive pointsto analysis on top of Soot’s SPARK PTA framework .
DroidSafe comprises approximately 70K lines of Java code.
Figure 4 presents the architecture of DroidSafe (previous
sections discuss the different phases of DroidSafe). DroidSafe
can analyze an APK and Java source code.
We compare DroidSafe’s information-ﬂow results to Flow-
Droid + IccTA , a ﬂow-sensitive and object-sensitive
static information-ﬂow analysis system developed by academic
researchers. This system incorporates Epicc to resolve
values for Intent objects used in ICC calls. For the remainder
of this section we refer to this system as FlowDroid since
FlowDroid is the underlying information-ﬂow analysis. We
run FlowDroid with our list of sources and sinks described
in Section IV. Both tools report ﬂows at a ﬁne granularity
as the generating source method call expression and the sink
method call expression (Soot IR representation of the analyzed
application).
We executed FlowDroid and DroidSafe on an Intel R
⃝CPU E5-2690 v2 @ 3.00GHz running Ubuntu 12.04.5
with 64GB of heap memory for the JVM. We executed on
a single core of the processor. We compare results for three
application sets:
DROIDBENCH: DROIDBENCH is an evolving set of Android micro-applications designed by the authors of FlowDroid
to test precision and accuracy (recall) of static information-
ﬂow analyses. For our evaluation of DroidSafe, we employ
DROIDBENCH version 1.2 plus the benchmarks developed
for IccTA , which includes 94 benchmarks. One of the
goals of DROIDBENCH is to exercise potentially problematic
Java idioms such as exceptions, callbacks, reﬂection2, Android
2DroidSafe handles reﬂection using its String and points-to analysis to
replace reﬂective calls in application code with direct calls to the target
method, when applicable. The mechanisms of this transformation are similar
to ICC transformation discussed in Section VI.
Inter-Component Communication (ICC), static initializers, and
arrays. It is also designed to test the ﬂow-, ﬁeld-, and object
sensitivity of the analysis. The largest DROIDBENCH application is under 200 lines of code. Reachable code including our
analyzed Android ADI is always at least 80,000 lines of code.
The maximum FlowDroid analysis time across the benchmark
suite is 11 seconds. Despite the fact that it analyzes substantially more code than FlowDroid, the maximum DroidSafe
analysis time is 222 seconds.
Additional Android Micro-Applications: To get better test
coverage of Android, we developed our own set of 40
information-ﬂow Android micro-applications. These applications test common Java and Android idioms for which coverage is missing in the current version of DROIDBENCH. The
largest app is 255 lines of code. Benchmarks include tests
of: Parcel, Activity saved state, Fragment, asynchronous
event orderings, global Application object, String to char
conversion, callback context, SharedPreferences, and dynamic dispatch precision. Fourteen (14) of the benchmarks test
Android ICC mechanism coverage such as: components not in
manifest, event ordering between components, programmatic
IntentFilter registration, Intent passed through API objects, and various mechanisms for creating explicit Intents.
We are working with the developers of DROIDBENCH to
incorporate our benchmarks into the DROIDBENCH suite.
APAC: The APAC applications are complete real-world Android applications that, as part of the DARPA Automated Program Analysis for Cybersecurity (APAC) program, have been
augmented with information-ﬂow leaks by three independent
hostile Red Team organizations. The goal of these organizations was to develop information leaks that would either evade
detection by static analysis tools or overwhelm static analysis
tools into producing unacceptable results (by, for example,
manipulating the tool into reporting an overwhelming number
of false positive ﬂows). The APAC applications are unique
because they are aggressive malware for which the ground
truth for malicious information ﬂows is deﬁned. Furthermore,
unlike much of the current generation of malware in the wild,
which is delivered in over-privileged applications , many of
the APAC applications contain malicious leaks to unauthorized
destinations of sensitive data that the application is authorized
to access based on its stated functionality.
The APAC applications comprise 24 Android applications.
The application sizes range from 200 to 80,000 lines of
Java code (not including library or Android run-time code).
Reachable code including our analyzed Android ADI ranges
from at least 80,000 to 180,000 lines. DroidSafe analysis times
for the APAC applications range from 4.4 to 27.5 minutes.
B. DroidBench and Additional Micro-Applications
Figure 5 presents results from the DroidSafe and Flow-
Droid analysis of the DROIDBENCH suite. The second column
contains entries of the form X/Y, where X is the number
of missed explicit ﬂows across all 94 applications and Y is
the number of missed implicit ﬂows. Implicit ﬂows have no
direct ﬂow of data from the source to the sink; the ﬂow is
instead created via control ﬂow that depends on sensitive data.
DroidSafe detects all of the 90 explicit ﬂows in the benchmark
suite. FlowDroid detects 78 of 90 explicit ﬂows. Inaccuracies
Application
Application
Application
AgentSmith
User Input
AndroidGame
63,755 Image Metadata Network
DeviceAdmin2
System Info
SmartWebCam
AndroidMap
387 SMS, Image, Browser
AndroidsFortune
KitteyKittey
Image Metadata
SMSBlocker
AudioSidekick
Image Metadata
Quickdroid
6,155 Contact, Bookmark
SnapshotShare
Screenshot
BatteryIndicator
RunningApp
User Input
SourceViewer
UltraCoolMap
Malicious Flow
Malicious Flow
Malicious Flow
APAC Information-Flow Applications: Size and malicious ﬂows details.
in the FlowDroid tool cause it to miss the 10 ﬂows: static
initializers not modeled properly with respect to ﬂow sensitivity, String to character conversions with unlinked ﬂows,
life-cycle event ordering inaccuracies, inaccurate fragments
modeling, missing ContentProvider ﬂows, and unresolved
ﬂows linked through reﬂected calls.
The fourth column of Figure 5 presents the number of
false positives — i.e., the number of reported ﬂows that do
not actually exist in the 94 benchmark programs. Despite its
greater accuracy, DroidSafe exhibits a lower false positive rate
than FlowDroid. The ﬁnal column presents the corresponding
precision numbers for these false positives.
DroidSafe reports 13 false positives. DroidSafe reports
two false ﬂows due to conﬂating all elements of an array
with tainted and untainted elements and two false ﬂows due
to accesses of a container (Map and List) with tainted and
untainted elements. DroidSafe also reports four false ﬂows due
to ﬂow insensitivity. We reports two false positives because of
our conservative (though accurate) model of life-cycle event
orderings; in one benchmark the ﬂow was connected by an
order that could never occur at runtime (onCreate() called
after onDestroy()). Two false ﬂows are caused by conﬂating
accesses of the Intent state map based on a string key.
Eighteen (18) of the 30 FlowDroid false positives are
due to a conservative “Callback” source type that FlowDroid
always injects for callback handler arguments because it does
not model callback context accurately. Conversely, DroidSafe
accurately and precisely models callback context in the ADI,
and does not have to conservatively inject these ﬂows. The
remaining 12 false positives in FlowDroid are due to various causes such as conﬂating array and container elements,
imprecisions in analyzing callback de-registration, and ﬂow
insensitivity on ﬁeld assignments.
We now present results for the forty additional Android
micro-applications developed by the authors. There are 42
leaks of sensitive information in the 40 applications. Droid-
Safe achieves 100% precision and accuracy for the suite.
DroidSafe’s comprehensive and precise Android model, the
ADI, enables DroidSafe to capture all ﬂows. FlowDroid (plus
IccTA) achieves 34.88% accuracy and 79.0% precision. The
low accuracy for FlowDroid is caused by the incomplete
model of the Android environment that is included in the
system. Examples of common Android idioms that FlowDroid
currently does not model accurately nor conservatively include:
API calls that access state (such as SharedPreferences and
Application); taint transferred from an array index; String
to char conversion; accounting for all legal asynchronous
event orderings; callback context modeling (ﬂows through API
callbacks); accounting for components not deﬁned in manifest;
event ordering between components; Service binding and
messages; and programmatic IntentFilter registrations.
C. APAC Malicious Applications
We next present analysis results for 24 real-world applications with malicious ﬂows. Figure 6 presents details on
the source lines of code and the malicious ﬂows. The most
common type of sink is the network (when the ﬂow exﬁltrates
sensitive information via the network). The developers of the
APAC applications attempted to intentionally hide malicious
ﬂows. Some of the patterns they used include ﬂows through
raised exceptions, application native methods, reﬂection, and
character and string manipulation. They also employ Android
API methods that are difﬁcult to model precisely and accurately such as Object.clone, System.arraycopy, and
primitive to string (and vice versa) conversion. One application
(SmartWebCam) leaks sensitive information (camera) via an
AIDL-deﬁned RPC call that could be called by a colluding
application. Android-speciﬁc implementation decisions that
complicate information-ﬂow analysis include:
1) ICC: In 17 of the applications, malicious ﬂows cross
components via Intents, messages, or RPCs.
2) Callbacks: In 17 of the applications, either a) sources or
sink calls are reachable via control ﬂow initiated via a
callback, or b) malicious ﬂows are linked through callback
arguments passed via the runtime.
3) API Inter-method ﬂows: In 6 of the applications malicious
ﬂows are linked through API method combinations with
ﬂows that are challenging to model. More speciﬁcally,
method a is called to assign a reachable ﬁeld or static
memory location to a tainted value, then method b is called
that accesses this memory via static memory or a path
of ﬁelds from its arguments. SharedPreferences are an
example: one component could write taint to a preference,
and another component could read from that preference.
4) Non-argument sink ﬂows: In 7 of the applications, a
malicious ﬂow is not linked via the arguments of the sink
call. Instead the source taint is accessed beginning with
a) memory reachable from a ﬁeld of the receiver, or b)
memory reachable via a static access.
Figure 7 presents information-ﬂow results. The column
“Malicious Flows” gives the total number of malicious ﬂows in
the application. Many apps leak multiple sources of sensitive
data; for example UltraCoolMap leaks location information
from four sources to the network.
Reachable Lines
Application
(including ADI)
Time (sec)
Source Calls
Sink Calls
Malicious Flows Time (sec)
Malicious Flows
AgentSmith
AndroidGame
AndroidMap
AndroidsFortune
AudioSidekick
BatteryIndicator
DeviceAdmin2
KitteyKittey
Quickdroid
RunningApp
SmartWebCam
SMSBlocker
SnapshotShare
SourceViewer
UltraCoolMap
Did not complete
APAC Information-Flow Applications: DroidSafe and FlowDroid evaluation results.
DroidSafe achieves an accuracy of 100%, reporting all 69
of the malicious ﬂows in the APAC apps. The high accuracy
of our Android model enabled this result; the malicious ﬂows
in these applications often attempt to exploit Android behavior
that is difﬁcult to model. For DroidSafe, the ratio of reported
malicious ﬂows to total ﬂows is 2.1%.
FlowDroid, in contrast, misses 63 of the 69 malicious
ﬂows, for an accuracy of 8.7%. Reasons for the low accuracy
include missing ICC modeling, not considering all valid event
orderings (exacerbated by FlowDroid’s ﬂow-sensitive analysis), inaccurate modeling of many Android API calls (causing disconnection of ﬂows), and inaccurate callback context
modeling. FlowDroid’s ratio of found malicious ﬂows to total
ﬂows is 0.3%. FlowDroid timed out after 2 hours for the
AndroidGame application.
The “Total Flows” column in Figure 7 reports the total
number of ﬂows from sources to sinks that the tools report.
Even though these ﬂows involve sensitive information, the
majority are not malicious as the ﬂow is part of the intended
functionality of the application. For example, some legitimate
ﬂows in UltraCoolMap send location information via the
network to a trusted server. The malicious ﬂows, in contrast,
send the location via the network to an untrusted destination.
The APAC applications, as with all unknown applications,
do not come with speciﬁcations that would enable DroidSafe
or FlowDroid to distinguish malicious from legitimate ﬂows.
Instead, someone must understand the intended functionality of
the application and make a subjective determination of which
ﬂows are malicious. Because all of the malicious ﬂows that we
report were inserted by the hostile Red Team, there is no doubt
that at least these ﬂows are malicious. We did not attempt to
analyze all of the remaining reported ﬂows to determine if the
ﬂows actually exist in the application or not.
D. Intent Resolution in APAC Applications
Section VI presents our ICC modeling and deﬁnes resolved
Intent objects. A resolved Intent is an Intent for which
an analysis concludes that at least one of its ﬁeld values is only
a set of constants; resolved values can be used to reduce the
number of true target components. Over all of the APAC applications, DroidSafe calculates that there are 213 Intent-based
communication calls. DroidSafe resolves Intent objects in
95.8% of the calls. Of the calls with resolved Intents, 59.2% of
calls employ explicit Intent objects, and 40.8% calls employ
implicit Intent objects. Of the resolved Intent-based calls,
74.0% target at least one component of the app; DroidSafe
concludes that the other 26.0% cannot target a component of
the app. On average, across the APAC apps, calls with resolved
Intent objects that target an in-application component resolve
to 1.03 destination components.
FlowDroid relies on Epicc to resolve values for Intent.
We inspected the output of Epicc to determine the percentage
of Intent objects that are resolved based on our deﬁnition.
We ignore the Uri data ﬁeld since Epicc does not reason
about Uri objects. Epicc ﬁnds 177 Intent-based ICC calls
in the APAC applications, Epicc resolves the Intent object
arguments for 85.9% of the calls (versus DroidSafe’s 95.8%).
The lower number of total calls versus DroidSafe may be
because of Epicc’s model of Android callbacks and reachable
code. Causes for unresolved Intent objects include lack of
support for some explicit Intent construction mechanisms
and Intent objects passed through API methods.
applications,
ContentProvider operations. Of the operations, 66.4%
use Uri objects that DroidSafe resolves. Of the resolved
operations, 35.6% target a components of the application, and
each resolved operation targets 1.0 components. Epicc does
not resolve Uri values, and consequently FlowDroid does not
link ﬂows through ContentProvider operations.
RELATED WORK
Object-Sensitive Points-To Analysis: For robustness and ﬂexibility, typical whole-program object-sensitive analysis implementations reduce program facts into representations appropriate for general solvers; examples include logic relations ,
constraints , and binary decision diagrams . Our
implementation differs from these systems in that it operates
directly on the pointer assignment graph (PAG) representation
of the program , an explicit representation of the program.
Previous work has demonstrated that direct implementations
of points-to analysis problems, when they ﬁt in memory, are
typically faster than general solvers . Today main
memory sizes are large enough to accommodate our direct implementation of a context sensitive analysis of large programs.
Tuning context-sensitivity of an analysis for precision
and scalability has also received much work. Hybrid context
sensitivity treats virtual and static method calls differently, and
in addition to object sensitivity, attempts to emulate call-site
sensitivity for static calls . Our analysis implements hybrid
context sensitivity by cloning static method calls for calls to
application methods, and certain API factory methods. Type
sensitivity is a form of object sensitivity that merges contexts
based on types . We tried type sensitivity for our client, but
it did not provide adequate precision. An introspective analysis
drops context sensitivity from program elements that could
blow-up the analysis , without regard for precision of the
client. In client-driven approaches , a client analysis asks
for more precision from the points-to analysis when needed.
In contrast, our technique pre-calculates the set of classes
(and thus allocations and methods calls) for which precision
is historically not helpful for our problem.
Information-Flow Security Analysis: DroidSafe follows a
long history of information-ﬂow analysis (sometimes called
taint analysis) systems for security. Livshits and Lam 
present an approach for taint analysis of Java EE applications
that is demand-driven, uses call-site context sensitivity, and
shallow object sensitivity via inlining. TAJ focuses on
Java web application and employs a program slicing technique
combined with a selective object-sensitive analysis. F4F is
a taint analysis for Java applications built on web frameworks
that uses a speciﬁcation language to describe the semantics of
the underlying framework.
Focusing on information-ﬂow analysis for Android, Flow-
Droid is a sophisticated, open-source static information
ﬂow analysis for Android applications. FlowDroid’s analysis
is ﬂow-sensitive, and thus, is more precise than DroidSafe,
however the FlowDroid model of Android is not nearly as
complete as DroidSafe’s. FlowDroid attempts to compensate
with inaccurate blanket ﬂow policies on unmodeled API
methods. From testing, we discovered that FlowDroid does
not accurately model all possible combinations of life-cycle
or callback events, demonstrating the difﬁculty of modeling
Android execution in a ﬂow-sensitive system. FlowDroid’s
analysis is on-demand and ﬂow-sensitive as opposed to Droid-
Safe. However, each instantiation of the analysis is expensive;
in preliminary experiments running FlowDroid with our ADI,
the analysis completed only 7 of 24 applications given a 2
hour timeout for each application.
Epicc is a tool that resolves Intent destinations in
an application. Epicc developed a model of commonly-used
classes and methods involved in the Android Intent implementation. Their analysis is on-demand and ﬂow-sensitive. The
DroidSafe system includes a more comprehensive model of
classes and mechanisms used in inter-component and interapplication communication (for example Uri and Service
messages). DroidSafe’s resolution can also reason about values
created in and passed through API methods.
IccTA combines FlowDroid with Epicc and seeks to
identify sensitive inter-component and inter-application information ﬂows. DidFail also combines FlowDroid and Epicc
to discover sensitive ﬂows across applications. Though not
discussed here, DroidSafe includes an analysis to capture interapplication ﬂows via a database of previously resolved Intent
values and reachable source ﬂows. This database is consulted
and appropriate ﬂows are injected before information analysis.
There are other many other examples of static information
ﬂow analyses for Android. CHEX detects information
ﬂow vulnerabilities between components. ScanDal is a
static analysis implemented as an abstract interpretation of
Dalvik bytecode. CHEX and ScanDal employ analysis with
k = 1 call-site context sensitivity. SCanDroid resolves
data ﬂows between components using a limited model of
Android, and conservative ﬂow policies for API methods.
LeakMiner tracks ﬂows with a context-insensitive analysis. AndroidLeaks combines both context-sensitive and
context insensitive analyses, but models ﬂows through API
methods with a blanket policy that reduces precision. Droid-
Safe includes a more precise analysis and has a more accurate
and precise model of the Android API than these other tools.
Dynamic testing and monitoring approaches engender different tradeoffs compared to static analysis. Examples include
the sophisticated dynamic taint-tracking tool TaintDroid ,
and Tripp and Rubin who describe an approach for
classifying information leakages by considering values that
ﬂow through sources and sinks. They do not have issues with
reﬂection and dynamic class loading. But, if employed for
triage, they require adequate test coverage. If used for dynamic
monitoring they are susceptible to denial-of-service attacks if
malware is activated during execution and the application is
killed or functionality is disabled. This might be unacceptable
for mission-critical applications. Similar to static analysis, they
require user-mediated judgment for reported sensitive ﬂows.
DroidSafe’s list of sources and sinks was compiled manually. SuSi employs supervised machine learning to automatically designate source and sink methods in the Android
API. Merlin is a probabilistic approach that employs a
potentially incomplete list of sources, sinks, and sanitizers
to calculate a more comprehensive list. Merlin automatically
infers an information ﬂow speciﬁcation for an application
from its propagation graph using probabilistic inference rules.
While SuSi’s list proved incomplete for the APAC applications,
Merlin’s technique is complementary to ours and a possible
next step for helping the results of DroidSafe.
CONCLUSION
Malicious leaks of sensitive information pose a signiﬁcant
threat to the security of Android applications. Static analysis
techniques offer one way to detect and eliminate such ﬂows.
The complexity of modern application frameworks, however,
can pose a major challenge to the ability of static analyses to
deliver acceptably accurate and precise analysis results.
Our experience developing DroidSafe shows that 1) there
is no substitute for an accurate and precise model of the
application environment, and 2) using the model to drive the
design decisions behind the analysis and supporting techniques
(such as accurate analysis stubs) is one effective but (inevitably) labor-intensive way to obtain an acceptably precise
and accurate analysis. As long as there are complex application
frameworks, we anticipate that making an appropriate set of
design decisions (such as the use of a scalable ﬂow insensitive
analysis) to successfully navigate the trade-off space that the
application framework implicitly presents will be a necessary
prerequisite for obtaining acceptable accuracy and precision.
Our results indicate that the ﬁnal DroidSafe system, with
its combination of a comprehensive model of the Android
runtime and an effective set of analyses and techniques tailored
for that model, takes a signiﬁcant step towards the ﬁnal goal
of an information ﬂow analysis that can eliminate malicious
information leaks in Android applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank our shepherd, Ben Livshits, and
our anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. This
material is based on research sponsored by DARPA under
agreement number FA8750-12-X-0110. The U.S. Government
is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation