HAL Id: inria-00548512
 
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs
To cite this version:
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs. Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection. International
Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR ’05), Jun 2005, San Diego, United
States. pp.886–893, ￿10.1109/CVPR.2005.177￿. ￿inria-00548512￿
Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection
Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs
INRIA Rhˆone-Alps, 655 avenue de l’Europe, Montbonnot 38334, France
{Navneet.Dalal,Bill.Triggs}@inrialpes.fr, 
We study the question of feature sets for robust visual object recognition, adopting linear SVM based human detection as a test case. After reviewing existing edge and gradient based descriptors, we show experimentally that grids
of Histograms of Oriented Gradient (HOG) descriptors signiﬁcantly outperform existing feature sets for human detection. We study the inﬂuence of each stage of the computation
on performance, concluding that ﬁne-scale gradients, ﬁne
orientation binning, relatively coarse spatial binning, and
high-quality local contrast normalization in overlapping descriptor blocks are all important for good results. The new
approach gives near-perfect separation on the original MIT
pedestrian database, so we introduce a more challenging
dataset containing over 1800 annotated human images with
a large range of pose variations and backgrounds.
Introduction
Detecting humans in images is a challenging task owing
to their variable appearance and the wide range of poses that
they can adopt. The ﬁrst need is a robust feature set that
allows the human form to be discriminated cleanly, even in
cluttered backgrounds under difﬁcult illumination. We study
the issue of feature sets for human detection, showing that locally normalized Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) descriptors provide excellent performance relative to other existing feature sets including wavelets . The proposed
descriptors are reminiscent of edge orientation histograms
 , SIFT descriptors and shape contexts , but they
are computed on a dense grid of uniformly spaced cells and
they use overlapping local contrast normalizations for improved performance. We make a detailed study of the effects
of various implementation choices on detector performance,
taking “pedestrian detection” (the detection of mostly visible
people in more or less upright poses) as a test case. For simplicity and speed, we use linear SVM as a baseline classiﬁer
throughout the study. The new detectors give essentially perfect results on the MIT pedestrian test set , so we have
created a more challenging set containing over 1800 pedestrian images with a large range of poses and backgrounds.
Ongoing work suggests that our feature set performs equally
well for other shape-based object classes.
We brieﬂy discuss previous work on human detection in
§2, give an overview of our method §3, describe our data
sets in §4 and give a detailed description and experimental
evaluation of each stage of the process in §5–6. The main
conclusions are summarized in §7.
Previous Work
There is an extensive literature on object detection, but
here we mention just a few relevant papers on human detection . See for a survey. Papageorgiou et
al describe a pedestrian detector based on a polynomial
SVM using rectiﬁed Haar wavelets as input descriptors, with
a parts (subwindow) based variant in . Depoortere et al
give an optimized version of this . Gavrila & Philomen
 take a more direct approach, extracting edge images and
matching them to a set of learned exemplars using chamfer
distance. This has been used in a practical real-time pedestrian detection system . Viola et al build an efﬁcient
moving person detector, using AdaBoost to train a chain of
progressively more complex region rejection rules based on
Haar-like wavelets and space-time differences. Ronfard et
al build an articulated body detector by incorporating
SVM based limb classiﬁers over 1st and 2nd order Gaussian
ﬁlters in a dynamic programming framework similar to those
of Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher and Ioffe & Forsyth
 . Mikolajczyk et al use combinations of orientationposition histograms with binary-thresholdedgradient magnitudes to build a parts based method containing detectors for
faces, heads, and front and side proﬁles of upper and lower
body parts. In contrast, our detector uses a simpler architecture with a single detection window, but appears to give
signiﬁcantly higher performance on pedestrian images.
Overview of the Method
This section gives an overview of our feature extraction
chain, which is summarized in ﬁg. 1. Implementation details
are postponed until §6. The method is based on evaluating
well-normalized local histograms of image gradient orientations in a dense grid. Similar features have seen increasing
use over the past decade . The basic idea is that
local object appearance and shape can often be characterized
rather well by the distribution of local intensity gradients or
into spatial &
Weighted vote
orientation cells
over detection
Collect HOG’s
non−person
classification
spatial blocks
over overlapping
Contrast normalize
Figure 1. An overview of our feature extraction and object detection chain. The detector window is tiled with a grid of overlapping blocks
in which Histogram of Oriented Gradient feature vectors are extracted. The combined vectors are fed to a linear SVM for object/non-object
classiﬁcation. The detection window is scanned across the image at all positions and scales, and conventional non-maximum suppression
is run on the output pyramid to detect object instances, but this paper concentrates on the feature extraction process.
edge directions, even without precise knowledge of the corresponding gradient or edge positions. In practice this is implemented by dividing the image window into small spatial
regions (“cells”), for each cell accumulating a local 1-D histogram of gradient directions or edge orientations over the
pixels of the cell. The combined histogram entries form the
representation. For better invariance to illumination, shadowing, etc., it is also useful to contrast-normalize the local
responses before using them. This can be done by accumulating a measure of local histogram “energy” over somewhat
larger spatial regions (“blocks”) and using the results to normalize all of the cells in the block. We will refer to the normalized descriptor blocks as Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) descriptors. Tiling the detection window with
a dense (in fact, overlapping) grid of HOG descriptors and
using the combined feature vector in a conventional SVM
based window classiﬁer gives our human detection chain
(see ﬁg. 1).
The use of orientation histograms has many precursors
 , but it only reached maturity when combined with
local spatial histogramming and normalization in Lowe’s
Scale Invariant Feature Transformation (SIFT) approach to
wide baseline image matching , in which it provides
the underlying image patch descriptor for matching scaleinvariant keypoints. SIFT-style approaches perform remarkably well in this application . The Shape Context
work studied alternative cell and block shapes, albeit initially using only edge pixel counts without the orientation
histogramming that makes the representation so effective.
The success of these sparse feature based representations has
somewhat overshadowed the power and simplicity of HOG’s
as dense image descriptors. We hope that our study will help
to rectify this. In particular, our informal experiments suggest that even the best current keypoint based approaches are
likely to have false positive rates at least 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than our dense grid approach for human detection, mainly because none of the keypoint detectors that we
are aware of detect human body structures reliably.
The HOG/SIFT representation has several advantages. It
captures edge or gradient structure that is very characteristic
of local shape, and it does so in a local representation with
an easily controllable degree of invariance to local geometric
and photometric transformations: translations or rotations
make little difference if they are much smaller that the local
spatial or orientation bin size. For human detection, rather
coarse spatial sampling, ﬁne orientation sampling and strong
local photometric normalization turns out to be the best strategy, presumably because it permits limbs and body segments
to change appearance and move from side to side quite a lot
provided that they maintain a roughly upright orientation.
Data Sets and Methodology
Datasets. We tested our detector on two different data sets.
The ﬁrst is the well-established MIT pedestrian database
 , containing 509 training and 200 test images of pedestrians in city scenes (plus left-right reﬂections of these). It contains only front or back views with a relatively limited range
of poses. Our best detectors give essentially perfect results
on this data set, so we produced a new and signiﬁcantly more
challenging data set, ‘INRIA’, containing 1805 64×128 images of humans cropped from a varied set of personal photos. Fig. 2 shows some samples. The people are usually
standing, but appear in any orientation and against a wide
variety of background image including crowds. Many are
bystanders taken from the image backgrounds, so there is no
particular bias on their pose. The database is available from
 for research purposes.
Methodology. We selected 1239 of the images as positive
training examples, together with their left-right reﬂections
(2478 images in all). A ﬁxed set of 12180 patches sampled
randomly from 1218 person-free training photos provided
the initial negative set. For each detector and parameter combination a preliminary detector is trained and the 1218 negative training photos are searched exhaustively for false positives (‘hard examples’). The method is then re-trained using
this augmented set (initial 12180 + hard examples) to produce the ﬁnal detector. The set of hard examples is subsampled if necessary, so that the descriptors of the ﬁnal training
set ﬁt into 1.7 Gb of RAM for SVM training. This retraining process signiﬁcantly improves the performance of each
detector (by 5% at 10−4 False Positives Per Window tested
(FPPW) for our default detector), but additional rounds of
retraining make little difference so we do not use them.
To quantify detector performance we plot Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) curves on a log-log scale, i.e. miss rate
( 1−Recall or
TruePos+FalseNeg) versus FPPW. Lower values are better. DET plots are used extensively in speech and
in NIST evaluations. They present the same information as
Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC’s) but allow small
Figure 2. Some sample images from our new human detection database. The subjects are always upright, but with some partial occlusions
and a wide range of variations in pose, appearance, clothing, illumination and background.
probabilities to be distinguished more easily. We will often
use miss rate at 10−4FPPW as a reference point for results.
This is arbitrary but no more so than, e.g. Area Under ROC.
In a multiscale detector it corresponds to a raw error rate of
about 0.8 false positives per 640×480 image tested. (The full
detector has an even lower false positive rate owing to nonmaximum suppression). Our DET curves are usually quite
shallow so even very small improvements in miss rate are
equivalent to large gains in FPPW at constant miss rate. For
example, for our default detector at 1e-4 FPPW, every 1%
absolute (9% relative) reduction in miss rate is equivalent to
reducing the FPPW at constant miss rate by a factor of 1.57.
Overview of Results
Before presenting our detailed implementation and performance analysis, we compare the overall performance of
our ﬁnal HOG detectors with that of some other existing
methods. Detectors based on rectangular (R-HOG) or circular log-polar (C-HOG) blocks and linear or kernel SVM
are compared with our implementations of the Haar wavelet,
PCA-SIFT, and shape context approaches. Brieﬂy, these approaches are as follows:
Generalized Haar Wavelets. This is an extended set of oriented Haar-like wavelets similar to (but better than) that used
in . The features are rectiﬁed responses from 9×9 and
12×12 oriented 1st and 2nd derivative box ﬁlters at 45◦intervals and the corresponding 2nd derivative xy ﬁlter.
PCA-SIFT. These descriptors are based on projecting gradient images onto a basis learned from training images using
PCA . Ke & Sukthankar found that they outperformed
SIFT for key point based matching, but this is controversial
 . Our implementation uses 16×16 blocks with the same
derivative scale, overlap, etc., settings as our HOG descriptors. The PCA basis is calculated using positive training images.
Shape Contexts. The original Shape Contexts used binary edge-presence voting into log-polar spaced bins, irrespective of edge orientation. We simulate this using our C-
HOG descriptor (see below) with just 1 orientation bin. 16
angular and 3 radial intervals with inner radius 2 pixels and
outer radius 8 pixels gave the best results. Both gradientstrength and edge-presence based voting were tested, with
the edge threshold chosen automatically to maximize detection performance (the values selected were somewhat variable, in the region of 20–50 graylevels).
Results. Fig. 3 shows the performance of the various detectors on the MIT and INRIA data sets. The HOG-based detectors greatly outperform the wavelet, PCA-SIFT and Shape
Context ones, giving near-perfect separation on the MIT test
set and at least an order of magnitude reduction in FPPW
on the INRIA one. Our Haar-like wavelets outperform MIT
wavelets because we also use 2nd order derivatives and contrast normalize the output vector. Fig. 3(a) also shows MIT’s
best parts based and monolithic detectors (the points are interpolated from ), however beware that an exact comparison is not possible as we do not know how the database in
 was divided into training and test parts and the negative images used are not available. The performances of the
ﬁnal rectangular (R-HOG) and circular (C-HOG) detectors
are very similar, with C-HOG having the slight edge. Augmenting R-HOG with primitive bar detectors (oriented 2nd
derivatives – ‘R2-HOG’) doubles the feature dimension but
further improves the performance (by 2% at 10−4 FPPW).
Replacing the linear SVM with a Gaussian kernel one improves performance by about 3% at 10−4 FPPW, at the cost
of much higher run times1. Using binary edge voting (EC-
HOG) instead of gradient magnitude weighted voting (C-
HOG) decreases performance by 5% at 10−4 FPPW, while
omitting orientation information decreases it by much more,
even if additional spatial or radial bins are added (by 33% at
10−4 FPPW, for both edges (E-ShapeC) and gradients (G-
ShapeC)). PCA-SIFT also performs poorly. One reason is
that, in comparison to , many more (80 of 512) principal
vectors have to be retained to capture the same proportion of
the variance. This may be because the spatial registration is
weaker when there is no keypoint detector.
Implementation and Performance Study
We now give details of our HOG implementations and
systematically study the effects of the various choices on de-
1We use the hard examples generated by linear R-HOG to train the kernel R-HOG detector, as kernel R-HOG generates so few false positives that
its hard example set is too sparse to improve the generalization signiﬁcantly.
DET − different descriptors on MIT database
false positives per window (FPPW)
Lin. R−HOG
Lin. C−HOG
Lin. EC−HOG
Lin. G−ShaceC
Lin. E−ShaceC
MIT best (part)
MIT baseline
DET − different descriptors on INRIA database
false positives per window (FPPW)
Ker. R−HOG
Lin. R2−HOG
Lin. R−HOG
Lin. C−HOG
Lin. EC−HOG
Lin. G−ShapeC
Lin. E−ShapeC
Figure 3. The performance of selected detectors on (left) MIT and (right) INRIA data sets. See the text for details.
tector performance. Throughout this section we refer results
to our default detector which has the following properties,
described below: RGB colour space with no gamma correction; [−1, 0, 1] gradient ﬁlter with no smoothing; linear
gradient voting into 9 orientation bins in 0◦–180◦; 16×16
pixel blocks of four 8×8 pixel cells; Gaussian spatial window with σ = 8 pixel; L2-Hys (Lowe-style clipped L2 norm)
block normalization; block spacing stride of 8 pixels (hence
4-fold coverage of each cell); 64×128 detection window;
linear SVM classiﬁer.
Fig. 4 summarizes the effects of the various HOG parameters on overall detection performance. These will be examined in detail below. The main conclusions are that for good
performance, one should use ﬁne scale derivatives (essentially no smoothing), many orientation bins, and moderately
sized, strongly normalized, overlapping descriptor blocks.
Gamma/Colour Normalization
We evaluated several input pixel representations including grayscale, RGB and LAB colour spaces optionally with
power law (gamma) equalization. These normalizations have
only a modest effect on performance, perhaps because the
subsequent descriptor normalization achieves similar results.
We do use colour information when available. RGB and
LAB colour spaces give comparable results, but restricting
to grayscale reduces performance by 1.5% at 10−4 FPPW.
Square root gamma compression of each colour channel improves performance at low FPPW (by 1% at 10−4 FPPW)
but log compression is too strong and worsens it by 2% at
10−4 FPPW.
Gradient Computation
Detector performance is sensitive to the way in which
gradients are computed, but the simplest scheme turns out
to be the best. We tested gradients computed using Gaussian smoothing followed by one of several discrete derivative masks. Several smoothing scales were tested including σ=0 (none). Masks tested included various 1-D point
derivatives (uncentred [−1, 1], centred [−1, 0, 1] and cubiccorrected [1, −8, 0, 8, −1]) as well as 3×3 Sobel masks and
2×2 diagonal ones
(the most compact centred 2-D derivative masks). Simple 1-D [−1, 0, 1] masks at
σ=0 work best. Using larger masks always seems to decrease performance, and smoothing damages it signiﬁcantly:
for Gaussian derivatives, moving from σ=0 to σ=2 reduces
the recall rate from 89% to 80% at 10−4 FPPW. At σ=0,
cubic corrected 1-D width 5 ﬁlters are about 1% worse than
[−1, 0, 1] at 10−4 FPPW, while the 2×2 diagonal masks are
1.5% worse. Using uncentred [−1, 1] derivative masks also
decreases performance (by 1.5% at 10−4 FPPW), presumably because orientation estimation suffers as a result of the
x and y ﬁlters being based at different centres.
For colour images, we calculate separate gradients for
each colour channel, and take the one with the largest norm
as the pixel’s gradient vector.
Spatial / Orientation Binning
The next step is the fundamental nonlinearity of the descriptor. Each pixel calculates a weighted vote for an edge
orientation histogram channel based on the orientation of the
gradient element centred on it, and the votes are accumulated into orientation bins over local spatial regions that we
call cells. Cells can be either rectangular or radial (log-polar
sectors). The orientation bins are evenly spaced over 0◦–
180◦(“unsigned” gradient) or 0◦–360◦(“signed” gradient).
To reduce aliasing, votes are interpolated bilinearly between
the neighbouring bin centres in both orientation and position. The vote is a function of the gradient magnitude at the
pixel, either the magnitude itself, its square, its square root,
or a clipped form of the magnitude representing soft presence/absence of an edge at the pixel. In practice, using the
DET − effect of gradient scale σ
false positives per window (FPPW)
σ=0, c−cor
DET − effect of number of orientation bins β
false positives per window (FPPW)
bin= 9 (0−180)
bin= 6 (0−180)
bin= 4 (0−180)
bin= 3 (0−180)
bin=18 (0−360)
bin=12 (0−360)
bin= 8 (0−360)
bin= 6 (0−360)
DET − effect of normalization methods
false positives per window (FPPW)
Window norm
DET − effect of overlap (cell size=8, num cell = 2x2, wt=0)
false positives per window (FPPW)
overlap = 3/4, stride = 4
overlap = 1/2, stride = 8
overlap = 0, stride =16
DET − effect of window size
false positives per window (FPPW)
DET − effect of kernel width,γ, on kernel SVM
false positives per window (FPPW)
Figure 4. For details see the text. (a) Using ﬁne derivative scale signiﬁcantly increases the performance. (‘c-cor’ is the 1D cubic-corrected
point derivative). (b) Increasing the number of orientation bins increases performance signiﬁcantly up to about 9 bins spaced over 0◦–
180◦. (c) The effect of different block normalization schemes (see §6.4). (d) Using overlapping descriptor blocks decreases the miss rate
by around 5%. (e) Reducing the 16 pixel margin around the 64×128 detection window decreases the performance by about 3%. (f) Using
a Gaussian kernel SVM, exp(−γ∥x1 −x2∥2), improves the performance by about 3%.
magnitude itself gives the best results. Taking the square root
reduces performance slightly, while using binary edge presence voting decreases it signiﬁcantly (by 5% at 10−4 FPPW).
Fine orientation coding turns out to be essential for good
performance, whereas (see below) spatial binning can be
rather coarse. As ﬁg. 4(b) shows, increasing the number
of orientation bins improves performance signiﬁcantly up to
about 9 bins, but makes little difference beyond this. This
is for bins spaced over 0◦–180◦, i.e. the ‘sign’ of the gradient is ignored. Including signed gradients (orientation range
0◦–360◦, as in the original SIFT descriptor) decreases the
performance, even when the number of bins is also doubled
to preserve the original orientation resolution. For humans,
the wide range of clothing and background colours presumably makes the signs of contrasts uninformative. However
note that including sign information does help substantially
in some other object recognition tasks, e.g. cars, motorbikes.
Normalization and Descriptor Blocks
Gradient strengths vary over a wide range owing to local
variations in illumination and foreground-background contrast, so effective local contrast normalization turns out to
be essential for good performance. We evaluated a num-
Cell size (pixels)
4x4 Block size (Cells)
Miss Rate (%)
Figure 5. The miss rate at 10−4 FPPW as the cell and block sizes
change. The stride (block overlap) is ﬁxed at half of the block size.
3×3 blocks of 6×6 pixel cells perform best, with 10.4% miss rate.
ber of different normalization schemes. Most of them are
based on grouping cells into larger spatial blocks and contrast normalizing each block separately. The ﬁnal descriptor
is then the vector of all components of the normalized cell
responses from all of the blocks in the detection window.
In fact, we typically overlap the blocks so that each scalar
cell response contributes several components to the ﬁnal descriptor vector, each normalized with respect to a different
block. This may seem redundant but good normalization is
critical and including overlap signiﬁcantly improves the performance. Fig. 4(d) shows that performance increases by 4%
at 10−4 FPPW as we increase the overlap from none (stride
16) to 16-fold area / 4-fold linear coverage (stride 4).
We evaluated two classes of block geometries, square or
rectangular ones partitioned into grids of square or rectangular spatial cells, and circular blocks partitioned into cells in
log-polar fashion. We will refer to these two arrangements
as R-HOG and C-HOG (for rectangular and circular HOG).
R-HOG. R-HOG blocks have many similarities to SIFT descriptors but they are used quite differently. They are
computed in dense grids at a single scale without dominant
orientation alignment and used as part of a larger code vector
that implicitly encodes spatial position relative to the detection window, whereas SIFT’s are computed at a sparse set
of scale-invariant key points, rotated to align their dominant
orientations, and used individually. SIFT’s are optimized for
sparse wide baseline matching, R-HOG’s for dense robust
coding of spatial form. Other precursors include the edge
orientation histograms of Freeman & Roth . We usually
use square R-HOG’s, i.e. ς×ς grids of η×η pixel cells each
containing β orientation bins, where ς, η, β are parameters.
Fig. 5 plots the miss rate at 10−4 FPPW w.r.t. cell size and
block size in cells. For human detection, 3×3 cell blocks
of 6×6 pixel cells perform best, with 10.4% miss-rate at
10−4 FPPW. In fact, 6–8 pixel wide cells do best irrespective of the block size – an interesting coincidence as human
limbs are about 6–8 pixels across in our images. 2×2 and
3×3 blocks work best. Beyond this, the results deteriorate:
adaptivity to local imaging conditions is weakened when the
block becomes too big, and when it is too small (1×1 block
/ normalization over orientations alone) valuable spatial information is suppressed.
As in , it is useful to downweight pixels near the edges
of the block by applying a Gaussian spatial window to each
pixel before accumulating orientation votes into cells. This
improves performance by 1% at 10−4 FPPW for a Gaussian
with σ = 0.5 ∗block width.
We also tried including multiple block types with different cell and block sizes in the overall descriptor. This slightly
improves performance (by around 3% at 10−4 FPPW), at the
cost of greatly increased descriptor size.
Besides square R-HOG blocks, we also tested vertical
(2×1 cell) and horizontal (1×2 cell) blocks and a combined
descriptor including both vertical and horizontal pairs. Vertical and vertical+horizontal pairs are signiﬁcantly better than
horizontal pairs alone, but not as good as 2×2 blocks (1%
worse at 10−4 FPPW).
C-HOG. Our circular block (C-HOG) descriptors are reminiscent of Shape Contexts except that, crucially, each
spatial cell contains a stack of gradient-weighted orientation cells instead of a single orientation-independent edgepresence count. The log-polar grid was originally suggested
by the idea that it would allow ﬁne coding of nearby structure to be combined with coarser coding of wider context,
and the fact that the transformation from the visual ﬁeld to
the V1 cortex in primates is logarithmic . However small
descriptors with very few radial bins turn out to give the best
performance, so in practice there is little inhomogeneity or
context. It is probably better to think of C-HOG’s simply as
an advanced form of centre-surround coding.
We evaluated two variants of the C-HOG geometry,
ones with a single circular central cell (similar to
the GLOH feature of ), and ones whose central cell is divided into angular sectors as in shape
contexts. We present results only for the circularcentre variants, as these have fewer spatial cells
than the divided centre ones and give the same performance in practice. A technical report will provide further details. The C-HOG layout has four parameters: the
numbers of angular and radial bins; the radius of the central
bin in pixels; and the expansion factor for subsequent radii.
At least two radial bins (a centre and a surround) and four
angular bins (quartering) are needed for good performance.
Including additional radial bins does not change the performance much, while increasing the number of angular bins
decreases performance (by 1.3% at 10−4 FPPW when going from 4 to 12 angular bins). 4 pixels is the best radius
for the central bin, but 3 and 5 give similar results. Increasing the expansion factor from 2 to 3 leaves the performance
essentially unchanged. With these parameters, neither Gaussian spatial weighting nor inverse weighting of cell votes by
cell area changes the performance, but combining these two
reduces slightly. These values assume ﬁne orientation sampling. Shape contexts (1 orientation bin) require much ﬁner
spatial subdivision to work well.
Block Normalization schemes. We evaluated four different block normalization schemes for each of the above HOG
geometries. Let v be the unnormalized descriptor vector,
∥v∥k be its k-norm for k=1, 2, and ϵ be a small constant.
The schemes are: (a) L2-norm, v →v/
2 + ϵ2; (b)
L2-Hys, L2-norm followed by clipping (limiting the maximum values of v to 0.2) and renormalizing, as in ; (c)
L1-norm, v →v/(∥v∥1 + ϵ); and (d) L1-sqrt, L1-norm followed by square root v →
v/(∥v∥1 + ϵ), which amounts
to treating the descriptor vectors as probability distributions
and using the Bhattacharya distance between them. Fig. 4(c)
shows that L2-Hys, L2-norm and L1-sqrt all perform equally
well, while simple L1-norm reduces performance by 5%,
and omitting normalization entirely reduces it by 27%, at
10−4 FPPW. Some regularization ϵ is needed as we evaluate descriptors densely, including on empty patches, but the
results are insensitive to ϵ’s value over a large range.
Centre-surround normalization. We also investigated an
alternative centre-surround style cell normalization scheme,
in which the image is tiled with a grid of cells and for
each cell the total energy in the cell and its surrounding region (summed over orientations and pooled using Gaussian
weighting) is used to normalize the cell. However as ﬁg. 4(c)
(“window norm”) shows, this decreases performance relative
to the corresponding block based scheme (by 2% at 10−4
FPPW, for pooling with σ=1 cell widths). One reason is
that there are no longer any overlapping blocks so each cell
is coded only once in the ﬁnal descriptor. Including several
normalizations for each cell based on different pooling scales
σ provides no perceptible change in performance, so it seems
that it is the existence of several pooling regions with different spatial offsets relative to the cell that is important here,
not the pooling scale.
To clarify this point, consider the R-HOG detector with
overlapping blocks. The coefﬁcients of the trained linear
SVM give a measure of how much weight each cell of each
block can have in the ﬁnal discrimination decision. Close examination of ﬁg. 6(b,f) shows that the most important cells
are the ones that typically contain major human contours (especially the head and shoulders and the feet), normalized
w.r.t. blocks lying outside the contour. In other words —
despite the complex, cluttered backgrounds that are common in our training set — the detector cues mainly on the
contrast of silhouette contours against the background, not
on internal edges or on silhouette contours against the foreground. Patterned clothing and pose variations may make
internal regions unreliable as cues, or foreground-to-contour
transitions may be confused by smooth shading and shadowing effects. Similarly, ﬁg. 6(c,g) illustrate that gradients
inside the person (especially vertical ones) typically count as
negative cues, presumably because this suppresses false positives in which long vertical lines trigger vertical head and
leg cells.
Detector Window and Context
Our 64×128 detection window includes about 16 pixels
of margin around the person on all four sides.
shows that this border provides a signiﬁcant amount of context that helps detection. Decreasing it from 16 to 8 pixels
(48×112 detection window) decreases performance by 6%
at 10−4 FPPW. Keeping a 64×128 window but increasing
the person size within it (again decreasing the border) causes
a similar loss of performance, even though the resolution of
the person is actually increased.
By default we use a soft (C=0.01) linear SVM trained
with SVMLight (slightly modiﬁed to reduce memory
usage for problems with large dense descriptor vectors). Using a Gaussian kernel SVM increases performance by about
3% at 10−4 FPPW at the cost of a much higher run time.
Discussion
Overall, there are several notable ﬁndings in this work.
The fact that HOG greatly out-performs wavelets and that
any signiﬁcant degree of smoothing before calculating gradients damages the HOG results emphasizes that much of
the available image information is from abrupt edges at ﬁne
scales, and that blurring this in the hope of reducing the sensitivity to spatial position is a mistake. Instead, gradients
should be calculated at the ﬁnest available scale in the current
pyramid layer, rectiﬁed or used for orientation voting, and
only then blurred spatially. Given this, relatively coarse spatial quantization sufﬁces (8×8 pixel cells / one limb width).
On the other hand, at least for human detection, it pays to
sample orientation rather ﬁnely: both wavelets and shape
contexts lose out signiﬁcantly here.
Secondly, strong local contrast normalization is essential for good results, and traditional centre-surround style
schemes are not the best choice.
Better results can be
achieved by normalizing each element (edge, cell) several
times with respect to different local supports, and treating
the results as independent signals. In our standard detector,
each HOG cell appears four times with different normalizations and including this ‘redundant’ information improves
performance from 84% to 89% at 10−4 FPPW.
Summary and Conclusions
We have shown that using locally normalized histogram
of gradient orientations features similar to SIFT descriptors
 in a dense overlapping grid gives very good results for
person detection, reducing false positive rates by more than
an order of magnitude relative to the best Haar wavelet based
detector from . We studied the inﬂuence of various descriptor parameters and concluded that ﬁne-scale gradients,
ﬁne orientation binning, relatively coarse spatial binning,
and high-quality local contrast normalization in overlapping
descriptor blocks are all important for good performance.
We also introduced a new and more challenging pedestrian
database, which is publicly available.
Future work: Although our current linear SVM detector is
reasonably efﬁcient – processing a 320×240 scale-space image (4000 detection windows) in less than a second – there is
still room for optimization and to further speed up detections
it would be useful to develop a coarse-to-ﬁne or rejectionchain style detector based on HOG descriptors. We are also
working on HOG-based detectors that incorporate motion information using block matching or optical ﬂow ﬁelds. Finally, although the current ﬁxed-template-style detector has
proven difﬁcult to beat for fully visible pedestrians, humans
are highly articulated and we believe that including a parts
based model with a greater degree of local spatial invariance
Figure 6. Our HOG detectors cue mainly on silhouette contours (especially the head, shoulders and feet). The most active blocks are
centred on the image background just outside the contour. (a) The average gradient image over the training examples. (b) Each “pixel”
shows the maximum positive SVM weight in the block centred on the pixel. (c) Likewise for the negative SVM weights. (d) A test image.
(e) It’s computed R-HOG descriptor. (f,g) The R-HOG descriptor weighted by respectively the positive and the negative SVM weights.
would help to improve the detection results in more general
situations.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the European Union research projects ACEMEDIA and PASCAL. We
thanks Cordelia Schmid for many useful comments. SVM-
Light provided reliable training of large-scale SVM’s.