Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Jiaming Zeng†, Berk Ustun†, Cynthia Rudin
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Summary. We investigate a long-debated question, which is how to create predictive models of recidivism that are sufﬁciently accurate, transparent, and interpretable to use for decision-making. This
question is complicated as these models are used to support different decisions, from sentencing, to
determining release on probation, to allocating preventative social services. Each case might have an
objective other than classiﬁcation accuracy, such as a desired true positive rate (TPR) or false positive
rate (FPR). Each (TPR, FPR) pair is a point on the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve. We
use popular machine learning methods to create models along the full ROC curve on a wide range of
recidivism prediction problems. We show that many methods (SVM, SGB, Ridge Regression) produce
equally accurate models along the full ROC curve. However, methods that designed for interpretability
(CART, C5.0) cannot be tuned to produce models that are accurate and/or interpretable. To handle this
shortcoming, we use a recent method called Supersparse Linear Integer Models (SLIM) to produce accurate, transparent, and interpretable scoring systems along the full ROC curve. These scoring systems
can be used for decision-making for many different use cases, since they are just as accurate as the
most powerful black-box machine learning models for many applications, but completely transparent,
and highly interpretable.
Keywords: recidivism, machine learning, interpretability, scoring systems, binary classiﬁcation
Introduction
Forecasting has been used for criminology applications since the 1920s when
various factors derived from age, race, prior offense history, employment, grades, and neighborhood background were used to estimate success of parole. Many things have changed since then, including the fact that
we have developed machine learning methods that can produce accurate predictive models, and have collected
large high-dimensional datasets on which to apply them.
Recidivism prediction is still extremely important. In the United States, for example, a minority of individuals commit the majority of the crimes : these are the “power few” of Sherman 
on which we should focus our efforts. We want to ensure that public resources are directed effectively, be they
correctional facilities or preventative social services. Milgram recently discussed the critical importance of accurately predicting if an individual who is released on bail poses a risk to public safety, pointing
out that high-risk individuals are being released 50% of the time while low-risk individuals are being released
less often then they should be. Her observations are in line with longstanding work on clinical versus actuarial
judgment, which shows that humans, on their own, are not as good at risk assessment as statistical models
 . This is the reason that several U.S. states have mandated the use
of predictive models for sentencing decisions .
There has been some controversy as to whether sophisticated machine learning methods are necessary to produce accurate predictive
models of recidivism, or if traditional approaches such as logistic regression or linear discriminant analysis
would sufﬁce . Random
forests may produce accurate predictive models, but these models effectively operate as black-boxes, which
make it difﬁcult to understand how the input variables are producing a predicted outcome. If a simpler, more
transparent, but equally accurate predictive model could be developed, it would be more usable and defensible
for many decision-making applications. There is a precedent for using such models in criminology ; Ridgeway argues that a “decent transparent model that is actually used will
outperform a sophisticated system that predicts better but sits on a shelf.” This discussion is captured nicely
by Bushway , who contrasts the works of Berk and Bleich and Tollenaar and van der Heijden
 
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
 . Berk and Bleich claim we need sophisticated machine learning methods due to their substantial
beneﬁts in accuracy, whereas Tollenaar and van der Heijden claim that “modern statistical, data mining
and machine learning models provides no real advantage over logistic regression and LDA,” assuming that
humans have done appropriate pre-processing. In this work, we argue that the answer to the question is far
more subtle than a simple yes or no.
In particular, the answer depends on how the models will be used for decision-making. For each use case
(e.g., sentencing, parole decisions, policy interventions), one might need a decision point at a different level of
true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) . Each (TPR, FPR) pair is a point on
the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve. To determine if one method is better than another, one must
consider the appropriate point along the ROC curve for decision-making. As we show, for a wide range of
recidivism prediction problems, many machine learning methods (support vector machines, random forests)
produce equally accurate predictive models along the ROC curve. However, there are trade-offs between
accuracy, transparency, and interpretability: methods that are designed to yield transparent models (CART,
C5.0) cannot be tuned to produce as accurate models along the ROC curve, and do not always yield models
that are interpretable. This is not to say that interpretable models for recidivism prediction do not exist. The
fact that many machine learning methods produce models with similar levels of predictive accuracy indicates
that there is a large class of approximately-equally-accurate predictive models . In this case, there may exist interpretable models that also attain the same level of
accuracy. Finding models that are accurate and interpretable, however, is computationally challenging.
In this paper, we explore whether such accurate-yet-interpretable models exist and how to ﬁnd them. To
this end, we use a new machine learning method known as a Supersparse Linear Integer Model to learn scoring systems from data. Scoring systems that have used for many criminal justice
applications because they let users make quick predictions by adding, subtracting and multiplying a few small
numbers . In contrast to existing tools, which have been built using heuristic approaches , the models built by SLIM are fully optimized for accuracy and sparsity,
and can handle additional constraints (e.g., bounds on the false positive rate, monotonicity properties for the
coefﬁcients). We use SLIM to produce a set of simple scoring systems at different decision points across the
full ROC curve, and provide a comparison with other popular machine learning methods. Our ﬁndings show
that the SLIM scoring systems are often just as accurate as the most powerful black-box machine learning
models, but transparent and highly interpretable.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 1.2, we discuss related work. In Section 2, we
describe how we derived 6 recidivism prediction problems. In Section 3, we provide a brief overview of SLIM
and describe several new techniques that can reduce the computation required to produce scoring systems.
In Section 4, we compare the accuracy and interpretability of models produced by the 9 machine learning
methods on the 6 recidivism prediction problems. We include additional results related to the accuracy and
interpretability of models from different methods in the Appendix.
Related Work
Predictive models for recidivism have been in widespread use in different countries and different areas of
the criminal justice system since the early 1920s .
The use of these tools has been spurred on by continued research into the superiority of actuarial judgment
 as well as a desire to efﬁciently use limited public resources
 . In the U.S., federal guidelines currently mandate
the use of a predictive recidivism measure known as the Criminal History Category for sentencing . Besides the U.S., countries that currently use risk assessment tools include
Canada , the Netherlands , and the U.K.
 . Applications of these tools can be seen in evidence-based sentencing ,
corrections and prison administration , informing release on parole , determining the level of supervision during parole , determining appropriate sanctions for parole violations ,
and targeted policy interventions .
Our paper focuses on binary classiﬁcation models to predict general recidivism (i.e., recidivism of any type
of crime) as well as crime-speciﬁc recidivism (i.e., recidivism for drug, general violence, domestic violence,
sexual violence, and fatal violence offenses). Risk assessment tools for general recidivism include: the Salient
Factor Score , the Offender Group Reconviction Scale , the Statistical Information of Recidivism scale
 , and the Level of Service/Case Management Inventory . Crime-speciﬁc applications include risk assessment tools for domestic violence , sexual violence , and general violence .
The scoring systems that we present in this paper are designed to mimic the form of risk scores that are
currently used throughout the criminal justice system – that is, linear classiﬁcation models that only require
users to add, subtract and multiply a few small numbers to make a prediction . These
tools are unique in that they allow users make quick predictions by hand, without a computer, calculator,
or nomogram (which is a visualization tool for more difﬁcult calculations). Current examples of such tools
include: the Salient Factor Score (SFS) , the Criminal History Category (CHC)
 , and the Offense Gravity Score (OGS) . Our approach aims to produce scoring systems that are fully optimized for accuracy and
sparsity without any post-processing. In contrast, current tools are produced through heuristic approaches that
primarily involve logistic regression with some ad-hoc post processing to ensure that the models are sparse
and use integer coefﬁcients .
Our scoring systems differ from existing tools in that they directly output a predicted outcome (i.e., prisoner
i will recidivate) as opposed to an predicted probability of the outcome (i.e. the predicted probability that
prisoner i will recidivate is 90%). The predicted probabilities from existing tools are typically converted into
an outcome by imposing a threshold (i.e., classify a prisoner as “high-risk” if the predicted probability of
arrest > 70%). In practice, users arbitrarily pick several thresholds to translate predicted probabilities into
an ordinal outcome (e.g., prisoner i is “low risk,” if the predicted probability is < 30%, “medium risk” if the
predicted probability is < 60%, and “high risk” otherwise). These arbitrary threshholds make it difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to effectively assess the predictive accuracy of the tools . Netter ,
for instance, mentions that “the possibility of making a prediction error (false positive or false negative) using
a risk tool is probable, but not easily determined.” In contrast to existing tools, the scoring systems let users
assess accuracy in a straightforward way (i.e., through the true positive rate and true negative rate). Further,
our approach has the advantage that is can yield a scoring system that optimizes the class-based accuracy at a
particular decision point (i.e., produce the model that maximizes the true positive rate, given a false-positive
rate of at most 30%).
Our work is related to a stream of research that has aimed to leverage new methods for predictive modeling
in criminology. In contrast to our work, much of the research to date has focused on improving predictive
accuracy by training powerful black-box models such as random forests and stochastic
gradient boosting Friedman . Random forests , in particular, have been used for
several criminological applications, including: predicting homicide offender recidivism ;
predicting serious misconduct among incarcerated prisoners ; forecasting potential murders
for criminals on probation or parole ; forecasting domestic violence and help inform court
decisions at arraignment . We note that not all studies in used black-box models:
Berk et al. , for instance, help the Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department develop a simple and practical
screener to forecast domestic violence using decision trees. More recently, , developed a
simple scoring system to help the New York Police Department address stop and frisk by ﬁrst running logistic
regression, and then rounding the coefﬁcients.
Data and Prediction Problems
Each problem is a binary classiﬁcation problem with N = 33, 796 prisoners and P = 48 input variables.
The goal is to predict whether a prisoner will be arrested for a certain type of crime within 3 years of being
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
released from prison. In what follows, we describe how we created each prediction problem.
Database Details
We derived the recidivism prediction problems in our paper from the “Recidivism of Prisoners Released in
1994” database, assembled by the U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics . It is the
largest publicly available database on prisoner recidivism in the United States. The study tracked 38,624
prisoners for 3 years following their release from prison in 1994. These prisoners were randomly sampled
from the population of all prisoners released from 15 U.S. states (Arizona, California, Delaware, Florida,
Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, and
Virginia). The sampled population accounts for roughly two-thirds of all prisoners that were released from
prison in the U.S. in 1994. Other studies that use this database include: Bhati and Piquero ; Bhati
 ; Zhang et al. .
The database is composed of 38,624 rows and 6,427 columns, where each row represents a prisoner and
each column represents a feature (i.e. a ﬁeld of information for a given prisoner). The 6,427 columns consist of
91 ﬁelds that were recorded before or during release from prison in 1994 (e.g., date of birth, effective sentence
length), and 64 ﬁelds that were repeatedly recorded for up to 99 different arrests in the 3 year follow-up period
(e.g., if a prisoner was rearrested three times with 3 years, there would be three record cycles recorded). The
information for each prisoner is sourced from record-of-arrest-and-prosecution (RAP) sheets kept by state
law enforcement agencies and/or the FBI. A detailed descriptive analysis of the database was carried out
by statisticians at the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics . This study restricted its
attention to 33,796 of the 38,624 prisoners to exclude extraordinary or unrepresentative release cases. To be
selected for the analysis of Langan and Levin , a prisoner had to be alive during the 3 year follow-up
period, and had to have been released from prison in 1994 for an original sentence that was at least 1 year
or longer. Prisoners with certain release types – release to custody/detainer/warrant, absent without leave,
escape, transfer, administrative release, and release on appeal – were excluded. To mirror the approach of
Langan and Levin , we restricted our attention to the same subset of prisoners.
This dataset has some serious ﬂaws which we point out below. To begin, many important factors that could
be used to predict recidivism are missing, and many included factors are noisy enough to be excluded from
our preliminary experiments. The information about education levels is extremely minimal; we do not even
know whether each prisoner attended college, or completed high school. The information about courses in
prison is only an indicator of whether the inmate took any education or vocation courses at all. Also, there is
no family history for each prisoner (e.g., foster care) and no record of visitors while in prison (e.g., indicators
of caring family members or friends). There is no information about reentry programs or employment history.
While some of these factors exist, such as drug or alcohol treatment and in-prison vocational programs, the
data is highly incomplete and therefore excluded from our analysis. For example, for drug treatment, less than
14% of the prisoners had a valid entry. The rest were “unknown.” To include as many prisoners as possible,
we chose to exclude factors with extremely sparse information.
Deriving Input Variables
We provide a summary of the P = 48 input variables derived from the database in Table 1. We encoded each
input variable as a binary rule of the form xij ∈{0, 1}, j = 1 . . . , P, where xij = 1 if condition j holds true
about prisoner i. This allows a linear model to encode nonlinear functions of the original variables. We refer
to input variables in the text using italicized font (e.g., female). All prediction problems in Table 2 and all
machine learning methods in Table 4 use these same input variables.
The ﬁnal set of input variables are representative of well-known risk factors for recidivism and have been used in risk assessment tools since 1928 . They include: 1) information
about prison release in 1994 (e.g., time served, age at release, infraction in prison); 2) information from
past arrests, sentencing, and convictions (e.g., prior arrests≥1, any prior jail time);1 3) history of substance
abuse (e.g., alcohol abuse) 4) gender (e.g., female). These input variables are advantageous because: a) the
1The prior arrest variable does not count the original crime for which they were released from prison in 1994; thus,
about 12% of the prisoners have no prior arrests =1 even though they were arrested at least once.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
information is easily accessible to law enforcement ofﬁcials (all above information can be found in state
RAP sheets); b) they do not include socioeconomic factors such as race, which would directly eliminate the
potential to use these tools in applications such as sentencing.
We note that encoding the input variables as binary values presents many advantages. They produce
models that are easier to understand (removing the wide range presented by continuous variables), and they
avoid potential confusion stemming from coefﬁcients of normalized inputs (for instance, after undoing the
normalization for normalized coefﬁcients, a small coefﬁcient might be highly inﬂuential if it applies to a
variable taking large values). Binarization is especially useful for SLIM as we can ﬁt SLIM models by
solving a slightly easier discrete optimization problem when the data only contains binary input variables
(as discussed in Section 3.3). In Appendix E, we explore the change in predictive accuracy if continuous
variables are included and show that the changes in performance are minor for most methods. There are some
exceptions; for example, CART and C5.0T experienced an improvement of 4.6% for drug and SVM RBF
experienced a 7.7% improvement for fatal violence. Yet even for these methods, no clear improvement
is seen across all problems.
Deriving Outcome Variables
We created a total of 6 recidivism prediction problems by encoding a binary outcome variable yi ∈{−1, +1}
such that yi = +1 if a prisoner is arrested for a particular type of crime within 3 years after being released
from prison. For clarity, we refer to each prediction problem in the text using typewriter font (e.g., arrest).
We provide details on each recidivism prediction problems in Table 2. These include: an arrest for any
crime (arrest); an arrest for a drug-related offense (drug); or an arrest for a certain type of violent offense
(general violence, domestic violence, sexual violence, fatal violence).
In the dataset, all crime types can be broken down into smaller subcategories (e.g., fatal violence
can be broken into 6 subcategories such as murder, vehicular manslaughter, etc.). We chose to use
the broader crime categories for the sake of conciseness and clarity. Indeed, the study by Langan and Levin
 also split the crimes into the same major categories. We note that the outcomes of violent offenses are
mutually exclusive, as different types of violence are treated differently within the U.S. legal system. In other
words, yi = +1 for general violence does not necessarily imply yi = +1 for domestic violence,
sexual violence, fatal violence).
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
Table 1. Overview of input variables for all prediction problems. Each variable is a binary rule of the form
xij ∈{0, 1}. We list conditions required for xij = 1 under the Deﬁnition column.
Input Variable
P(xij = 1)
prisoner i is female
prior alcohol abuse
prisoner i has history of alcohol abuse
prior drug abuse
prisoner i has history of drug abuse
age at release≤17
prisoner i was ≤17 years old at release in 1994
age at release 18 to 24
prisoner i was 18-24 years old at release in 1994
age at release 25 to 29
prisoner i was 25-29 years old at release in 1994
age at release 30 to 39
prisoner i was 30-39 years old at release in 1994
age at release≥40
prisoner i was ≥40 years old at release in 1994
released unconditional
prisoner i released at expiration of sentence
released conditional
prisoner i released by parole or probation
time served≤6mo
prisoner i served ≤6 months
time served 7 to 12mo
prisoner i served 7–12 months
time served 13 to 24mo
prisoner i served 13–24 months
time served 25 to 60mo
prisoner i served 25–60 months
time served≥61mo
prisoner i served ≥61 months
infraction in prison
prisoner i has a record of misconduct in prison
age 1st arrest≤17
prisoner i was ≤17 years old at 1st arrest
age 1st arrest 18 to 24
prisoner i was 18-24 years old at 1st arrest
age 1st arrest 25 to 29
prisoner i was 25-29 years old at 1st arrest
age 1st arrest 30 to 39
prisoner i was 30-39 years old at 1st arrest
age 1st arrest≥40
prisoner i was ≥40 years at 1st arrest
age 1st conﬁnement≤17
prisoner i was ≤17 years old at 1st conﬁnement
age 1st conﬁnement 18 to 24
prisoner i was 18-24 years old at 1st conﬁnement
age 1st conﬁnement 25 to 29
prisoner i was 25-29 years old at 1st conﬁnement
age 1st conﬁnement 30 to 39
prisoner i was 30-39 years old at 1st conﬁnement
age 1st conﬁnement≥40
prisoner i was ≥40 years at 1st conﬁnement
prior arrest for drug
prisoner i was once arrested for drug offense
prior arrest for property
prisoner i was once arrested for property offense
prior arrest for public order
prisoner i was once arrested for public order offense
prior arrest for general violence
prisoner i was once arrested for general violence
prior arrest for domestic violence
prisoner i was once arrested for domestic violence
prior arrest for sexual violence
prisoner i was once arrested for sexual violence
prior arrest for fatal violence
prisoner i was once arrested for fatal violence
prior arrest for multiple types
prisoner i was once arrested for multiple types of crime
prior arrest for felony
prisoner i was once arrested for a felony
prior arrest for misdemeanor
prisoner i was once arrested for a misdemeanor
prior arrest for local ordinance
prisoner i was once arrested for local ordinance
prior arrest with ﬁrearms involved
prisoner i was once arrested or an incident involving ﬁrearms
prior arrest with child involved
prisoner i was once arrested for an incident involving children
no prior arrests
prisoner i has no prior arrests
prior arrests≥1
prisoner i has at least 1 prior arrest
prior arrests≥2
prisoner i has at least 2 prior arrests
prior arrests≥5
prisoner i has at least 5 prior arrests
multiple prior prison time
prisoner i has been to prison multiple times
any prior jail time
prisoner i has been to jail at least once
multiple prior jail time
prisoner i has been to prison multiple times
any prior probation or ﬁne
prisoner i has been on probation or paid a ﬁne at least once
multiple prior probation or ﬁne
prisoner i has been on probation or paid a ﬁne multiple times
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Table 2. Overview of recidivism prediction problems. The percentages P(yi = +1) do not add up to 100%
because a prisoner could be arrested for multiple types of crime at one time (e.g., both drug and public
order offenses), and could also be arrested multiple times over the 3 year follow-up period.
Prediction Problem
P(yi = +1)
Outcome Variable
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for any offense within 3 years of release
from prison
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for drug-related offense (e.g., possession, trafﬁcking) within 3 years of release from prison
general violence
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for a violent offense (e.g., robbery,
aggravated assault) within 3 years of release from prison
domestic violence
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for domestic violence within 3 years of
release from prison
sexual violence
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for sexual violence within 3 years of
release from prison
fatal violence
yi = +1 if prisoner i is arrested for murder or manslaughter within 3
years of release from prison
Relationships between Input and Output Variables
Table 3 lists the conditional probabilities P(y = 1|xj = 1) between the outcome variable y and each input
variable xj for all prediction problems. Using this table, we can identify strong associations between the input
and output for each prediction problem. These associations can help uncover insights into each problem and
also help qualitatively validate predictive models in Section 4.4.
Consider, for instance, the arrest problem. Here, we can see that prisoners who are released from
prison at a later age are less likely to be arrested (as the probability for arrest decreases monotonically as
age at release increases). This also appears to be the case for prisoners who were ﬁrst conﬁned (i.e., sent to
prison or jail) at an older age (see e.g., age of ﬁrst conﬁnement). In addition, we can also see that prisoners
with more prior arrests have a higher likelihood of being arrested (as the probability for arrest increases
monotonically with prior arrest).
Similar insights can be made for crime-speciﬁc prediction problems. In drug, for instance, we see that
prisoners who were previously arrested for a drug-related offense are more likely to be rearrested for a drugrelated offense (32%) than those who were previously arrested for any other type of offense. Likewise, looking
at domestic violence, we see that the prisoners with the greatest probability of being arrested for a domestic violence crime are those with a history of domestic violence (13%).
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
Table 3. Table of conditional probabilities for all input variables (row) and prediction problems (columns). Each
cell represents the conditional probability P(y = +1|x = +1) where x is the input variable that is speciﬁed in the
row and y is the outcome variable for the prediction problem speciﬁed in the column.
Input Variable
Prediction Problem
prior alcohol abuse
prior drug abuse
age at release≤17
age at release 18 to 24
age at release 25 to 29
age at release 30 to 39
age at release≥40
released unconditional
released conditional
time served≤6mo
time served 7 to 12mo
time served 13 to 24mo
time served 25 to 60mo
time served≥61mo
infraction in prison
age 1st arrest≤17
age 1st arrest 18 to 24
age 1st arrest 25 to 29
age 1st arrest 30 to 39
age 1st arrest≥40
age 1st conﬁnement≤17
age 1st conﬁnement 18 to 24
age 1st conﬁnement 25 to 29
age 1st conﬁnement 30 to 39
age 1st conﬁnement≥40
prior arrest for drug
prior arrest for property
prior arrest for public order
prior arrest for general violence
prior arrest for domestic violence
prior arrest for sexual violence
prior arrest for fatal violence
prior arrest for multiple crime types
prior arrest for felony
prior arrest for misdemeanor
prior arrest for local ordinance
prior arrest with ﬁrearms involved
prior arrest with child involved
no prior arrests
prior arrest≥1
prior arrest≥2
prior arrest≥5
multiple prior prison time
any prior jail time
multiple prior jail time
any prior probation or ﬁne
multiple prior probation or ﬁne
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Supersparse Linear Integer Models
A Supersparse Linear Integer Model (SLIM) is a new machine learning method for creating scoring systems –
that is, binary classiﬁcation models that only require users to add, subtract and multiply a few small numbers
to make a prediction . Scoring systems are widely used because they allow users
to make quick predictions, without the use of a computer, and without extensive training in statistics. These
models are also useful because their high degree of sparsity and integer coefﬁcients let users easily gauge
the inﬂuence of multiple input variables on the predicted outcome (see Section 4.4 for an example). In what
follows, we provide a brief overview of SLIM, and provide several new techniques to reduce the computation
for problems with binary input variables.
Framework and Optimization Problem
SLIM scoring systems are linear classiﬁcation models of the form:
λjxij > λ0
λjxij ≤λ0.
Here, λ1, . . . , λP represent the coefﬁcients (i.e. the “points” for input variables j = 1, . . . , P), and λ0 represents an intercept (i.e. the “threshold score” that has to be surpassed to predict ˆyi = +1).
The values of the coefﬁcients are determined from data by solving a discrete optimization problem that
has the following form:
1 [yi ̸= ˆyi] + C0
1 [λj ̸= 0] + ϵ
(λ0, λ1, ..., λP ) ∈L.
Here, the objective directly minimizes the error rate
i=1 1 [yi ̸= ˆyi] and directly penalizes the number of non-zero terms PP
j=1 1 [λj ̸= 0]. The constraints restrict coefﬁcients to a ﬁnite set such as L =
{−10, . . . , 10}P+1. Optionally, one could include additional operational constraints on the accuracy and
interpretability of the desired scoring system.
The objective includes a tiny penalty on the absolute value of the coefﬁcients to restrict coefﬁcients to
coprime values without affecting accuracy or sparsity. To illustrate the use of this penalty, consider a classiﬁer
such as ˆy = sign (x1 + x2). If SLIM only minimized the misclassiﬁcation rate and the number of terms
(the ﬁrst two terms of the objective), then ˆy = sign (2x1 + 2x2) would have the same objective value as
ˆy = sign (x1 + x2) because it makes the same predictions and has the same number of non-zero coefﬁcients.
Since coefﬁcients are restricted to a discrete set, we use this tiny penalty on the absolute value of these
coefﬁcients so that SLIM chooses the classiﬁer with the smallest (coprime) coefﬁcients, ˆy = sign (x1 + x2).
The C0 parameter represents the maximum accuracy that SLIM is willing to sacriﬁce to remove a feature
from the optimal scoring system. If, for instance, C0 is set within the range (1/N, 2/N), we would sacriﬁce
the accuracy of one observation to have a model with one fewer feature. Given C0, we can set the ℓ1-penalty
parameter ϵ to any value
min(1/N, C0)
max{λj}j∈L
so that it does not affect the accuracy or sparsity of the optimal classiﬁer, but only induces the coefﬁcients to
be coprime for the features that are selected.
SLIM differs from traditional machine learning methods because it directly optimizes accuracy and sparsity without making approximations that other methods make for scalability (e.g., controlling for accuracy
using convex surrogate loss functions). By avoiding these approximations, SLIM sacriﬁces the ability to ﬁt a
model in seconds or in a way that scales to extremely large datasets. In return, however, it gains the ability to
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
ﬁt models that are highly customizable, since one could directly encode a wide range of operational constraints
into its integer programming formulation. In this paper, we primarily make use of a simple constraint to limit
the number of non-zero coefﬁcients, however, it is also natural to incorporate constraints on class-speciﬁc
accuracy, structural sparsity, and prediction .
In this paper we trained the following version of SLIM, which is different than (1) in that it includes class
weights, and has speciﬁc constraints on the coefﬁcients:
1 [yi ̸= ˆyi] + W −
1 [yi ̸= ˆyi] + C0
1 [λj ̸= 0] + ϵ
1 [λj ̸= 0] ≤8
λj ∈{−10, . . . , 10} for j = 1...P
λ0 ∈{−100, . . . , 100}.
In the formulation above, the constraints restrict each coefﬁcient λj to an integer between −10 and 10, the
threshold λ0 to an integer between −100 and 100, the number of non-zero to at most 8 . The parameters W + and W −are class-based
weights that control the accuracy on positive and negative examples. We typically choose values of W + and
W −such that W ++W −= 2, so that we recover an error-minimizing formulation by setting W + = W −= 1.
The C0 parameter was set to a sufﬁciently small value so that SLIM would not sacriﬁce accuracy for sparsity:
given W + and W −, we can set C0 to any value
0 < C0 < min{W −, W +}/(N × P)
to ensure this condition. The ϵ parameter was set to a sufﬁciently small value so that SLIM would produce a
model with coprime coefﬁcients without affecting accuracy or sparsity: given W +, W −and C0, we can set ϵ
to any value 0 < ϵ < C0/ max PP
j=1 |λj| to ensure this condition.
General SLIM IP Formulation
Training a SLIM scoring system requires solving an integer programming (IP) problem using a solver such
as CPLEX, Gurobi, or CBC. In general, we use the following IP formulation to recover the solution to the
optimization problem (2):
error on i
C0αj + ϵβj
penalty for coef j
Z ∩[−Λj, Λj]
coefﬁcient set
loss variables
penalty variables
ℓ0 variables
j = 1...P.
ℓ1 variables
The constraints in (3a) compute the error rate by setting the loss variables zi = 1
yiλT xi ≤0
linear classiﬁer with coefﬁcients λ misclassiﬁes example i (or is close to misclassifying it, depending on
the margin γ). This is a Big-M constraint for the error rate that depends on scalar parameters γ and Mi
 . The value of Mi represents the maximum score when example i is misclassiﬁed,
and can be set as Mi = maxλ∈L(γ −yiλT xi) which is easy to compute since L is ﬁnite. The value of γ
represents the margin, and the objective is penalized when points are either incorrectly classiﬁed, or within
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
γ of the decision boundary. How close a point is to the decision boundary (or whether it is misclassiﬁed) is
determined by yiλT xi. When the features are binary, and since the coefﬁcients are integers, γ can naturally
be set to any value between 0 and 1. (In other cases, we can set γ = 0.5 for instance, which makes an implicit
assumption on the values of the features.) The constraints in (3b) set the total penalty for each coefﬁcient to
Φj = C0αj + ϵβj, where αj := 1 [λj ̸= 0] is deﬁned by Big-M constraints in (3c), and βj := |λj| is deﬁned
by the constraints in (3d). We denote the largest absolute value of each coefﬁcient as Λj := maxλj∈Lj |λj|.
Restricting coefﬁcients to a ﬁnite set results in signiﬁcant practical beneﬁts for the SLIM IP formulation,
especially in comparison to other IP formulations that minimize the 0–1-loss and/or penalize the ℓ0-norm.
Without the restriction of λ to a bounded set, we would not have a natural choice for the Big-M constant,
which means the user chooses one that is very large, leading to a less efﬁcient formulation . For SLIM, the Big-M constants used to compute the 0–1 loss in constraint (3a) is bounded as Mi ≤
maxλ∈L(γ −yiλT xi), and the Big-M constant used to compute the ℓ0-norm in constraints (3c) is bounded as
Λj ≤maxλj∈Lj |λj|. Bounding these constants lead to a tighter LP relaxation, which narrows the integrality
gap, and improves the ability of commercial IP solvers to obtain a proof of optimality more quickly.
Improved SLIM IP Formulation
The following formulation provides a tighter relaxation of the IP which reduces computation. It relies on the
fact that when the input variables are binary, we are likely to get repeated feature values among observations.
error on s(4a)
error on t(4b)
∀s, t : xs = xt, ys = −yt
conﬂicting labels(4c)
C0αj + ϵβj
penalty for coef j(4d)
ℓ0-norm(4e)
ℓ1-norm (4f)
Z ∩[−Λj, Λj]
coefﬁcient set
loss variables
penalty variables
ℓ0 variables
j = 1...P.
ℓ1 variables
The main difference between this formulation and the one in (3) is that we compute the error rate of the
classiﬁer using loss constraints that are expressed in terms of the number of distinct points in the dataset.
Here, the set S represents the set of distinct points with positive labels, and the set T represents the set of
distinct points with negative examples. The parameters ns (and nt) count the number of times a point of type
s (or t) are found in the original dataset so that P
i=1 1 [yi = +1], P
i=1 1 [yi = −1], and
The main computational beneﬁts of this formulation are due to the fact that: (i) we can reduce the number
of loss constraints by counting the number of repeated rows in the dataset; and (ii) we can directly encode a
lower bound on the error rate by counting the number of points s, t with identical feature but opposite labels
(i.e., xs = xt but ys = −yt). Here (i) reduces the size of the problem that we pass to an IP solver, and (ii)
produces a much stronger lower bound on the 0–1 loss (in comparison to the LP relaxation), which speeds up
the progress of branch-and-bound type algorithms. Note that it would be possible to use this formulation on a
dataset without binary input variables, though it would not necessarily be effective because it could be much
less likely for a dataset to contain repeated rows in such a setting.
Another subtle beneﬁt of this formulation is that the margin for the negative points is 0 while the margin
for the positive points is 1. This means that for positive points, we have a correct prediction if and only if the
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
score ≥1. For negative points, we have a correct prediction if and only if the score ≤0. This provides a
slight computational advantage since the negative points do not need to have scores below -1 to be correctly
classiﬁed, which reduces the size of the Big-M parameter and the coefﬁcient set. For instance, say we would to
produce a linear model that encode: “predict rearrest unless a1 or a2 are true.” Using the previous formulation
with the margin of γ ∈(0, 1) on both positives and negatives, the optimal SLIM classiﬁer would be: “rearrest
= sign(1 −2a1 −2a2).” In contrast, the margin of the current formulation is: “rearrest = sign(1 −a1 −a2)”,
which uses smaller coefﬁcients, and produces a slightly simpler model.
Active Set Polishing
On large datasets, IP solvers may take long time to produce an optimal solution or provider users with a
certiﬁcate of optimality. Here, we present a polishing procedure that can be used to improve the quality of
solutions locally. For a ﬁxed set of features, this procedure optimizes the values of coefﬁcients.
The polishing procedure takes as input a feasible set of coefﬁcients from the SLIM IP λfeasible, and returns
a polished set of coefﬁcients λpolished by solving a a simpler IP formulation shown in (5). The polishing IP
only optimizes the coefﬁcients of features that belong to the active set of λfeasible: that is, the set of features
with nonzero coefﬁcients A :=
j : λfeasible
. The coefﬁcients for features that do not belong to the
active set are ﬁxed to zero so that λj = 0 for j /∈A. In this way, the optimization no longer involves feature
selection, and the formulation becomes much easier to solve.
error on s
error on t
∀s, t : xs = xt, ys = −yt
conﬂicting labels
Z ∩[−Λj, Λj]
coefﬁcient set
s ∈S t ∈T .
loss variables
The polishing IP formulation is especially fast to solve to optimality for classiﬁcation problems with binary
input variables because this limits the number of loss constraints. Say for instance that we wish to polish a
set of coefﬁcients with only 5 nonzero variables, then there are at most |{−1, +1}| × |{0, 1}5| = 64 possible
unique data points, and thus the same number of possible loss constraints.
In our experiments in Section 4, we use the polishing procedure on all of the feasible solutions we ﬁnd
from the earlier formulation. In all cases, we can solve the polishing IP to optimality within a few seconds
(i.e. a MIPGAP of 0.0%).
Experimental Results
In this section, we compare the accuracy and interpretability of recidivism prediction models from SLIM to
models from 8 other popular classiﬁcation methods. In Section 4.1, we explain the experimental setup used
for all the methods. In Section 4.2, we compare the predictive accuracy of the methods with the AUC values
and ROC curves. In Section 4.3 and 4.4, we evaluate the interpretability of the models. Finally, in Section
4.5, we present the scoring systems generated by SLIM.
Methodology
In what follows we discuss cost-sensitive classiﬁcation for imbalanced problems, provide an overview of
techniques.
Evaluating Predictive Accuracy for Imbalanced Problems
The majority of classiﬁcation problems that we consider are imbalanced, where the data contain a relatively
small number of examples from one class and a relatively large number of examples from the other.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Imbalanced problems necessitate changes in the way that we evaluate the performance of classiﬁcation
models. Consider, for instance, a heavily imbalanced problem such as fatal violence where only P(yi =
+1) = 0.7% of individuals are arrested within 3 years of being released from prison. In this case, a method
that maximizes overall classiﬁcation accuracy is likely to produce a trivial model that predicts no one will be
arrested for fatal offenses – a result that is not surprising given that the trivial model is 99.3% accurate on the
overall population. Unfortunately, this model will never be able to identify individuals that will be arrested
for a fatal offense, and therefore be 0% accurate on the population of interest.
To provide a measure of classiﬁcation model performance on imbalanced problems, we assess the accuracy
of a model on the positive and negative classes separately. In our experiments, we report the class-based
accuracy of each model using the true positive rate (TPR), which reﬂects the accuracy on the positive class,
and the false positive rate (FPR), which reﬂects the error rate on negative class. For a given classiﬁcation
model, we compute these quantities as
1 [ˆyi = +1]
1 [ˆyi = +1] ,
where ˆyi denotes the predicted outcome for example i, N+ denotes the number of examples in the positive
class I+ = {i : yi = +1}, and N−denotes the number of examples from the negative class I−= {i : yi =
−1}. Ideally, a classiﬁcation model should have high TPR and low FPR (i.e., TPR close to 1 and FPR = 0).
Most classiﬁcation methods can be adapted to yield a model that is more accurate on the positive class,
but only if we are willing to sacriﬁce some accuracy on examples from the negative class, and vice-versa.
To illustrate the trade-off of classiﬁcation accuracy between positive and negative classes, we plot all models
produced by a given method as points on a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, which plots the TPR
on the vertical axis and the FPR on the horizontal axis. Having constructed an ROC curve, we then assess
the overall performance of each method by calculating the area under the ROC curve (AUC).2 A detailed
discussion of ROC analysis in recidivism prediction can be found in the work of Maloof .
Fitting Models over the Full ROC Curve using a Cost-Sensitive Approach
Different applications require predictive models at different points of the ROC curve. Models for sentencing,
for example, need low FPR in order to avoid predicting that a low-risk individual will reoffend. Models
for screening, however, need high TPR in order to capture as many high-risk individuals as possible. In
our experiments, we use a cost-sensitive approach to produce classiﬁcation models at different points of the
ROC curve . This approach involves controlling the accuracy on the positive and
negative classes by tuning the misclassiﬁcation costs for examples in each class. In what follows, we denote
the misclassiﬁcation cost on examples from the positive and negative classes as W + and W −, respectively.
As we increase W +, the cost of making a mistake on a positive example increases, and we expect to obtain a
model that classiﬁes the positive examples more accurately (i.e. with higher TPR). We choose W + and W −
so that W + + W −= 2. Thus, when W + = 2, we obtain a trivial model that predicts ˆyi = +1 and attains
TPR = 1. When W + = 0, we obtain a trivial model that predicts ˆyi = −1 that attains FPR = 0.
Choice of Classiﬁcation Methods
We compared SLIM scoring systems to models produced by eight popular classiﬁcation methods, including
those previously used for recidivism prediction (see Section 1.2) or those that ranked among the “top 10
algorithms in data mining” . In choosing these methods, we restricted our attention to
methods that have publicly-available software packages, and allow users to specify misclassiﬁcation costs for
positive and negative classes. Our ﬁnal choice of methods includes:
• C5.0 Trees and C5.0 Rules: C5.0 is an updated version of the popular C4.5 algorithm that can create decision trees and rule sets.
2We note that AUC is a summary statistic that is frequently misused in the context of classiﬁcation problems. It is true
that a method that with AUC = 1 always produces models that are more accurate than a method with AUC = 0. Other
than this simple case, however, it is not possible to state that a method with high AUC always produces models that are
more accurate than a method with low AUC.
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
• Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART): CART is a popular method to create decision trees
through recursive partitioning of the input variables .
• L1 and L2-Penalized Logistic Regression: Variants of logistic regression that penalize the coefﬁcients
to prevent overﬁtting . L1-penalized methods are typically used to create linear
models that are sparse . The L2 regularized methods are called
“ridge” and are not generally sparse.
• Random Forests: A popular black-box method that makes predictions using a large ensemble of weak
classiﬁcation trees. The method was originally developed by Breiman but is widely used for
recidivism prediction .
• Support Vector Machines: A popular black-box method for non-parametric linear classiﬁcation. The
Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel lets the method to handle classiﬁcation problems where the decisionboundary may be non-linear .
• Stochastic Gradient Boosting: A popular black-box method that create prediction models in the form
of an ensemble of weaker prediction models .
Details on Experimental Design, Parameter Tuning, and Computation
We summarize the methods, software, and settings that we used in our experiments in Table 4.
For each of the 6 recidivism prediction problems and each of the 9 methods, we constructed ROC curves by
running the algorithm with 19 values of W +. The values of W + were chosen to produce models across the full
ROC curves. By default, we chose values of W + ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.9} and set W −= 2 −W +. These values
of W + were inappropriate for problems with a signiﬁcant class imbalance as all methods produced trivial models. Thus, for signiﬁcantly imbalanced problems, such as domestic violence and sexual violence, we
used values of W + ∈{1.815, 1.820, . . . , 1.995}. For fatal violence, which was extremely imbalanced,
we used W + ∈{1.975, 1.976, . . . , 1.995}.
This setup requires us to produce a total of 1,026 recidivism prediction models (6 recidivism problems × 9
methods × 19 imbalance ratios). Each of the 1,026 models were built on a training set and their performance
was assessed out-of-sample. In particular, 1/3 of the data was reserved as the test set. The remaining 2/3 of
the data was the training set. During training, we used 5-fold nested cross-validation (5-CV) for parameter
tuning. Explicitly, the training data were split into 5 folds, and one of those 5 was reserved as the validation
fold. The validation fold was rotated in order to select free parameter values, and a ﬁnal model was trained on
the full training set (2/3) with the selected parameter values and its performance was assessed on the test set
(1/3). The folds were generated once to allow for comparisons across methods and prediction problems. The
parameters were chosen during nested cross validation to minimize the mean weighted 5-CV validation error
on the training set. Having obtained a set of 19 different models for each method and each problem, we then
constructed an ROC curve for that method on that problem by plotting the test TPR and test FPR of the 19
ﬁnal models.
We trained all baseline methods using publicly available packages in R 3.2.2 without
imposing any time constraints. In comparison, we trained SLIM by solving integer programming problems
(IP) with the CPLEX 12.6 API in MATLAB 2013a. We solved each IP through the following procedure: (i)
we trained the solver on the formulation in Section 3.3 for a total of 4 hours on a local computing cluster
with 2.7GHz CPUs. Each time we solved a IP we kept 500 feasible solutions, and polished them using the
formulation in Section 3.4. We then used the same nested cross-validation procedure as the other methods
to tune the number of terms in the ﬁnal model. Polishing all 500 solutions took less than one minute of
computing time. Thus, the total number of optimization problems we solved were 500 polishing IP’s × (5
folds + 1 ﬁnal model) × 6 problems × 19 values of W + = 342,000 integer programming problems.
Observations on Predictive Accuracy
We show ROC curves for all methods and prediction problems in Figure 1 and summarize the test AUC of
each method in Table 5. Tables with the training and 5-CV validation AUC’s for all methods are included in
Appendix A.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Table 4. Methods, software and free parameters used to train models for all 6 recidivism prediction problems.
We ran each method for 19 values of W + and all combinations of free parameters listed in the table. For each
value of W +, we selected the model that minimized the mean weighted 5-CV validation error. The values of
W + are problem-speciﬁc (see Section 4.1.4 for details)
Free Parameters and Settings
CART Decision Trees
 
minSplit ∈(3, 5, 10, 15, 20) ×
CP ∈(0.0001, 0.001, 0.01)
C5.0 Decision Trees
 
default settings
C5.0 Decision Rules
 
default settings
Logistic Regression
(L1-Penalty)
 
100 values of L1-penalty chosen by glmnet
Logistic Regression
(L2-Penalty)
 
100 values of L2-penalty chosen by glmnet
Random Forests
randomForest
 
sampsize ∈(0.632N, 0.4N, 0.2N) ×
nodesize ∈(1, 5, 10, 20)
with unbounded tree depth
Support Vector Machines
(Radial Basis Kernel)
 
C ∈(0.01, 0.1, 1, 10) ×
Stochastic Gradient Boosting
(Adaboost)
 
shrinkage ∈(0.001, 0.01, 0.1) ×
interaction.depth ∈(1, 2, 3, 4) ×
ntrees ∈(100, 500, 1500, 3000)
SLIM Scoring Systems
CPLEX 12.6
 
C0 and ϵ set to ﬁnd most accurate model with ≤8 coefﬁcients
where λ0 ∈{−100, . . . , 100} and λj ∈{−10, . . . , 10}
We make the following important observations, which we believe carry over to a large class of problems
beyond recidivism prediction:
• All methods did well on the general recidivism prediction problem arrest. In this case, we observe
only small differences in predictive accuracy of different methods: all methods other than CART attain a test AUC above 0.72; the highest test AUC of 0.73 was achieved by SGB, Ridge, and RF. This
multiplicity of good models reﬂects the Rashomon effect of Breiman .
• Major differences between methods appeared in their performance on imbalanced prediction problems.
We expected different methods to respond differently to changes in the misclassiﬁcation costs, and
therefore trained each method over a large range of possible misclassiﬁcation costs. Even so, it was
difﬁcult (if not impossible) to tune certain methods to produce models at certain points of the ROC
curve (see e.g., problems with signiﬁcant imbalance, such as fatal violence).
• SVM RBF, SGB, Lasso and Ridge were able to produce accurate models at different points on the ROC
curve for most problems. SGB usually achieved the highest AUC on most problems (e.g., arrest,
drug, general violence, domestic violence, fatal violence). Lasso, Ridge, and SVM RBF
often produce comparable AUCs. We ﬁnd that these methods respond well to cost-sensitive tuning, but it
is difﬁcult to tune the misclassiﬁcation costs for highly imbalanced problems, such as fatal violence,
to get models at speciﬁc points on the ROC curve.
• C5.0T, C5.0R and CART were unable to produce accurate models at different points on the ROC curve
on any imbalanced problems. We found that these methods do not respond well to cost-sensitive tuning.
The issue becomes markedly more severe as problems become more imbalanced.
and general violence, for instance, these methods could not produce models with high TPR. For
fatal violence, sexual violence, and domestic violence, these methods almost always produced trivial models that predict y = −1 (resulting in AUCs of 0.5). This result may be attributed to
the greedy nature of the algorithms used to ﬁt the trees, as opposed to the use of tree models in general.
The issue is unlikely to be software-related as it affects both C5.0 and CART, and has been observed by
others . This problem might not occur if trees were better optimized.
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
• In general, SLIM produced models that are close to or on the efﬁcient frontier of the ROC curve, despite
being restricted to a relatively small class of simple linear models (at most 8 non-zero coefﬁcients from -
10 to 10). Even on highly imbalanced problems such as domestic violence and sexual violence,
it responds well to changes in misclassiﬁcation costs (as expected, by nature of its formulation).
In addition to predictive accuracy, we also examine the risk calibration of the models. Figure 2 show the
risk calibration for arrest, constructed using the binning method from Zadrozny and Elkan . We
include calibration plots for all other problems in Appendix B. We see that SLIM is well-calibrated, even
though there is no reason it should be; it is a decision-making tool, not a risk assessment tool. For arrest,
Lasso and Ridge are well-calibrated; however, they lose this quality once we consider only sparse models (see
Appendix D). This property would also be lost if the Lasso and Ridge coefﬁcients were rounded.
Table 5. Test AUC for all methods on all prediction problems. Each cell contains the test AUC.
Prediction Problem
general violence
domestic violence
sexual violence
fatal violence
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
general violence
domestic violence
sexual violence
fatal violence
Fig. 1. ROC curves for general recidivism-related prediction problems with test data. We plot SLIM models
using large blue dots. All models perform similarly except for C5.0R, C5.0T, and CART.
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
Mean Score
Fraction of True Positives
Fig. 2. Risk calibration plot for arrest based on test data. We compare 3 models chosen at a similar decision
point, with test FPR≤50%. Although it is not a risk assessment tool, we see that SLIM is well calibrated.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Trade-offs Between Accuracy and Interpretability
In Appendix C, we show that the baseline methods are unable to maintain the same level of accuracy as they
have in Section 4.2 when their model size was constrained. For Lasso, Ridge and SLIM, model size is deﬁned
as the number of features in the model. For CART and C5.0, model size is the number of leaves or rules. In
fact, we ﬁnd the only methods that can consistently produce accurate models along the full ROC curve and
also have the potential for interpretability are SLIM and (non-sparse) Lasso.
Tree and rule-based methods such as CART, C5.0T and C5.0R were generally unable to produce models that attain high degrees of accuracy. Worse, even for balanced problems such as arrest, where these
methods did produce accurate models, the models are complicated and use a very large number of rules or
leaves . As we show in
Appendix C, it was not reasonably possible to obtain a C5.0R/C5.0T/CART model with at most 8 rules or 8
leaves for almost every prediction problem.
On the Interpretability of Equally Accurate Transparent Models
To assess the interpretability of different models, we provide a comparison of predictive models produced
by SLIM, Lasso and CART for the arrest problem in Figures 3–5. This setup provides a nice basis for
comparison as all three methods produce models at roughly the same decision point, and with the same degree
of sparsity. For this comparison, we considered any transparent model with at most 8 coefﬁcients (Lasso), 8
rules (C5.0R) or 8 leaves (C5.0T, CART) and had a test FPR of below 50%. We report the models with the
minimum weighted test error. Here, neither C5.0R nor C5.0T could produce an acceptable model with at most
8 rules or 8 leaves, so only models from SLIM, CART and Lasso could be displayed. As described before, it
is rare for Lasso and CART to produce models with a similar degree of accuracy to SLIM when model size is
constrained. We make the following observations:
• All three models attain similar levels of predictive accuracy. Test TPR values ranged between 70-79%
and test FPR values ranged between 43-48%. There may not exist a classiﬁcation model that can attain
substantially higher accuracy.
• The SLIM model uses 5 input variables and small integer coefﬁcients (see e.g., Figure 3). There is a natural
rule-based interpretation. In this case, the model implies that if the prisoner is young (age at release of 18 to 24)
or has a history of arrests (prior arrests≥5), he is highly likely to be rearrested. On the other hand, if he is
relatively older (age at release≥40) or has no history of arrests (no prior arrests), he is unlikely to commit
another crime.
• The CART model also allows users to make predictions without a calculator. In comparison to the SLIM
model, however, the hierarchical structure of the CART model makes it difﬁcult to gauge the relationship of
each input variable on the predicted outcome. Consider, for instance, the relationship between age at release
and the outcome. In this case, users are immediately aware that there is an effect, as the model branches
on the variables age at release≥40 and age at release 18 to 24. However, the effect is difﬁcult to comprehend since it depends on prior arrests for misdemeanor: if prior arrests≥5 = 1 and age at release 18 to 24
= 1 then the model predicts ˆy = +1; if prior arrests≥5 = 0 and age at release≥40 = 0 then ˆy = +1; however, if prior arrests≥5 = 0 and age at release≥40 = 1 then ˆy = +1 only if prior arrest for misdemeanor
= 1. Such issues do not affect linear models such as SLIM and Lasso, where users can immediately gauge
the direction and strength of the relationship between a input variable and the predicted outcome by the size
and sign of a coefﬁcient. The literature on interpretability in machine learning indicates that interpretability
is domain-speciﬁc; there are some domains where logical models are preferred over linear models, and vice
versa .
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
PREDICT ARREST FOR ANY OFFENSE IF SCORE > 1
age at release 18 to 24
· · · · · ·
prior arrests≥5
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for misdemeanor
· · · · · ·
no prior arrests
· · · · · ·
age at release≥40
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1–5
· · · · · ·
Fig. 3. SLIM scoring system for arrest. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 76.6%/44.5%, and a mean 5-CV
validation TPR/FPR of 78.3%/46.5%.
PREDICT ARREST FOR ANY OFFENSE IF SCORE > 0.31
prior arrests≥5
0.63 points
· · · · · ·
age 1st conﬁnement 18 to 24
0.15 points
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for property
0.09 points
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for misdemeanor
0.05 points
· · · · · ·
age at release≥40
-0.20 points
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1–5
· · · · · ·
Fig. 4. Lasso model for arrest, with coefﬁcients rounded to two signiﬁcant digits. This model has a test
TPR/FPR of 70.9%/43.8%, and a mean 5-CV validation TPR/FPR of 72.2%/44.0%.
prior arrests≥5
age at release 18 to 24
not rearrested
rearrested
age at release ≥40
rearrested
prior arrest for misdemeanor
rearrested
not rearrested
Fig. 5. CART model for arrest. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 79.1%/47.9%, and a mean 5-CV validation
TPR/FPR of 79.9%/48.5%.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Scoring Systems for Recidivism Prediction
We show a SLIM scoring system for each of the prediction problems that we consider in Figures 6–10.
The models are chosen at speciﬁc decision points, with the constraint that 5-CV FPR≤50% except for
sexual violence, which is chosen at 5-CV FPR≤20%. The models presented here may be suitable for
screening tasks. To obtain a model suitable for sentencing, a point on the ROC curve with a much higher TPR
would be needed. We note that these models generalize well from the dataset, evident by the close match
between test TPR/FPR (Table 5) and training TPR/FPR (Table 6).
Many of these models exhibit the same “rule-like” tendencies discussed in Section 4.4. For example, the
model for drug in Figure 6 predicts that a person will be arrested for a drug-related offense if he/she has
ever had any prior drug offenses. Similarly, model for sexual violence in Figure 9 effectively states that
a person will be rearrested for a sexual offense if and only if he/she has prior history of sexual crimes. For
completeness, we include comparisons with other models in Appendix B. Additional risk calibration plots for
models with constrained model size are included in Appendix D.
PREDICT ARREST FOR DRUG OFFENSE IF SCORE > 7
prior arrest for drugs
· · · · · ·
age at release 18 to 24
· · · · · ·
age at release 25 to 29
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for multiple types of crime
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for property
· · · · · ·
age at release 30 to 39
· · · · · ·
no prior arrests
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1-7
· · · · · ·
Fig. 6. SLIM scoring system for drug. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 85.7%/51.1%, and a mean 5-CV
validation TPR/FPR of 82.3%/49.7%.
PREDICT ARREST FOR GENERAL VIOLENCE OFFENSE IF SCORE > 7
prior arrest for general violence
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for misdemeanor
· · · · · ·
infraction in prison
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for local ord
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for property
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for fatal violence
· · · · · ·
prior arrest with ﬁrearms involved
· · · · · ·
age at release≥40
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1-8
· · · · · ·
Fig. 7. SLIM scoring system for general violence. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 76.7%/45.4%, and
a mean 5-CV validation TPR/FPR of 76.8%/47.6%.
Zeng, Ustun, and Rudin
PREDICT ARREST FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE OFFENSE IF SCORE > 3
prior arrest for misdemeanor
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for felony
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for domestic violence
· · · · · ·
age 1st conﬁnement 18 to 24
· · · · · ·
infraction in prison
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1-5
· · · · · ·
Fig. 8. SLIM scoring system for domestic violence. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 85.5%/46.0%, and
a mean 5-CV validation TPR/FPR of 81.4%/48.0%.
PREDICT ARREST FOR SEXUAL VIOLENCE OFFENSE IF SCORE > 2
prior arrest for sexual
· · · · · ·
prior arrests≥5
· · · · · ·
multiple prior jail time
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for multiple types of crime
· · · · · ·
no prior arrests
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1-5
· · · · · ·
Fig. 9. SLIM scoring system for sexual violence. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 44.3%/17.7%, and a
mean 5-CV validation TPR/FPR of 43.7%/19.9%.
PREDICT ARREST FOR FATAL VIOLENCE OFFENSE IF SCORE > 4
age 1st conﬁnement≤17
· · · · · ·
prior arrest with ﬁrearms involved
· · · · · ·
age 1st conﬁnement 18 to 24
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for felony
· · · · · ·
age at release 18 to 24
· · · · · ·
prior arrest for drugs
· · · · · ·
ADD POINTS FROM ROWS 1-6
· · · · · ·
Fig. 10. SLIM scoring system for fatal violence. This model has a test TPR/FPR of 55.4%/35.5%, and a
mean 5-CV validation TPR/FPR of 64.2%/42.4%.
Interpretable Classiﬁcation Models for Recidivism Prediction
Discussion
Our paper merges two perspectives on recidivism modeling: the ﬁrst is to obtain accurate predictive models
using the most powerful machine learning tools available, and the second is to create models that are easy to
use and understand.
We used a set of features that are commonly accessible to police ofﬁcers and judges, and compared the
ability of different machine learning methods to produce models at different decision points across the ROC
curve. Our results suggest that it is possible for traditional methods, such as Ridge Regression, to perform just
as well as more modern methods, such as Stochastic Gradient Boosting – a ﬁnding that is in line with the work
of Tollenaar and van der Heijden and Yang et al. . Further, we found that even simple models
may perform surprisingly well, even when they are ﬁtting from a heavily constrained space – a ﬁnding that is
in line with work on the surprising performance of simple models .
Our study shows that there may be major advantages of using SLIM for recidivism prediction, as it can
dependably produce a simple scoring system that is accurate and interpretable on any decision point along the
ROC curve. Interpretability is crucial for many of the high-stakes applications where recidivism prediction
models are being used. In such applications, it is not enough for the decision-maker to know what input
variables are being used to train the model, or how individual input variables are related to the outcome;
decision-makers should know how the model combines all the input variables to generate its predictions,
and whether this mechanism aligns with their ethical values. SLIM not only shows this mechanism, but
also accommodates constraints that are designed to align the prediction model with the ethical values of the
decision-maker.
In comparison to current machine learning methods, the main drawback of running SLIM is increased computation involved in solving an integer programming problem. To this end, we proposed two new techniques
to reduce computation involved in training high quality SLIM scoring systems: (i) a polishing procedure that
improves the quality of feasible solutions found by an IP solver; and (ii) an IP formulation that makes it easier
for an IP solver to provide a certiﬁcate of optimality. In our experiments, the time required to train SLIM was
ultimately comparable to the time required to train random forests or stochastic gradient boosting. However,
it was still signiﬁcant compared to the time required for other methods such as CART, C5.0 and penalized
logistic regression. In theory, the computation required to ﬁnd an optimal solution to the SLIM integer program is NP-hard, meaning that the runtime increases exponentially with the number of features. In practice,
the runtime depends on several factors: such as the number of samples, the number of dimensions, the underlying ease of the classiﬁcation, and how the data are encoded. Since most criminological problems cannot
by nature involve massive datasets (since each observation is a person), and since computer speed of solving
MIPs is also increasing exponentially, it is possible that mathematical programming techniques like SLIM are
well-suited for criminological problems that are substantially larger and more complex than the one discussed
in this work.