Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 74 75-109
Submitted 12/2021; published 05/2022
©2022 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.
Rethinking Fairness: An Interdisciplinary Survey of Critiques of
Hegemonic ML Fairness Approaches
Lindsay Weinberg
 
Honors College, Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
This survey article assesses and compares existing critiques of current fairness-enhancing
technical interventions in machine learning (ML) that draw from a range of non-computing
disciplines, including philosophy, feminist studies, critical race and ethnic studies, legal studies,
anthropology, and science and technology studies. It bridges epistemic divides in order to offer
an interdisciplinary understanding of the possibilities and limits of hegemonic computational
approaches to ML fairness for producing just outcomes for society’s most marginalized. The
article is organized according to nine major themes of critique wherein these different fields
intersect: 1) how "fairness" in AI fairness research gets defined; 2) how problems for AI systems
to address get formulated; 3) the impacts of abstraction on how AI tools function and its
propensity to lead to technological solutionism; 4) how racial classification operates within AI
fairness research; 5) the use of AI fairness measures to avoid regulation and engage in ethics
washing; 6) an absence of participatory design and democratic deliberation in AI fairness
considerations; 7) data collection practices that entrench “bias,” are non-consensual, and lack
transparency; 8) the predatory inclusion of marginalized groups into AI systems; and 9) a lack of
engagement with AI’s long-term social and ethical outcomes. Drawing from these critiques, the
article concludes by imagining future ML fairness research directions that actively disrupt
entrenched power dynamics and structural injustices in society.
1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a wave of AI scholarship working to define and measure fairness,
equity, and bias in computational terms. While there is an array of computational approaches to
fairness in the context of machine learning (ML), these approaches are typically through
intervention prior to modeling, at the point of modeling, or after modeling, and involve metrics
for quantifying the fairness of decisions and technical efforts for mitigating bias and unfairness
 . This article assesses and compares existing critiques of hegemonic
fairness-enhancing interventions in ML that draw from a range of non-computing disciplines,
including philosophy, feminist studies, critical race and ethnic studies, legal studies,
anthropology, and science and technology studies (STS). It bridges epistemic divides in order to
provide an interdisciplinary understanding of the possibilities and limits of these technical
interventions for producing just outcomes for society’s most marginalized. Drawing from a
feminist STS perspective, the author understands AI as a sociotechnical system requiring an
account of the ways that humans and AI tools are situated within social and historical contexts, as
well as implicated in larger systems of power that shape the distribution of resources,
opportunities, and (dis)advantages across the social field (e.g. militarism, capitalism, systemic
racism). Power, in this sense, refers to the ability to coerce, oblige, influence, or command how
life is organized and experienced by others through a range of methods. According to the insights
of critical social theory, power is not simply an expression of individual actions and behaviors
towards others, but a force that can be diffused through institutionalized ways of knowing,
governing, and communicating about the world . Power is often distributed
unevenly in society among individuals and groups through techniques of domination and
subordination (e.g. surveillance, labor exploitation, racial discrimination). This results in different
levels of access to resources and opportunities that social actors navigate within a given context,
also known as power dynamics. As this article will argue, ML fairness is a discourse that is
deeply embedded within larger institutional and social arrangements (structures) of power that
actively shape our shared social world. Johnson explains discourse as “an institutionalized
way of speaking that determines not only what we say and how we say it, but also what we do not
say” (p. 1). To begin, then, it is worthwhile to start with how the debates concerning
computational approaches to ML fairness are often framed.
ML fairness scholarship frequently incorporates a retelling of the 2016 ProPublica
controversy concerning the COMPAS recidivism risk tool used in US courts . This tool provides a prediction of the likelihood of a given defendant repeating a criminal
offense compared to individuals from similar data groups. In this case, ProPublica researchers
found that COMPAS disproportionately falsely labels Black criminal defendants in the US as
high risk for committing future crimes. Northpointe, the owner of COMPAS, argued that the tool
was fair because there was accuracy equity across racial groups. Ultimately, it became clear that
due to unequal base rates between Black defendants and white defendants as a result of past
patterns of historical discrimination, accuracy equity was mathematically impossible to achieve
alongside equalized false positive rates . This debate, and the understanding of a
range of irreconcilable “fair” statistical constraints, gave rise to benchmarks for assessing
different statistical definitions of ML fairness, including equal opportunity, disparate
mistreatment, statistical parity, counterfactual fairness, and disparate impact . Many of these benchmarks directly appropriate
terms from US anti-discrimination law . These benchmarks have informed
several open-source toolkits sponsored by major tech companies, including IBM’s AI Fairness
360 for mitigating bias in training data and Google’s ML-fairness-gym for
anticipating the effects of automated decision systems .
Many scholars have used the COMPAS debate to illustrate the limitations of hegemonic
computational approaches to ML fairness. For instance, Green demonstrates how the
COMPAS tool itself is biased towards incapacitation because only incapacitation via recidivism
has been rigorously measured in a manner conducive to ML, in contrast to many non-punitive
alternatives. Furthermore, as Green and Hu argue, “even accurate and calibrated
predictions of recidivism extend the legacy of historical discrimination by punishing blacks for
having been subjected to…criminogenic circumstances in the first place” (p. 4). This fixation on
parity or imparity between racial groups overlooks fairness considerations that cannot be captured
statistically, such as whether the tool’s fundamental purpose is itself fair .
The COMPAS debates have helped to entrench statistical notions of fairness into a range of ML
fairness research efforts. Yet, these debates do not adequately capture the historical roots of
contemporary institutional aspirations for algorithmic fairness.
In order to understand this phenomenon, Ochigame argues that we must first
understand the emergence of the modern concept of risk. According to Ochigame ,
throughout the nineteenth-century in the US, the concept of risk was intrinsically tied to the rise
of corporate risk management, largely concerning “antebellum legal disputes over marine
insurance liability for slave revolts in the Atlantic Ocean.” Ochigame traces how the
concept of risk was used to justify and entrench racial discrimination across a range of insurance
industries throughout the nineteenth century. With the rise of modern mathematical statistics,
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
Fourcade and Healy argue that US postwar neoliberal era market institutions “increasingly
use[d] actuarial techniques to split and sort individuals into classification situations that shape
life-chances” (p. 559). By the second half of the twentieth century, actuarial methods were a key
feature in policing, parole decisions, and credit bureaus. These methods were often couched in
promises of transparency and equal, dispassionate treatment .
Furthermore, in the 1970s, credit-scoring companies used ideas of statistical objectivity in order
to prevent anti-discrimination legislation from passing that would ban the use of these scores
 . When US civil rights and feminist activists challenged the use of risk
classification in the pricing of insurance as being unfair and discriminatory, the insurance
industry promoted the idea of actuarial fairness as a complex, technical, objective, and apolitical
matter in order to evade regulation . This move effectively reframed the debate
about the fairness of insurance around inaccurate predictions, rather than the use of actuarial risk
classification itself.
Furthermore, scholars like Hutchinson and Mitchell and Hoffman have
critically evaluated the influence of 1960s US antidiscrimination discourse on contemporary AI
fairness debates. This discourse has significantly shaped how ML fairness is understood legally,
institutionally, and technologically. Hutchinson and Mitchell describe how 1960s and
1970s debates from the use of assessment tests in public and private industry “stimulated a wealth
of research into how to mathematically measure unfair bias and discrimination within the
educational and employment testing communities, often with a focus on race” (p. 1). These
research efforts included the “introduction of formal notions of fairness based on population
subgroups, the realization that some fairness criteria are incompatible with one another, and
pushback on quantitative definitions of fairness due to their limitations” (p. 1). In the 1980s, there
were significant fairness debates concerning educational testing, and particularly, whether
educational testing reproduced and intensified racial inequality, or whether group-based fairness
considerations unfairly privileged members of minority groups .
According to Hutchinson and Mitchell , over time, fairness determinations became “less
tied to the practical needs of society, politics and law, and more tied to unambiguously
identifying fairness” (p. 9). These efforts to unambiguously identify fairness served to
depoliticize fairness metrics and concealed the ways that researchers’ values, goals, and
assumptions about the world shaped fairness assessments.
Based on AI fairness debates’ relationship to anti-discrimination discourse, Hoffman
 argues that current research on AI fairness often inherits this discourse’s limitations for
realizing social justice. As she explains, “in mirroring some of antidiscrimination discourse’s
most problematic tendencies, efforts to achieve fairness and combat algorithmic discrimination
fail to address the very hierarchical logic that produces advantaged and disadvantaged subjects in
the first place” (p. 901). Hoffman revisits critiques of US antidiscrimination law from the
1970s, including the ways that antidiscrimination discourse shifted away from broader aims of
social justice through an emphasis on: discrete “bad actors” and individual prejudices rather than
structural causes; single-axis approaches to discrimination rather than looking at how forces of
gender-, race-, ability-, and class-based oppressions are produced and intersect; a focus on
relative disadvantage rather than the systematic production of advantages for privileged groups;
and a focus on a limited set of fairness considerations, such as the distribution of a narrow set of
goods rather than the conditions that structure the distribution and exercise of rights,
opportunities, and resources in the first place.
By widening the frame of ML fairness debates to include these earlier periods, we can
understand contemporary debates as the latest iteration of longstanding struggles for just
sociotechnical arrangements. Furthermore, this frame demands an engagement with the ways that
ML fairness discourse itself is actively produced within existing social, political, and historical
realities, the power dynamics of which shape hegemonic approaches to ML fairness in the
present, and often remove from view relevant structural and social concerns for a more just
society. Thus, the central goal of this survey article is to summarize and assess critiques of
contemporary, hegemonic ML fairness research in order to help AI researchers broaden
approaches for disrupting these entrenched power dynamics, including who generally gets to
participate in the design of ML tools, how, and who benefits from their deployment. In the
following section, the author describes how the relevant literature was identified. Section 3 gives
the author’s breakdown of the major themes of critique, along with additional details,
explanation, and examples from the literature. Section 4 provides an overview of proposals for
how the ML fairness community can address these critiques, and evaluates whether these
proposed solutions are likely to disrupt entrenched power dynamics and structural injustices in
society. The article concludes in Section 5 with a discussion of what an anti-oppressive, powercentered approach to ML fairness research could prioritize in order to foreground social justice.
2. Article Selection
In order to conduct this survey, the author limited the search criteria to papers, articles, books,
and conference proceedings published after 2015 with full text available, and that explicitly
position themselves as critiques of computational fairness interventions in ML.1 While issues of
fairness in sociotechnical systems were considered long before 2015 across a range of disciplines,
including philosophy, computer science, law, and STS, this article sets out to map the
contemporary landscape of critiques of fair-ML in particular, which expanded substantially in the
wake of the COMPAS debates. For conference proceedings, the author focused primarily on the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, given its multidisciplinary scope and fairness focus. After identifying relevant
literature available through the author’s institutional library, Google scholar, and arXiv through a
title and abstract screening process, the author then used Zotero in order to manually tag and
annotate relevant readings according to the key thematic concerns (e.g., technological
solutionism) epistemic frameworks (e.g., feminist standpoint theory), and core theoretical
concepts (e.g., data justice) that emerged in the full text. This database ultimately included a total
of 58 sources published between 2015 and 2021. The author found that there were nine major
themes of critique running through the sampled scholarship concerning the following: 1) how
fairness gets defined; 2) how problems for AI systems to address get formulated; 3) the impacts
of abstraction on how AI tools function and its propensity to lead to technological solutionism; 4)
how racial classification operates within AI fairness research; 5) the use of AI fairness measures
to avoid regulation and engage in ethics washing; 6) an absence of participatory design and
democratic deliberation in AI fairness considerations; 7) data collection practices that entrench
“bias,” are non-consensual, and lack transparency; 8) the predatory inclusion of marginalized
groups into AI systems; and 9) a lack of engagement with AI’s long-term social and ethical
It is worth noting the epistemological and evaluative assumptions embedded in the NSF
Program on Fairness in Artificial Intelligence in Collaboration with Amazon, which funded this
survey research as part of a larger cross-institutional AI fairness project. The grant solicitation’s
framing asserts that past NSF-funded innovations in AI and ML have offered “new levels of
economic opportunity and growth, safety and security, and health and wellness, intended to be
shared across all segments of society.” Furthermore, the grant solicitation argues that there is a
need to encourage broad acceptance and adoption of large-scale deployments of AI so that these
1 In some cases in the surveyed scholarship, authors extend their critiques of ML to the broader AI
community and/or use AI as an umbrella term including ML. This is reflected in the article with “AI/ML”
and “AI” respectively when needed.
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
benefits can be fully enjoyed, and that this can be accomplished through the creation of
“trustworthy” AI tools that are fair, transparent, explainable, and accountable. Thus, the explicit
goal of this NSF program is to fund computational research that will promote the acceptance of
AI systems, and AI’s capacities for social good are assumed a priori. The author sees this
assumption as a feature of the ways that power dynamics shape knowledge claims, the research
that gets funded and given access, and finally, who generally gets to conduct this research. This
survey article operates in productive tension with these assumptions and goals in order to map
modes of AI fairness research inquiry that are not skewed towards the priorities of individuals
and institutions that benefit from structural injustice, and to expand dialogue between AI/ML
fairness practitioners and critical scholars operating within and outside of computing fields.
3. Major Themes of Critique
3.1 How Fairness Gets Defined
According to Green and Hu , the hegemonic theory of fairness in ML is that fairness can be
presented in terms of a domain-general procedural or statistical guideline, and that "this definition
can be operationalized such that, so long as the chosen fairness criteria are satisfied, the resulting
procedures and outcomes of the system are necessarily fair" (p. 1). In contrast, the authors argue
that fairness judgments are always under contestation, and that all fairness measures in ML
involve "value-laden assertions about a system's purpose, individuals' entitlements, and the
relevant criteria for decision-making" (p. 2). For Green and Hu , equating statistical
parities of various types to fairness limits the realm of fairness considerations and side-steps
questions such as, is the tool's fundamental purpose a just one? Are individuals' entitlements to
fair procedure respected? Similarly, the authors are concerned with the ways that quantifiable
metrics can get prioritized over other value considerations, as well as a lack of engagement with
possible downstream effects and the need for democratic deliberation (see section 3.7). To give
an example, the authors describe how COMPAS's prioritization of recidivism rates could have the
unintended consequence of leading judges to place greater emphasis on incapacitation as the goal
of sentencing, which then leads to significant policy and jurisprudence shifts.
This concern with the reduction of fairness considerations to quantifiable metrics is
shared by scholars like Ochigame et al. , who argue that “any claim of fairness requires a
critical evaluation of the ethical and political implications of deploying a model in a specific
social context" (p. 1). In order to illustrate this argument, Ochigame et al. use the example
of risk assessment algorithms in the US penal system, highlighting a range of concerning features.
According to these authors, AI fairness researchers engaging with these tools often claim that
models can predict the likelihood that an individual will commit a crime when the data does not
represent the prevalence of crimes, but rather, recorded arrests, convictions, or incarcerations,
which leads to inaccuracies and fallacious claims about crime prediction. Additionally,
researchers conceptualize interpretability in terms of listing a sequence of steps taken, rather than
documenting background assumptions and domain specific theories that can be deeply
problematic, such as flawed criminological theories that are biased towards mass incarceration,
and the use of static factors like age, sex, and arrest history as ostensible measures of "risk.”
Furthermore, researchers turn fairness into a mathematical property of algorithms, which is then
used to designate a given "solution" as fair, precluding approaches to penal reforms that focus on
decarceration. These reforms include the elimination of monetary bail, the abolition of mandatory
minimum sentences, and the reduction of prison admission and sentence lengths. Ultimately,
Ochigame et al. argue that fairness should be understood not as a property of algorithms
but rather of decisions, "justified by interpretations of data analyses, in particular social contexts,
from the perspective of ethical and political commitments of specific subjects" (p. 4).
Furthermore, they encourage vigilance regarding the ways that ideas of fairness are used to
promote "the false and dangerous claim that fairness is a technical and apolitical matter,” (p. 5)
resulting in the legitimization of the status quo.
Binns argues that fairness is used as a placeholder for a range of egalitarian
considerations in ML. Regarding discrimination, the author addresses understandings of
discrimination as either a decision-maker's bad intent or animosity, or as the existence of
disparate impact, wherein decision-makers fail to anticipate or redress disparities in people's
treatment. He argues that mental state accounts of discrimination would be difficult to apply to
the context of algorithmic decision-making, given that AI tools do not bear states such as
contempt or animosity, although data can reflect either the intentional encoding of bias or
negligence in addressing bias. Ultimately, Binns highlights the "practical challenges which
may limit how effective and systematic fair ML approaches can be in practice" (p. 9), given that it
is difficult to assess an individual's responsibility, culpability, or desert without extensive
information, "such as their socio-economic circumstances, life experience, personal development,
and the relationships between them" (p. 9). This paper points to the limitations of training data
and legally protected categories for doing justice to complex and highly contingent and contested
fairness considerations.
Furthermore, Mitchell et al. argue that mathematical definitions of fairness treat
the learning problem that is used to formulate a predictive model as external to the evaluation of
fairness, which can overlook issues concerning sampling bias, societal bias, and temporal
dynamics. The authors also identify utilitarian assumptions generally built into predictive models,
including the assumptions that outcomes are not affected by the decisions of others, that social
welfare is a sum of individual utilities, and that individuals can be considered symmetrically, e.g.,
the harm of denying a loan to someone who could repay is equal across people. The authors
contend that, at best, formal fairness metrics can be used to illustrate "when interventions are
necessary to bring about a different world" (p. 158), and to recognize trade-offs that don't need to
be accepted as a given, but can rather be used to encourage the consideration of a range of options
beyond predictions to realize ethical goals.
3.2 Problem Formulation
A second line of critique of concerns how problems for ML to address get formulated in the first
place. Passi and Barocas argue that greater attention needs to be placed on the practice of
problem formulation in data science in order to better understand the ethical concerns that emerge
at this stage, including: a potential bias towards what is most easily quantifiable; target variables
that produce unfairness because they vary by population; and problem formulations that are based
on objectionable ways of achieving desired outcomes. To illustrate this last point, they offer the
example of financial aid admissions strategies that maximize the recruitment of wealthy and/or
"gifted" students using multiple smaller offers, rather than using those resources to support
marginalized applicants. Different potential proxies frame a given problem in subtly different
ways and raise different ethical concerns. Thus, problem formulation necessitates a careful
discussion about normative commitments, meaning one’s values, assumptions, and priorities
concerning what ought to be.
Similarly, Mitchell et al. argue that the social objective of deploying a model, the
individuals subject to the decision, and the decision space are all value-laden choices that impact
fairness. They point to the ways that certain design choices can lead to poor outcomes, such as
narrowing focus to a chosen, measured outcome (omitted payoff bias). They also describe the
risks of only evaluating fairness criteria on the population to which the model is applied, which
may overlook unfairness in terms of who came to be subject to the model in the first place.
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
Furthermore, restricting interventions/options within the decision space can have negative social
and ethical implications. One such example is limiting the pre-trial decision space to either
release, set bail, or detain, as opposed to directing a person to expanded pretrial services, or
focusing on individual as opposed to community-based policies more broadly.
Fazelpour and Lipton argue that the key for determining what should be optimized
for in a given context is to base one’s understanding on the relevant causal mechanisms that
account for present injustices and that govern the impact of proposed interventions. These authors
push for evaluating the fairness of ML using a sociotechnical framework that accounts for social
context, actors, users, and dynamic impact, which necessarily goes beyond “simple modifications
of existing ML algorithms” (p. 11). According to these authors, who draw from political
philosophy, ideal theories—theories that begin with a conception of an ideally just world under
ideal conditions, which then provide a target state and evaluative standard—seem to implicitly
inform much of the current work on fairness in ML, and are in need of challenging for the
following reasons. Ideal theories “(1) can lead to systematic neglects of some injustices and
distort our understanding of other injustices; (2) do not, by themselves, offer sufficient practical
guidance about what should be done, sometimes leading to misguided mitigation strategies; and
finally (3) do not, by themselves, make clear who, among decision-makers is responsible for
intervening to right specific injustices" . In contrast, the nonideal approach begins by identifying actual injustices that will likely impact those on the
receiving end of a decision-maker's behaviors, which requires evaluating what causes the problem
and the responsibility of different actors to address it. These authors argue that many of ML
researchers' primary approaches fail to consider broader social contexts, rely on reductive
decontextualized parity-constrained formulations of fairness, and neglect considerations about the
responsibilities of the decision-maker as well as the impact of a proposed intervention within the
existing social system.
Overdorf et al. also point to the ways that the goals of optimization systems are in
need of greater scrutiny within discussions of ML fairness. They argue that calls for fairness often
overlook the fact that these goals might intentionally "aspire for asocial or negative outcomes,"
and "lack incentives to maximize society's welfare" (p. 3). Thus, providers might simply utilize
fairness solutions that align with their goals. For example, Overdorf et al. describe how
Uber could apply fairness metrics to their rider-driver matching algorithm with the goal of
ensuring that all Uber drivers are equally likely to find riders, access surges, and earn similar
wages across protected categories, without addressing the ways their algorithm suppresses driver
wages in order to maximize profit. Furthermore, these authors are concerned with the failures of
service providers to honestly and effectively apply fairness solutions. There are frequent conflicts
between fairness and profit maximization, and service providers are often focused on outcomes
rather than processes. This results in service providers ignoring or overlooking the substantial and
often negative “externalities” they create. These negative features include: disregard for non-users
and environments; disregard for non "high-value" users; externalization of exploration risks to
users and environments; unfair distribution of errors; prioritizing optimization goals through
shortcuts; and concentration of resources, power, and data collection practice in a few data
holders. Similarly, Kasy & Abebe emphasize, “leading notions of fairness take the
objective of the algorithm’s owner or designer as a normative goal” (p. 1) and ignore withingroup inequalities. This leads to the perpetuation of inequalities that are justified on the grounds
of “merit,” which reinforces the status-quo distribution of power between decision-makers and
those who are impacted. Furthermore, like Overdorf et al. , they note that limiting fairness
considerations in the narrow context of the algorithm’s immediate application overlooks its
impact on the wider population.
3.3 Abstraction and Technological Solutionism
A third line of critique regarding hegemonic computational approaches to ML fairness is
abstraction, meaning the ways that ML fairness gets conceptualized such that AI tools are
removed from the social contexts in which they are generated and applied, ultimately resulting in
the loss of necessary information for understanding and implementing fairness . Selbst et al. understand fairness not as a property of technical tools, but of social
systems, and identify five failures that result from computer scientists not considering social
context: the framing trap, meaning the "failure to model the entire system over which a social
criterion, such as fairness, will be enforced," (p. 60); the portability trap, meaning the "failure to
understand how repurposing algorithmic solutions designed for one social context may be
misleading, inaccurate, or otherwise do harm when applied to a different context" (p. 61); the
formalism trap, meaning the "failure to account for the full meaning of social concepts such as
fairness, which can be procedural, contextual, and contestable, and cannot be resolved through
mathematical formalisms" (p. 61); the ripple effect trap, meaning the "failure to understand how
the insertion of technology into an existing system changes the behaviors and embedded values of
the pre-existing system" (p. 62); and finally, the solutionism trap, meaning the "failure to
recognize the possibility that the best solution to a problem may not involve technology” (p. 63).
Abstraction is also a key issue for Green and Viljoen , who argue that abstraction
can be problematic in terms of a loss of engagement with the complexity of the existing social
and political conditions that shape AI tools, designs, and outcomes. For Green and Viljoen
 , formal approaches to algorithmic fairness “fail to provide the epistemic and
methodological tools necessary to fully identify and act upon the social implications of
algorithmic work” (p. 20). They substantiate this claim using the example of hegemonic
approaches to algorithmic fairness for predictive analytics in the US criminal legal system. They
point to this work’s limited framing of tradeoffs, a lack of critical engagement with what counts
as a “crime” for predictive policing algorithms, tendencies towards technological solutionism and
determinism, as well as a lack of explicitly articulated normative commitments. According to
these researchers, abstraction contributes to the reasons why formal approaches to algorithmic
fairness “typically overlook the ways in which these ‘fair’ algorithms can lead to unfair social
impacts, whether through biased uses by practitioners, entrenching unjust policies, distorting
deliberative processes, or shifting control of governance towards unaccountable private actors”
 . Furthermore, Green and Viljoen argue that the sense that
algorithms can be applied to all situations and problems means that its methods often dominate
and crowd out other forms of knowledge and inquiry, and particularly local forms of situated
knowledge that may be better positioned to address a given task. Situated knowledge, drawing
from feminist epistemology, thinks of knowledge as a contextual practice, wherein the social
locations of individuals shape how they come to “know” the world .
It is important to note that abstraction is deeply embedded in dominant epistemological
and educational frameworks in computer science (CS). Malazita and Resetar argue that the
epistemological practices of the computer science discipline and pedagogy privilege instrumental
and abstracted programming techniques. Technical competency is often “split from the social,
political, and ideological world" (p. 301). They argue that this split is doubly impactful for
marginalized students, who then have to embody knowledge practices and epistemological
frameworks that counter their lived experiences. These students are actively recruited into the
very CS practices that disparately harm marginalized groups. Furthermore, these epistemic
tendencies provide narrow opportunities for students to articulate the negative consequences of
these tools in the classroom. According to the authors, abstraction in CS intentionally limits
knowledge of the broader system coding practices are situated within for the purposes of
efficiency and achieving specified goals, which problematically constrains what counts as
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
relevant points of intervention.
3.4 Racial Classification in AI Fairness
The challenges of abstraction are intertwined with the limitations of existing hegemonic
approaches to racial classification in ML fairness. As Benthall and Haynes argue,
abstraction contributes to how racial categories for fairness considerations get treated as "nominal
categories of personal identity" rather than as qualities that are part of "systems of hierarchical
social statuses" (p. 1). In other words, they argue that race is best understood as a political
category rather than as "an intrinsic property of persons" (p. 4). These researchers offer a brief
history of how racial categories have been constructed and contested to show their inextricable
connection to systems of racial inequality. Racial categorization is inseparable from the systems
of segregation and stratification in housing, education, employment, and civic life that allow for
racially marked individuals to be sorted and then “subject to disparate opportunities and
outcomes” (p. 2).
Hanna et al. also argue that algorithmic fairness research does not adequately
account for the ways that social group categories, which AI fairness research operationalizes, are
socially constructed, resulting in the "widespread use of racial categories as if they represent
natural and objective differences between groups" (p. 2). They demonstrate how mathematically
comparable group-based fairness criteria, such as parity-based fairness metrics, often treat
oppressed social groups as interchangeable and deny the “hierarchical nature and the social,
economic and political complexity of the social groups under consideration" (p. 8). They draw
from the work of Black feminist scholarship and critical race theory’s critique of fairness within
liberal democracies to highlight how simplistic and decontextualized understandings of race
obscure the unique oppressions different groups encounter. As fields of knowledge, the Black
feminist tradition highlights the interlocking oppressions of racism, sexism, and economic
subordination that condition Black women’s lives , and critical race theory
interrogates how these interlocking oppressions are embedded in purportedly color-blind laws
and institutions . Ultimately, this accepted approach to racial classification
within hegemonic ML fairness research minimizes the structural factors that contribute to
algorithmic unfairness.
3.5 Regulation Avoidance and Ethics Washing
Another key theme concerning critiques of hegemonic algorithmic fairness metrics is that these
measures are intertwined with big tech's interests in preventing the emergence of regulations that
significantly curtail or ban the deployment of AI/ML for commercial and military purposes.
Drawing from his time as a graduate student researcher on ethical AI at the MIT Media Lab,
Ochigame offers examples of how academic AI ethics work is used to influence policy in
ways that ethics wash a range of AI applications, including the use of algorithms for detention
decisions and drone warfare. Furthermore, Ochigame argues that academic AI ethics
research has helped shift the discussion towards industry self regulation, including "voluntary
'ethical principles,' 'responsible practices,' and technical adjustments or 'safeguards' framed in
terms of 'bias' and 'fairness' (e.g., requiring or encouraging police to adopt 'unbiased' or 'fair'
facial recognition)." He also describes how some larger firms prefer mild regulation to none at all,
as they have the means to more easily comply with regulatory requirements when compared to
competitors, and can therefore consolidate market control. Ultimately, Ochigame posits
that, "no defensible claim to 'ethics' can sidestep the urgency of legally enforceable restrictions to
the deployment of technologies of mass surveillance and systemic violence.” While some
scholars like Barocas do not go as far as to say that AI ethics discourse is co-produced
with corporate efforts to avoid regulation, Barocas does feel that companies have co-opted
the fair ML community's efforts in order to justify greater data collection and oversimplify
fairness issues in ways that align with their interests, rather than with progressive goals.
3.6 Absence of Participatory Design and Democratic Deliberation
These literatures’ efforts to shift hegemonic ML fairness discourse towards more progressive
goals often include a critique of the absence of participatory design and democratic deliberation
in algorithmic fairness work. Participatory design refers to a design approach that involves users
in the design process for the purposes of ensuring that a given tool is informed by, and responsive
to, the needs of the people/groups who will be impacted by its use .
Participatory design and democratic deliberation are valuable to ML fairness research, given that
many ML tools have disparate impacts on marginalized groups, and given that fairness judgments
are always under contestation. Furthermore, Green and Hu explain how the absence of
democratic deliberation allows for a given ML tool to have downstream effects (see section 3.9)
that then lead to significant political and institutional shifts without meaningful debate or legal
opportunities for contestation.
According to Blodgett et al. , the absence of participatory design is one of the ways
that dominant power relations between technologies and racialized communities get reproduced.
As the authors explain, “algorithmic fairness techniques, by proposing incremental technical
mitigations—e.g., collecting new datasets or training better models—maintain these power
relations by (a) assuming that automated systems should continue to exist, rather than asking if
they should be built at all, and (b) keeping development and deployment in the hands of
technologists” . The absence of members from groups who are
disadvantaged or multiply-burdened by systems of power in design processes often contributes to
heightened levels of scrutiny and increased exposure to potential harms for marginalized people
 . Furthermore, according to Kalluri , the failure to “listen to,
amplify, cite, and collaborate with communities that have borne the brunt of surveillance” has
contributed to the presupposition, dominant within computational approaches to ML fairness, that
AI is “marred only by biased data.” While Cowgill et al. set out to test whether biased
predictions arise from biased programmers or biased datasets, their heuristic is whether AI
engineers from different demographic backgrounds will make technical adjustments for fairness
in their code when designing ML tools for hiring decisions (see section 3.7 for limits of technical
debiasing methods). This approach, as Barocas et al. note, overlooks a range of critical
questions that marginalized people might bring to bear in a given AI application context. Instead,
Kalluri argues that AI fairness practitioners should be asking how the field is currently
conditioned and constrained by dominant power relations that actively shape research agendas.
In terms of the absence of participatory design, Malik is careful to distinguish
perfunctory non-binding consultation from the meaningful participation of impacted groups in the
design of ML tools, which includes their participation in the problem formulation, design,
labeling, refinement, and testing stages with veto power. There are numerous studies where the
inclusion of socially and economically marginalized groups is done through the use of services
like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, wherein input from these groups is collected about the fairness
of a given AI outcome, but where those human subjects are otherwise not engaged in the AI
tool’s development, nor empowered to effect any changes. Robertson and Salehi 
demonstrate how the elicitation of preferences over a fixed set of alternatives is often insufficient
and unequal, given the ways individual preferences typically reflect existing social biases and
inequalities, and given that these methods are not always paired with meaningful democratic
deliberation. Additionally, Whittaker et al. describe how, in the context of AI for disabled
people, these community members are frequently excluded from the design process itself, and
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
often lack the ability to access, modify, and hold to account the technology marketed to them. It is
also noteworthy that in Madaio et al.’s semi-structured interviews and workshops for codesigning AI fairness checklists with 48 ML practitioners, they found that participants reported
that soliciting input and concerns from diverse stakeholders on AI fairness, including getting
feedback from groups with significantly less power or influence than others, was an area that they
felt would be difficult to integrate into their existing workflows due to a lack of resources and
gaps in existing UX research methods. Furthermore, in a global context and drawing from Jobin
et al. , Mohamed et al. document how geographic areas like Africa, South and
Central America, and Central Asia and their structural legacies of colonialism are
underrepresented in AI ethics debates. These legacies include exploitative medical and scientific
experimentation on colonized peoples, the appropriation of land and labor, and control over social
structures in order to oppress colonized populations . The authors argue that AI developmentalist projects are often rooted in paternalism,
technosolutionism, and predatory inclusion (see section 3.8) rather than in intercultural dialogue
and solidarity with grassroots organizations and marginalized people. This leads to practices
where overdeveloped countries export harms and unethical AI research practices to vulnerable
populations in low- and middle-income countries with weaker protections, perpetuating global
power dynamics of experimentation and extraction rooted in colonialism .
3.7 Data Collection and Bias
Some scholars have also called for greater attention to the ethics of data collection underpinning
ML fairness research, including the ways that cultural values and social and historical
contingencies get embedded into data collection, cleaning, curating, and management . Others have critiqued the ways that improving the accuracy and thus “fairness” of
algorithmic systems often involves surveillance, without people’s consent, as well as the
exploited labor of people who manually classify objects for training purposes . Furthermore, Mohamed et al. call attention to how colonial power
relations—the reproduction of structural inequalities that can be “contextualized historically as
colonial continuities” (p. 8)—manifest in AI design and deployment, including through the
conditions of “ghost workers” who annotate data. In many cases, this work is done by prisoners
and the economically vulnerable, and in geographic areas with limited worker protections.
Additionally, a range of scholars have sought to problematize the focus on data “bias” as
a means of addressing algorithmic unfairness. Powles and Nissenbaum argue that the
problem of AI bias, and the fixation on notions of measurable, mathematical ideas of fairness to
address it, has "limited the entire imagination of ethics, law, and the media as well." They identify
three problems with a focus on AI bias. The first problem is that understanding bias as a
computational problem rather than a social problem obscures its root causes. The second problem
is that addressing bias can have perverse consequences, which Powles and Nissenbaum 
illustrate using the example of improving the accuracy of facial recognition systems for women of
color. This approach to addressing bias can increase this group's susceptibility to surveillance and
classification (see section 3.8). Thirdly, a focus on bias distracts from other important and larger
considerations, such as the “colossal asymmetry between societal cost and private gain in the
rollout of automated systems” . This focus on AI bias frequently
frames AI as inevitable, rather than a tool that often emerges from power asymmetries in society.
Dobbe et al. also urge for a shift away from a fixation on data bias, and towards the ways
that the very methods and approaches that the ML community uses to reduce, formalize, and
gather feedback are themselves sources of bias. Amoore also takes up this point about
epistemology, arguing that ML algorithms “categorically require bias and assumption to function
in the world” (p. 74).
Similarly, West, Whittaker, and Crawford argue that AI fairness research needs to
go beyond technical debiasing to include a wider social analysis of how AI is used in context so
that a more capacious accounting of bias is possible. They explain, “harms are frequently defined
in terms of economic disadvantage, with less attention paid to harms of how people are
represented or interpreted by AI systems, and the downstream social and political consequences
of such representation” (p. 16). Furthermore, they argue that attempts to address AI unfairness by
locating individual biases within a given technological system, and attempting to fix these biases
by tweaking that system, overlooks the context of existing power dynamics. These power
dynamics shape how a given AI tool will impact the distribution of benefits and harms in society.
Ultimately, while a given AI tool’s application may be free from bias in a statistical sense, this
does not mean it is fair in an ethical sense . Drawing from the Black
feminist tradition, Hampton argues that “oppression” rather than “bias” is a better
descriptor for AI tools that contribute to material harms against marginalized people.
“Oppression” helps link ML fairness discourse to the longstanding history of scientific and
technological abuses that systematically advantage dominant groups. These groups continue to
hold disproportionate power over how AI is being developed, assessed, and debated . For instance, videos from transgender YouTubers were taken
without their knowledge for the purposes of training facial recognition technology (FRT) to better
recognize people in the process of transitioning . Another example is the
improvement of the “fairness” of FRT for people of color. Existing forms of FRT have been
shown time and again to have higher error rates for women, people of color , and transgender people . However, the inclusion of marginalized
people into facial recognition datasets ultimately justifies the widening of surveillance’s net, and
by proxy, the reach of systems of oppression that deploy forms of automated recognition.
Browne’s work has demonstrated the deeply entrenched historical linkages between
surveillance and racial oppression, from the transatlantic slave trade to contemporary forms of
racial profiling in Canada and the US. More accurate facial recognition will not rectify criminal
legal systems that are historically rooted in racial oppression. For instance, US laws and policing
practices concerning what is treated as “criminal” behavior, and how, have continuously resulted
in the oppression of communities of color, from slave patrols, to the enforcement of Jim Crow-era
systems of racial segregation, to the War on Drugs . Furthermore, images of students, immigrants, abused children, people who have had
mugshots taken, and deceased people have all been used without consent to test facial recognition
technology within and outside of the US .
Sloane et al. have also cautioned against “participation-washing,” wherein powerful
agencies use the participation of communities to manufacture consent and legitimize injustice. As
these authors note, this is a longstanding practice in the context of the international development
sector that has particular relevance for ML. Some approaches to participatory design (see section
4.9) can lead to predatory inclusion, wherein the labor and data from marginalized groups are
extracted for making oppressive AI tools “fairer.”
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
3.9 Lack of Engagement with Long-Term Outcomes
The final thread of critique running through these literatures concerns the ML fairness
community’s lack of engagement with the long-term outcomes of AI systems. As Green 
explains, there is a prioritization of immediate improvements over long-term impacts. This limits
the degree to which unintended impacts, as well as alternative solutions that “might be necessary
in conjunction with or instead of algorithms” (p. 4), are considered. Similarly, Green and Hu
 identify a lack of engagement with possible downstream effects and thus unintended
consequences that can result from the implementation of a given ML tool, such as COMPAS’s
potential to lead judges to “place greater emphasis on incapacitation as the goal of sentencing” (p.
3). However, as Parvin and Pollock caution, the term “unintended consequences” in
science and technology discourses is often used to dismiss important ethical and political
considerations. This term sidesteps the fact that, in many cases, the consequences could have
indeed been anticipated in advance by those from specializations that are often not conceived of,
or empowered to, participate in the design and implementation of technology. Additionally,
Parvin and Pollock argue that “phenomena described as unintended consequences are
deemed too difficult, too out of scope, too out of reach, or too messy to have been dealt with at
any point in time before they created problems for someone else” (p. 322). Thus, the term can
function as a defensive and dismissive strategy that allows for the abdication of developer
responsibility and accountability, on the one hand, and a lack of “consideration of the complexity
of social systems in such a way as to lead to quick technical fixes” (p. 326), on the other. Jasanoff
 also argues that the term “unintended consequences” functions as a means for
technologists to abdicate responsibility and minimizes the need for imagining negative
implications in advance.
Additionally, Elish and boyd have pointed to the ways that celebratory discourses
frame Big Data and AI as solutions to “otherwise intractable social, political and economic
problems, and seem to promise efficiency, neutrality, and fairness” (p. 18). They argue that AI
proponents often use spectacle to manufacture legitimacy, and emphasize what is “possible”
rather than what is realistic. This framing obscures these fields’ limits and tradeoffs, including the
long-term outcomes and ripple effects that can result from the implementation of AI in the social
world. Overdorf et al. share this concern about long-term outcomes and ripple effects.
They describe how ML fairness literature’s frequent presupposition of the algorithm and the
environments in which it is deployed as fixed makes it “ill-equipped to prevent the negative
effects that arise when agents evolve” (p. 3). One such example they provide is of predictive
policing, wherein data is derived from communities that are disproportionately patrolled, creating
a feedback loop that intensifies the surveillance of these communities. This point is similar to
Selbst et al.’s understanding of the ripple effect trap that results from the abstraction of
ML from the social contexts its design and implementation are embedded within (see section 3.3).
Hegemonic approaches often fail to address the ways that the insertion of a given AI system into
an existing social world will have transformative impacts on pre-existing behaviors and values.
4. Proposed Solutions
A variety of solutions have been proposed for addressing the limits and harms of hegemonic ML
fairness research described above. However, not all solutions are equally well positioned to
fundamentally disrupt the existing power dynamics and structural injustices historically and
presently shaping the field. This is not to say that only highly disruptive solutions are useful, but
it is to say that some solutions on their own are less likely to produce just outcomes for society’s
most marginalized. At their worst, however, some proposed paths forward can contribute to ethics
washing or the legitimation of dominant systems of power more broadly. One such example is
improving the efficiency and accuracy of algorithms for pre-trial risk assessment, which
reinforces carceral logics and outcomes, and siphons off political will for more radical and
necessary reforms, such as the ending of cash bail and pretrial detention . This
example is part of what Benjamin identifies as the New Jim Code: forms of technological
practice that reproduce structural racism, and yet appear to offer greater impartiality. In what
follows, the author describes a sample of both technical and non-technical solutions, and
evaluates whether they are positioned to disrupt existing power dynamics and deeply entrenched
forms in inequality in society. This is by no means an exhaustive list, but it is meant to provide
examples for thinking through the possibilities and potential limits of different and adjacent
approaches.
4.1 Causal Graphs
One proposed technical solution to the limits of existing AI fairness research is Mitchell et al.’s
 argument for incorporating causal graphs. These authors are working to find a place for
quantitative modeling and quantitative measures for making ethical judgments amidst the critique
that quantitative notions of fairness fail to address the structural conditions that sustain inequality.
According to the authors, causal reasoning with clearly articulated goals could be used to design
interventions and estimate the effects of decisions rather than to define fairness. Causal reasoning
assesses cause-effect relationships between relevant attributes that lead to a decision .
Mitchell et al.’s proposed technical solution recognizes that all aspects of designing AI
tools are value-laden. Furthermore, the authors state, “it is crucial to involve members of the
impacted community in the entire development process” (p. 158). Causal graphs on their own do
not address how ML practitioners currently have a disproportionate amount of power in
deliberations and debates concerning what society’s objectives should be and how they should be
achieved due to a range of social, institutional, and economic privileges . It seems difficult to imagine a model-driven or automated decision making tool that
coincides with democratic, deliberative, and just decision-making mechanisms unless explicitly
designed with anti-oppressive goals and inclusive of the needs and perspectives of marginalized
groups. This limitation also applies to Google’s ML-fairness gym, which on the one hand
provides tools for simulating system level dynamics, feedback loops, and other long-term effects
of ML systems in order to better evaluate fairness considerations in relation to a given social
context . On the other hand, however, it does not require that AI
researchers work with community members or domain experts from other disciplines who might
be better positioned to understand how agents’ behaviors are institutionally conditioned and
constrained by power dynamics within a given social context.
Additionally, Hu argues that recent attempts to overcome the limits of paritybased fairness metrics with causal diagrams are flawed, given the ways this method is often
incompatible with an understanding of race as a social category. She writes, "a causal diagram
that draws race as a singular node that independently causes downstream effects, or that sees race
as something that can be isolated from confounders and mediators such as ‘socioeconomic status’
or ‘high school performance’ rests upon an incorrect theory of what race is—and why it matters
in our society." She argues that counterfactual methods rely on a phenotype-only view of race.
Key to her argument is that this framework allows for wrongful discrimination to be reduced to
irrationality in decision-making rather than concrete social meanings and practices that emerge
from a society organized around the production of racial stratification. Similarly, drawing from
Hu’s work, Malik argues that, “from a sociologically rigorous point of view, the
idea that one could hold everything but somebody’s race constant is incoherent: aspects of people
are so deeply tied into how their racial identity is constructed, and the ‘effects’ of race so suffused
into so many other variables, that a hypothetical ‘race-switched’ world is meaningless” (p. 16).
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
4.2 Intersectionality as Differential Fairness Classifier
Another technical solution that has emerged is to incorporate intersectionality into technical
fairness measures. According to Foulds, Islam, Keya, and Pan , an intersectional definition
of AI fairness should satisfy the following criteria: “A) Multiple protected attributes should be
considered; B) All of the intersecting values of the protected attributes, e.g. Black women, should
be protected by the definition; C) We should still also ensure protection is provided on individual
protected attribute values, e.g. women; D) The definition should protect minority groups, who are
often particularly affected by discrimination in society; E) The definition should ensure the
systematic differences between protected groups, assumed to be due to structural oppression, are
rectified, rather than codified" (p. 3). To demonstrate the practicality of their differential fairness
classifier method, they use data from COMPAS. While the paper nuances discussions of fairness
with a greater consideration of how different systems of oppression intersect, the uncritical use of
COMPAS to establish the efficacy of their methods speaks to the limitations of this approach.
While it may be true that this intersectional approach to technical fairness has better outcomes for
minority groups than subgroup fairness, making a tool for predicting the likelihood of recidivism
intersectionally fair does not interrogate the problem formulation space’s inherent bias towards
incapacitation and its constitutive power dynamics.
4.3 Redirecting the Problem Formulation Space
Beyond new technical approaches to assessing fairness, other scholars have argued for the
redirection of ML research such that the problem formulation space is explicitly geared towards
the interrogation of systemic discrimination. Green and Hu cite Goel et al.’s use of
ML for understanding racial disparities in New York City’s (NYC) stop-and-frisk policy as an
example of such work. In Goel et al. , the authors deploy ML methods in order to intervene
in the debate concerning stop-and-frisk policy's constitutionality and relationship to racial
discrimination. They find that stop-and-frisk policies in NYC are both racially discriminatory and
frequently do not meet the bar for reasonable suspicion. Based on these results, the authors argue
that it is possible to design stop heuristics that would guide officers in only conducting stops that
are statistically likely to result in the discovery of weapons (the most commonly occurring
suspected crime in their dataset), and produce a more racially-balanced pool of stopped suspects.
According to the authors, this effort "could temper public reaction to the policy, including
resentment and distrust of police" (p. 383). While this article shows an example of ML research
that directly grapples with questions of systemic discrimination and focuses its efforts on
evaluating dominant institutions of power, it does not sufficiently engage with the larger
sociotechnical context of US policing, including the criminalization of poverty and the structural
conditions that produce criminogenic factors in the first place. Thus, the article makes
assumptions about the likelihood that these police reforms will not only be adopted, but also unproblematically implemented. Ultimately, the function of such an approach could be to ethics
wash policing itself, disarticulating it from its foundational relationship to racial capitalism in the
US and imperial power abroad .
As Moore and Abebe et al. caution, many AI for “social good” efforts are not
sufficiently aimed at the root of problems, diverting attention from demands for structural change.
In the specific context of ML fairness debates concerning the US criminal legal system,
Barabas et al. argue that instead of risk assessment tools grounded in regression and ML,
which lend themselves to incapacitation rather than rehabilitation, a casual inference framework
would allow for the consideration of criminogenic factors for more ethical intervention. These
factors might include the existing criminal legal system itself and racialized and gendered
covariates, as well as point towards ways to address the underlying social, economic, and
psychological drivers of crime. This approach requires the design of “experimental conditions in
which covariates are altered systematically to see if the alteration produces effect changes in the
outcome variable” (p. 6), ultimately helping researchers identify what interventions in the
criminal legal system work. They offer randomized control testing regarding psychological
therapy in prisons as an example of what this might look like in practice, and invoke US
institutional bodies like Institutional Review Boards (IRB) to address the counter-argument that
there are ethical concerns with such an approach. Ultimately, the authors are shifting the
conversation from the question of trade-offs regarding, for example, accuracy equity and
predictive parity, towards deeper questions about "what the purpose of these tools is and should
be in the first place" . They note that a combination of quantitative and
qualitative methods, with greater researcher reflexivity in examining underlying assumptions,
would help in ultimately understanding and responding to underlying drivers of crime. They are
also not opposed to the use of ML for the development of diagnostic risk assessments, and think
ML could be useful in identifying highly correlational covariates, which could then inform
hypotheses on interventions.
While this approach takes into consideration the underlying structural conditions that
contribute to criminalized behavior, it gives short thrift to the ethical concerns and power
imbalances surrounding randomized control testing with prison populations (a group that is
already significantly marginalized and without a range of protections). Several feminist and
critical race studies researchers have critiqued the IRB as prioritizing institutional liability over
justice considerations . It is also worth noting that this proposed solution might be an example of the
solutionism trap in the sense that there have been decades of abolitionist work
in a range of humanities and social science disciplines that have documented the social policies,
legal reforms, and community resources needed to address the systemic poverty and racial
inequality that feed the existing US criminal legal system, a system designed to make it harder,
not easier, for people to access the support structures needed to live, work, and redress harm . Yet, more radical reforms have not received
robust implementation as they pose fundamental challenges to the existing social order.
4.4 Fairness Checklists
Another proposed solution for remedying hegemonic approaches to ML fairness is the
implementation of AI fairness checklists in order to empower individual advocates and formalize
ad-hoc fairness practices. In the context of EU non-discrimination law, Wachter, Mittelstadt, and
Russel propose a yes-no checklist for ML developers, deployers, and other users of
automated decision-making systems to encourage these groups to justify fairness-related
decisions and to incorporate technical fairness criteria that counter inequality. Madaio et al.
 also propose fairness checklists, but do not employ questions with “yes” or “no” answers,
which they feel avoids the assumption that AI ethics can be addressed via purely technical
solutions. They account for the limitations of checklists that have resulted in misuse, including in
the airline industry and medical field, due to lacking organizational processes and cultures,
practitioner motivation, and workflow alignment. In Madaio et al.’s co-design workshop
with ML practitioners, participants expressed that checklists might help reduce anxiety or fear
about social costs and encourage productive tensions and critical conversations. However, to be
effective, participants felt checklists must be “aligned with existing workflows, supplemented
with additional resources, and not framed as a simple compliance process" (p. 6). Some
participants reported apprehension about the checklist approach as potentially producing bad
practices, such as cutting corners or superficial completion and/or a reliance on overly procedural
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
understandings of fairness.
While Madaio et al. bring up the risks of technosolutionism and ethics washing
with checklist-based approaches, they are optimistic about the possibility of creating checklists
that can mitigate the understanding of AI fairness as a purely technical consideration, if supported
by the larger organizational culture and "designed to prompt discussion and reflection that might
otherwise not take place" (p. 10). Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russel express a similar
weariness of technosolutionism, but an optimism concerning the capacities of checklists to
prompt critical self-reflection. However, there are several possible limitations with checklist
approaches to consider. These approaches often rely on "individual advocates" using checklists in
order to push through AI fairness considerations, as opposed to ethics being embedded within,
and the responsibility of, all levels of a given organization. Additionally, checklists, on their own,
are unlikely to transform the limits of many existing legal frameworks and industry cultures,
particularly those that are deeply entrenched in longstanding commitments to technological
solutionism and the limiting of worker power. This is why scholars like Metcalf, Moss, and boyd
 are skeptical of checklists. Furthermore, there remains the risk of checklists being
privileged over other efforts, such as regulation, precisely because they do not compel the
redistribution of power in the design and implementation of AI tools.
4.5 Improving Data Collection Practices
In terms of the problems identified with dominant data collection practices in AI fairness research
(see section 3.7), Jo and Gebru argue that ethical data collection practices for ML can
draw from the institutional and procedural strategies and structures of archives and libraries for
addressing "ethics, representation, power, transparency, and consent" (p. 10). Building on the
practices of archives and libraries, the authors argue for researchers to have a public mission
statement for guiding their data collection practice and encouraging contributions from other
researchers. They also advocate for researchers to incorporate more open-ended input from
communities through improved crowdsourcing and participatory collection measures.
Furthermore, Jo and Gebru argue for the addition of multiple levels of review and record
keeping for transparency and accountability, and to have a designated data collector role that is
responsible for complying with ethics codes. While an interdisciplinary sub-field focused on
“data gathering, sharing, annotation, ethics-monitoring, and record-keeping processes" (p. 2)
alongside "governing bodies…to audit collectors" (p. 10) could have significantly positive
impacts, the location of responsibility for ethics compliance within a “data collector” role, and
relying on institutional/professional codes for ethical practice, have been critiqued as being
inadequate for combating longstanding industry trends .
Elish and boyd also call for more critical, reflective approaches to data collection,
and particularly, for AI researchers to account for how “their research practices might influence
or distort the knowledge that results from their work” (p. 17). Elish and boyd also ask
researchers to account for their own positionality as embodied and socially situated actors, which
impacts the knowledge claims they make and how. Building on the methodological insights of
anthropological ethnography, these authors feel that greater critical attention to the ways that
cultural values and social and historical contingencies get embedded into data collection
processes will result in more appropriate and effective design. Drawing from value-sensitive
design, Dobbe et al. also argue for ML practitioners to take seriously how their social
position shapes their epistemology and to engage in critical self-reflection in conversation with
affected stakeholders. A more self-reflexive methodology for AI would be an impactful
development, as it is of paramount importance that AI developers recognize that they are always
already engaged in political and ethical judgment-making when building these tools. However, it
is important to note that a more self-reflexive AI researcher methodology does not, on its own,
upset power dynamics concerning who gets to fully engage in the problem formulation and
research stages of AI development in the first place.
In order to promote greater transparency and accountability concerning ML dataset
practices, Gebru et al. propose the creation of a standardized process for documenting the
motivation, composition, funding, collection processes, distribution, and recommended uses of
these datasets. They argue that these “datasheets for datasets” have the potential to “mitigate
unwanted biases in machine learning systems, facilitate greater reproducibility of machine
learning results, and help researchers and practitioners select more appropriate datasets for their
chosen tasks” . While datasheets might help the ML community to be
more reflective about their data practices, and potentially equip policy makers, consumer
advocates, individuals included in datasets, and those who might be impacted by a given model
with useful information for contesting unjust data uses, greater transparency does not always lead
to accountability. As Ananny and Crawford argue, being able to “see” a system does not
necessarily mean one is empowered to govern or change it. Datasheets, on their own, do not
create mechanisms for addressing the power asymmetries that exist at all stages of AI’s design,
development, and deployment, nor necessarily curtail unethical data collection practices, but they
could certainly be coupled with these efforts. Relatedly, Denton et al. have called for ML
practitioners to reflexively interrogate how data pipelines are shaped by the decision making
practices, motives, working conditions, methodologies, and embedded values of dataset
developers, and have proposed a research program for promoting accountability and
contestability in the development of benchmark datasets.
Hanna et al. also lay out possible avenues for addressing the harms that
hegemonic approaches to data collection pose to marginalized groups, and draw from the insights
of the social sciences in order to do so. To mitigate the ways that racial categories are taken up in
AI fairness research such that oppressed groups are treated as interchangeable and the structural
aspects of algorithmic unfairness get minimized (see section 3.4), the authors propose that
algorithmic fairness researchers work to engage in context-specific understandings of race. Such
an understanding would require considering the fact that race is unstable across time, place, and
context. It would also require taking seriously the question of who is doing the classifying, for
what purposes, and to what ends. Furthermore, they argue that algorithmic fairness research needs
to recognize that measurements of race are reflective of the social properties that help produce,
shape, and condition race. Thus, different dimensions of race, from racial self-classification to the
race others believe you to be based on appearance or interactions, “might reveal different patterns
of unfairness in sociotechnical systems” (p. 10). These categories and measurements should be
critically assessed, and justification should be provided for the use of any racial schema used in
research. Hanna et al.’s interdisciplinary approach is highly context-specific and process
oriented, and it both centers and addresses the impacts of structural racism on classification
systems. However, it is also possible that, like Elish and boyd’s recommendation for more
self-reflexive research practices, such an approach might be appropriated within the ML fairness
community to function as a more elaborate discussion of the limits of a chosen classification
system, without curtailing harmful ML research.
4.6 Protective Optimization Technologies
In response to hegemonic fairness frameworks that do not interrogate the fundamental goals of a
given optimization system, as well as its negative externalities and long-term outcomes, Overdorf
et al. propose the creation of “Protective Optimization Technologies” (POTs), inspired by
creative user approaches to subvert problems with Waze routing, Uber wage suppression, and
discriminatory targeted advertising. POTs "empower people and environments affected by
optimization systems to intervene when OSPs [optimization system providers] fail to meet their
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
needs” (p. 4). POTs are explicitly modeled on, and evaluate, the impact of optimization systems
on populations and environments in order to broaden the scope of unfairness and influence
system outcomes, such as by poisoning training data, crafting alternative inputs to counteract the
optimization effect, and other adversarial machine learning techniques to reduce negative impacts
on users and the environment. On their own, POTs can sometimes privilege individual modes of
resistance over collective organizing. For instance, the University of Chicago SAND Lab’s
algorithm and software tool, Fawkes, helps individuals limit how unknown third parties track
their images for improving facial recognition technology, as well as poison models that try to
learn what that individual looks like . Furthermore, the development and
implementation of some POTs, such as TensorClog —a poisoning
attack technique for increasing the privacy of user data from deep neural networks—require
levels of technical knowledge that are not accessible to all. Additionally, while POTs can be used
to help users avoid or disrupt harmful optimization systems, acts of modifying, subverting, or
sabotaging an optimization system can also be used for antisocial ends.
4.7 Addressing Social Context
Regarding the issue of hegemonic ML fairness approaches failing to consider social context,
Selbst et al. offer several ways of incorporating social context into ML fairness
considerations, drawing from STS's sociotechnical framing and methodology. These authors
propose: taking a process-oriented approach that involves "social actors, institutions, and
interactions" (p. 60), including "local incentives and reward structures, institutional environments,
decision-making cultures, and regulatory systems" (p. 64); modeling for these factors using
normative values that are based on the social context; and being transparent in how these
decisions get made and including those who will be most significantly impacted by these systems
in determining appropriate norms. Selbst et al. also encourage technical researchers to
acknowledge and account for the ways that existing power dynamics shape and condition how a
technical system will operate and how its use will evolve in practice. This includes
acknowledging and mitigating the ways that quantifiable metrics can be unconsciously privileged
at the expense of other fairness considerations, and grappling with the ways that modeling/AI
might not be the appropriate or best solution to a problem, particularly when "fairness definitions
are politically contested or shifting" (p. 63) or when "the modeling required would be so complex
as to be computationally intractable" (p. 63). Ultimately, these solutions require technical
researchers to learn new skills or collaborate with social scientists, and to consider working with
advocacy organizations or vulnerable populations directly. Selbst et al.’s solution is
explicitly proposed to mitigate technological solutionism and exclusionary AI design practices,
and this would hinge on the degree to which marginalized people are involved and empowered.
In response to calls for designers of algorithmic systems to take more process-oriented
approaches that foreground algorithmic justice and include social context in fairness assessments,
Barabas et al. draw from the anthropological practice of "studying up." Rather than
directing research efforts towards examining disadvantaged subjects, studying up entails
examining those who have agency, authority, and institutional power. Studying up also demands
a consideration of how issues of power and domination impact the research process, including the
knowledge claims that get produced, the research that gets funding and given access, and the
positionality of researchers. In anthropology, the call to study up emerged in part due to the field's
complicity in US imperialism in the 60s and 70s, such as through anthropologists’ participation in
Project Camelot, conducted at American University. The United States Army funded this
counterinsurgency study in 1964 for the purposes of predicting and influencing social and
political developments in Latin America in order to maintain US economic hegemony in the
region. The project received international and national backlash, resulting in its cancellation
 . Similarly, data science has faced several recent high profile controversies
regarding its relationship to larger social and political struggles, including discriminatory
outcomes in targeted advertising, automated image recognition, and AI chatbots . Drawing from these recent controversies, Barabas et al. 2020 argue that "data scientists
tend to uncritically inherit dominant modes of seeing and understanding the world when
conceiving of their data science projects" (p. 170).
In order to illustrate what “studying up” looks like in practice in the context of ML
fairness work, the authors evaluated how data science interventions concerning bail reform mirror
the default epistemological and normative assumptions of the US criminal legal system. Instead,
the authors argue that what to study, what to predict, and whose behavior to influence should be
shaped in relation to evaluating "a judicial culture that permits excessive incarceration" . Their studying up involved collaborating with community organizers
working on bail reform through conversations and a roundtable, which led them to focus on
judges' agency and accountability in relation to state and federal laws protecting against excessive
pretrial detention in the US. Ultimately, the researchers found a lack of needed data regarding
defendant outcomes, which led them to refuse to try to reform predictive tools for bail on ethical
grounds. Instead, they produced a judicial risk assessment tool that provides a "failure to adhere"
score based on whether a judge is likely to adhere to the US Constitution regarding imposing
unaffordable bail without due process. While their model surpasses the accuracy and validity of
mainstream pretrial risk assessments, they say it is not intended for practical use, but rather, to
help imagine alternative methods, discourses, and thus futures by "subjecting those in power to
the very socio-technical processes which are typically reserved for only the poor and
marginalized" (p. 174). Given the fact that community members helped guide the question
framing, methodology, and outcomes of the development of the AI tool based on their
experiences and needs, and given that the site of data collection does not render marginalized
groups more vulnerable to repression because the target of collection is dominant institutions and
social actors, Barabas et al.’s approach is positioned to redress entrenched power
dynamics in ML fairness research.
4.8 Interdisciplinarity and Cross-Disciplinary Collaboration for New Methodologies
While some scholars have borrowed from the methodological insights of the social sciences,
others have explicitly called for interdisciplinarity to inform a new methodology for the design of
AI tools in order to produce just outcomes. Green calls for leveraging interdisciplinarity in
order for algorithmic interventions to be evaluated against alternative reforms so that solutions for
meaningful social change can be identified, and for designers to consider the insights of social
thinkers and activists. Pasquale argues that engaging with interdisciplinary insights from
social theory, critical race theory, and feminist theory would allow for “a more inclusive and
critical conception of algorithmic accountability” in order to mitigate the continued entrenchment
of power asymmetries under the pretenses of addressing bias. West et. al also argue that
interdisciplinarity would allow for ML fairness research to go beyond technical debiasing and
meaningfully address how AI is used in context. Similarly, Binns argues that algorithmic
fairness considerations should account for how and why certain social circumstances exist
through engagement with other disciplines, such as sociology, history, and economics. He argues
that feature selection should be informed by an awareness of historical causes of inequalities and
broader existing social structures. Considering these factors might also help with determining
which disparities should take priority in fairness analysis and mitigation, such as focusing
attention on the historic reasons for unequal base rates when evaluating the fairness of COMPAS.
Relatedly, Malik imagines mixed methods research through collaborations with
researchers with different toolsets and perspectives alongside greater researcher reflexivity,
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
reciprocity with impacted communities, and humility, including holding space for the possibility
that other methods might be most appropriate. Manjarres et al. have also called for a
coordinated interdisciplinary effort, in particular to establish an “AI for Equity” field (AI4Eq) in
response to the United Nations Agenda for Sustainable Development, drawing from ICT for
Development.
Given the ways that interdisciplinary collaborations have the potential to challenge
hegemonic computational epistemologies and practices, and particularly, problems of
technological solutionism and abstraction, there is reason to believe that such collaborations
would disrupt existing institutionalized power dynamics within ML fairness research. Yet, the
question of which interdisciplinary frameworks are taken up for ML fairness considerations, and
how they get leveraged, is paramount. For instance, Irani et al. have argued for the need to
shift from developmentalist frameworks to STS and postcolonial computing frameworks that
center “questions of power, authority, legitimacy, participation, and intelligibility.” Mohamed et
al. draw from Irani et al.’s critique when they envision decolonial AI rooted in
solidarity rather than benevolence (see section 4.9). As Abebe et al. note, there is a
longstanding and rich tradition of critical reflection in STS, Values-in-Design, and legal
scholarship that some AI/ML practitioners have begun taking up over the past five years, but
many of these interdisciplinary engagements have not been well aligned with broader efforts for
social change. Examples of recent efforts to incorporate value sensitive design into ML include
Umbrello and van de Poel’s bringing together of value-sensitive design with AI for social
good principles, arguing that there is a need for ML to be explicitly orientated towards socially
desirable ends. They argue that these ends can be modeled on the United Nation’s Sustainable
Development Goals. However, it is not specified to what degree the participation of impacted
communities figures into this approach, nor whether these approaches set out to substantively
alter relations of power in society.
Abebe et al. provide a model for how computing can be an accomplice to efforts
for structural change, even if insufficient on its own. They propose using computing to: measure
social problems and diagnose how they manifest in technical systems; to generate public debate
about how problems are being formalized for decision-making tools; to illuminate gaps,
constraints, and flaws with existing datasets; to challenge entrenched policy thinking and harmful,
inaccurate, and overstated technological capabilities through computational practice and
advocacy work; and to use computing to call attention to long-standing social problems in ways
that catalyze public engagement. Abebe et al. are attentive to the potential limits and
drawbacks of these approaches, including the possibilities that these sorts of critical interventions
will be appropriated or watered down by powerful stakeholders. Greene, Hoffman, and Stark
 share this concern about co-optation, demonstrating how several high-profile ethical AI
vision statements engage with some of the criticisms of STS and other critical scholarly
perspectives, but often limit ML fairness debates to appropriate design and implementation, not
whether these systems should be built at all, or whether the "dominance of corporations on
political processes with no democratic accountability" (p. 8) is a causal factor in harmful
4.9 Participatory Design and Co-Development
In addition to interdisciplinarity, many scholars see robust participatory design measures as a
method of significantly improving the development of AI tools in order to produce more just
outcomes. Whittaker et al. for example imagine a shift in AI fairness discourse from bias
and inclusion towards agency and control, where AI developers collaborate with disabled people
who are empowered to define the terms of engagement and the order of priorities. This approach
is seen as a way of challenging sociotechnical systems that exclude and oppress disabled people
and other marginalized people. Participatory design processes that reimagine power relations
between technologists and marginalized communities have the potential to significantly address
what is most ethically concerning rather than what is most convenient to measure . Such an approach would make it possible for the design process to meaningfully leverage
the knowledge that comes from people who occupy subjugated standpoints in society . For Kalluri , research should be oriented less around providing highly
accurate information to decision makers and instead to serving the needs of marginalized
communities, who are empowered to investigate, contest, influence, and dismantle AI. This
approach would be AI “by and for the people” .
Drawing from decolonial theory, a body of work that actively seeks to disrupt colonial
systems of power, Mohamed et al. propose AI co-development projects "driven by the
agency, self-confidence, and self-ownership of the communities they work for" (p. 13). These
projects would explicitly be designed for the purposes of exposing systematic biases and directly
confronting colonizing knowledge systems and tools of expropriation. According to Mohamed et
al. , this work could be designed to support grassroots organizations that are already doing
the work of generating intercultural dialogue, solidarity, and alternative modes of community,
and by ensuring marginalized groups have meaningful decision-making powers over the AI tools’
development. Such an approach would counter tendencies towards importing AI tools made in the
West by Western technologists to non-Western contexts like Africa, which, as Birhane 
describes, can be both “irrelevant and harmful due to lack [of] transferability from one context to
another,” and also “an obstacle that hinders the development of local products” (p. 396). Such
outcomes are in keeping with longstanding histories of imperialist oppression in contexts like
Africa and India .
It is important to note that in order for participatory design to distinguish itself from
participation-washing, those from marginalized groups who are subject to heightened levels of
scrutiny and potential harm within many AI systems must have a significant degree of control
over the development, deployment, and assessment of the AI tool. Sloane et al. argue that
participation in ML can be carried out equitably by: recognizing participation as work that
requires consent, opt-out options, and compensation; participation processes that are context
specific and co-designed; and be genuine and long-term through transparency and knowledge
sharing. This work necessarily requires de-centering Western notions of algorithmic fairness in
non-Western contexts, including working with relevant culturally and historically contextualized
categories, social structures, power dynamics, value-systems, and going beyond model fairness
 . However, as Tucker and Yang caution, decolonization is
frequently adopted as a metaphor divorced from the actual revolutionary project of restoring land
and cultural, economic, and political freedom to colonized people. Adams argues that any
effort to draw decolonial theory into AI must situate AI within the history of colonialism that
informs the field’s foundational epistemic assumptions regarding racial classification and notions
of intelligence. The Indigenous Protocol and Artificial Intelligence Working Group is one such
effort to imagine decolonial AI systems that prioritize Indigenous concerns and perspectives. For
instance, the group’s position paper offers guidelines for indigenous-centered AI that include
Indigenous communities developing computational methods that reflect their own cultural
practices and values, and ethically accounting for how hardware and software materials are
extracted from and returned to the earth .
4.10 Increased Democratic Deliberation and Regulation
In response to an absence of democratic deliberation in AI fairness considerations, McQuillan
 calls for more democratic forms of governance over the development and use of AI tools,
and more specifically, for the creation of people’s councils in contexts where people are
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
significantly impacted by ML. He defines people’s councils as “bottom-up, confederated
structures that act as direct democratic assemblies” . Participants are
empowered through inclusive, horizontal structures for collective action. McQuillan draws
from the successes of people’s councils in the US contexts of healthcare in the early 1990s and
the Combined Shop Stewards Committee of 1976. The idea of people’s councils reimagines who
has the power to hold AI to account for unfairness and how by decentering technologists.
However, as McQuillan himself notes, the efforts of people’s councils are not always
taken up by the institutions they seek to inform or challenge. This means that grassroots coalitionbased movements, ideally bolstered by the support of AI fairness researchers, would be essential
for pushing for the disruption of entrenched institutional power dynamics. McQuillian 
makes this point as well when describing the potency of tech worker dissent against facial
recognition technology when carried out in conjunction with social movements.
Other scholars have explicitly called for regulation as a vehicle for disrupting existing
power asymmetries that underpin hegemonic ML fairness approaches. For instance, Powles and
Nissenbaum argue that what is needed is US policy attention to the “wholesale giveaway
of societal data that undergirds A.I. system development” and to “disincentivize and devalue data
hoarding with creative policies, including carefully defined bans, levies, mandated data sharing,
and community benefit policies, all backed up by the brass knuckles of the law.” Certainly, one
can imagine the development of regulations that would help shift ML fairness from a set of
voluntary principles and superficial technical adjustments to something that provides legally
enforceable safeguards and restrictions against abuses of power. However, while regulation has
the potential to disrupt existing power dynamics, regulatory frameworks can also be used to
further consolidate and centralize power, assets, control, and/or rights in the hands of a minority,
such as in the context of international AI governance standards and AI for international social
development that often privilege Western interests . Furthermore, regulations like the European Union General Data Protection Regulation
 , a series of data protection rules implemented in 2018 for addressing data security and
issues of consent, transparency, and accountability, have been criticized as being “too slow and
too soft” . The more recent European AI Act , a
risk-based framework for regulating AI, has received similar challenges concerning its efficacy.
Over one hundred civil society organizations have argued in a collective statement that the act is
in need of amendments in order to ensure it is precise and robust enough to address structural
imbalances of power . In addition to stricter
regulation, Birhane argues that, “social pressure through organized movements, strong
reward systems for technology that empowers the least privileged, and a completely new
application of technologies” (p. 57) are best positioned to counter the ways that the AI/ML
community’s current incentive structures pressure even the most well-intentioned developers
towards maintaining existing power dynamics.
4.11 Centering Justice
For some scholars, foregrounding theories of justice into AI fairness work would have a
transformative impact on the degree to which ML fairness discourse engages with structural
oppression and social justice considerations. For instance, Dencik et al. use the term “data
justice” to highlight the significant relationship between data and social justice that goes beyond
issues of data processing. Data justice takes as its starting point not the data system itself, but
rather “the dynamics upon which data processes are contingent in terms of their development,
implementation, use and impact” . This process necessarily involves
evaluating the socio-historical conditions, power structures, and relationships that produce
injustice in the first place. It centers the experiences of marginalized groups, with the goal of
alleviating unnecessary and unwanted suffering. Drawing from disability studies, Bennet and
Keyes argue that questions of justice rather than questions of fairness should be centered
in the context of disability and AI in order to resist reinforcing the existing powers of medical
gatekeepers, and to prioritize the needs of multiply marginalized disabled people. Furthermore,
Sambasivan et al. point out that there is a range of alterative moral foundations of cultural
importance outside the context of hegemonic Western notions of fairness, including restorative
justice, which could provide more potent frameworks for redressing algorithmic harms.
Restorative justice emphasizes repairing harm through community-based processes that involve
those who have been harmed and those who take responsibility for the harm working together to
determine solutions that promote accountability and collective healing. Benthall and
Green have both called for the explicit inclusion of justice at the ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency as a core component of its research agenda. However,
Gangadharan and Niklas argue that most fairness, accountability, transparency, and data
justice studies approaches are techno-centric and process-oriented, when what is needed is an
evaluative ethical framework that decenters technology. According to the authors, such an
approach would “position sociotechnical systems of discrimination alongside other modalities
and offer nuance into what injustice discrimination causes, who is affected, and how
discrimination can be remedied” . While Gangadharan &
Niklas raise an essential point about the constraints of techno-centrism, it remains possible
to imagine design processes for AI tools that are explicitly geared towards anti-oppressive ends.
Such ML research might support both technical and non-technical solutions, and empower groups
working to build a more just and equitable world. The author will return to this point in Section 5.
4.12 Diversifying the AI Field
Finally, any overview of solutions to the limitations of hegemonic ML fairness approaches must
address the AI field’s fundamental lack of robust racial and gender diversity. Both Guillory
 and West et al. argue that the AI sector’s lack of diversity is deeply linked to the
prevalence of biased and discriminatory AI tools. Guillory points out that racial bias
pervades the AI field due to racial bias in who gets admitted to the field, who gets mentored, who
is turned to for collaboration, what research topics get emphasized and de-emphasized, who gets
hired in academia, and who is given adequate financial and community support. Guillory 
also argues that the field’s complicity in the harms that repressive technological systems produce
within Black communities can further drive marginalized people from the AI field. In response to
the limits of both conventional workplace diversity and tech debiasing initiatives for addressing
racial and gender discrimination, West et al. argue that there needs to be a deeper
engagement with “workplace cultures, power asymmetries, harassment, exclusionary hiring
practices, unfair compensation, and tokenization" (p. 3). Dominant "pipeline studies" often study
primarily white women's individual psychology as a barrier to their full participation in computer
science, as opposed to studying the barriers imposed by institutions, including their cultures and
unfair distributions of power and privilege . However, as the authors and
Hampton note, diversifying the tech workforce will not necessarily address the deeper
structural challenges that AI poses to communities, which is why a power-centered framework is
necessary for examining the relationship between technological development and the lived
experiences of marginalized people.
Such a power-centered framework would require that the ML community critically attend
to algorithmic tools’ reproduction of longstanding histories of scientific racism and use of
harmful systems of classification . Furthermore, this
framework would need to account for the deliberate, historical and present-day pushing out of
women from computing, with disparate consequences for Black women in particular .
Central to such an approach would also be questions concerning who is harmed, who benefits,
and who gets to decide in a given ML application context, grounded in an analysis that prioritizes
justice considerations. This analysis would need to include but go beyond a politics of
representation within the AI field and interrogate the ways that the field’s very formation and
dominant epistemic frameworks are deeply embedded with logics that sustain social and
economic inequality, and often prioritize industry and military imperatives rather than community
5. Discussion
This survey has argued that hegemonic computational approaches to ML fairness research
currently perpetuate and amplify many of the existing unequal power dynamics in society. At
present, most ML tools serve to optimize a given system, rather than shift the politics within those
systems towards social justice . At minimum, this review conveys the need for
modeling social actors, institutions, and their interactions in a given social context so that the ML
tool’s function across a social system is rendered observable, and for using fairness criteria that
are context-specific and grounded in the voices, experiences, and needs of the marginalized
people. The redesigning of AI tools with the full participation of people who are intersectionally
disadvantaged under capitalism, white supremacy, heteropatriarchy, and colonialism, and the
meaningful incorporation of intersectional feminist thinking into the design and evaluation of
technical standards and bias audits, could improve AI outcomes for marginalized groups in
contexts where data gaps for minoritized people are systematically contributing to harm
 . However, closing representational data gaps
will be insufficient on its own to overcome the unequal social and economic conditions that
produce these gaps in the first place, and that condition how “fixing” them will actually impact
the lives of marginalized people in practice.
The ML fairness community must also be weary of not prioritizing quantifiable fairness
metrics at the expense of other fairness considerations for the sake of building a workable AI tool,
and this should include the consideration of whether a given AI tool should be built at all in a
world deeply conditioned by entrenched power asymmetries. As D’Ignazio and Klein 
argue, tracing linkages between digital technologies and “historical and ongoing forces of
oppression can help us answer the ethical question, should this system exist?” (p. 13). Whether to
build an AI tool concerns a range of ethical and social issues that also require inclusive and
critical discussion, and in cases of grave harm, some researchers have actively intervened. As just
one example, in the wake of the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
mathematicians at several US universities called for a boycott on collaborations with police
departments for developing predictive policing software, arguing that these collaborations create
a “‘scientific’ veneer for racism” . Their open letter, submitted to the Notices of the
American Mathematical Society in June 2020, has since been signed by over 1,500 researchers
from a range of universities within and outside of the US context .
While not all of the reforms proposed in Section 4 are “operationalizeable,” this does not
mean that these approaches are outside the frame of what the AI/ML fairness community can do
or call for. To provide an example, a research team can set out to build an AI tool using as many
sociotechnical considerations as possible in a world rife with injustice. Such an understanding
necessarily requires interdisciplinarity and forming peer relationships with relevant communities
at all stages, from research, to design, to implementation, to evaluation. This can be difficult or
resource-intensive work, and it requires negotiating different epistemic frameworks, as well as the
active mitigation of the unequal power dynamics that surface in collaborative work between
participants who hold different degrees of institutional and social privilege. As Abdurahman
 explains, peer relationships are predicated on algorithmic designers critically addressing
“whose language is used, whose viewpoint and values are privileged, whose agency is extended,
and who has the right to frame a ‘problem.’” Assessing the tool will require having a critical
understanding of how existing actors operate in the given social context, which means having to
grapple with power, privilege, and structural inequality. Ultimately, a model may technically
produce desired outcomes according to the research team’s value-laden criteria, but given what
they and their community interlocutors know about the social context, it may be unlikely to be
applied in a fair way long-term unless there is also a formal and robust process to contest these
outcomes that impacted people are able to access and meaningfully leverage. Calls for—and
participation in—the development of complementary social, political, and legal processes to
ensure just outcomes must be treated as necessary to the work of ML fairness.
Perhaps, then, and as many of the scholars in this survey article have argued, it is time for
a wholesale rethinking of what it means to do ML fairness work. For instance, whom does it
serve to call an AI tool built on exploitative labor conditions and predatorily inclusive data
collection practices “fair”? What might it look like to reorient ML fairness research around the
goals of evaluating institutions’ production of structural advantages, and of eliminating relations
of domination? Whose voices, experiences, and epistemic frameworks are included in the design
process, and in what ways do structural inequalities and historical patterns of oppression shape a
given ML tool’s distribution of risks and rewards? What might it look like for ML fairness
research to engage in a deliberate, self-conscious reckoning with computer science’s historical
and present day complicity in injustice, including through disciplinary knowledge gaps,
paternalism, and perpetuations of harmful pseudoscience ? How might the AI field transform if this reckoning were to form the very foundation of
computer science education? What would it mean to judge the “goodness” of an AI tool if “good”
were defined as that which gives people the ability to “exist, survive, thrive, and change in
positive ways of their own choosing” ? How might ML fairness research be
developed in solidarity with community and industry movements for progressive technological
reform, for the rights of tech workers, and for greater agency, self-determination, and democratic
control for marginalized people over AI tools?
There are existing models available for robust participatory research that center questions
of power, justice, and community needs in the context of digital systems (e.g., “Our Data
Bodies,” n.d; “Design Beku,” n.d.), and it is promising to see the rise of interdisciplinary
workshops explicitly geared towards justice-oriented AI research at major computing conferences
where productive tensions, collaborations, and alternative approaches might emerge . Yet, as this review has argued, a great deal of existing ML
fairness research continues to entrench dominant relations of power and subordination, deploying
ideas of participation, inclusion, and fairness to encourage the diffusion of algorithmic tools that
optimize an unjust social order. Anything less than an anti-oppressive approach to AI is poorly
equipped to support the societal changes necessary for a more equitable society. An antioppressive approach to AI would involve explicit commitments to undoing the unequal
distribution of social, economic, and political power shaping the AI field and contributing to the
systematic advantaging of dominant groups at all stages of the AI lifecycle. This requires not only
bridging divides between different epistemic communities, but also aligning ML fairness work
with existing, historically longstanding, and international struggles for just institutions and
community relations.
RETHINKING FAIRNESS
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to Yan Zhou, Rakin Haider, Tom Doyle, Chris Clifton, Christopher
Yeomans, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Blase Ur for their helpful feedback and recommendations
during the drafting of this article, and to the reviewers and editorial team at JAIR for their
generative comments during the peer review process. This article is based upon work supported
by the NSF Program on Fairness in AI in Collaboration with Amazon under Award number
1939728, “FAI: Identifying, Measuring, and Mitigating Fairness Issues in AI.”