Stochastic models of intracellular transport
Paul C. Bressloﬀ1,2 and Jay M. Newby2
1Department of Mathematics
2Mathematical Institute,
University of Utah
University of Oxford,
155 South 1400 East
94-96 St. Giles’,
Salt Lake City
OX1 3LS UK
The interior of a living cell is a crowded, heterogenuous, ﬂuctuating environment. Hence,
a major challenge in modeling intracellular transport is to analyze stochastic processes
within complex environments. Broadly speaking, there are two basic mechanisms for
intracellular transport: passive diﬀusion and motor-driven active transport. Diﬀusive
transport can be formulated in terms of the motion of an over-damped Brownian particle. On the other hand, active transport requires chemical energy, usually in the form of
ATP hydrolysis, and can be direction speciﬁc, allowing biomolecules to be transported
long distances; this is particularly important in neurons due to their complex geometry.
In this review we present a wide range of analytical methods and models of intracellular
transport. In the case of diﬀusive transport, we consider narrow escape problems, diffusion to a small target, conﬁned and single-ﬁle diﬀusion, homogenization theory, and
fractional diﬀusion.
In the case of active transport, we consider Brownian ratchets,
random walk models, exclusion processes, random intermittent search processes, quasisteady-state reduction methods, and mean ﬁeld approximations. Applications include
receptor traﬃcking, axonal transport, membrane diﬀusion, nuclear transport, protein-
DNA interactions, virus traﬃcking, and the self–organization of subcellular structures.
PACS numbers:
87.10.-e, 87.16.Wd, 05.40.-a
I. Introduction
II. Diﬀusive transport: First-passage problems
A. Derivation of the diﬀusion equation
1. Random walks
2. Langevin equation
B. First passage times
C. Narrow escape problems
D. Diﬀusion-limited reaction rates
E. Diﬀusive search for a protein-DNA binding site
III. Diﬀusive transport: Eﬀects of molecular crowding, traps
and conﬁnement
A. Anomalous diﬀusion
B. Molecular crowding
C. Diﬀusion–trapping models
1. Sequence-dependent protein diﬀusion along DNA
2. Diﬀusion along spiny dendrites
3. Diﬀusion in the plasma membrane
D. Diﬀusion in conﬁned geometries
1. Fick-Jacobs equation
2. Brownian motion in a periodic potential with tilt
3. Single-ﬁle diﬀusion
E. Nuclear transport
IV. Active intracellular transport
A. Modeling molecular motors at diﬀerent scales
1. Brownian ratchets
2. PDE models of active transport
B. Tug-of-war model of bidirectional transport
C. Quasi–steady–state (QSS) reduction of PDE models of
active transport
D. Fast and slow axonal transport
E. Active transport on microtubular networks
F. Virus traﬃcking
G. Exclusion processes
1. Asymmetric exclusion process and the
hydrodynamic limit
2. Method of characteristics and shocks
3. mRNA translation by ribosomes
H. Motor transport and random intermittent search
1. Mean-ﬁeld model
2. Local target signaling
I. Active transport on DNA
V. Transport and self-organization in cells
A. Axonal elongation and cellular length control
B. Cooperative transport of proteins in cellular
organelles
C. Cell polarity
VI. Discussion
Acknowledgements
References
I. INTRODUCTION
The eﬃcient delivery of proteins and other molecular
products to their correct location within a cell (intracellular transport) is of fundamental importance to normal
cellular function and development .
Moreover, the breakdown of intracellular transport is a
major contributing factor to many degenerative diseases.
Broadly speaking, there are two basic mechanisms for intracellular transport; passive diﬀusion within the cytosol
or the surrounding plasma membrane of the cell, and active motor–driven transport along polymerised ﬁlaments
such as microtubules and F-actin that comprise the cytoskeleton. Newly synthesised products from the nucleus
are mainly transported to other intracellular compartments or the cell membrane via a microtubular network
that projects radially from organising centres (centrosomes). The same network is used to transport degraded
cell products back to the nucleus. Moreover, various animal viruses including HIV take advantage of microtubulebased transport in order to reach the nucleus from the cell
surface and release their genome through nuclear pores
 . The challenges of intracellular transport are particularly acute for brain cells
(neurons), which are amongst the largest and most complex cells in biology, in particular, with regards to the
eﬃcient traﬃcking of newly synthesized proteins from
the cell body or soma to distant locations on the axon
or dendrites. In healthy cells, the regulation of protein
traﬃcking within a neuron provides an important mechanism for modifying the strength of synaptic connections
between neurons , and synaptic plasticity is generally believed
to be the cellular substrate of learning and memory. On
the other hand, various types of dysfunction in protein
traﬃcking appear to be a major contributory factor to
a number of neurodegenerative diseases associated with
memory loss including Alzheimers .
Over the past 20 years, intracellular transport has been
a major application area within the statistical physics
community, and has driven a large number of papers on
the stochastic modeling and analysis of molecular motors
and diﬀusion in complex environments. Many excellent
reviews have been written on topics relevant to intracellular transport including anomalous diﬀusion ,
molecular motors , reaction kinetics
 , conﬁned diﬀusion , random intermittent search processes , and exclusion processes .
However, as far as we are aware, there has not been a
substantial review in which intracellular transport itself
is the central topic.
The overall goal of the current review is to provide an
up to date and uniﬁed perspective on stochastic models
of intracellular transport. One of the major aims is to
cover a wide range of models and analytical methods,
highlighting links between them wherever possible. Although it is not possible to cover every topic in complete
detail, suﬃcient details are provided to make the review
as self-contained and pedagogical as possible. Another
aim of the review is to highlight aspects of stochastic
processes that are particularly relevant to intracellular
transport, some of which have not been emphasised in
other reviews. These include the following:
1. Since the aqueous environment (cytosol) of a cell is
highly viscous at the length scale of macromolecules (low
Reynolds number), a diﬀusing particle can be treated as
an overdamped Brownian particle where inertial eﬀects
are ignored.
2. One of the characteristics of diﬀusive transport inside
the cell is that often a particle is conﬁned to a domain
with small exits on the boundary of the domain. Examples include an ion looking for an open ion channel within
the cell membrane , the transport of newly transcribed mRNA from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm via nuclear pores , the conﬁnement of neurotransmitter receptors within a synapse of a neuron , and the conﬁnement of calcium and other signaling molecules within sub cellular compartments such as
dendritic spines . This has led to recent
interest in using Green’s function and asymptotic methods to solve the so–called narrow escape problem .
A related class of problems involves the search for
a small target within the interior of a cellular domain.
In this case it is necessary to extend the Smoluchowski
theory of diﬀusion limited reaction rates to bounded domains or to more complex transport processes than simple diﬀusion. One example is the arrival of a receptor at
a localised reaction site on the surface of an immune cell,
which is a key step in the signaling cascade responsible
for activating the cell . Another
important example is a promotor protein searching for
its binding site on DNA, which is facilitated by an intermittent search process in which the particle switches
between 3D and 1D diﬀusion .
4. The intracellular environment is extremely crowded
with macromolecules, subcellular compartments and con-
ﬁnement domains, suggesting that anomalous subdiﬀusion is likely to occur .
plasma membrane is also a complex heterogeneous environment . Thus, many papers model diﬀusion
in such environments in terms of continuous time random walks and fractional Brownian motion.
it is still unclear to what extent intracellular diﬀusion is
anomalous in the long–time limit rather than just at intermediate times. This motivates studying diﬀusion in
the presence of obstacles and transient traps whereby
normal diﬀusion is recovered asymptotically .
Another common form of diﬀusion within cells is
the transport of particles through a narrow biological
pore or channel . Restricting the volume of the phase space
available to the diﬀusing particles by means of conﬁning
boundaries or obstacles causes striking entropic eﬀects
 . Moreover, various mechanisms of
facilitated diﬀusion can occur through interactions between a diﬀusing particle and proteins within the channel, as exempliﬁed by nuclear pore complexes, which are
the sole mediators of exchange between the nucleus and
cytoplasm . When a channel
becomes suﬃciently narrow, particles are no longer able
to pass each other (single-ﬁle diﬀusion), which imposes
strong constraints on the diﬀusive motion. In particular, a tagged particle exhibits anomalous subdiﬀusion on
long time scales 
6. There have been many stochastic models of motordriven transport at multiple spatial and temporal scales,
ranging from Brownian ratchet models 
to random walk models to systems of partial diﬀerential
equations (PDEs) . However, many of these treatments neglect
the fact that the goal of such transport is to deliver molecular cargo to speciﬁc sites. This then naturally leads to
a connection with random intermittent search processes
 . It also raises the important question regarding signaling mechanisms responsible for localizing a motor complex at a target. Another issue in
active transport involves exclusion eﬀects due to multiple motors moving along the same ﬁlament track . One of the challenges in cellular
biology is understanding how the coupling of diﬀusive or
vesicular transport with chemical reactions and cell signaling generates self-organizing structures within a cell.
One clear example is given by the actin and microtubular
cytoskeletons, which not only provide tracks for intracellular transport, but also determine cell shape and polarity , drive cell motility , and
form the spindle apparatus during cell division . Self-organization of the cytoskeleton and its regulation by cell signaling also plays a
crucial role in axonal growth and guidance during neurogenesis and cortical development .
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, diffusive transport is developed from the perspective of the
Langevin equation for an overdamped Brownian particle,
and various ﬁrst passage time problems are considered
(points 1-3). In Sec. III, the anomalous eﬀects of molecular crowding, trapping and conﬁnement are discussed
(points 4 and 5). The diﬀerences in diﬀusive behavior at
multiple timescales are highlighted. In Sec. IV, the theory of motor-driven active transport is reviewed, emphasizing the connection with random intermittent search
processes (point 6). A method for reducing the complexity of molecular motor models is also described, and used
to study the eﬀects of local signaling. Finally, in Sec. V
some examples illustrating the role of intracellular transport in self-organizing systems are presented (point 7).
II. DIFFUSIVE TRANSPORT: FIRST-PASSAGE
A. Derivation of the diﬀusion equation
1. Random walks
Consider a particle that hops at discrete times between
neighboring sites on a one–dimensional (1D) lattice with
unit spacing. At each step, the random walker moves a
unit distance to the right with probability p or to the left
with probability q = 1 −p. Let Pn(r) denote the probability that the particle is at site r at the Nth time step.
The evolution of the probability distribution is described
by the discrete-time master equation
PN(r) = pPN−1(r −1) + qPN−1(r + 1),
r ∈Z. (2.1)
If q = p = 1/2 then the random walk is symmetric or
unbiased, whereas for p > q (p < q) it is biased to the
right (left). In order to solve this equation, introduce the
discrete Laplace-Fourier transform
eP(k, z) =
eikrP(r, N).
Applying this transform to the master equation and multiplying by an extra factor of z, it is straightforward to
eP(k, z) −
P0(r)eikr = z(peik + qe−ik) eP(k, z).
Assuming that the particle starts at the origin so that
P0(r) = δr,0, we have
eP(k, z) =
u(k) = peik + qe−ik.
Here u(k) is the Fourier transform of the single-step hopping probability.
The original probability distribution
can now be reconstructed using the inverse transform
2π e−ikr eP(k, z)
with the z-contour taken around the unit circle.
Taylor expanding the solution for eP(k, z) in terms of z thus
e−ikru(k)Ndk
pmqN−me−ik(N−2m)dk
p(N+r)/2q(N−r)/2.
Using Stirling’s approximation for large N,
log n! ≈n log n −n + 1
2 log(2πn),
and assuming p, q ≈1/2, it can be shown that
e[r−N(p−q)]2/2N.
(To be more precise, PN(r) should be multiplied by a factor of 2, since N −r must be even). Indeed, the Gaussian
form of PN(r) in the large time limit arises universally
whenever the mean and variance of the displacement ∆r
in a single step are ﬁnite. This is basically a statement
of the central-limit theorem. One way to see this is to
note that when ⟨∆r⟩and ⟨∆r2⟩are both ﬁnite, u(k) has
the small-k series expansion
u(k) = 1 + ik⟨∆r⟩−1
2k2⟨∆r2⟩+ . . . ∼eik⟨∆r⟩−1
2 k2⟨∆r2⟩.
Substituting this approximation into the ﬁrst line of
equation (2.5) using the fact that the integral is dominated by the behavior in the region around k = 0 when
N is large, the resulting Gaussian integral yields the approximation
e(r−N⟨∆r⟩)2/2N⟨∆r2⟩.
Having analyzed the discrete random walk, it is now
possible to take an appropriate continuum limit to obtain
a diﬀusion equation in continuous space and time. First,
introduce inﬁnitesimal step lengths δx and δt for space
and time and set PN = ρ(x, t)δx with x = rδx, t = Nδt.
Substituting into the master equation (2.1) gives the following equation for the probability density ρ(x, t):
ρ(x, t) = pρ(x −δx, t −δt) + qρ(x + δx, t −δt)
ρ(x, t) −∂ρ
where ρ has been Taylor expanded to ﬁrst order in δt
and to second order in δx. Note that p+q = 1. Dividing
through by δt and taking the continuum limit δx, δt →0
such that the quantities V, D are ﬁnite, where
δx,δt→0(p −q)δx
yields the Fokker–Planck (FP) equation with constant
= −V ∂[ρ(x, t)]
+ D∂2ρ(x, t)
Note that p = 0.5+κδx and q = 0.5−κδx with κ = O(1).
Applying the same continuum limit to the Gaussian distribution (2.6) gives the density
e−(x−V t)2/4Dt,
which is the fundamental solution of equation (2.7) under the initial condition ρ(x, 0) = δ(x). Although we will
mainly consider continuum models of diﬀusion, it should
be noted that random walk models are particularly helpful in developing theories of diﬀusion in complex heterogeneous media and associated phenomena such as anomalous diﬀusion , see also section IIIA.
2. Langevin equation
Consider a microscopic particle moving in a water solution such as found in the interior of cells (the cytoplasm).
Suppose that it is subject to some external force of size F.
Collisions with ﬂuid molecules have two distinct eﬀects.
First, they induce an apparent diﬀusive or Brownian motion of the particle, and second they generate an eﬀective
frictional force that opposes motion induced by the external force. In the case of microscopic particles, water
acts as a highly viscous medium (low Reynolds number)
so that any particle quickly approaches terminal velocity and inertial eﬀects can be ignored. The eﬀects of all
collisions on the motion of the particle can then be represented in terms of the Langevin or stochastic diﬀerential
equation 
where X(t) is the stochastic position of the particle at
time t, γ is a drag coeﬃcient, and ξ(t) is a Gaussian
noise term with
⟨ξ(t)⟩= 0,
⟨ξ(t)ξ(t′)⟩= 2Dδ(t −t′).
Suppose, for the moment, that F is a constant. Formally
integrating equation (2.9) with X(0) = 0 shows that
X(t) = V t +
with V = F/γ the terminal velocity.
Averaging with
respect to the noise then implies that
⟨X(t)⟩= V t,
⟨(X(t) −V t)2⟩= 2Dt.
Thus the mean-square displacement about the deterministic trajectory x(t) = V t is given by ⟨∆X(t)⟩= 2Dt,
which suggests identifying D as a diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
Moreover, X(t) is itself a Gaussian process whose probability density p(x, t) evolves according to the FP equation
(2.7). Under the initial condition p(x, 0) = δ(x), this can
be solved to give the Gaussian distribution (2.8).
We now present a more formal derivation of the FP
equation applicable to position–dependent forces F(x).
Since X(t) is a stochastic variable, each simulation of
the Langevin equation generates one sample out of the
set of all possible trajectories. This motivates an alternative way of thinking about such a stochastic process,
namely in terms of the conditional probability density
p(x, t|x0, t0) that the particle is at x at time t, given
that it started at x0 at time t0. Exploiting the fact that
the stochastic process is Markovian, that is, X(t + δt)
only depends on the state at the previous time step
X(t), it follows that p(x, t|x0, t0) satisﬁes the Chapman–
Kolmogorov equation
p(x, t|x0, t0) =
p(x, t|x′, t′)p(x′, t′|x0, t0)dx′ (2.11)
for any t′ ∈[t0, t]. Such an equation is a deﬁning property
of a Markov process. Consider an inﬁnitesimal version of
this equation by taking t →t + δt, t′ →t and setting
w(x, t; u, δt) = p(x + u, t + δt|x, t):
p(x, t + δt) =
w(x −u, t; u, δt)p(x −u, t)du,
where the initial argument (x0, t0) has been suppressed.
Now suppose that over a suﬃciently small time window
δt, large jumps u in position are highly unlikely, so that
u can be treated as a small variable. Performing a Taylor
expansion with respect to u gives
p(x, t + δt) = α0(x, t)p(x, t) −∂x[α1(x, t)p(x, t)]
xx[α2(x, t)p(x, t)] + . . .
αn(x, t) =
w(x, t; u, δt)undu.
The Langevin Eq. (2.9) can be used to calculate the
coeﬃcients αn. First, rewrite Eq. (2.9) in the inﬁnitesimal form
X(t + δt) = x + F(x)δt/γ + δtξ(t),
given that X(t) = x. This implies that the transition
probability w can be written as
w(x, t; u, δt) = ⟨δ(x + u −X(t + δt))⟩ξ
= ⟨δ(u −F(x)δt/γ −δtξ(t))⟩ξ.
Discretizing time in units of δt means that ξ(t) becomes
a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance
2D/δt. The corresponding probability density is
δt/4πDe−ξ2δt/4D.
Hence, averaging with respect to ξ(t),
w(x, t; u, δt) =
4πDδte−(u−F (x)δt/γ)2/4Dδt.
It follows that
α1 = F(x)δt/γ,
α2 = 2Dδt + α2
and αm = O(δt2) for m > 2. Substituting these results
into Eq. (2.12) and taking the limit δt →0 ﬁnally leads
to the Fokker–Planck (FP) equation
∂[F(x)p(x, t)]
+ D∂2p(x, t)
Note that it is straightforward to generalize the above
analysis to higher dimensions. Assuming for simplicity
isotropic diﬀusion and friction, Eq. (2.9) becomes
dt = Fi(X)
i = 1, . . . , d
with ⟨ξi(t)⟩= 0 and ⟨ξi(t)ξj(t′)⟩= 2Dδi,jδ(t −t′). The
corresponding multivariate FP equation is
γ ∇· [F(x)p(x, t)] + D∇2p(x, t).
The 1D FP Eq. (2.15) can be rewritten as a probability
conservation law according to
= −∂J(x, t)
J(x, t) = 1
γ F(x)p(x, t) −D∂p(x, t)
is the probability ﬂux. An equilibrium steady-state solution corresponds to the conditions ∂p/∂t = 0 and J ≡0.
This leads to the ﬁrst-order ODE for the equilibrium density P(x): DP ′(x) −γ−1F(x)P(x) = 0, which has the
P(x) = Ne−Φ(x)/γD.
Here Φ(x) = −
R x F(y)dy is a potential energy function
and N is a normalization factor (assuming that it exists). Comparison of the equilibrium distribution with
the Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution of statistical mechanics yields the Einstein relation
where T is the temperature (in degrees Kelvin) and kB ≈
1.4 × 10−23JK−1 is the Boltzmann constant. This formula relates the variance of environmental ﬂuctuations to
the strength of dissipative forces and the temperature. In
the case of a sphere of radius R moving in a ﬂuid of viscosity η, Stoke’s formula can be used, that is, γ = 6πηR.
For water at room temperature, η ∼10−3kg m−1s−1 so
that a particle of radius R = 10−9m has a diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient D ∼100µm2s−1.
So far, we have considered diﬀusive–like motion from
the probabilistic perspective of a single microscopic particle moving in a ﬂuid medium.
However, it is possible to reinterpret Eq. (2.15) or (2.17) as a deterministic
advection–diﬀusion equation for the concentration u(x, t)
of many particles. That is, ignoring any interactions or
correlations between the particles, set u(x, t) = Np(x, t)
where N is the total number of particles (assumed large).
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (2.15) by N then leads to
the corresponding advection–diﬀusion (or Smoluchowski)
equation for u(x, t) with NJ(x, t) interpreted as the particle ﬂux arising from a combination of advection and
Fickian diﬀusion. In this review we will often switch between the microscopic probabilistic formulation of diffusion and the macroscopic deterministic formulation,
which can be viewed as a mean-ﬁeld limit of the former.
However, the relationship between macroscopic and microscopic formulations is more complicated when chemical reactions are included. Macroscopically, reactions are
described in terms of the deterministic law of mass action,
whereas microscopically they are modeled stochastically
using a chemical master equation. Diﬀerences between
the two levels of modeling become signiﬁcant when the
number of interacting molecules becomes small .
Finally, note that another important issue arises in the
case of space–dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcients. From the
macroscopic picture of Fickian diﬀusion, the conservation equation ∂tu = −∇· J can lead to two diﬀerent
forms of the diﬀusion equation, depending on whether
J(x, t) = ∇[D(x)u(x, t)] or J(x, t) = D(x)∇u(x, t).
(These are equivalent when D is a constant). In order to
distinguish between the two cases, it is necessary to incorporate details regarding the microscopic dynamics using,
for example, kinetic theory . From the perspective of the FP equation, a
space–dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient arises when the corresponding Langevin equation is driven by multiplicative
(state-dependent) noise, and the position of the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient will depend on whether the noise is interpreted
in the sense of Ito or Statonovich . The situation is even more complicated in
anisotropic heterogeneous media, where it is no longer
possible to characterize the rate of diﬀusion in terms of a
single coeﬃcient. One now needs to consider a diﬀusion
tensor, see Sec. IVE.
B. First passage times
One of most important ways of quantifying the eﬃcacy of diﬀusive transport is in terms of the ﬁrst passage
time to reach a target .
In the case of intracellular transport, such a target could
represent a substrate for a subsequent biochemical reaction or an exit from some bounded domain such as a
chemical synapse. ). Consider a particle whose position evolves according to the 1D Langevin
Eq. (2.9) with motion restricted to the bounded domain
x ∈[0, L]. Suppose that the corresponding FP Eq. (2.15)
has a reﬂecting boundary condition at x = 0 and an absorbing boundary condition at x = L:
J(0, t) = 0,
p(L, t) = 0.
We would like to determine the stochastic time T(y) for
the particle to exit the right hand boundary given that it
starts at location y ∈[0, L] at time t. As a ﬁrst step, we
introduce the survival probability P(y, t) that the particle
has not yet exited the interval at time t:
p(x, t|y, 0)dx.
It follows that Prob[T(y) ≤t] = 1 −P(y, t) and we can
deﬁne the ﬁrst passage time (FPT) density according to
f(y, t) = −∂P(y, t)
The FPT density satisﬁes a backwards FP equation,
which can be derived from the Chapman-Kolmogorov Eq.
(2.11) by diﬀerentiating boths sides with respect to the
intermediate time t′ and using the forwards equation. Using the fact that ∂t′p(x, t|x′, t′) = −∂tp(x, t|x′, t′), which
follows from time-translation invariance, then yields the
backwards FP equation for p:
∂tp(x, t|x′, t′) = A(x′)∂x′p(x, t|x′, t′)+D∂2
x′x′p(x, t|x′, t′),
where A(x) = F(x)/γ. Taking x′ →y, t′ = 0 and integrating with respect to x shows that P(y, t), and hence
f(y, t), also satisfy a backwards FP equation:
= A(y)∂P(y, t)
+ D∂2P(y, t)
A quantity of particular interest is the mean ﬁrst passage time (MFPT) τ(y) deﬁned according to
τ(y) = ⟨T(y)⟩≡
f(y, t)tdt
P(y, t)dt,
after integration by parts. Hence, integrating both sides
of Eq. (2.26) shows that the MFPT satisﬁes the ODE
Eq. (2.28) is supplemented by reﬂecting and absorbing
boundary conditions for the backwards FP equation:
τ ′(0) = 0,
It is straightforward to solve Eq. (2.28) by direct integration . First, introduce the integration
ψ(y) = exp
= exp (−V (y)/kBT) ,
where D−1A(y) = (Dγ)−1F(y) = −(kBT)−1V ′(y) and
V (y) is a potential energy. Eq. (2.28) becomes
dy [ψ(y)τ ′(y)] = −ψ(y)
ψ(y)τ ′(y) = −1
where the boundary condition τ ′(0) = 0 has been used.
Integrating once more with respect to y and using τ(L) =
0 then gives
In the case of pure diﬀusion (A(x) = 0), we have ψ(y) = 1
and τ(y) = (L2 −y2)/2D. It follows that for any ﬁnite
L−y, τ(y) →∞as L →∞. Thus, although 1D diﬀusion
is recurrent i.e. the particle surely reaches the origin, the
average time it takes is inﬁnite. (This can also be understood in terms of the scaling properties of the FPT
density, see below).
Now suppose that L is ﬁnite and
the particle starts at the left–hand boundary. The corresponding MFPT is then τ = L2/D. Within the cytosol
of cells, macromolecules such as proteins tend to have
diﬀusivities D < 1µm2s−1, which is due to eﬀects such
as molecular crowding, see Sec.
III. This implies that
the mean time for a diﬀusing particle to travel a distance
100µm is at least 104s (a few hours), whereas to travel
a distance 1mm is at least 106s (10 days). Since neurons, which are the largest cells in humans, have axonal
and dendritic protrusions that can extend from 1mm up
to 1m, the mean travel time due to passive diﬀusion becomes prohibitively large, and an active form of transport
becomes essential.
It is also possible to extend the above analysis to the
case where the particle can exit from either end . It is often of interest to keep
track of which end the particle exits, which leads to the
concept of a splitting probability. Let G0(x, t) denote the
probability that the particle exits at x = 0 after time t,
having started at the point x. Then
G0(x, t) = −
J(0, t′|x, 0)dt′
J(0, t|x, 0) = A(0)p(0, t|x, 0) −D ∂p(y, t|x, 0)
Diﬀerentiating with respect to t and using the backwards
FP Eq. (2.25) gives
= J(0, t|x, 0) = −
∂J(0, t′|x, 0)
= A(x)∂G0(x, t)
+ D∂2G0(x, t)
The hitting or splitting probability that the particle exits at x = 0 (rather than x = L) is Π0(x) = G0(x, 0).
Moreover, the probability that the particle exits at time
t through x = 0, is Prob(T0(x) > t) = G0(x, t)/G0(x, 0),
where T0(x) is the corresponding conditional FPT. Since
the conditional MFPT satisﬁes
t∂Prob(T0(x) > t)
G0(x, 0)dt,
Eq. (2.32) is integrated with respect to t to give
A(x)∂Π0(x)τ0(x)
+ D∂2Π0(x)τ0(x)
= −Π0(x), (2.33)
with boundary conditions Π0(0)τ0(0) = Π0(L)τ0(L) = 0.
Finally, taking the limit t →0 in Eq. (2.32) and noting
that J(0, 0|x, 0) = 0 for x ̸= 0,
A(x)∂Π0(x)
+ D∂2Π0(x)
with boundary conditions Π0(0) = 1, Π0(L) = 0. A similar analysis can be carried out for exit through the other
end x = L such that Π0(x) + ΠL(x) = 1.
The above formalism extends to higher spatial dimensions. In particular, suppose that a particle evolves according to the Langevin Eq. (2.16) in a compact domain
Ωwith boundary ∂Ω. Suppose that at time t = 0 the
particle is at the point y ∈Ωand let T(y) denote the
ﬁrst passage time to reach any point on the boundary ∂Ω.
The probability that the particle has not yet reached the
boundary at time t is then
p(x, t|y, 0)dx,
where p(x, t|y, 0) is the solution to the multivariate FP
Eq. (2.17) with an absorbing boundary condition on ∂Ω.
The FPT density is again f(y, t) = −dP(y, t)/dt which,
on using Eq. (2.17) and the divergence theorem, can be
expressed as
f(y, t) = −
[−A(x)p(x, t|y, 0) + D∇p(x, t|y, 0)] · dσ
with A = F/γ.
Similarly, by constructing the corresponding backwards FP equation, it can be shown that
the MFPT satisﬁes the equation
A(y) · ∇τ(y) + D∇2τ(y) = −1
with ∂nτ(y) = 0 for y ∈∂Ω.
In the case of 1D diﬀusion, it is straightforward to
calculate the FPT density explicitly. In the absence of
boundaries we can set the conditional probability density
p(x, t|x0, 0) = p(x −x0, t). Similarly the FPT density of
arriving for the ﬁrst time at x at time τ starting from
x0 can be written as f(x, τ|x0, 0) = f(x −x0, τ). The
densities p and f are related according to the integral
p(x −x0, t) =
p(x −x′, t −τ)f(x′ −x0, τ)dτ. (2.37)
Taking Laplace transforms,
ep(x −x0, s) = ep(x −x′, s) ef(x′ −x0, s).
Laplace transforming the Gaussian distribution (2.8) for
V = 0 yields ep(x, s) =
x2s/D, so that
ef(x −x0, s) = e−√
(x−x0)s/D.
The inverse Laplace transform then yields the Levy-
Smirnov distribution
f(x −x0, t) = 1
e−(x−x0)2/4Dt.
This inverse-Gaussian decays asymptotically as f(x, t) ∼
t−3/2, which immediately establishes that it does not
have a ﬁnite ﬁrst moment, that is, the MFPT from x0
to x diverges. On the other hand,
f(x −x0, t)dt = 1
so that the diﬀusing particle will almost surely hit any
point x during its motion.
C. Narrow escape problems
Within the context of intracellular transport, there has
been a growing interest in a particular class of ﬁrst passage processes, namely, the escape of a freely diﬀusing
molecule from a 2D or 3D bounded domain through small
absorbing windows on an otherwise reﬂecting boundary
 . Examples include the FPT for an ion to ﬁnd an open ion channel situated within the cell membrane or the FPT of a
protein receptor to locate a particular target binding site.
Within the context of intracellular transport in neurons,
recent applications include analyzing the conﬁnement of
neurotransmitter receptors within the synapse of a neuron and the the role of dendritic spines in conﬁning signaling molecules such as calcium . , see Sec. II.D). In order
to develop the basic theory, we will focus on diﬀusion in a
two–dimensional domain Ω⊂R2 whose boundary can be
decomposed as ∂Ω= ∂Ωr ∪∂Ωa, where ∂Ωr represents
the reﬂecting part of the boundary and ∂Ωa the absorbing part. We then have a narrow escape problem in the
limit that the measure of the absorbing set |∂Ωa| = O(ε)
is asymptotically small, that is, 0 < ε ≪1. It follows
from the analysis of exit times, see Eq. (2.36), that the
MFPT to exit the boundary ∂Ωa satisﬁes the equation
(in the absence of external forces)
∇2τ(x) = −1
with boundary conditions
x ∈∂Ωa = ∪N
∂nτ(x) = 0,
The absorbing set is assumed to consist of N small disjoint absorbing windows ∂Ωj centered at xj ∈∂Ω. In the
2D case, each window is a small absorbing arc of length
|∂Ωj| = εlj with lj = O(1). It is also assumed that the
windows are well separated, that is, |xi −xj| = O(1) for
all i ̸= j. An example of a Brownian particle in a 2D
unit disk with small absorbing windows on the circular
boundary is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Since the MFPT diverges as ε →0, the calculation
of τ(x) requires solving a singular perturbation problem. There have been a number of studies of the narrow
FIG. 1 Example trajectory of a Brownian particle moving in
a 2D unit disk with small absorbing windows on an otherwise
reﬂecting circular boundary. Inset: a local coordinate system
around the jth arc.
escape problem using a combination of singular perturbation theory and Green’s function methods for a variety of geometries in two and three dimensions . Here we will
review the particular approach of Ward and collaborators . The basic idea is
to construct the asymptotic solution for the MFPT in
the limit ε →0 using the method of matched asymptotic
expansions. That is, an inner or local solution valid in a
O(ε) neighborhood of each absorbing arc is constructed
and then these are matched to an outer or global solution
that is valid away from each neighborhood.
In order to construct an inner solution near the jth
absorbing arc, Eq. (2.40) is rewritten in terms of a local
orthogonal coordinate system (z, s), in which s denotes
arc length along ∂Ωand z is the minimal distance from
∂Ωto an interior point x ∈Ω, as shown in the inset of
Fig. 1. Now introduce stretched coordinates bz = z/ε
and bs = (s −sj)/ε, and write the solution to the inner
problem as τ(x) = w(bz, bs). Neglecting terms of O(ε), it
can be shown that w satisﬁes the homogeneous equation
 
∂2bz + ∂2w
0 < bz < ∞,
−∞< bs < ∞(2.43)
with the following boundary conditions on bz = 0:
∂bz = 0 for |bs| > lj/2,
w = 0 for |bs| < lj/2.
The resulting boundary value problem can be solved by
introducing elliptic cylinder coordinates. However, in order to match the outer solution we need only specify the
far-ﬁeld behavior of the inner solution, which takes the
w(x) ∼Aj [log |y| −log dj + o(1)] as |y| →∞,
where dj = lj/4, |y| = |x −xj|/ε =
bz2 + bs2 and Aj
is an unknown constant (that is determined by matching
with the outer solution).
As far as the outer solution is concerned, each absorbing arc shrinks to a point xj ∈∂Ωas ε →0.
point xj eﬀectively acts as a point source that generates
a logarithmic singularity resulting from the asymptotic
matching of the outer solution to the far–ﬁeld behavior
of the inner solution. Thus the outer solution satisﬁes
∇2τ(x) = −1
with reﬂecting boundary condition
∂nτ = 0 for x ∈∂Ω\{x1, . . . , xN}
+ Aj log |x −xj| as x →xj, j = 1, . . . , N,
This can be solved in terms of the Neumann Green’s
function, deﬁned as the unique solution of
∇2G(x, x′) = 1
|Ω| −δ(x −x′),
G(x, xj) ∼−1
π log |x −xj| + R(xj, xj) as x →xj ∈∂Ω
∂nG(x, x′) = 0, x ∈∂Ω,
G(x, xj)dx = 0,
where R(x, x′) is the regular part of G(x, x′). It follows
that the outer solution can be expressed in terms of the
Green’s function G and an unknown constant χ,
AiG(x, xj) + χ.
Integrating both sides of Eq. (2.51) shows that χ is the
MFPT averaged over all possible starting positions:
The problem has reduced to solving N +1 linear equations for N + 1 unknowns Ai, χ. The ﬁrst N equations
are obtained by matching the near-ﬁeld behavior of the
outer solution as x →xj with the far–ﬁeld behavior of
the corresponding inner solution (2.45). After cancellation of the logarithmic terms, we have
AiGji + χ = Aj
for j = 1, . . . , N, where Gji ≡G(xj, xi) and Rj ≡
R(xj, xj). The remaining equation is obtained by noting
that ∇2τ(x) = −π PN
j=1 Aj∇2G(x, xj) and, hence
In the case of a single absorbing window of arc length
2ε (d = 1/2), Eqs. (2.53) and (2.54) are easily solved to
give A1 = Ω|/πD and
π log(ε/2) + R(x1, x1) −G(x, x1)
π log(ε/2) + R(x1, x1)
All that remains is to calculate the regular part of the
Neumann Green’s function R(x, xj), which will depend
on the geometry of the domain Ω. In certain cases such as
the unit disk or a rectangular domain, explicit formulae
for R can be obtained, otherwise numerical methods are
required . The Green’s function for a unit
disk when the source xj is on the unit circle has the well
known formula
G(x, xj) = −1
π log |x −xj| + |x|2
It immediately follows that R(xj, xj) = 1/8π (since
|xj|2 = 1) and
D [−log(ε) + log 2 + 1/8] .
For a rectangular domain of width L2 and height L1,
the Green’s function can be solved using separation of
variables and expanding the result in terms of logarithms,
see .
D. Diﬀusion-limited reaction rates
Another important type of ﬁrst passage process arises
in Smoluchowski rate theory for diﬀusion–controlled reactions . The simplest
version of the theory concerns the bimolecular reaction
A+B →AB for which the concentrations evolve according to the following law of mass action:
= k[A][b].
We assume that an A molecule and a B molecule react immediately to form the complex AB when they encounter each other within a reaction radius, so that the
speed of reaction k is limited by their encounter rate
via diﬀusion.
(Also note that k has units of volume
s−1). One can then formulate the problem as an idealized
ﬁrst passage process, in which one molecule is ﬁxed and
treated as the target, whilst the other reactants diﬀuse
and are absorbed if they hit the target. It is assumed that
the density of the particles is suﬃciently small, so that reactions amongst the diﬀusing particles can be neglected,
that is, a reaction only occurs if one of the background
diﬀusing particles comes within the reaction radius of the
target molecule. The steady–state ﬂux to the target (if
it exists) is then identiﬁed as the reaction rate k. Let
Ωdenote the target domain (which is often treated as a
sphere of radius a) and ∂Ωits absorbing boundary. We
then need to solve the diﬀusion equation for the concentration c(x, t) of background molecules exterior to the
= D∇2c(x, t),
c(x ∈∂Ω, t) = 0, c(x, 0) = 1,
subject to the far–ﬁeld boundary condition c(x, t) = 1
for x →∞. The ﬂux through the target boundary is
Note the sign, which is due to the fact that the ﬂux is
from the exterior to interior of the target.
Let d denote the spatial dimension of the target. For
d > 2, a diﬀusing particle is transient, which means that
there is a non-zero probability of never reaching the target. Hence, the loss of reactants by target absorption is
balanced by their resupply from inﬁnity. It follows that
there exists a steady state in which the reaction rate is
ﬁnite. On the other hand, for d ≤2, reactants are sure to
hit the target (recurrent diﬀusion) and a depletion zone
continuously develops around the target so that the ﬂux
and reaction rate decay monotonically to zero with respect to time. Although a reaction rate does not strictly
exist, it is still useful to consider the time-dependent ﬂux
as a time–dependent reaction rate. The two–dimensional
case is particularly important when considering interactions of molecules embedded in the plasma membrane
of a cell or the lipid bilayer surrounding an intracellular
compartment.
First consider the case of a spherical target of radius a
(d = 3). Exploiting the radial symmetry of the problem,
it is possible to set u(r, t) = rc(r, t) such that the 3D
diﬀusion equation for c reduces to a 1D diﬀusion equation
for u :
= D∂2u(r, t)
with u(r, 0) = r, u(a, t) = 0 and u(r, t) = r as r →∞.
Laplace transforming this equation gives seu(r, s) −r =
Deu′′(r, s), which has the solution
eu(r, s) = 1
r −ae−(r−a)√
Since the inverse Laplace transform of s−1[1 −e−r√
is the error function erf(r/
4Dt), one ﬁnds that
It follows that the time–dependent ﬂux is
J(t) = 4πa2D ∂c
Hence, we obtain the Smoluchowski reaction rate k =
4πaD. As highlighted by Redner , it is straightforward to generalize the steady–state result to other three–
dimensional targets by making a connection with electrostatics. That is, setting φ(x) = 1 −c(x) in steady–state,
it follows that φ satisﬁes Laplace’s equation with φ = 1
on the target boundary and φ = 0 at inﬁnity, so that
φ is equivalent to the electrostatic potential generated
by a perfectly conducting object Ωheld at unit potential. Moreover, the steady–state reaction rate k = 4πDQ
where Q is the total charge on the surface of the conductor, which for a unit potential is equal to the capacitance,
Q = C. Thus, determining the reaction rate for a general 3D target is equivalent to ﬁnding the capacitance of
a perfect conductor with the same shape; see also .
Although it is possible to calculate the exact time–
dependent ﬂux for d ≤2, a much simpler method is to use
a quasi–static approximation . Consider,
for example a target disk of radius r = a. The region exterior to the disk is divided into a near zone that extends
a distance
Dt from the surface and a complementary
far zone. In the near zone, it is assumed that diﬀusing
particles have suﬃcient time to explore the domain before
being absorbed by the target so that the concentration in
the near zone can be treated as almost steady or quasi–
static. Conversely, it is assumed that the probability of a
particle being absorbed by the target is negligible in the
far zone, since a particle is unlikely to diﬀuse more than
a distance
Dt over a time interval of length t. Thus,
c(r) ≈1 for r >
Dt + a. The near zone concentration
is taken to be a radially symmetric solution of Laplace’s
equation, which for d = 2 is c(r) = A + B log r. Matching the solution to the boundary conditions c(a) = 0 and
Dt) = 1 then gives considered the case where molecules in
proximity to each other do not react immediately. Thus,
the target is assumed to act like an imperfect absorber,
which can be taken into account by modifying the boundary condition at the surface of the (spherical) target:
4πa2D ∂c(r, t)
= k0c(a, t),
where k0 is the intrinsic reaction rate. Incorporating this
modiﬁed boundary condition into Smoluchowki’s theory
leads to a new expression for the diﬀusion–controlled reaction rate of the form
Another important extension was developed by Keizer
 , who used the theory of nonequilibrium pair correlation functions to include many body eﬀects that become important at higher concentrations of reactants.
So far it has been assumed that the diﬀusion of the
background reactants occurs in an unbounded domain
with a uniform concentration at inﬁnity. The analysis
becomes considerably more involved when the boundary
of the domain is taken into account. Recently, however,
Straube et al. have shown how methods similar to
the analysis of the narrow escape problem, Sec. II.C, can
be used to determine the reaction rate in the asymptotic
limit that the target is much smaller than the domain
Here we sketch the basic steps of their analysis.
Consider a target disk Ωε of radius ε ≪1 and center x0
that is located in the interior of a rectangular domain
Ωof size O(1). The calculation of the reaction rate can
be formulated in terms of the solution to the following
diﬀusion equation:
= D∇2c(x, t),
with ∂nc = 0 on the exterior boundary ∂Ωand c = 0 on
the interior boundary ∂Ωε. The initial condition is taken
to be c(x, 0) = 1. Following Straube et al. , we seek
a solution in the form of an eigenfunction expansion,
cjφj(x)e−λjDt
where the eigenfunctions φj(x) satisfy the Helmholtz
∇2φj + λjφj = 0,
subject to the same boundary conditions as c(r, t). The
eigenfunctions are orthogonalized as
φi(x)φj(x)dx = δi,j.
The initial condition then implies that
Taking the limit ε →0 results in an eigenvalue problem
in a rectangular domain without a hole. It is well known
that the eigenvalues are ordered as λ0 = 0 < λ1 ≤λ2 ≤
. . .. This ordering will persist when 0 < ε ≪1 so that
in the long–time limit, the solution will be dominated by
the eigenmode with the smallest eigenvalue:
c(x, t) ∼c0φ0(x)e−λ0t.
It can also be shown that the principal eigenvalue has an
inﬁnite logarithmic expansion :
λ0 = νΛ1 + ν2Λ2 + . . . ,
Moreover, the eigenfunction φ0(x) will develop a boundary layer in a neighborhood of the target, where it
changes rapidly from zero on the boundary ∂Ωε to a
value of O(1) away from the target. This suggests dividing the domain into inner/outer regions, and using
matched asymptotics along analogous lines to the study
of the narrow escape problem.
Therefore, introduce stretched coordinates y = (x −
x0)/ε and write the inner solution of the principal eigenfunction as ϕ(y) = φ0(εy). Using the logarithmic expansion of λ0 shows that the righthand side of the rescaled
eigenvalue equation is of O(ε2ν2) = o(νk) for all k ≥0.
Thus to logarithmic accuracy, it follows that ∇2ϕ(y) = 0
on R2\S1 where S1 is the unit circle centered about the
origin, and ϕ = 0 on |y| = 1. Hence, ϕ(y) = A log |y|
and the inner solution has the far–ﬁeld behavior
ϕ ∼A log(|x −x0|/ε).
The outer solution satisﬁes the equation
∇2φ0 + λ0φ0 = 0,
x ∈Ω\{x0},
φ0 ∼A log(|x −x0|/ε),
0(x)dx = 1.
Following the analysis in Sec. II.C, the outer problem
can be solved in terms of the Neumann Green’s function
for the Helmholtz equation:
∇2G(x, x0; λ0) + λ0G(x, x0; λ0) = −δ(x −x0),
∂nG(x, x0; λ0) = 0,
G(x, x0; λ0) ∼−1
2π log |x −x0| + R(x0, x0; λ0), x →x0.
φ0(x) = −2πAG(x, x0; λ0).
Matching the near–ﬁeld behavior of the outer solution
with the far–ﬁeld behavior of the inner solution then
yields a transcendental equation for the principal eigenvalue:
R(x0, x0; λ0) = −1
Finally, the normalization condition for φ0 determines
the amplitude A according to
G(x, x0; λ0)2dx = 1.
The Helmholtz Green’s function and its regular part
can be calculated along similar lines to Sec. II.C. Here
it is suﬃcient to note that, since 0 < λ0 ≪1 for a small
target, the Green’s function has the expansion
G(x, x0; λ0) = −
λ0|Ω0|+G1(x, x0)+λ0G2(x, x0)+O(λ2
ΩGj(x, x0)dx = 0. The regular part R(x, x0; λ0)
can be expanded in an identical fashion. Hence, neglecting terms of O(λ0) and higher, substitute R(x, x0; λ0) ≈
−(λ0|Ω0|)−1 + R1(x, x0) into the transcendental Eq.
(2.79). This yields a linear equation for λ0 such that
1 + 2πνR1(x0, x0).
Substituting the expansion (2.81) into Eq. (2.80) shows
that to leading order in λ0,
Moreover, using Eqs. (2.78), (2.80) and
ΩGj(x)dx = 0,
the coeﬃcient c0 is
G(x, x0; λ0)dx = 2πA
We now have all the components necessary to determine
the time–dependent reaction rate k(t). That is, using the
inner solution ϕ(x) = A log(r/ε), r = |x −x0|, we combine Eqs. (2.73), (2.83) and (2.84) to obtain the result
 
J(t) = Dc0e−λ0t
= 2πDc0e−λ0tA ≈c0|Ω0|λ0e−λ0Dt.
Note that Straube et al. applied the above analysis
to the particular problem of protein receptor clustering
on a cylindrical surface membrane. The only modiﬁcation to the rectangular domain Ωis that the left and right
side boundaries are identiﬁed by replacing the reﬂecting
boundary conditions with periodic boundary conditions.
This generates the topology of a cylinder and modiﬁes
the form of the Helmholtz Green’s function accordingly.
E. Diﬀusive search for a protein-DNA binding site
A wide range of cellular processes are initiated by a
single protein binding a speciﬁc target sequence of base
pairs (target site) on a long DNA molecule.
The precise mechanism whereby a protein ﬁnds its DNA binding
site remains unclear. However, it has been observed experimentally that reactions occur at very high rates, of
around k = 1010M −1s−1 . This is around 100 times faster than the rate
based on the Smoluchowski theory of diﬀusion–limited reaction rates (Sec. II.D), and 1000 times higher than most
known protein-protein association rates.
 ). This apparent discrepancy
in reaction rates, suggests that some form of facilitated
diﬀusion occurs. The best known theoretical model of
facilitated diﬀusion for proteins searching for DNA targets was originally developed by Berg, Winter and von
Hippel (BHW) , and subsequently extended by
a number of groups . The basic idea of the BHW model is to assume that the protein randomly switches between two distinct phases of
motion, 3D diﬀusion in solution and 1D diﬀusion along
DNA (sliding), see Fig. 2. Such a mechanism is one example of a random intermittent search process, see Sec.
IVB. The BHW model assumes that there are no correlations between the two transport phases, so that the main
factor in speeding up the search is an eﬀective reduction
in the dimensionality of the protein motion. However,
as recently reviewed by Kolomeisky , there are a
number of discrepancies between the BHW model and
experimental data, which has led to several alternative
theoretical approaches to facilitated diﬀusion. We ﬁrst
review the BHW model and then brieﬂy discuss these
alternative models.
A simple method for estimating the eﬀective reaction
rate of facilitated diﬀusion in the BHW model is as follows . Consider a single protein searching for a single binding site
on a long DNA strand of N base pairs, each of which has
length b. Suppose that on a given search, there are R
rounds labeled i = 1, . . . , R. In the ith round the protein spends a time T3,i diﬀusing in the cytosol followed
by a period T1,i sliding along the DNA. The total search
time is thus T = PR
i=1(T3,i + T1,i), and the mean search
time is τ = r(τ3 + τ1). Here r is the mean number of
rounds and τ3, τ1 are the mean durations of each phase
of 3D and 1D diﬀusion. Let n denote the mean number
of sites scanned during each sliding phase with n ≪N.
If the binding site of DNA following a 3D diﬀusion phase
is distributed uniformly along the DNA, then the probprotein
3D diffusion
FIG. 2 (a) Mechanism of facilitated diﬀusion involving alternating phases of 3D diﬀusion and 1 D diﬀusion (sliding along
the DNA). (b) 1D representation of facilitated diﬀusion.
ability of ﬁnding the speciﬁc promoter site is p = n/N.
It follows that the probability of ﬁnding the site after R
rounds is (1−p)R−1p. Hence, the mean number of rounds
is r = 1/p = N/n. Assuming that 1D sliding occurs via
normal diﬀusion, then nb = 2√D1τ1 where D1 is the 1D
diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and we have 
n (τ1 + τ3),
Since τ3 depends primarily on the cellular environment
and is thus unlikely to vary signiﬁcantly between proteins, it is reasonable to minimize the mean search
time with respect to τ1 while τ3 is kept ﬁxed. Setting
dτ/dτ1 = 0 implies that the optimal search time occurs
when τ1 = τ3 with τopt = 2Nτ3/n = Nb
τ3/D1. Comparing with the expected search time for pure 3D diﬀusion by setting τ1 = 0, n = 1 gives τ3D = Nτ3. Thus
facilitated diﬀusion is faster by a factor n/2. Further insights to facilitated diﬀusion may be obtained by using
the Smoluchowski formula for the rate at which a diﬀusing protein can ﬁnd any one of N binding sites of size N,
namely, τ −1
= 4πD3Nb. Using this to eliminate N shows
that the eﬀective reaction rate of facilitated diﬀusion is
 
k ≡τ −1 = 4πD3
This equation identiﬁes two competing mechanisms in
facilitated diﬀusion. First, sliding diﬀusion eﬀectively increases the reaction cross-section from 1 to n base pairs,
thus accelerating the search process compared to standard Smoluchowski theory.
This is also known as the
antenna eﬀect . However, the search is
also slowed down by a factor τ3/(τ1 + τ3), which is the
fraction of the time the protein spends in solution. That
is, a certain amount of time is lost by binding to nonspeciﬁc sites that are far from the target.
A more complicated analysis is needed in order to
take into account the eﬀects of boundaries, for example.
Here we review the particular formulation of Coppey et.
al., which generalizes the original analysis of Berg et al.
 . Suppose that DNA is treated as a ﬁnite track of
length l = L + M with reﬂecting boundaries at x = −M
and x = +L and a point–like target at x = 0, see Fig. 2.
Rather than modeling 3D diﬀusion explicitly, each time
the protein disassociates from DNA it simply rebinds at
a random site at a time t later that is generated from an
exponential waiting time density. This is based on the
assumption that 3D excursions are uncorrelated in space.
It might be expected that excursions would be correlated
due to the geometric conﬁguration of DNA. However, in
solution DNA is a random coil so that even short 3D trips
can generate long displacements relative to the linear position of the protein along the DNA strand, resulting in
decorrelation of excursions. If P3(t) denotes the probability density that the protein in solution at time t = 0
binds to the DNA at time t at a random position, then
P3(t) = λ3e−λ3t,
where τ3 = 1/λ3 is again the mean time spent in solution. Next, let P1(t, x) be the conditional probability
density that the protein disassociates from the DNA at
time t without ﬁnding the target, given that it is at linear
position x along the DNA at time t = 0:
P1(x, t) = λ1e−λ1tP(x, t)
where τ1 = 1/λ1 is the mean time of each sliding phase,
and P(t, x) is the conditional probability density that the
protein starting at x has not met the target at time t.
Finally, let Q1(x, t) be the conditional probability density
that the protein starting at x ﬁnds the target at time t:
Q1(x, t) = e−λ1tf(x, t),
where f(x, t) = −dP(x, t)/dt is the FPT density associated with diﬀusion along the DNA strand.
f(x, t)dt is the probability that starting at x at t = 0,
the protein ﬁnds the target during a single phase of sliding diﬀusion in the time interval [t, t+dt]. (Protein-DNA
binding is assumed to be diﬀusion-limited so that as soon
as the protein reaches the target site it reacts).
Suppose that in a given trial, a protein starting at x
at time t = 0 executes n−1 excursions before ﬁnding the
target with t1, . . . , tn the residence times on DNA and
τ1, . . . , τn−1 the excursion times. The probability density
for such a sequence of events with t = Pn
i=1 ti +Pn−1
Pn(x, {ti, τi}) = Q1(tn)P3(τn−1)P1(tn−1) . . .
× P1(t2)P3(τ1)P1(x, t1),
where P1(t)
⟨P1(x, t)⟩, Q1(t)
⟨Q1(x, t)⟩and
⟨g(x, t)⟩≡(L+M)−1 R L
−M g(x, t)dx for an arbitrary function g. In order to determine the FPT density F(x, t) for
ﬁnding the target, it is necessary to sum over all possible numbers of excursions and intervals of time, given
the constraint t = Pn
i=1 ti + Pn−1
Thus, setting
F(t) = ⟨F(x, t)⟩, one ﬁnds that
dt1 . . . dtndτ1 . . . dτn
transforming
 
eF(s) = ef(λ1 +s)
1 −ef(λ1 + s)
(1 + s/λ1)(1 + s/λ3)
with ef(s) =
e−st⟨f(x, t)⟩dt. Given eF(s), the MFPT
to ﬁnd the target (averaged over the starting position x)
tF(t)dt = −d eF(s)
which can be evaluated to give
τ = 1 −ef(λ1)
All that remains is to determine ef(x, s) averaged with
respect to x. If x < 0 (x > 0), then one simply needs to
determine the FPT density for a 1D Brownian particle
on the interval [−M, 0] ([0, L]) with a reﬂecting boundary at x = −M (x = L) and an absorbing boundary at
x = 0. Recall from Sec. (II.B) that f(x, t) satisﬁes the
backwards FP equation
with f(x, 0) = 0, f(0, t) = δ(t) and ∂xf(L, t) = 0 or
∂xf(−M, t) = 0. Taking Laplace transforms,
s ef(x, s) = D1
∂2 ef(x, s)
with ef(0, s) = 1, ∂x ef(L, s) = 0 or ∂x ef(−M, s) = 0. The
general solution is ef(x, s) = Ae−√
s/D1x + Be−√
with the coeﬃcients A, B determined by the boundary
conditions. Solving for A, B separately when x < 0 and
x > 0 and averaging with respect to x ﬁnally gives
λ1/D1) + tanh(M
Thus, setting τi = 1/λi, i = 1, 3,
(L + M)/√τ1D1
tanh(L/√τ1D1) + tanh(M/√τ1D1) −1
(τ1 + τ3) ,
which recovers the original result of Berg et al. . It
also recovers Eq. (2.86) when L/√τ1D1, M/√τ1D1 ≫1.
There have been a number of extensions of the BHW
model that incorporate various biophysical eﬀects. For
example, sequence-dependent protein-DNA interactions
generate a rugged energy landscape during sliding motion of the protein - see also Sec. III.C. This
observation then leads to an interesting speed-stability
paradox . On
the one hand, fast 1D search requires that the variance σ2
of the protein-DNA binding energy be suﬃciently small,
that is, σ ∼kBT, whereas stability of the protein at
the DNA target site requires σ ∼5kBT. One suggested
resolution of this paradox is to assume that a protein-
DNA complex has two conformational states: a recognition state with large σ and a search state with small
σ . If the
transitions between the states are suﬃciently fast then
target stability and fast search can be reconciled. ). Other eﬀects include changes in the conformational state of DNA and the possibility of correlated association/disassociation of the protein , and molecular crowding along
DNA or within the cytoplasm . Molecular crowding will be considered in
Sec. IIIB.
The BHW model and its extensions provide a plausible
mechanism for facilitated diﬀusion that has some support
from experimental studies, which demonstrate that proteins do indeed slide along DNA . In particular, recent advances
in single–molecule spectroscopy means that the motion
of ﬂourescently labeled proteins along DNA chains can
be quantiﬁed with high precision, although it should be
noted that most of these studies have been performed
in vitro. A quantitative comparison of the BHW model
with experimental data leads to a number of discrepancies, however. For example, it is usually assumed that
D1 ≈D3 in order to obtain a suﬃcient level of facilitation. On the other hand, single–molecule measurements
indicate that D1 ≪D3 . Such experiments have also shown that τ1 ≫τ3,
which is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the optimal condition
τ1 = τ3. Hence the intermittent search process could actually result in a slowing down compared to pure 3D diffusion . The RHW model also exhibits
unphysical behavior in certain limits. These issues have
motivated a number of alternative models of facilitated
diﬀusion, as recently highlighted by Kolomeisky .
Electrostatic interactions.
One alternative hypothesis is
that the observed fast association rates are due to electrostatic interactions between oppositely charged molecules,
and thus do not violate the 3D diﬀusion limit . This is motivated by the theoretical result that the
maximal association rate in Smoluchowski theory when
there are long-range interactions between the reacting
molecules is
k = 4πDa/β,
eU(r)/kBT dr
where U(r) is the interaction potential. The standard result is recovered when U(r) = 0 for r > a, see Eq. (2.63).
It follows that long–range attractive interactions can signiﬁcantly increase diﬀusion–limited reaction rates. It has
been further argued that in vitro experiments tend to be
performed at low salt concentrations so that the eﬀects
of screening could be small.
However, experimentallybased estimates of the Debye length, which speciﬁes the
size of the region where electrostatic forces are important, indicate that it is comparable to the size of the
target sequence. Hence, electrostatic forces are unlikely
to account for facilitated diﬀusion.
Colocalization
Another proposed mechanism is based on
the observation that in bacteria, genes responsible for
producing speciﬁc proteins are located close to the binding sites of these proteins. This colocalization of proteins
and binding sites could signiﬁcantly speed up the search
process by requiring only a small number of alternating
3D and 1D phases . However, such
a mechanism might not be eﬀective in eukaryote cells,
where transcription and translation tend to be spatially
and temporally well separated. Moreover, colocalization
breaks down in cases where proteins have multiple targets on DNA.
Correlations.
Yet another theoretical mechanism involves taking into account correlations between 1D sliding and 3D bulk diﬀusion. These correlations reﬂect the
fact that attractive interactions between a protein and
non-speciﬁc binding sites means that there is a tendency
for a protein to return back to a neighborhood of the
DNA site from which it recently disassociated .
Although such interactions
tend to slow down proteins moving along DNA, they also
increase the local concentration of proteins absorbed to
DNA. This suggests that facilitated diﬀusion can occur
at intermediate levels of protein concentration and intermediate ranges of protein–DNA interactions.
III. DIFFUSIVE TRANSPORT: EFFECTS OF
MOLECULAR CROWDING, TRAPS AND
CONFINEMENT
A. Anomalous diﬀusion
In normal (unobstructed) diﬀusion in d dimensions, the
mean-square displacement (MSD) of a Brownian particle
is proportional to time, ⟨R2⟩= 2dDt, which is a consequence of the central limit theorem.
A general signature of anomalous diﬀusion is the power law behavior
 
⟨R2⟩= 2dDtα,
corresponding to either subdiﬀusion (α < 1) or superdiffusion (α > 1). Due to recent advances in single-particle
tracking methods, subdiﬀusive behavior has been observed for a variety of biomolecules and tracers within
living cells. Examples include messenger RNA molecules
 and chromosomal loci moving within the cytoplasm of bacteria,
lipid granule motion in yeast cells ,
viruses , telemores in cell nuclei , and protein channels moving
within the plasma membrane .
There are currently three subcellular mechansims
thought to generate subdiﬀusive motion of particles in
cells, each with its own distinct type of physical model
 . The ﬁrst mechanism, which is typically modeled using the continuous time random walk
(CTRW) , involves transient immobilization or trapping, see Sec.
IIIC. That is, if a diﬀusing particle encounters a binding
site then it will pause for a while before disassociating
and diﬀusing away. Multiple binding events with a range
of rate constants can generate long tails in the waiting
time distribution leading to subdiﬀusive behavior . In addition to having a heavy-tailed
waiting time distribution, the CTRW is weakly nonergodic; the temporal average of a long particle trajectory
diﬀers from the ensemble average over many diﬀusing
particles . The second mechanism
for subdiﬀusion in cells is obstructed diﬀusion (OD) due
to molecular crowding or cytoskeletal networks that impose obstacles around which diﬀusing molecules have to
navigate, see Sec.
IIIB. If the concentration of obstacles is suﬃciently high, then subdiﬀusive behavior occurs, in which the domain of free diﬀusion develops a
fractal-like structure . Diﬀusion on a fractal is a stationary process and is thus ergodic. The ﬁnal
mechanism involves the viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm due to the combined eﬀects of macromolecular
crowding and the presence of elastic elements such as nucleic acids and cytoskeletal ﬁlaments. As a particle moves
through the cytoplasm, the latter “pushes back”, thus
generating long-time correlations in the particle’s trajectory. This memory eﬀect leads to subdiﬀusive behavior
that can be modeled in terms of fractional Brownian motion (FBM) or the fractional Langevin equation (FLE)
 . In contrast to CTRW and diﬀusion on fractals, the probability density for unconﬁned subdiﬀusion in FBM/FLE is a
Gaussian (with a time–dependent diﬀusivity). Moreover,
FBM/FLE are ergodic systems, although under conﬁnement time-averaged quantities behave diﬀerently from
their ensemble-averaged counterparts . However, other studies suggest that both ergodic
(OD or FBM/FLE) and nonergodic processes (CTRW)
can coexist .
In this review we are going to focus on biophysical
models of the cellular environment and how it eﬀects diffusive transport via molecular crowding, trapping and
conﬁnement, rather than on generic models of anomalous
transport such as CTRW and FBM/FLE. The reasons
are two-fold: (i) there are already a number of comprehensive reviews of such models , and (ii) it is still unclear to what extent intracellular diﬀusion is anomalous
in the long–time limit rather than just at intermediate
times. This motivates studying diﬀusion in the presence
of obstacles and transient traps whereby normal diﬀusion is recovered asymptotically.
However, before proceeding, we brieﬂy sketch the basic structure of CTRW
and FBM/FLE models.
The CTRW considers a particle performing random
jumps whose step length is generated by a probability density with ﬁnite second moments.
However, the
waiting times between jumps are assumed to be distributed according to a power law (rather than an exponential waiting time density characteristic of Markovian random walks).
The resulting heavy tailed waiting times generate subdiﬀusive behavior. Consider, for
example, a 1D CTRW generated by a sequence of independent identically distributed (iid) positive random
waiting times T1, T2, . . . , Tn, each having the same probability density function φ(t), and a corresponding sequence of (iid) random jumps X1, X2, . . . ∈R, each having the same probability density w(x). Setting t0 = 0
and tn = T1 + T2 + . . . + Tm for positive integers n,
the random walker makes a jump of length Xn at time
tn. Hence, its position is x0 = 0 for 0 ≤t < T1 and
xn = X1 + X2 + . . . + Xn for tn ≤t < tn+1. It follows
that the probability density p(x, t) that the particle is at
position x at time t satisﬁes the integral equation
p(x, t) = δ(x)Ψ(t)
w(x −x′)p(x′, t′)dx′
where Ψ(t) =
φ(t′)dt′ is the survival probability that
at time t the particle has not yet moved from its initial
position at x = 0. In the special case of an exponential
waiting time density φ(t) = τ −1e−t/τ, we can diﬀerentiate both sides of Eq. (3.2) to obtain
τ ∂p(x, t)
−p(x, t′) +
w(x −x′)p(x′, t′)dx′
Setting w(x) = 0.5δ(x −δx) + 0.5δ(x + δx) then yields
a spatially discrete version of the diﬀusion equation. On
the other hand, anomalous subdiﬀusion occurs if φ(t) ∼
t−α−1 with 0 < α < 1 .
In order to motivate the FLE, recall that a molecule
moving through a ﬂuid is subject to a frictional force and
a random ﬂuctuating force originating from random collisions between the Brownian molecule and particles of the
surrounding ﬂuid. In the Langevin Eq. (2.9), the random
ﬂuctuations are represented by a zero-mean Gaussian
noise term with a two-point correlation function taken to
be a Dirac function. Moreover, the amplitude-squared of
the noise (diﬀusion coeﬃcient) is related to the friction
coeﬃcient via the Einstein relation, which is an example of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. It has been
suggested that the Langevin equation can be generalized
to the case of diﬀusion in complex heterogeneous media
such as the cytoplasm or plasma membrane by considering a Brownian particle subject to frictional and ﬂuctuating forces with long–time correlations that exhibit
power-law behavior . For example, consider the
following generalized Langevin equation for a Brownian
particle with unit mass moving in a 1D medium :
˙X(t) = V (t),
φ(t −t1)V (t1)dt1 = F(t),
where φ(t) represents a friction memory kernel with
φ(t) = 0 for t < 0. The Gaussian noise term F(t) satisﬁes
⟨F(t)⟩= 0,
⟨F(0)F(t)⟩= C(t).
Following Wang ; Wang and Lung , the correlation function C(t) is governed by a power law,
C(t) = F0(α)t−α,
with 0 < α < 1 for subdiﬀusive behavior and C(−t) =
Using a generalized ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, the functions φ(t), C(t) are related according to
C(t) = kBTφ(t),
We now show how to derive a FP equation for the
generalized Langevin equation following Wang . Since the ﬂuctuating force is described by a Gaussian process then so is the random variable X(t). Let
p(x, t) denote the probability density for X(t) = x and
introduce the characteristic function or Fourier transform
Γ(k, t) ≡⟨eikX(t)⟩=
p(x, t)eikxdx.
It follows that Γ is given by the Gaussian
Γ(k, t) = eikX(t)−k2σ2(t)/2,
X(t) = ⟨X(t)⟩,
σ2(t) = ⟨[X(t) −X(t)]2⟩.
The mean and variance can be determined from Laplace
transforming the generalized Langevin equation (3.3):
X(s) −X(0) = eV (s),
X(s) −V (0) −sX(0) + eφ(s)V (s) = eF(s).
Rearranging (3.10b) gives
X(s) −s−1X(0) −eH(s)V (0) = eH(s) eF(s),
s[s + eφ(s)]
Inverting the equation for e
X(s) thus yields
X(t) −X(0) −V (0)H(t) =
H(t −t1)F(t1)dt1 (3.12)
It immediately follows from equation (3.12) that
X(t) = X(0) + V (0)H(t).
Calculation of the variance is a little more involved.
First, using equations (3.12) and (3.13),
dt2H(t1)H(t2)⟨F(t −t1)F(t −t2)⟩
dt2H(t1)H(t2)C(t1 −t2)
dt2H(t1)H(t2)C(t1 −t2)
dt2H(t1)H(t2)φ(t1 −t2)
The last two lines follow from the fact that C(t) is an
even function and the generalized ﬂuctuation-dissipation
theorem, respectively. The ﬁnal step is to note that
H(t2)φ(t1 −t2)dt2
−→eA(s) = eH(s)eφ(s) = 1
−−−→A(t1) = 1 −dH(t1)
where L denotes the Laplace transform operator. Substituting back into the expression for σ2 gives (Wang,
σ2(t) = kBT
H(τ)dτ −H(t)2
The ﬁnal step in the analysis is to substitute equations
(3.13) and (3.14) into equation (3.8) and to diﬀerentiate
the resulting expression for Γ(k, t) with respect to time
t. This gives
ikV (0)h(t) −k2kBTH(t)(1 −h(t))
where h(t) = dH(t)/dt. Finally, carrying out the inverse
Fourier transform gives the FPE
= −h(t)V (0)∂p(x, t)
+ kBTH(t)(1 −h(t))∂2p(x, t)
For a given choice of correlation function C(t) and the
asymptotic properties of Laplace transforms in the small
s limit, one can determine the large t behavior of the
FP equation. For example, if C(t) = F0(α)t−α, it can be
shown that when t →∞and 0 < α < 1, the FP equation
has the asymptotic form 
= −a1(α)V (0)tα−2V (0)∂p(x, t)
b1(α)kBTtα−1 ∂2p(x, t)
for α–dependent coeﬃcients a1, b1.
Note in particular
that the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is time–dependent and there
is a drift term when V (0) ̸= 0. Both of these reﬂect the
non–Markovian nature of the process. Given the initial
condition p(x, 0) = δ(x), the asymptotic FP equation has
the solution
√4πD0tα exp
−(x + atα−1)2/(4D0tα)
where D0 = b1kBT/α, a = a1V (0)/(α −1). It can also
be shown that the mean-square displacement ⟨[X(t) −
X]2⟩= 2D0tα, thus signifying anomalous subdiﬀusion.
Finally, note that one can construct a FBM model that
exhibits the same Gaussian behavior as the FLE in the
long-time limit . The former considers a particle evolving according to a Langevin equation of the
dt = −kX + ξ(t),
which is driven by fractional Gaussian noise of zero mean
and a slowly decaying, power-law autocorrelation function (t ̸= t′)
⟨ξ(t)ξ(t′)⟩∼α(α −1)K|t −t′|α−2.
In contrast to FLE, this process is driven by external
noise without considering the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. Note that the Gaussian solution of FBM breaks
down in the case of conﬁned motion.
B. Molecular crowding
One of the characteristic features of the interior aqueous environment of cells (cytoplasm) and intracellular
compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria is that they are crowded with macromolecules
and skeletal proteins, which occupy 10%−50% of the volume . Cell membranes are also crowded environments
containing lipids (molecules consisting of nonpolar, hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains that end in a polar hydrophylic head), which are often organized into raft structures, and various mobile and immobile proteins . One consequence of molecular crowding,
which we will not consider further here, is that it can
drastically alter biochemical reactions in cells . That is, volume
or area exclusion eﬀects increase the eﬀective solute concentration, thus increasing the chemical potential of the
Another consequence of molecular crowding is
that it hinders diﬀusion, although there is an ongoing debate regarding to what extent this results in anomalous
diﬀusion rather than a simple reduction in the normal
diﬀusion coeﬃcient .
One of the diﬃculties in experimentally establishing
the existence of anomalous diﬀusion is that the behavior
of ⟨R2⟩can depend on the spatial or temporal scale over
which observations are made. Consider, for example, the
eﬀects of obstacles on protein diﬀusion . The presence of obstacles reduces the space available for diﬀusion, and consequently
decreases the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient. As the volume or area fraction of obstacles φ is increased, there is
a fragmentation of the available space in the sense that
many paths taken by a diﬀusing protein terminate in a
dead end and thus do not contribute to diﬀusive transport. The region of free diﬀusion develops a fractal–like
structure resulting in anomalous diﬀusion at intermediate times, ⟨R2⟩∼tα, α < 1. (For suﬃciently small times
Dt ≪ξ, where ξ is the mean distance between obstacles, so that diﬀusion is normal). However, assuming
that the volume or area fraction is below the percolation
threshold, diﬀusion is expected to be normal on suﬃciently long time-scales, ⟨R2⟩∼t. On the other hand,
above the percolation threshold, proteins are conﬁned
and ⟨R2⟩saturates as t →∞.
The time it takes to
cross over from anomalous to normal diﬀusion increases
with the volume or area fraction φ, and diverges at the
percolation threshold φc where ⟨R2⟩∼tα for all times.
Another diﬃculty in interpreting experimental data is
that there are certain practical limitations of current
methods .
The most eﬀective method for describing membrane diﬀusion is singleparticle tracking (SPT). This involves the selective labeling of proteins or lipids with ﬂuorophores such as quantum dots, green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) or organic
dyes so that continuous high resolution tracking of individual molecules can be carried out.
SPT can yield
nanometer spatial resolution and submillisecond temporal resolution of individual trajectories. However, it is
not currently suitable for measuring diﬀusion in three
dimensions due to the relatively rapid speed of 3D diffusion and the problems of imaging in depth. Hence, in
the case of diﬀusion within the cytosol, it is necessary to
use a method such as ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). Here ﬂuorescently labeled molecules
are introduced into the cell and those in some speciﬁed
volume are bleached by a brief intense laser pulse. The
diﬀusion of unbleached molecules into the bleached volume is then measured. FRAP is limited because it only
provides ensemble averaged information of many ﬂuorescent particles, and it also has a restricted measurement
time, making it diﬃcult to capture long-tail phenomena
expected in anomalous subdiﬀusion.
Recently, homogenization theory has been used to develop a fast numerical scheme to calculate the eﬀects of
excluded volume due to molecular crowding on diﬀusion
in the cytoplasm . The basic idea is
to model the heterogeneous environment in terms of randomly positioned overlapping obstacles. (Note, however,
that this is an oversimpliﬁcation, since single-particle
tracking experiments indicate that the cytoplasm is more
properly treated as a dynamic, viscoelastic environment).
Although obstacles don’t overlap physically, when the ﬁnite size of a diﬀusing molecule (tracer) is taken into
account, the eﬀective volume excluded by an obstacle
increases so that this can result in at least partially overlapping exclusion domains, see Fig. 3(a). In the absence
of any restrictions on the degree of overlap, the fraction
of inaccessible volume is φ = 1 −e−V , where V is the
sum of the individual obstacles per unit volume. A sim-
<R2> [µm2]
FIG. 3 (a) Diﬀusion of a ﬁnite size particle (tracer) between obstacles of volume ν (left) can be modeled as diﬀusion
of a point particle between eﬀective obstacles of volume ν′
(right). Eﬀective obstacles can partially overlap. (b) Sketch
of MSD ⟨R2⟩against time t, illustrating three diﬀerent diffusion regimes: unobstructed diﬀusion (I), anomalous intermediate diﬀusion (II), and normal eﬀective diﬀusion (III). (c)
Illustrative plot of the normalized eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient Deﬀ(φ)/D0 for random spheres. The scale of the curves
in (b,c) are based on the results of Novak et al. .
ple argument for this is to consider
a set of N identical overlapping objects placed in a box
of total volume |Ω|.
Let ν denote the volume of each
obstacle. The probability P(x) that a randomly selected
point x ∈Ωis outside any given obstacle is 1 −ν/|Ω|.
Hence, the probability for that point to be outside all
obstacles is P(x)N = (1 −ν/|Ω|)N. The volume fraction
of accessible space at ﬁxed number density n = N/|Ω| is
N→∞(1 −ν/|Ω|)N = lim
N→∞(1 −νn/N)N = e−nν = e−V
and the result follows. The mean distance between obstacles can then be determined in terms of φ and the
geometry of each obstacle.
As previously discussed, three regimes of diﬀusion are
expected below the percolation threshold, φ < φc, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). For suﬃciently short times there
is unobstructed diﬀusion, for intermediate times there is
anomalous diﬀusion, and for long times there is normal
eﬀective diﬀusion. Novak et al. use homogenization theory to estimate the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient
Deﬀin the last regime. The starting point for their analysis is to consider a periodic arrangement of identical
obstacles in a large rectangular box of volume Ωwith
accessible volume Ω1 and φ = 1 −|Ω1|/|Ω|. The spatial
periods of the arrangement in Cartesian coordinates are
aj, j = 1, 2, 3 such that the ratio
The heterogeneous diﬀusion coeﬃcient is
otherwise.
Inhomogeneous Dirichlet conditions are imposed on the
boundaries of the box in order to maintain a steady–state
diﬀusive ﬂux. In the case of a heterogeneous diﬀusion
coeﬃcient, the ﬂux is determined by the steady–state
diﬀusion equation for the tracer distribution u(x):
∇· (Dϵ(x)∇u(x)) = 0.
The basic idea of the homogenization method is to represent the diﬀusive behavior of a tracer on two diﬀerent spatial scales : one involving a macroscopic slow variable x and
the other a microscopic fast variable y ≡x/ϵ so that u
is periodic with respect to y. Thus, we write
u = u(x, y),
∇u = ∇xu(x, y) + ϵ−1∇yu(x, y).
Also Dϵ(x) ≡D(x/ϵ) = D(y) with D and u having the
same periodicity in y.
A solution to Eq. (3.23) is then constructed in terms
of the asymptotic expansion
u = u0(x, y) + ϵu1(x, y) + ϵ2u2(x, y) + . . . .
Collecting terms of the same order in ϵ then yields a
hierarchy of equations, which up to O(1) are as follows:
∇y · [D(y)∇yu0(x, y)] = 0
∇y · [D(y)∇yu1(x, y)] = −∇y · [D(y)∇xu0(x, y)]
−∇x · [D(y)∇yu0(x, y)]
∇y · [D(y)∇yu2(x, y)] = −∇x · [D(y)∇xu0(x, y)]
−∇y · [D(y)∇xu1(x, y)]
−∇x · [D(y)∇yu1(x, y)] .
Eq. (3.25a) and periodicity with respect to y establishes
that u0(x, y) ≡u0(x), that is, u0 corresponds to an homogenized solution. It follows from Eq. (3.25b) that
∇yD(y) · ∇xu0(x) + ∇y · [D(y)∇yu1(x, y)] = 0,
which has the solution
u1(x, y) =
with wi(y) a periodic function satisfying
D(y)∂wi(y)
Finally, averaging both sides of Eq. (3.25c) with respect
to y over a unit volume |ω0|/ϵ3 of the periodic structure,
using the divergence theorem, and expressing u1 in terms
of u0 yields the homogenized diﬀusion equation
with the anisotropic diﬀusion tensor
eDeﬀ,ij = ϵ3
D(y)δi,j + D(y)∂wi(y)
Finally, rewriting the diﬀusion tensor in a more symmetric form using Eq. (3.27) and integration by parts gives
 
eDeﬀ,ij = D0
δi,k + ∂bwi(x)
δj,k + ∂bwj(x)
where ω1 is the accessible region of the fundamental domain ω0. The function w(x) has been rescaled according
to bw(x) = ϵw(x/ϵ) so that
Dϵ(x)∂bwi(x)
over a unit cell with periodic boundary conditions. Note
that the concentration u0(x) is only deﬁned in free
space so that the macroscopic concentration is actually
u(x) = (1 −φ)u0(x) and the macroscopic diﬀusion tensor is Deﬀ,ij = eDeﬀ,ij/(1 −φ). In the case of isotropic
periodic structures Deﬀ,ij = Deﬀδi,j.
Novak et al. numerically extended the homogenization method to a random arrangement of obstacles
by approximating the disordered medium with a periodic
one, in which the unit cell consists of N randomly placed
obstacles. N is taken to be suﬃciently large so that for a
given density of obstacles, one obtains a statistically stationary Deﬀ. Comparing the homogenized diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient with that obtained from Monte Carlo simulations,
Novak et. al. showed that the numerical homogenization
method yielded reasonable agreement for N = O(100).
One of the interesting results of their study was that the
variation of Deﬀwith the excluded volume fraction φ can
be approximated by the power law
Deﬀ(φ) = D0
(1 −φ/φc)µ
where the parameters φc, µ depend on the geometry
of the obstacles.
For example, for randomly arranged
spheres, φc ≈0.96 and µ ≈1.5.
A typical plot of
Deﬀ(φ) is shown in Fig.
Previously, the above
power law behavior had been predicted close to the percolation threshold , but
these results suggest it also holds for a wider range of
volume fractions.
C. Diﬀusion–trapping models
In the Smoluchowski theory of reaction kinetics, it is
assumed that when a diﬀusing particle reacts with the
target it disappears, that is, we have the trapping reaction A+B →B where A denotes a diﬀusing particle and
B denotes an immobile trap. However, within the context of intracellular transport, there are many examples
where there is transient trapping of diﬀusing particles,
resulting in anomalous diﬀusion on intermediate timescales and normal diﬀusion on long time-scales. This has
been elucidated by Saxton , who carried out
Monte–Carlo simulations of random walks on a 2D lattice with a ﬁnite hierarchy of binding sites, that is binding sites with a ﬁnite set of energy levels. This means
that there are no traps that have an inﬁnite escape time
so that diﬀusing particles ultimately equilibrate with the
traps and diﬀusion becomes normal. On the other hand,
in the case of inﬁnite hierarchies, arbitrarily deep traps
exist but are very rare, resulting in a nonequilibrium system in which anomalous subdiﬀusion occurs at all times
 . The latter process can
be modeled in terms of a continuous-time random walk,
see Sec. III.A. Here we will consider some examples of
diﬀusive transport in the presence of transient immobile traps.
Note that a related application is calcium
buﬀering, where freely diﬀusing calcium molecules bind
to large proteins in the cytosol that can either be mobile
or immobile.
In particular, mobile buﬀering can lead
to a nonlinear advection-diﬀusion equation that changes
many properties of the basic diﬀusion model, as detailed
in Keener and Sneyd .
1. Sequence-dependent protein diﬀusion along DNA
We begin by considering a 1D random walk model
used to study sequence-dependent protein diﬀusion along
DNA . This concerns the important problem of how a site–speciﬁc DNA binding protein
locates its target binding site on DNA. As discussed in
Sec. II.E, such a search process is thought to involve a
combination of mechanisms, including one–dimensional
sliding along the DNA and uncorrelated 3D diﬀusion
 . Barbi et al.
 model the sliding phase of protein movement in
terms of a 1D random walk, in which the step probability to neighboring sites depends on an energy landscape
that reﬂects sequence dependent protein-DNA interactions, see Fig. 4. This is motivated by the idea that the
protein needs to “read” the underlying sequence of base
pairs (bps) as it slides along the DNA in order to be able
to detect the target site. Thus each nonspeciﬁc site on
DNA acts as a potential trap for the sliding protein.
The sequence of the target site usually consists of a
few (r) consecutive bps, and sequence recognition is of-
target sequence
FIG. 4 Schematic illustration of Barbi et al. random walk model of sequence-dependent protein diﬀusion
along DNA. Each lattice site corresponds to a base pair with
four binding sites that can potentially make hydrogen bonds
with the diﬀusing protein: acceptor sites (black dots), donor
sites (gray dots) and missing sites (white dots). In this example, the protein interacts with a base pair sequence of length
r = 2. The energy of protein-DNA interactions determines
the transition rates to nearest neighbor lattice sites.
ten mediated by hydrogen bonds to a set of four speciﬁc
binding sites on each base pair. Some binding sites form a
hydrogen bond as an acceptor, some as a donor and some
do not to form a bond. Barbi et. al. assume that at each
site n of DNA, the protein attempts to form hydrogen
bonds with the local sequence of r base pairs. Hence,
each potential binding site n is represented as a sequence
of r-vectors {bn, bn+1, . . . , bn+r−1}, one for each bp in
the sequence, according to the rule
 (1, −1, 1, 0)T for AT
(0, 1, −1, 1)T for TA
(1, 1, −1, 0)T for GC (0, −1, 1, 1)T for CG ,
where +1, −1, 0 denote, respectively, an acceptor, a
donor and a missing hydrogen bond on a given bp. The
protein is then represented by a so–called (r×4) recognition matrix R describing the pattern of hydrogen bonds
formed by the protein and DNA at the target site where
there is optimal matching. The protein-DNA interaction
energy is then deﬁned by counting the matching and unmatching bonds between the recognition matrix and the
DNA sequence at site n:
E(n) = −ϵTr[R · B],
where B is the matrix whose r columns are given by
the vectors {bn, bn+1, . . . , bn+r−1}, and ϵ denotes each
hydrogen bond energy.
Given the above energy landscape, Barbi et. al. model
the dynamics of protein sliding motion along DNA as a
1D random walk, in which the protein is represented as
a particle hopping to its nearest neighboring lattice sites
with rates
2τ e−∆En→n′/kBT ,
n′ = n ± 1,
where ∆En→n′ is the eﬀective energy barrier between
neighboring sites, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is
the temperature. Various models can be considered relating the barrier energy to the site-dependent energy E(n)
 . The simplest is to take ∆En→n′ =
max[E(n′)−E(n), 0]. Monte Carlo simulations may then
be used to study the dynamics of the resulting random
walk with transient traps . In the
large time limit, a population of non-interacting random
walkers will reach a stationary Boltzmann distribution of
the form ρ(n) ∼e−E(n)/kBT and the associated dynamics
will exhibit normal diﬀusion. However, for large enough
values of ϵ/kBT, some sites along the DNA could trap
a protein for signiﬁcant times, suggesting that anomalous behavior could be observed at intermediate times.
This is indeed found to be the case. Deﬁning the MSD
according to ⟨∆n2⟩= N −1 PN
i=1(ni(t) −ni(0))2 where
N is the number of proteins in the population, it was
found numerically that ⟨∆n2⟩∼tα, α < 1 at intermediate times, with a crossover to normal diﬀusion (α = 1) at
large times. Moreover, using experimentally based model
parameters, Barbi et. al. showed that the crossover time
was suﬃciently large that anomalous diﬀusion occurred
on time-scales comparable to the typical sliding phase of
target search . This suggests that
anomalous diﬀusion is likely to dominate.
2. Diﬀusion along spiny dendrites
Another recent example of anomalous diﬀusion in the
presence of transient traps has been considered by Santamaria et al. . These authors used a combination
of experimental and computational modeling to study
how the presence of dendritic spines aﬀects the 3D diffusion of signaling molecules along the dendrites of neurons. Neurons are amongst the largest and most complex
cells in biology. Their intricate geometry presents many
challenges for cell function, in particular with regards to
the eﬃcient delivery of newly synthesized proteins from
the cell body or soma to distant locations on the axon
or dendrites. The axon contains ion channels for action
potential propagation and presynaptic active zones for
neurotransmitter release, whereas each dendrite contains
postsynaptic domains (or densities) where receptors that
bind neurotransmitter tend to cluster, see Fig.
most excitatory synapses in the brain, the postsynaptic
density (PSD) is located within a dendritic spine, which
is a small, sub-micrometer membranous extrusion that
protrudes from a dendrite , see
Fig. 6. Typically spines have a bulbous head that is connected to the parent dendrite through a thin spine neck,
and there can exist thousands of spines distributed along
a single dendrite. It is widely thought that spines act to
compartmentalize chemical signals generated by synaptic activity, thus impeding their diﬀusion into dendrites
 . Conversely, in
the case of signaling molecules diﬀusing along the dendrite, the spines act as transient traps as illustrated in
Fig. 7(a). Following along similar arguments to the case
of diﬀusion in the presence of obstacles, normal diﬀusion
is expected at short and long times and anomalous subdiﬀusion at intermediate times. Anomalous subdiﬀusion
was indeed observed by Santamaria et al. , such
that the mean square displacement ⟨x2(t)⟩∼D0t2/β at
intermediate times with β > 2 and D0 the free diﬀusion
coeﬃcient.
As might be expected, β increases (slower
diﬀusion) with increasing spine density. β also increases
when the volume of the spine head is increased relative
to the spine neck, reﬂecting the fact there is an enhanced
bottleneck. Note that anomalous diﬀusion can occur at
all times if the reactions within each spine are taken to
have a non-exponential waiting time density , see also III.A.
A related problem is the diﬀusive transport of neurotransmitter protein receptors within the plasma membrane of a dendrite, with each spine acting as a transient
trap that localizes the receptors at a synapse. The madendrite
FIG. 5 Basic structure of a neuron. [Inset shows a synaptic
connection of strength wij from an upstream or presynaptic
neuron labeled j and a downstream or postsynaptic neuron
labeled i]. Neurons in the brain communicate with each other
by transmitting electrical spikes (action potentials). An action potential (AP) propagates along the axon of a neuron
until it reaches a terminal that forms the upstream or presynaptic component of the synaptic connection to a downstream
or postsynaptic neuron. The arrival of the action potential induces the release of chemical transmitters into the synapse.
These subsequently bind to protein receptors in the postsynaptic membrane resulting in the opening of various ion channels. This generates a synaptic current that ﬂows along the
dendritic tree of the postsynaptic neuron and combines with
currents from other activated synapses. If the total synaptic
current u(t) forces the membrane potential V (t) at a certain
location within the cell body to cross some threshold, then the
postsynaptic neuron ﬁres an action potential and the process
continues. One can thus view the brain as a vast collection
of synaptically–coupled networks of spiking neurons. Moreover, the strength of synaptic connections within and between
networks are modiﬁable by experience (synaptic plasticity).
FIG. 6 An example of a piece of spine studded dendritic tissue
(from rat hippocampal region CA1 stratum radiatum). The
dendrite on the right-hand side is ∼5µm in length. Taken
with permission from SynapseWeb, Kristen M. Harris, PI,
 
jority of fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system is mediated by AMPA (α-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid) receptors,
dendritic spines
degradation
AMPA receptor
scaffolding protein
FIG. 7 (a) Schematic illustration of the anomalous diﬀusion
model of Santamaria et al. , who carried out detailed
3D simulations of diﬀusion in a spiny dendrite treated as
a system of connected cylinders with the following baseline
parameter values: spine neck diameter 0.2µm, neck length
0.6µm, head length and diameter 0.6µm , dendrite diameter 1µm and a spine density of 15 spines/µm. The dendritic
spines act as transient traps for a diﬀusing particle within the
dendrite, which leads to anomalous diﬀusion on intermediate
time scales. (b) Schematic illustration of various pathways of
AMPA receptor traﬃcking at a dendritic spine.
which respond to the neurotransmitter glutamate. There
is now a large body of experimental evidence that the fast
traﬃcking of AMPA receptors into and out of spines is
a major contributor to activity-dependent, long-lasting
changes in synaptic strength . Single–particle tracking experiments
suggest that surface AMPA receptors diﬀuse freely within
the dendritic membrane until they enter a spine, where
they are temporarily conﬁned by the geometry of the
spine and through interactions with scaﬀolding proteins
and cytoskeletal elements . A surface receptor may also be internalized via endocytosis and stored within an intracellular pool, where
it is either recycled to the surface via exocytosis or degraded , see Fig. 7(b). Endocytosis is the
physical process whereby vesicles are formed within the
plasma membrane and then internalized, and exocytosis is the complementary process in which intracellular
vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane and release their
contents . Molecular motors transport internalized vesicles to intracellular compartments that either recycle vesicles to the cell surface
(early endosomes and recycling endosomes) or sort them
for degradation (late endosomes and lyososomes) .
A number of
single spine models have explored the combined eﬀects of
diﬀusion, trapping, receptor clustering and recycling on
the number of synaptic AMPA receptors . In such
models, the synapse is treated as a self-organizing compartment in which the number of AMPA receptors is a
dynamic steady-state that determines the strength of the
synapse; activity-dependent changes in the strength of
the synapse then correspond to shifts in the dynamical
set-point.
When receptor-receptor interactions are included a synapse can exhibit bistability between a nonclustered and clustered state , which can
be understood in terms of a liquid-vapor phase transition
 .
It is also possible to develop a diﬀusion–trapping model
of receptor traﬃcking at multiple spines by considering
a 2D version of the Santamaria et al. model, in
which receptors diﬀuse on the surface of a cylindrical
dendrite containing multiple disk-like traps; when a receptor transiently enters a trap it can undergo various
reactions corresponding to processes within a spine such
as receptor recycling and binding to anchoring proteins.
Using asymptotic methods similar to those of Straube
et al. , see Sec. II.D, one can show that the 2D
model is well approximated by a reduced 1D cable model
in which dendritic spines are treated as point–like sources
or sinks . The advantage of the 1D
model is that the associated 1D Green’s function is non–
singular. Therefore, consider a population of N identical spines distributed along a uniform dendritic cable of
length L and circumference l, with xj, j = 1, . . . , N, the
position (axial coordinate) of the jth spine. Let p(x, t)
denote the probability density (per unit area) that a surface receptor is located within the dendritic membrane
at position x at time t.
Similarly, let Rj(t), Sj(t) denote the probability that the receptor is trapped at the
surface of the jth spine or within an associated intracellular pool, respectively. A simple version of the 1D
diﬀusion–trapping model of AMPA receptor traﬃcking
takes the form 
Ω[pj −Rj/A]δ(x −xj),
= Ω[pj −Rj/A] −kRj + σSj,
dt = −σSj + kRj,
where D0 is the surface diﬀusivity and pj(t) = p(xj, t).
The term Ω(pj −Rj/A) with A the surface area of a
spine represents the probability ﬂux into the jth spine
with Ωan eﬀective hopping rate.
 ). It is assumed that surface receptors within
the jth spine can be recycled with respect to the intracellular pool with k, σ the rates of endocytosis and exocytosis, respectively. Eq. (3.34a) is supplemented by
reﬂecting boundary conditions at the ends of the cable:
D∂xp(0, t) = 0 and D∂xp(L, t) = 0.
The eﬀective diﬀusivity of a receptor in the long-time
limit, which takes into account the eﬀects of trapping
at spines, can be determined by calculating the MFPT
τ(X) to travel a distance X from the soma. Introducing
an absorbing boundary condition at x = X, the function
P(X, t) ≡l
p(x, t)dx +
[Rj(t) + Sj(t)]
is then the probability that t < τ(X); i.e., the probability
that a receptor which was initially at the origin has not
yet reached the point x = X in a time t. Here NX is
the number of spines in the interval [0, X). The MFPT
is then τ(X) =
P(X, t)dt. It follows that the MFPT
can be expressed in terms of Laplace transforms;
ep(x, 0)dx +
eRj(0) + eSj(0)
where ef(z) ≡
e−ztf(t)dt. Laplace transforming Eqs.
(3.34a), (3.34c) and using the initial conditions, gives
Ω[epj −eRj/A]δ(x −xj) −l−1δ(x),
z eRj = Ω[epj −eRj/A] −k eRj + σ eSj,
z eSj = −σ eSj + k eRj,
where epj(z) = ep(xj, z). In the limit z →0, Eqs. (3.37b)–
(3.37c) imply that Aepj(0) = eRj(0) = σ eSj(0)/k, and Eq.
(3.37a) becomes
∂2ep(x, 0)
Imposing the boundary conditions at x = 0, X gives
lep(x, 0) = (X −x)/D0. Combining these results,
where η = A[1+k/σ]/l. The ﬁrst term on the right–hand
side of this equation is the MFPT in the absence of any
spines, whereas the remaining terms take into account
the eﬀects of being temporarily trapped at a spine.
In order to calculate an eﬀective diﬀusivity, consider
the simple example of identical spines distributing uniformly along the cable with spacing d. That is, xj = jd,
j = 1, . . . , N such that Nd = L and NX = X/d for
X ≫d. Eq. (3.39) then becomes (for NX ≫1)
Using the approximation
(X −jd) = NXX −(NX + 1)NXd
ﬁnally gives 
As expected, the presence of traps reduces the eﬀective
diﬀusivity of a receptor. In particular, the diﬀusivity is
reduced by increasing the ratio k/σ of the rates of endocytosis and exocytosis or by increasing the surface area
A of a spine relative to the product of the spine spacing d and circumference of the cable l. Interestingly, D
does not depend on the hopping rate Ω. Taking typical measured values of the diﬀusivity (D = 0.1µm2s−1)
 , the area of a spine
(A = 1µm2), the spacing between spines (d = 1µm) and
the circumference of a dendrite (l = 1µm) , it follows that Deff = 0.5D when k = σ,
whereas D ≪D0 when k ≫σ. There is experimental
evidence that the rates of exo/endocytsosis are activity–
dependent so that the ratio k/σ, and
hence D, may be modiﬁable by experience.
There have been various generalizations of the above
model to include the eﬀects of binding/unbinding to cytoskeletal proteins and
dendritic branching . In the latter case,
homogenization theory can be used to replace the discrete
distribution of spines by a continuum density. One major simpliﬁcation of the diﬀusing–trapping model is that
it neglects the detailed structure of a spine and the associated PSD. A more comprehensive model would need
to take into the complex organization of the PSD, interactions with scaﬀolding proteins, and the geometry of
the spine . Finally, note that the coupling between exocytosis and endocytosis during AMPA receptor recycling is one example of a more general transport mechanism that occurs
in neurons (and other secretory cells) via the so–called
endocytic pathway .
examples include the insertion and removal of membrane
proteins during axonal elongation and guidance , see also Sec. V.A, and the stimulusinduced release of secretory molecules (neurotransmitters) at the presynaptic terminal of a synapse (see Fig.
5). The latter is regulated by the exocytosis of synaptic
vesicles; endocytic processes then have to be coordinated
so that there is an eﬃcient reuptake of vesicles in order
to restore functionality of the synapse.
For a detailed
discussion of whole cell kinetic models of receptor recycling and its role in chemical signaling see Lauﬀenburger
 ; Wiley et al. .
3. Diﬀusion in the plasma membrane
At the simplest level, the plasma membrane can be
treated as a 2D lipid sheet into which proteins are embedded. In the ﬂuid mosaic model of Singer and Nicolson , the membrane lipids are treated as the solvent (water concentrations are very low within the membrane) into which proteins are dissolved. One of the consequences of the ﬂuid mosiac model is that protein clustering, which alters the eﬀective size of a diﬀusing particle, has only a weak eﬀect on diﬀusion in the plasma
membrane. This follows from the hydrodynamic membrane diﬀusion model of Saﬀman and Delbruck , which implies that the diﬀusion coeﬃcient for a cylinder of radius r in a 2D membrane
varies as log r. Although the diﬀusion of lipids appears
to be Brownian in pure lipid bilayers, single-particle
tracking experiments indicate that lipids and proteins
undergo anomalous diﬀusion in the plasma membrane
 
Anchored-protein (picket)
Picket-fence model of membrane diﬀusion.
plasma membrane is parceled up into compartments whereby
both transmembrane proteins and lipids undergo short-term
conﬁned diﬀusion within a compartment and long-term hop
diﬀusion between compartments. This corralling is assumed
to occur by two mechanisms. (a) The membrane-cytoskeleton
(fence) model: transmembrane proteins are conﬁned within
the mesh of the actin-based membrane skeleton.
anchored-protein (picket) model:
transmembrane proteins,
anchored to the actin-based cytoskeleton, eﬀectively act as
rows of pickets along the actin fences.
cobson, 1997).
This has led to a modiﬁcation of the
original ﬂuid mosaic model, whereby lipids and transmembrane proteins undergo conﬁned diﬀusion within,
and hopping between, membrane microdomains or corrals ; the
corraling could be due to “fencing” by the actin cytoskeleton or conﬁnement by anchored protein “pickets”, see
These microdomains could also be associated
with lipid rafts between anchored proteins, and solving the narrow escape problem . ; Kenkre et al. , based on a random
walker moving on a 1D lattice with either periodically or
randomly distributed semipermeable barriers). On the
other hand, the membrane cytoskeleton surrounding a
corral is usually modeled as an eﬀective energy barrier
over which a diﬀusing protein must escape. For exam-
ple, Saxton carried out a computational study of
a particle diﬀusing inside a corral surrounded by a static
energy barrier. It was assumed that when the particle
hit the barrier it had a ﬁxed probability of escape. The
MFPT out of the corral was numerically determined for
a wide range of corral sizes, shapes and escape probabilities. In earlier work, Saxton considered a
static fence model in which a protein could only move
from one corral to another if the particular barrier separating the two corrals was dissociated. In this particular
model, large-scale diﬀusion only occurs if there exists a
percolation network. However, estimates of the density
of the actin cytoskeleton in red blood cells (erythrocytes),
for example, suggests that the fraction of disassociated
cytoskeleton is below the percolation threshold. Hence,
it is necessary to modify the percolation model by considering time-dependent, ﬂuctuating energy barriers.
Consider, for example, the spatially homogeneous
stochastic gating model of Brown et al. ; Leitner
et al. . Let Pn(t) denote the probability that there
are n free particles within the corral at time t. Denote
the time-dependent rates of protein inﬂux and loss by
λ(t) and µ(t), respectively. The probability distribution
is then taken to evolve according to the master equation
= σ(t)Pn−1 + µ(t)(n + 1)Pn+1(t) −[σ(t) + µ(t)n]Pn
with n ≥0 and P−1(t) ≡0. The positive terms on the
right-hand side represent the various transitions into the
state (n) whereas the negative terms represent the various transitions from the state (n). The initial condition
is Pn(0) = δn,n0; i.e., at time t = 0 there are n0 free
particles within the corral. In the model of Brown et al.
 ; Leitner et al. , the escape of a protein from
the corral is controlled by a stochastic gate that can be
in two states, an open state for which µ(t) = µo > 0 and
a closed state for which µ(t) = µc = 0.
The opening
and closing of the stochastic gate is governed by the rate
= −γ−Po + γ+Pc,
= γ−Po −γ+Pc,
where Po(t) (Pc(t)) is the probability that the gate is
open (closed) at time t, and γ± are the transition rates
between the two states. Thus the time-dependent escape
rate µ(t) describes a dichotomous noise process. From
detailed balance, the rate at which receptors enter the
PSD is then taken to be σ(t) = Cµ(t) with C ﬁxed. (At
equilibrium C can be identiﬃed with the mean number
of particles in the corral). One possible interpretation
of the stochastic gate is that it represents the random
opening and closing of a small hole within the boundary of the PSD. This suggests that one could consider
a multi–state version of the stochastic gate, which corresponds to the random opening and closing of multiple
small holes within the PSD boundary. The master Eq.
(3.41) is solved for a single realization of the stochastic
process described by Eq. (3.42). As a consequence, different realizations of µ(t) will yield diﬀerent probability
distributions Pn.
In order to analyze the above model, introduce the
generating function
It follows from the master Eq. (3.41) that G satisﬁes the
ﬁrst-order linear partial diﬀerential equation
∂t + µ(t)(u −1)∂G
∂u = σ(t)(u −1)G
with initial condition G(u, v, 0) = un0. Eq. (3.44) can
be solved using the method of characteristics (Kampen,
G(u, t) = [1 + N(t)(u −1)]n0eC(1−N(t))(u−1),
N(t) = exp
Given G(u, t), the mean and variance of n can be calculated according to the formulae
Eµ(n) = ∂G
, Eµ(n2 −n) = ∂2G
where the subscript µ indicates that these means are calculated with respect to a single realization of the random variable µ only, and may therefore take on diﬀerent
values for diﬀerent realizations of µ. Calculating these
derivatives yields
Eµ(n) = (n0 −C)N(t) + C, Varµ(n) = Eµ(n) −n0N(t)2.
A more useful characterization of the means and variances can be obtained by averaging N(t) with respect to
all possible stochastic realizations of the gate, which is
denoted by ⟨N⟩. This can be performed using a method
originally developed by Kubo in the study of spectral line broadening in a quantum system, and subsequently extended to chemical rate processes with dynamical disorder by Zwanzig . One thus ﬁnds that the
µ-averaged mean and variance are
E(n) = (n0 −C)⟨w⟩+ C,
E(N) = E(n) + L,
Var(n) = E(n) −n0⟨w2⟩+ (n0 −C)2  ⟨w2⟩−⟨w⟩2
jµo + γ−−γ+
for j = 1, 2. Here Πl, l = o, c, are the stationary probability distributions for the dichotomous noise process of
Eq. (3.42):
The averages ⟨wj⟩, j = 1, 2, approach zero as time increases, hence the steady-state means and variances are
E∞(n) = Var∞(n) = C. There have been a number of
extensions of the stochastic gating model. For example,
Bressloﬀand Earnshaw have considered the effects of proteins binding to scaﬀolding proteins within a
corral, whereas Reingruber and Holcman have analyzed the narrow escape problem for a particle that can
switch between diﬀerent conformational states and can
only exit a domain in one of these states.
D. Diﬀusion in conﬁned geometries
Another common form of diﬀusion within cells is the
transport of particles through a narrow biological pore or
channel. Examples include membrane transport through
ion channels and pumps , and the translocation of structured polynucleotides through nanopores
 , which is an important technique for
investigating the translocation dynamics of biologically
relevant macromolecules . In such examples, changes in the motion of
a particle occur mainly in the axial direction along the
channel, whereas local equilibrium is rapidly reached in
the transverse directions. Thus transport is quasi one–
dimensional and the eﬀects of the boundaries of the channel can be incorporated by introducing an entropic barrier into the dynamics of a Brownian particle, leading to
the so–called Fick–Jacobs equation .
Typically a 3D narrow channel is represented by a cylinder that extends axially in the x–direction and has a periodically varying cross section that is rotationally symmetric about the x-axis, see Fig.
Denoting the
space–dependent radius by w(x), the cross-section varies
as A(x) = πw(x)2. In the case of a corresponding 2D
channel, w(x) represents the half–width of the channel.
An extreme version of conﬁned diﬀusion along a channel
is single–ﬁle diﬀusion, in which the channel is so narrow
that particles cannot pass each other. In other words,
the longtitudinal motion of each particle is hindered by
the presence of its neighbors, which act as moving obstacles, see Fig. 9(b). Hence, interparticle interactions
can suppress Brownian motion and lead to subdiﬀusive
behavior .
1. Fick-Jacobs equation
We begin by deriving the Fick-Jacobs equation for a
Brownian particle diﬀusing in a 2D channel as shown in
Fig. 9(a). We follow the particular derivation of Zwanzig
 , see also . It is assumed
that the channel walls at y = ±w(x) conﬁne the motion of the particle but do not exchange energy with it.
Thus the probability ﬂux normal to the boundary is zero.
This condition can be imposed by introducing a conﬁning potential U(x, y) such that U(x, y) = 0 for |y| < w(x)
and U(x, y) = ∞for |y| ≥w(x). Let p(x, y, t) denote
the probability that the particle is located at position
x = (x, y) at time t with periodic boundary conditions in
the longtitudinal direction, p(x + L, y, t) = p(x, y, t). For
a general potential U(x, y), the 2D FP equation takes the
where Fx = −∂xU, Fy = −∂yU. Using the Einstein relations D0γ = kBT = β−1, the FP equation can be rewritten as
∂xe−βU(x,y) ∂
∂xeβU(x,y)p(x, y, t)
∂y e−βU(x,y) ∂
∂y eβU(x,y)p(x, y, t).
In order to reduce to a 1D equation, ﬁrst integrate both
sides of the FP equation with respect to the transverse
coordinate y:
e−βU(x,y) ∂
∂xeβU(x,y)p(x, y, t)dy,
where P(x, t) is the reduced probability density
p(x, y, t)dy.
FIG. 9 Conﬁned diﬀusion in a narrow cylindrical channel with
a periodically modulated boundary w(x) in the axial direction. (a) Small diﬀusing particle. (b) Single-ﬁle diﬀusion.
The major step in the reduction is to assume that the
probability density reaches equilibrium in the transverse
direction. That is, p(x, y, t) is assumed to factorize as
p(x, y, t) ≈P(x, t)ρ(x, y),
where ρ(x, y) is a normalized Boltzmann-Gibbs probability density:
ρ(x, y) = e−βU(x,y)
A0e−βF(x) ,
e−βF(x) = 1
e−βU(x,y)dy,
where A0 = 2
0 w(x)dx and F(x) interpreted as an effective x–dependent free energy. Under this factorization
the averaged FP equation becomes
∂xe−βF(x) ∂
∂xeβF(x)P(x, t).
This holds for a general potential energy function U(x, y)
 .
If U is now taken to be the conﬁning potential of the
channel boundary, then e−βF(x) = 2w(x)/A0 ≡σ(x) and
we obtain the Fick–Jacobs equation
∂xD0σ(x) ∂
The same equation is obtained in 3D with σ(x) =
A(x)/A0 with A(x) = πw(x)2 and A0 the mean crosssectional area. The Fick–Jacobs equation is valid provided that |w′(x)| ≪1. However, it has been shown that
the introduction of an x–dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
into the Fick-Jacobs equation can considerably increase
the accuracy of the reduced FP equation and thus extend the domain of validity :
[1 + w′(x)2]α ,
with α = 1/3, 1/2 for 2D and 3D respectively. Note that
in the absence of any external forces, the eﬀective free
energy F(x) = V(x), where V(x) ≡−kBT log[A(x)/A0]
reﬂects the existence of an entropic barrier to diﬀusion
 . That is, using the standard
thermodynamic deﬁnition of free energy F = E −TS,
where E is internal energy and S is the entropy, it
follows that S(x) ∼log A(x) where A(x) is the crosssectional area of the channel at x.
This is consistent
with the microcanonical ensemble deﬁnition of entropy.
That is, in equilibrium there is a uniform probability
density ρ0 in the channel, so that the equilibrium x–
dependent density Peq(x) = ρ0A(x)/A0 and the number
of microstates available to a diﬀusing particle at location
x is proportional to the area of the channel. It also follow that when there is a constant external force F0 in
the x direction, then Eq. (3.51) still holds except that
F(x) = −F0x −kBT log σ(x).
Given an external force F0 and the periodic entropic
barrier potential V(x), it remains to determine the mean
and variance of the particle position in the long time
limit, which naturally leads to the following deﬁnitions of
the drift mobility and diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the particle:
µ(F0) ≡⟨˙X⟩
D(F0) = lim
⟨X(t)2⟩−⟨X(t)⟩2
Note that the relationship between ⟨˙X⟩and the long time
limit of ⟨X(t)⟩/t is a consequence of ergodicity . In order to determine µ and D, it is necessary to
extend the classical problem of Brownian motion in a
periodic potential with tilt ,
see also III.D.2. The force–dependence of the mobility
and diﬀusion coeﬃcient have been studied both analytically and numerically in the case of a sinusoidal boundary
function 
w(x) = a[sin(2πx/L) + b],
a > 0, b > 1.
The basic results are sketched in Fig. 10. A number of
interesting observations emerge from this study. First,
the mobility only depends on the temperature via the dimensionless parameter F0L/kBT. Hence, increasing the
temperature reduces the mobility. Second, as the force is
increased the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient D(F0) exceeds
the free diﬀusion coeﬃcient D0. Using scaling arguments,
it can also be shown that the analysis based on the Fick-
Jacobs equation begins to break down at a critical force
F0,c where 
The Fick-Jacobs equation represents diﬀusion through
a narrow channel in terms of a 1D overdamped Brownian particle moving in an eﬀective potential U(x) that
arises from entropic eﬀects. Such a 1D model has also
been the starting point for a series of studies of channelfacilitated membrane transport, where now U(x) reﬂects
the constructive role of attractive interactions between
permeating particles and proteins forming the channel
pore . In these studies, mixed boundary conditions are assumed at the ends
x = 0, L of the channel:
J(0, t) = −κ0P(0, t) and
J(L, t) = −κLP(L, t). The probability of crossing the
channel and the mean time in the channel can then be calculated using the standard theory of ﬁrst passage times
FIG. 10 Illustrative sketches of how mobility and diﬀusivity
vary with non-dimensionalized applied force F0L/kBT in the
case of a 2D channel with a sinusoidally varying half-width
(3.56). (a) Eﬀective mobility µ in units of γ. In the limit
F0 →∞, µ →γ−1. (b) Diﬀusion coeﬃcient D in units of
free diﬀusivity D0. In the limit F0 →∞, D →D0. Sketches
are based on numerical results of for
a = L/2π and b = 1.02.
and splitting probabilities, see Sec. II.B. It can be shown
that there is an optimal form of the interaction potential that maximizes the ﬂux through the channel, and
involves a play oﬀbetween increasing the translocation
probability through the channel and decreasing the average time particles spend in the channel .
For a complementary approach
to studying channel-facilitated transport that is based
on spatially discrete stochastic site-binding models, see
 .
Finally, note that
stochastic models of conﬁned diﬀusion through channels
have also been developed for charged particles ﬂowing
through a nanopore connected to two large reservoirs of
electrolyte solutions . The motion of the ions is sensitive to the speciﬁc
nanoscale geometry and the charge distribution around
the channel so that standard continuum mean-ﬁeld models breakdown.
Two of the most common mean-ﬁeld
models are the equilibrium Poisson-Boltzmann equation
and the non-equilibrium Poisson-Nernst-Planck equation
 . These equations assume a constitutive relation between the average ion ﬂux and an eﬀective
mean ﬁeld potential that satisﬁes Poisson’s equation for
the average charge concentrations. We will not consider
ion transport further in this review.
See for example
Keener and Sneyd for a detailed discussion of the
role of ion transport in cell physiology.
2. Brownian motion in a periodic potential with tilt
Motivated by the problem of a particle diﬀusing in
a narrow channel with a periodically varying boundary,
consider the 1D FP equation
∂[V ′(x) −F0]p
where V (x) is an L–periodic potential, V (x + L) = V (x)
for all x, and F0 is a constant external force, see Fig.
For the moment, we will take the diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient to be constant.
Within the context of motion
through a narrow channel V (x) can be identiﬁed with
the entropic potential V(x) = −kBT log[A(x)/A0]. However, there are many other important applications where
a periodic potential arises, including Brownian ratchet
models of molecular motors , see Sec.
IV.A.1. Again we will focus on spatially continuous processes. Note, however, that an alternative approach has
been developed in a seminal paper by Derrida ,
which is concerned with calculating the eﬀective diﬀusion and velocity of particles on a discrete lattice, and
is a spatilly discrete version of the processes considered
here. The approach of Derrida has many applications, including motor protein modeling (Kolomeisky and Fisher,
FIG. 11 Brownian particle moving in a periodic potential
V (x). In the absence of tilt (F0 = 0) the mean velocity in the
long time limit is zero. On the other hand, in the presence of
a tilt (F0 ̸= 0) the net motion of the particle is in the direction
of the force.
We begin by considering the standard Stratonovichbased calculation of the mean velocity . Introduce the eﬀective potential or free energy F(x) = V (x) −F0x and note that
F′(x) is periodic even though F is not. Next consider
the reduced probability density and currents
bp(x, t) =
p(x+nL, t),
bJ(x, t) =
J(x+nL, t)
J(x, t) = −D0
kBT F′(x)p + ∂p
It immediately follows that
bp(x + L, t) = bp(x, t),
bp(x, t)dx = 1.
Moreover, multiplying both sides of the FP equation by
x and integrating with respect to x gives
J(x, t)dx =
bJ(x, t)dx.
(Using the identity J(x, t) = ⟨˙X(t)δ(x −X(t))⟩and integrating both sides with respect to x, it follows that
⟨˙X(t)⟩= d⟨X(t)⟩/dt ). The periodicity
of F′(x) implies that if p(x, t) is a solution of the FP
equation, then so is p(x + nL, t). The principle of superposition for a linear PDE then shows that bp satisﬁes the
FP equation
+ ∂bJ(x, t)
bJ(x, t) = −D0
kBT F′(x)bp + ∂bp
and periodic boundary conditions at x = 0, L.
exists a stationary solution bp0 of the reduced FP equation
with constant ﬂux bJ0 such that
eF(x)/kBT bp0(x)
eF(x)/kBT .
Integrating this equation from x to x + L and using periodicity yields the stationary solution
1 −e−F0L/kBT ,
e−F(x)/kBT
eF(y)/kBT dy.
Finally, bJ0 is determined by imposing the normalization
condition on bp0. Since ⟨˙X(t)⟩= L bJ0 for constant current,
⟨˙X(t)⟩= L1 −e−F0L/kBT
It can be seen that there is no net motion in a purely
periodic potential, since the numerator vanishes when
F0 = 0. Moreover the net direction of motion for F0 ̸= 0
is in the direction of the applied force. Note that in the
case of a space–dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient D(x), the
above analysis is easily extended with N(x) now given
by 
N(x) = e−F(x)/kBT
D(y)eF(y)/kBT dy.
The calculation of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is considerably more involved. However, an elegant method for
determing D (as well as the mobility µ) is to exploit a
well-known recursion relation for the moments of the ﬁrst
passage time . Let T(x0 →b) denote the ﬁrst
passage time for the diﬀusing particle to reach the point b
given that it started at x0 with x0 < b. The nth moment
of the ﬁrst passage time is τn(x0 →b) = ⟨T n(x0 →b)⟩.
It can then be shown that for the stochastic process described by the FP Eq. (3.58), the moments satisfy the
recursion relation 
τn(x0 →b) = n
dx eF(x)/kBT
dy eF(y)/kBT
× τn−1(y →b),
n = 1, 2 . . . ,
with τ0(y →b) = 1. Note for n = 1, x0 = y, b = L
we recover Eq. (2.30) (after taking the left hand boundary to −∞). The basic derivation proceeds as follows.
First, it can be shown that T(x0 →x0 + lL), integer l
is statistically equivalent to a sum of (iid) random variables T(x0 →x0 + L), T(x0 + L →x0 + 2L), . . . , T(x0 +
(l −1)L →x0 + lL).
Hence, for large l, the central
limit theorem implies that the FPT
T(x0 →x0+lL) approaches a Gaussian distribution with
mean lτ1(x0 →x0 + L) and variance l∆τ2(x0 →x0 + L)
where ∆τ2 = τ2 −τ 2
1 . Second, since µ and D are de-
ﬁned in the large t limit, the evaluation of ⟨x(t)⟩and
⟨x2(t)⟩can be partitioned into a set of large but ﬁnite
steps over which the statistics of the corresponding FPT
is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution. This
has the important implication that if any two stochastic processes described by an FP equation of the form
(3.58) have the same mean τ1(x0 →x0 +L) and variance
∆τ2(x0 →x0 + L), then they have the same ⟨˙X⟩and D.
It ﬁnally follows that 
τ1(x0 →x0 + L), D = L2
∆τ2(x0 →x0 + L)
[τ1(x0 →x0 + L)]3 .
The proof of the last step simply consists of verifying that
these formulae hold when V (x) = 0 (no periodic potential), for which ⟨˙X⟩= F/γ and D = kBT/γ. Having obtained D in terms of the ﬁrst and second order moments
of the FPT, Eq. (3.69) can now be used to calculate D.
After some algebra ), one ﬁnds that
N(x)2N(x)dx/L
with N(x) given by Eq. (3.66) and
e−F(y)/kBT dy.
3. Single-ﬁle diﬀusion
When a pore or channel becomes suﬃciently narrow,
particles are no longer able to pass each other, which imposes strong constraints on the diﬀusive motion. An idealized model of single–ﬁle diﬀusion considers a 1D collection of diﬀusing particles with hard-core repulsion. The
many–body problem of single–ﬁle diﬀusion was originally
tackled by relating the dynamics of the interacting system with the eﬀective motion of a free particle . In particular, in the case of an inﬁnite system and a uniform initial particle density, it was
shown that a tagged particle exhibits anomalous subdiffusion on long time scales, ⟨X2(t)⟩∼t1/2. (On the other
hand, the center of mass of the system of particles exhibits normal diﬀusion). More recently, a variety of complementary approaches to analyzing single-ﬁle diﬀusion
have been developed . Here
we review the particular formulation of Barkai and Silbey
 , which develops the analysis
of a tagged particle in terms of classical reﬂection and
transmission coeﬃcients.
FIG. 12 (a) Single-ﬁle diﬀusion of a tagged particle (red)
surrounded by other impenetrable particles. (b) Equivalent
noninteracting picture, in which each trajectory is treated as
a non-interacting Brownian particle by keeping track of the
exchange of particle label.
Suppose that the tagged particle is initially at the origin with N particles to its left and N particles to its right,
see Fig. 12(a). The motion of each particle in the absence of hard core interactions is taken to be overdamped
Brownian motion as described by the Langevin Eq. (2.9)
or the corresponding FP Eq. (2.15). As a further simpliﬁcation, the potential energy function V (x) =
R x F(x′)dx′
is taken to be symmetric, V (x) = V (−x), as is the initial
distribution of particles. That is, if the initial position
x0 of a particle is drawn from fR(x0) for x0 > 0 and
from fL(x0) for x0 < 0, then fR(x0) = fL(−x0). This
reﬂection symmetry ensures that ⟨X(t)⟩= 0, where X(t)
is the stochastic position of the tagged particle at time
t. The main underlying idea is to map the many-body
problem to a non-interacting one by allowing particles to
pass through each other and keeping track of the particle
label, see Fig. 12(b). That is, assuming that collisions
are elastic and neglecting n-body interactions for n > 2,
it follows that when two particles collide they exchange
momenta and this is represented as an exchange of particle labels. The probability density for the tagged particle
to be at X(t) = XT at time t then reduces to the problem
of ﬁnding the probability that the number of free particle trajectories that started at x0 < 0 and are now to the
right of XT is balanced by the number of free particle
trajectories that started at x0 > 0 and are now to the
left of XT .
Thus, let PLL(x−j
0 ) (PLR(x−j
0 )) denote the probability
that the jth free particle trajectory starting from x−j
at t = 0 is to the left (right) of XT at time t. Similarly, let
0) (PRL(xj
0)) denote the probability that the jth
free particle trajectory starting from xj
0 > 0 at t = 0 is to
the right (left) of XT at time t. Let α be the net number
of free particle trajectories that are on the opposite side of
XT at time t compared to their starting point (with left
to right taken as positive). The associated probability
distribution for α given 2N untagged particles is 
0) = eiφPLR(x−j
0) + PLL(x−j
0) + e−iφPLL(x−j
The integration with respect to φ ensures that the net
number of crossings is α, that is,
−π eiφn = δn,0. Since
the trajectories are independent and the initial conditions
are (iid) random variables, PN(α) can be averaged with
respect to the initial conditions to give
⟨PN(α)⟩= 1
⟨Γ(φ)⟩Neiαφdφ,
 ⟨PRR⟩+ e−iφ⟨PRL
  ⟨PLL⟩+ eiφ⟨PLR⟩
The averages ⟨PLR⟩etc.
can be calculated using the
Green’s function G(x, x0, t) of the corresponding FP Eq.
(2.15) with G(x, x0, 0) = δ(x −x0). For example,
G(x, x0, t)dx dx0,
where 2l is the length of the 1D domain, which can be
taken to be inﬁnity.
Eq. (3.74) takes the form of the generating function for
a discrete random walk of N steps and a net displacement
of α. Hence, for large N, application of the central limit
theorem leads to the Gaussian approximation
2πNσ2 exp(−Nµ2
where σ2 = µ2 −µ2
1 and µ1, µ2 are the ﬁrst two moments
of the structure function:
⟨Γ(φ)⟩= 1 + iµ1φ −1
2µ2φ2 + O(φ3).
µ1 = ⟨PLR⟩−⟨PRL⟩, σ2 = ⟨PRR⟩⟨PRL⟩+ ⟨PLL⟩⟨PLR⟩.
Since ⟨X(t)⟩= 0 and N is assumed to be large, µ1 and
σ2 can be Taylor expanded with respect to XT about
XT = 0. Reﬂection symmetry then implies that
⟨PLL⟩|XT =0 = ⟨PRR⟩|XT =0 ≡R,
⟨PLR⟩|XT =0 = ⟨PRL⟩|XT =0 ≡T = 1 −R,
∂XT ⟨PLR⟩|XT =0 = −∂XT ⟨PRL⟩|XT =0 ≡J .
The time–dependent functions R and T may be interpreted as reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients determining whether or not a free particle trajectory crosses
XT = 0. The resulting mean and variance are
µ1 = −2J XT + O(X2
σ2 = 2R(1 −R) + O(XT ).
Thus, ⟨PN(α)⟩for α = 0 reduces to a Gaussian distribution for the position X(t) = XT :
P(XT , t) =
⟨X(t)2⟩= R(1 −R)
Finally, using Eq. (3.76),
G(x, x0, t)dxdx0
f(x0)G(0, x0, t)dx0.
In the special case of zero external forces, the free particle Green’s function is
G(x, x0, t) =
e−(x−x0)2/4Dt.
Taking a uniform initial distribution f(x0) = 1/l with
l →∞and ﬁxed particle density ρ = N/l, one ﬁnds
anomalous subdiﬀusion for large times t :
On the other hand, for particles initially centered at the
origin, f(x0) = δ(x0), diﬀusion is normal
⟨X(t)2⟩∼πDt
In the case of a bounded domain or a Gaussian initial condition, anomalous diﬀusion occurs at intermediate times
only .
E. Nuclear transport
The nucleus of eukaryotes is surrounded by a protective
nuclear envelope (NE) within which are embedded nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). The NPCs are the sole mediators of exchange between the nucleus and cytoplasm.
In general small molecules of diameter ∼5nm can diﬀuse
through the NPCs unhindered, whereas larger molecules
up to around 40nm in diameter are excluded unless they
are bound to a family of soluble protein receptors known
as karyopherins (kaps), see the reviews . Within the cytoplasm kap receptors bind cargo to
be imported via a nuclear localization signal (NLS) that
results in the formation of a kap-cargo complex.
complex can then pass through an NPC to enter the nucleus. A small enzyme RanGTP then binds to the kap,
causing a conformational change that releases the cargo.
The sequence of events underlying the import of cargo is
shown in Fig. 13(a). In the case of cargo export from
the nucleus, kaps bind to cargo with a nuclear export signal (NES) in the presence of RanGTP, and the resulting
complex passes through the NPC. Once in the cytoplasm,
RanGTP undergoes hydrolysis to form RanGDP, resulting in the release of the cargo. The export process is illustrated in Fig. 13(b). Finally, RanGDP is recycled to the
nucleus by another molecule NFT2 and is reloaded with
GTP to begin another import/export cycle. This cycle
allows a single NPC to support a very high rate of transport on the order of 1000 translocations/sec . Since the transportation cycle is directional and accumulates cargo against a concentration
gradient, an energy source combined with a directional
cue is required. Both of these are provided by the hydrolysis of RanGTP and the maintenance of a concentration
gradient of RanGTP across the NPC. The RanGTP gradient is continuously regenerated by GTP hydrolysis in
the cytoplasm, translocation of RanGTD into the nucleus
by NFT2, and replacement of GDP by GTP in the nucleus. It is important to note that the energy generated
from RanGTP hydrolysis is ultimately used to create a
concentration gradient of kap-cargo complexes between
the nucleus and cytoplasm, so that the actual translocation across the NPC occurs purely via diﬀusion.
karyopherin
nuclear envelope
karyopherin
hydrolysis
FIG. 13 Schematic illustration of the (a) import and (b) export process underlying the karyopherin-mediated transportation of cargo between the nucleus and cytoplasm via a nuclear
pore complex (NPC). See text for details.
Although the above basic picture is now reasonably
well accepted, the detailed mechanism underlying facilitated diﬀusion of kap-cargo complexes within the NPC
is still not understood. The NPC is composed of about
30 distinct proteins known collectively as nucleoporins
(nups). It has emerged in recent years that individual
nups are directly related to a number of human diseases
including inﬂuenza and cancers such as leukemia , as well as playing an important role in viral infections by providing docking sites for
viral capsids . Associated with
many of the nups are natively unfolded phenylalanineglycine (FG) repeats, known collectively as FG-repeats.
The FG-repeats set up a barrier to diﬀusion for large
molecules so that the key ingredient in facilitated diffusion through the NPC is the interaction between kap
receptors with the FG-repeats.
In essence, the major
diﬀerence between the various theoretical models of NPC
transport concerns the built in assumptions regarding the
properties and spatial arrangements of FG-repeats within
the NPC, and the nature of interactions with kaps during translocation through the NPC .
Current models include the Entropic Gate
model , Selective
Phase models , Dimensionality Reduction model , and the
Polymeric Brush model . A number of computational models and molecular-based simulations are also being developed . Here we will review
the ﬁrst two types of model in a little more detail.
Entropic gate model.
Recall from Sec.
III.D that a
macromolecule diﬀusing in a conﬁned geometry (such as
a nuclear pore) experiences an entropic barrier due to
excluded volume eﬀects. Within the NPC this would be
enhanced by the densely packed FG-repeats. One way
to counteract the eﬀects of the entropic barrier is for the
kaps to have an aﬃnity for and bind to the FG-repeat
regions , thus lowering the eﬀective Gibbs free energy of the cargo-complex
within the NPC. The degree of aﬃnity has to be suﬃciently high to overcome the entropic barrier but not too
high otherwise the complex can be trapped within the
NPC and the rate of translocation would be too small.
One possible solution, is to have a large number of low–
aﬃnity binding sites within the nuclear pore. Recently,
a mathematical model for the eﬀects of binding on diffusion within the NPC has been developed by Zilman
et al. , based on diﬀusion through an eﬀective energy landscape. This is based on the assumption that
the binding/unbinding rates are relatively fast compared
to the diﬀusion rate. The simplest version of the model
is illustrated in Fig. 14 for the case of nuclear import.
The eﬀective potential energy U(X) is taken to be a ﬂat
potential well of depth E along an NPC, and zero outside
the NPC. Absorbing boundary conditions are placed at
the points x = 0, L a distance R from either side of the
NPC, which has length L −2R. The left-hand boundary
takes into account the fact that not all complexes entering the NPC will reach the nucleus, that is, some will
eventually return to the cytoplasm. Diﬀusion within the
NPC is described by a standard Smoluchowski equation
for the density of cargo-complexes ρ(x), x = [0, L], see
Sec. II.A.2:
∂x , J = −D ∂ρ
with U measured in units of kBT. This equation is supplemented by the boundary conditions ρ(0) = ρ(L) = 0.
potential U(x)
absorbing boundary
absorbing boundary
FIG. 14 Model of Zilman et al. . Transport of cargocomplex through the NPC is modeled as diﬀusion in an energy
landscape. See text for details.
The steady-state solution is obtained by assuming that
there are constant ﬂuxes J0 in [0, R], JL in [L−R, L] and
J in [R, L −R] with J0 < 0. These ﬂuxes are related according to JS = J −|J0| and J = JL + Je, where JS is
the total ﬂux of complexes injected into the NPC from
the cytoplasm, which is proportional to density of complexes in the cytoplasm, and Je denotes the ﬂux due to
active removal of complexes from the nucleus end of the
NPC by RanGTP. The latter depends on the number
of complexes at the nuclear exit, the rate Jran at which
RanGTP molecules hit the exit: Je = Jranρ(L −R)R.
The steady-state rate of transport J can now be determined by solving for ρ(x) in terms of J0, JL, J in each of
the three domains and imposing continuity of the density
at x = R and x = R −L. The result is that the fraction
of complexes reaching the nucleus is given by 
with K = JranR2/D. It follows that for a suﬃciently
deep well (large E), where the integral term is negligible,
and for suﬃciently large K (large Jran), the probability of
translocation is P ≈1. On the other hand, if K is small
so that RanGTP does not facilitate entry of complexes
into the nucleus then Pmax = 0.5. As previously indicated, it is not possible to arbitrarily increase the aﬃnity
of binding sites and thus the well depth E, since this will
lead to trapping of the complexes so that they accumulate within the NPC, resulting in molecular crowding and
an unrealistically long time for an individual molecule to
pass through the NPC. Thus there is some optimal well
depth that balances an increase of transport probability
P with increased time spent in the NPC . Finally, note that the model is robust with regards the particular shape of the potential well. For example, one could represent transport through the NPC
as diﬀusion in an array of overlapping potential wells that
represent ﬂexible FG-repeat regions. The shape of each
well will depend on the number and aﬃnity of binding
sites on each FG-repeat, and the degree of ﬂexibility of
the polymers which will determine the entropic costs of
bending and stretching the FG-repeats. It can be shown
that for relatively fast binding/unbinding, the multi-well
potential can be replaced by a single well along the lines
of Fig. 14.
Selective phase models.
The basic assumption of these
models is that the NPC can be treated as a channel ﬁlled
with a hydrophobic medium consisting of a concentrated
polymer solution; the latter is composed of the natively
unfolded, ﬂexible protein domains of FG-repeats .
The FG-repeats form weak bonds with each other suggesting that they act approximately like a weak reversible
gel. Particles smaller than the mesh size of the network
can diﬀuse freely through the NPC, whereas non-selective
macromolecules larger than the mesh size cannot. On the
other hand, kap-cargo complexes can ’dissolve’ in the gel
due to the presence of hydrophobic domains on the surface of the kap receptors, and then diﬀuse through the
pore by breaking the weak bonds of the reversible gel
 . However, as pointed
out by Bickel and Bruinsma , the observed high
permeability of the NPC with respect to the transport of
kap-cargo complexes is inconsistent with the basic theory
of reversible gels. The argument proceeds as follows ). For a homogeneous pore ﬁlled with reversible gel, the ﬂux of particles
through the pore is given by J = D∆φ/L, where L is the
length of the pore, D is the diﬀusivity of dissolved complexes, and ∆φ = φL −φR is the diﬀerence in concentrations of dissolved complexes at the ends of the pore. The
permeability Π, however, is deﬁned in terms of the difference in concentrations of exterior particle reservoirs on
either side of the pore, ∆c = cL −cR. That is, J = Π∆c.
In order to relate ∆c and ∆φ, it is necessary to consider
the ﬂuxes entering and exiting the pore. Equating the
ﬂuxes at the left and right ends gives
J = kincL −koutφL = koutφR −kincR
This allows one to express ∆φ in terms of ∆c such that
2 + koutL/D.
From detailed balance the ratio of the rates is kin/kout =
eβ∆F where ∆F is the free energy gain (assuming ∆F >
0) of entering the gel. Ignoring other contributions to
the free energy, ∆F = nϵ, where n is the number of
interactions of strength ϵ between a kap receptor and the
gel. It can also be shown that the diﬀusivity of a spherical
kap-cargo complex moving through a reversible gel is
D = D0(1 + e−nϵ)−1 ≈D0e−βnϵ.
Suppose that in the high aﬃnity regime kout is given
by the Arrhenius law kout ∼(D/δ)e−β∆F , where ∆is
taken to be the size of the boundary layer at either end
of the pore. Combining all of these results then shows
that 
L + 2δeβnϵ .
Thus the permeability decreases with the number of sites
n, implying that increasing the aﬃnity of the complex
moving in a reversible gel should decrease the permeability; this contradicts the high permeabilities seen experimentally . One suggestion for modifying the original selective phase model is
FIG. 15 Selective phase model , in which the FG repeats
within a NPC are treated as a reversible polymer gel. See
text for details.
to assume that the polymer gel is under tension due to
pinning of the polymers to the container walls . Thermal ﬂuctuations would then
lead to local rearrangements of the stretched polymer
network, resulting in rearrangements of the associated
tension ﬁeld.
This, in turn, could generate force ﬂuctuations on a dissolved macromolecule that could enhance its eﬀective diﬀusivity.
Such a mechanism has
not yet been conﬁrmed experimentally. However, single
particle tracking of individual complexes moving through
the NPC shows that cargo bound to more kap receptors
diﬀuse more freely . This is consistent with the tensile gel model but inconsistent with the
entropic gate model, for which greater aﬃnity implies
slower transport of individual complexes.
Chaperone–assisted
translocation
nanopores.
Finally, note that here and in Sec. IIID we
have considered diﬀusion of particles that are smaller
than or comparable in size to the diameter of the channel. However, there are many examples where it is necessary to consider translocation of an unfolded (or partially folded) polymer through a nanopore, including the
translocation of RNA through the nuclear pore membrane, as well as newly synthesized proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum (see also Sec. VB). Polymer translocation through a nanopore involves a large entropic barrier due to the loss of many conformational states, so that
some form of driving force is required. One suggested
driving mechanism involves the binding of chaperone proteins to the translocating polymer on the far side of the
nanopore, which prohibits the polymer diﬀusing backward through the pore, thus speeding up translocation
 . This rectiﬁed stochastic motion
was orginally analyzed in terms of a Brownian ratchet
by Peskin et al. , and has subsequently been developed in a number of studies .
IV. ACTIVE INTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT
A. Modeling molecular motors at diﬀerent scales
Diﬀusion inside the cytosol or along the plasma membrane of a cell is a means by which dissolved macromolecules can be passively transported without any input of energy. However, there are two main limitations of
passive diﬀusion as a mechanism for intracellular transport. First, it can take far too long to travel the long
distances necessary to reach targets within a cell, which
is particularly acute in the case of the axons and dendrites of neurons. Second, diﬀusive transport tends to
be unbiased, making it diﬃcult to sort resources to speciﬁc areas within a cell. Active intracellular transport
can overcome these diﬃculties so that movement is both
faster and direct speciﬁc, but does so at a price.
Active transport cannot occur under thermodynamic equilibrium, which means that energy must be consumed
by this process, typically via the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The main type of active intracellular transport involves the molecular motors kinesin
and dynein carrying resources along microtubular ﬁlament tracks. Microtubules are polarized polymeric ﬁlaments with biophysically distinct (+) and (−) ends, and
this polarity determines the preferred direction in which
an individual molecular motor moves. In particular, kinesin moves towards the (+) end whereas dynein moves
towards the (−) end . Each motor protein
undergoes a sequence of conformational changes after reacting with one or more ATP molecules, causing it to
step forward along the microtubule in its preferred direction. Thus, ATP provides the energy necessary for the
molecular motor to do work in the form of pulling its
cargo along the microtubule in a biased direction.
The movement of molecular motors and motor/cargo
complexes occur over several length and time scales
 . In the case of a single motor there are at least
three regimes: (i) the mechanicochemical energy transduction process that generates a single step of the motor; (ii) the eﬀective biased random walk along a ﬁlament during a single run; (iii) the alternating periods
of directed motion along the ﬁlament and diﬀusive or
stationary motion when the motor is unbound from the
ﬁlament. A popular model for the stochastic dynamics
of a single motor step in regime (i) is the so–called Brownian ratchet , which extends the theory
of overdamped Brownian motion in periodic potentials
that was reviewed in Sec. III.D.2. In the case of dimeric
or double–headed kinesin, a single step is of length 8µm
and the total conformational cycle takes around 10ms.
In the second regime (ii), multiple steps are taken before
a motor disassociates from the ﬁlament. For example,
kinesin takes around 100 steps in a single run, covering
a distance of around 1µm.
Walking distances can be
substantially increased if several molecular motors pull
the cargo. In the third motility regime (iii), molecular
motors repeatedly unbind and rebind to ﬁlaments.
the unbound state a motor diﬀuses in the surrounding
aqueous solution with a diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the order
However, molecular crowding tends to con-
ﬁne the motor so that it stays close to its detachment
point. At these longer length and time scales, the motion of the motor can be represented in terms of a system
of PDEs. This combines a discrete Markov process for
the transitions between bound and unbound states with
an FP equation for the advective or diﬀusive motion in
the diﬀerent states . In bidirectional
transport, there may be more than one type of bound
1. Brownian ratchets
In performing a single step along a ﬁlament track, a
molecular motor cycles through a sequence of conformational states before returning to its initial state (modulo
the change in spatial location).
Suppose that there is
a total of M conformational states in a single cycle labeled i = 1, . . . , M. Given a particular state i, the motor
is modeled as an overdamped, driven Brownian particle
moving in a periodic potential Vi(x). The Langevin equation for the location of the particle X(t) assuming that
it remains in the given state is
dt + ξ(t),
with ⟨ξ(t)⟩= 0 and ⟨ξ(t)ξ(t′)⟩= 2Dtδ(t −t′). The corresponding FP equation is
= −∂Ji(x, t)
where pi(x, t) is the probability density that the motor
particle is in internal state i and at location x at time t,
and Ji(x, t) is the probability ﬂux
Ji(x, t) = 1
i (x) −kBT ∂
If the state transitions between the conformational states
are now introduced according to a discrete Markov process, then it is necessary to add source terms to the FP
= −∂Ji(x, t)
[ωij(x)pj(x, t) −ωji(x)pi(x, t)] ,
FIG. 16 Brownian ratchet model of a molecular motor that
can exist in two internal states with associated l–periodic potentials V1(x) and V2(x). State transition rates are denoted
by ω1 and ω2.
where ωij(x) is the rate at which the motor switches from
state j to state i.
In order to develop the basic theory, consider the simple case of two internal states N = 2 following along the
lines of Julicher et al. ; Parmeggiani et al. ;
Prost et al. . Then
+ ∂J1(x, t)
= −ω1(x)p1(x, t) + ω2(x)p2(x, t)
+ ∂J2(x, t)
= ω1(x)p1(x, t) −ω2(x)p2(x, t).
Note that adding the pair of equations together and setting p = p1 + p2, J = J1 + J2 leads to the conservation equations ∂tp + ∂xJ = 0. An example of l–periodic
ratchet (asymmetric) potentials V1(x), V2(x) is shown in
16, with l the basic step length of a cycle along
the ﬁlament track. The analysis of the two–state model
proceeds along similar lines to the one state model considered in Sec. III.D.2. That is, set
bpj(x, t) =
pj(x+nl, t), bJj(x, t) =
Jj(x+nl, t).
The total probability ﬂux can then be written as
1(x)bp1(x, t) + V ′
2(x)bp2(x, t) + kBT ∂bp(x, t)
Consider the steady-state solution for which there is a
constant total ﬂux bJ0 so that
1(x)bp1(x) + V ′
2(x)bp2(x) + kBT ∂bp(x)
Deﬁning λ(x) = bp1(x)/bp(x), this equation can be rewritten as
eﬀ(x)bp(x) + kBT ∂bp(x)
1(y) + (1 −λ(y))V ′
Suppose that the system is in thermodynamic equilibrium so that detailed balance holds. That is, the state
transition rates and steady-state probabilities satisfy
ω2(x) = e[V1(x)−V2(x)]/kBT = p2(x)
Therefore,
1 + e−[V1(x)−V2(x)]/kBT ,
and, in particular, λ(x) reduces to an l–periodic function.
It follows that Veﬀ(x) in Eq. (4.8) is also an l-periodic
potential and hence there is no net motion in a particular
direction (in the absence of an external force or tilt), see
Sec. III.D.2. In conclusion, in order for a molecular motor to sustain directed motion that can pull against an
applied load, we require a net positive supply of chemical energy that maintains the state transition rates away
from detailed balance - this is the role played by ATP.
Therefore, consider the situation in which transitions
between the two states occur as a result of chemical reactions involving ATP hydrolysis. Denoting the two conformational states of the motor by M1, M2, the scheme
is taken to be 
α1 M2 + ADP + P
ADP + P + M1
γ1 M2 + ATP
with αj, γj, βj x–dependent. The ﬁrst reaction pathway
involves ATP hydrolysis with chemical free energy gain
∆µ and a corresponding transition from state 1 to state 2,
the second involves hydrolysis in the opposite direction,
while the third involves thermal state transitions without
any change in chemical potential. Basic chemical kinetics
implies that
= e(V1−V2+∆µ)/kBT ,
= e(V1−V2−∆µ)/kBT ,
= e(V1−V2)/kBT .
It follows that the net transition rates between the two
conformational states are
ω1 = α2e(V1−V2+∆µ)/kBT + γ2e(V1−V2−∆µ)/kBT
+ β2e(V1−V2)/kBT
ω2 = α2 + γ2 + β2.
Clearly detailed balance no longer holds. In general, it is
now necessary to determine the steady–state solution of
the pair of Eqs. (4.5) numerically. Given such a solution,
the eﬃciency of the motor doing work against a load F
may be determined as follows. First the ﬂux (4.3) has an
additional term of the form Fpi(x, t)/γ. The mechanical
work done per unit time against the external force is then
˙W = Fv where v = l bJ0 is the velocity of the motor. On
the other hand, the chemical energy consumed per unit
time is ˙Q = r∆µ, where r is the steady–state rate of ATP
consumption:
[(α1(x) −γ1(x))bp1(x) −(α2(x) −γ2(x))bp2(x)]dx.
The eﬃciency of the motor is then deﬁned to be η =
FIG. 17 State transition diagram for a discrete Brownian
ratchet that cycles through M = 3 internal states and makes
a single step of length ∆x
It is often convenient to simplify the generalized
ratchet model further by taking the transition rate functions to be localized at the discrete set of positions
x = xk, k = 1, . . . , K, and to replace the continuum diffusion and drift terms by hopping rates between nearest
lattice sites . The resulting discrete Brownian ratchet
model can be mapped on to a stochastic network of KM
states as shown in Fig. 17; for an alternative approach to stochastic network
models of molecular motors). The stochastic dynamics
is now described by a master equation, an example of
[Pkn(t)Wkm;kn −Pkm(t)Wkn;km] (4.15)
+ Pk+1,1(t)WkM;k+1,1 + Pk−1,M(t)Wk1;k−1,M
−Pk,1(t)Wk−1,M;k,1 −Pk,M(t)Wk+1,1;k,M,
where Pkm(t) = pm(xk, t) and for “vertical” transitions
Wkm;kn = ωmn(xk). In this example steps along the ﬁlament (power strokes) only occur between states m = 1
and m = M.
Observing a molecular motor’s motion
along a ﬁlament on longer time-scales (several cycles)
suggests that its macroscopic dynamics can be approximated by diﬀusion with constant drift . That is, in the long-time limit,
the probability density ρ(x = k∆x, t) = PM
m=1 Pkm(t)
satisﬁes the FP equation
∂t = −V ∂ρ
∂x + D ∂2ρ
Such an equation can be derived analytically by considering the vector F (z, t) with components Fm(z, t) = P∞
k=−∞Pkm(t)zk. This is related to the
probability generating function F(z, t) = PM
m=1 Fm(z, t)
for the moments of the discrete location K(t).
vector F (z, t) satisﬁes a matrix equation of the form
∂tF (z, t) = A(z)F (z, t) such that the long time behavior
of F (z, t) is dominated by the leading eigenvalue λ0(z)
of the matrix A(z). From this it can be shown that to
leading order the drift V = λ′
0(1)∆x and the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient D = ∆x2(λ′′
0(1))/2 .
2. PDE models of active transport
Over much longer time-scales a molecular motor alternates between phases where it is bound to a ﬁlament and
undergoing several cycles of mechanicochemical transduction, and phases where it is unbound and diﬀusing
in the cytosol.
As a further level of complexity, several molecular motors may be attached to a vesicular
cargo at the same time, which means that the active
transport of the motor/cargo complex will exhibit different velocity states depending on which combination of
motors are currently bound to the ﬁlament . Indeed, experimental observations of the dynamic behavior of motor/cargo complexes
transported along microtubules reveal intermittent behavior with constant velocity movement in both directions along the microtubule (bidirectional transport), interrupted by brief pauses or fast oscillatory movements
that may precede localization at speciﬁc targets .
In the axon and distal end of dendrites one ﬁnds that
microtubule ﬁlaments all have the same polarity, with
the (+) end oriented away from the cell body . This suggests a model of bidirectional
transport in which kinesin and dynein motors transport
a cargo in opposite directions along a single track. On
the other hand, dendritic microtubules located close to
the cell body tend to have mixed polarities , suggesting a model in which motors of the same
directional preference are distributed among two parallel
microtubules of opposite polarity. In both of the above
scenarios, there has to be some mechanism for coordinating the action of the various motors as part of a larger
motor complex. One possibility is that the motors interact through a tug–of–war competition, where individual
motors inﬂuence each other through the force they exert on the cargo , see Sec. IV.B. When a force is exerted on a motor opposite to its preferred direction, it is more likely
to detach from its microtubule. Ultimately the motion
of the cargo is determined by the random attachments
and force–dependent detachments from the microtubule
of each motor in the motor complex.
(An alternative
coordination mechanism could involve a fast molecular
switch that alternatively turns oﬀkinesin and dynein).
When considering the active transport of intracellular
cargo over relatively long distances, it is often convenient
to ignore the microscopic details of how a motor performs
a single step (as described by Brownian ratchet models),
and to focus instead on the transitions between diﬀerent
types of motion (eg. anterograde vs. retrograde active
transport, diﬀusion vs. active transport). This has motivated a class of mesoscopic models that take the form of
a system of PDEs . For the sake of illustration, consider a simple 3state model of a particle moving on a 1D track of length
L. Such a track could represent a single microtubular ﬁlament. Within the interior of the track, 0 < x < L, the
particle is taken to be in one of three states labeled by
n = 0, ±: unbound from the track and diﬀusing (n = 0),
bound to the track and moving to the right (anterograde)
with speed v+ (n = +), or bound to the track and moving to the left (retrograde) with speed −v−(n = −).
For simplicity, take v± = v > 0.Transitions between the
three states are governed by a discrete Markov process.
Let Z(t) and N(t) denote the random position and state
of the particle at time t and deﬁne P(x, n, t | y, m, 0)dx
as the joint probability that x ≤Z(t) < x + dx and
N(t) = n given that initially the particle was at position
Z(0) = y and was in state N(0) = m. Setting
pn(x, t) ≡
P(x, t, n|0, 0, m)σm
with initial condition pn(x, 0) = δ(x)σn, Pn
1, the evolution of the probability is described by the
following system of PDEs for t > 0:
= −v∂xp+ −β+p+ + αp0
= v∂xp−−β−p−+ αp0
∂t = β+p+ + β−p−−2αp0 + D0
Here α, β± are the transition rates between the stationary and mobile states. Eq. (4.18) is supplemented by
appropriate boundary condition at x = 0, L. For example, a reﬂecting boundary at x = 0 and an absorbing
boundary at x = L means that
p−(0, t) = p+(0, t),
p−(L, t) = 0.
In the general case that the velocities v± in the two directions are diﬀerent, the transport will be biased in the
anterograde (retrograde) direction if v+/β+ > v−/β−
(v+/β+ < v−/β−).
It is straightforward to generalize the 3–state model to
the case of n distinct velocity states as found for example
in the tug–of-war model, see IV.B. Introducing the n–
component probability density vector p(x, t) ∈Rn the
corresponding system of PDEs takes the form
∂t = Ap + L(p),
where A ∈Rn×n speciﬁes the transition rates between
each of the n internal motor states and the diﬀerential
operator L has the structure
where the scalar operators are given by
Lj = [−vj∂x + D0,j∂2
Here vj is the velocity of internal state j and D0,j is the
corresponding diﬀusivity.
B. Tug-of-war model of bidirectional transport
Suppose that a certain vesicular cargo is transported
along a one–dimensional track via N+ right–moving (anterograde) motors and N−left–moving (retrograde motors). At a given time t, the internal state of the cargo–
motor complex is fully characterized by the numbers n+
and n−of anterograde and retrograde motors that are
bound to a microtubule and thus actively pulling on
the cargo.
Assume that over the time–scales of interest all motors are permanently bound to the cargo so
that 0 ≤n± ≤N±. The tug–of–war model of Muller
et. al. assumes that the motors
act independently other than exerting a load on motors
with the opposite directional preference. ). Thus the properties of the
motor complex can be determined from the corresponding properties of the individual motors together with a
speciﬁcation of the eﬀective load on each motor. There
are two distinct mechanisms whereby such bidirectional
transport could be implemented .
First, the track could consist of a single polarized microtubule ﬁlament (or a chain of such ﬁlaments) on which
up to N+ kinesin motors and N−dynein motors can attach, see Fig. 18. Since individual kinesin and dynein motors have diﬀerent biophysical properties, with the former
tending to exert more force on a load, it follows that even
when N+ = N−the motion will be biased in the anterograde direction. Hence, this version is referred to as an
asymmetric tug–of–war model. Alternatively, the track
could consist of two parallel microtubule ﬁlaments of opposite polarity such that N+ kinesin motors can attach
to one ﬁlament and N−to the other. In the latter case,
if N+ = N−then the resulting bidirectional transport is
unbiased resulting in a symmetric tug–of–war model.
FIG. 18 Schematic diagram of an asymmetric tug–of–war
model. Two kinesin and two dynein motors transport a cargo
in opposite directions along a single polarized microtubule
Transitions between two possible motor states are
When bound to a microtubule, the velocity of a single
molecular motor decreases approximately linearly with
force applied against the movement of the motor . Thus, each motor is assumed to satisfy
the linear force-velocity relation
vf(1 −F/Fs) for F ≤Fs
vb(1 −F/Fs) for F ≥Fs
where F is the applied force, Fs is the stall force satisfying v(Fs) = 0, vf is the forward motor velocity in the
absence of an applied force in the preferred direction of
the particular motor, and vb is the backward motor velocity when the applied force exceeds the stall force. The
original tug–of–war model assumes the binding rate is
independent of the applied force, whereas the unbinding
rate is taken to be an exponential function of the applied
π(F) = π0,
γ(F) = γ0e
where Fd is the experimentally measured force scale on
which unbinding occurs.
The force dependence of the
unbinding rate is based on measurements of the walking
distance of a single motor as a function of load , in agreement with Kramers rate theory
 . Let Fc denote the net load on the
set of anterograde motors, which is taken to be positive
when pointing in the retrograde direction. Suppose that
the molecular motors are not directly coupled to each
other so that they act independently and share the load;
however, see . It follows that a single anterograde motor feels the force Fc/n−, whereas a
single retrograde motor feels the opposing force −Fc/n+.
Eq. (4.24) implies that the binding and unbinding rates
for both types of motor take the form
bγ(n, Fc) = nγ(Fc/n),
bπ(n) = (N −n)π0. (4.25)
The parameters associated with kinesin and dynein motors will be diﬀerent, so that it is necessary to add the
subscript ± to these parameters. The cargo force Fc is
determined by the condition that all the motors move
with the same cargo velocity vc. Suppose that N+ ≥N−
so that the net motion is in the anterograde direction,
which is taken to be positive. In this case, the forward
motors are stronger than the backward motors so that
n+Fs+ > n−Fs−. Eq. (4.23) implies that
vc = vf+(1 −Fc/(n+Fs+)) = −vb−(1 −Fc/(n−Fs−)).
This generates a unique solution for the load Fc and cargo
velocity vc:
Fc(n+, n−) = (Fn+Fs+ + (1 −F)n−Fs−),
n−Fs−vf−+ n+Fs+vb−
vc(n+, n−) =
n+Fs+ −n−Fs−
n+Fs+/vf+ + n−Fs−/vb−
The corresponding expressions when the backward motors are stronger, n+Fs+ < n−Fs−, are found by interchanging vf and vb.
The original study of Muller et al. considered the stochastic dynamics associated with transitions
between diﬀerent internal states (n+, n−) of the motor
complex, without specifying the spatial position of the
complex along a 1D track. This deﬁnes a Markov process
with a corresponding master equation for the time evolution of the probability distribution P(n+, n−, t). They
determined the steady-state probability distribution of
internal states and found that the motor complex exhibited at least three diﬀerent modes of behavior: (i) the
motor complex spends most of its time in states with
approximately zero velocity; (ii) the motor complex exhibits fast backward and forward movement interrupted
by stationary pauses, which is consistent with experimental studies of bidirectional transport; (iii) the motor complex alternates between fast backward and forward movements. The transitions between these modes
of behavior depend on motor strength, which primarily depends upon the stall force. More recently, Newby
and Bressloﬀ have constructed a system of
PDEs describing the evolution of the probability density
p(n+, n−, x, t) that the motor complex is in the internal state (n+, n−) and has position x at time t. This
version of the tug–of–war model simultaneously keeps
track of the internal state of the motor complex and
its location along a 1D track.
In order to write the
model in the general form (4.20), it is convenient to introduce the label i(n+, n−) = (N+ + 1)n−+ (n+ + 1)
and set p(n+, n−, x, t) = pi(n+,n−)(x, t). This then gives
an n–component probability density vector p ∈Rn with
n = (N+ + 1)(N−+ 1), which satisﬁes Eq.
The internal velocity of internal state j = j(n+, n−) is
vj = vc(n+, n−), and the diﬀusivities Dj are taken to be
zero unless all motors are detached from the microtubule:
Di = D0δi,1. The components ai,j, i, j = 1, . . . , n, of the
state transition matrix A are given by the corresponding
binding/unbinding rates of Eqs. (4.25). That is, setting
i = i(n+, n−), the non–zero oﬀ–diagonal terms are
ai,j = π+(n+ −1) for j = i(n+ −1, n−),
ai,j = π−(n−−1), for j = i(n+, n−−1),
ai,j = γ+(n+ + 1, Fc), for j = i(n+ + 1, n−),
ai,j = γ−(n−+ 1, Fc), for j = i(n+, n−+ 1).
The diagonal terms are then given by ai,i = −P
j̸=i aj,i.
One of the useful features of the tug-of-war model is
that it allows various biophysical processes to be incorporated into the model , see also Sec. IV.H.2. For example, a
convenient experimental method for changing the stalling
force (and hence the mode of motor behavior) is to vary
the level of ATP available to the motor complex.
low [ATP] the motor has little fuel and is weaker, resulting in mode (i) behavior; then, as [ATP] increases and
more fuel is available, mode (ii) behavior is seen until
the stall force saturates at high values of [ATP] where
mode (iii) behavior takes over. Thus, [ATP] provides a
single control parameter that tunes the level of intermittent behavior exhibited by a motor complex. There are a
number of models of the [ATP] and force-dependent motor parameters that closely match experiments for both
kinesin and
dynein . It is found
that [ATP] primarily aﬀects the stall force, forward motor velocity, and unbinding rate. For example, based on
experimental data, the forward velocity may be modeled
using Michaelis-Menten kinetics
vf([ATP]) =
[ATP] + Kv
where vmax
= 1µm/s, Kv
= 79.23µM for kinesin
= 0.7µm/s, Kv = 38µM for dynein.
backward velocity of both kinesin and dynein is small,
vb ≈±0.006µm/s, so that the [ATP] dependence can
be neglected).
The binding rate is determined by the
time necessary for an unbound motor to diﬀuse within
range of the microtubule and bind to it, which is assumed to be independent of [ATP]. The unbinding rate
of a single motor under zero load can be determined using the [ATP] dependent average run length Lk([ATP]) =
/([ATP] + Ku). The mean time to detach from the
microtubule is vf([ATP])/Lk([ATP]) so that
γ0([ATP]) =
([ATP] + Ku)
([ATP] + Kv),
where Lmax
= 0.86µm, Ku = 3.13µM for kinesin and
= 1.5µm, Ku = 1.5µM for dynein.
Finally, a
model for the [ATP]-dependent stall force of kinesin is
Fs([ATP]) = F 0
s + (F max
Ks + [ATP]
s = 5.5pN, F max
= 8pN, Ks = 100µM for kinesin and F 0
s = 0.22pN, F max
= 1.24pN, Ks = 480µM
for dynein.
C. Quasi–steady–state (QSS) reduction of PDE models of
active transport
Two important quantities characterizing the eﬀectiveness of motor-driven active transport are the hitting
probability and MFPT to deliver cargo to a speciﬁc
target within a cell, see Sec.
IVH. In the case of the
3-state model (4.18), in which the number of internal
states of the motor-cargo complex is suﬃciently small, it
is possible to derive exact analytical expressions for the
MFPT and hitting probability using Laplace transforms
or solving a corresponding system of backwards equations .
However, if the number of internal velocity states becomes large, as in the tug-of-war model, then some form
of approximation is needed. This also holds for active
transport in higher spatial dimensions where the direction of motion is random, see Sec. IVE. In this section,
we review a quasi–steady–state (QSS) method for reducing equations of the general form (4.20) to a scalar FP
equation under the assumption that the state transition
rates are faster than the velocity of motile states on an
appropriate length scale .
A number of authors have analyzed such equations in
this regime. For example, Reed et al. used singular perturbation theory to show that the transport of a
chemical along an axon can be analyzed in terms of an
approximate traveling-wave solution of a scalar advection diﬀusion equation for the chemical concentration.
Subsequent work rigorously established the validity of
this scalar reduction for a wide range of PDE models of
active transport . More recently, Newby
and Bressloﬀ have carried out a QSS reduction
of the tug-of-war model and used this to study the eﬃciency of intracellular active transport within the context
of random intermittent search processes, see also IV.H.
For a more general discussion of the QSS and projection methods for reducing the dimensionality of stochastic models, also referred to as adiabatic reduction, see
Gardiner .
The ﬁrst step in the QSS reduction is to ﬁx the units of
space and time by setting l = 1 and l/v = 1, where v =
i=1 vi. This corresponds to non–dimensionalizing Eq.
(4.18) by performing the rescalings x →x/l and t →
tv/l. Furthermore, suppose that for the given choice of
units, aij = O(1/ε) whereas Lij = O(1) for some small
parameter ε ≪1, and set A = ε−1 bA. Eq. (4.18) can then
be rewritten in the dimensionless form (after dropping
hat on bA)
ϵ Ap + L(p),
The transition matrix A is assumed to be irreducible and
conservative so that ψ = (1, 1, · · · , 1)T is in the nullspace
N(AT ). Moreover, A has one zero eigenvalue and the
remaining eigenvalues have negative real part. Let pss ∈
N(A) and choose pss so that ψT pss = 1. The next step
is to introduce the decomposition p = upss + w where
u ≡ψT p and ψT w = 0. Thus u is the component of p
in the left nullspace of A, whereas w is in the orthogonal
complement.
Multiplying both sides of (4.34) by ψT
yields the equation
∂tu = ψT L(upss + w).
Substituting p = upss + w into (4.34) gives
∂tw + (∂tu)pss = 1
ϵ A(w + upss) + L(w + upss).
Using equation (4.35) and the fact that pss is in the right
null space of A, shows that
ϵ Aw + (In −pssψT )L(w + upss),
where In is the n × n identity matrix.
Now introduce an asymptotic expansion for w:
w ∼w0 + ϵw1 + ϵ2w2 + . . . .
Substituting this expansion into (4.36) and collecting
O(ϵ−1) terms gives Aw0 = 0. Since w is in the orthogonal complement of the left nullspace of A, it follows that
w0 = 0. Now collecting terms of O(1) yields the equation
Aw1 = −(In −pssψT )L(upss),
where In is the n × n identity matrix. The orthogonal
projection In −pssψT ensures that the right–hand side
of the above equation is in the range of A, and a unique
solution for w1 is obtained by requiring that ψT w1 = 0.
It is convenient to deﬁne the mean of an n-vector z with
respect to the stationary distribution pss according to
⟨z⟩≡zT pss Substituting w ∼εw1 into Eq. (4.35) then
∂tu = −⟨v⟩∂xu + ⟨D0⟩∂2
From Eq. (4.38) it can be seen that the components of
w1 are linear combinations of ∂xu and ∂2
xu so that
w1,j = −θj∂xu + qj∂2
where θj and qj, j = 1, . . . , n, are u–independent. Collecting ∂xu terms in Eq. (4.38) yields an equation for
θ = (θ1, ..., θn)T ,
Aθ = −((⟨v⟩−v1)pss
1 , · · · , (⟨v⟩−vn)pss
The condition ψT w1 = 0 implies that ψT θ = 0 and
hence there exists a unique solution for θ. Likewise the
equation for q is given by
Aq = −((⟨D0⟩−D0,1)pss
1 , · · · , (⟨D0⟩−D0,n)pss
Finally, assuming that the diﬀusivity D0,j = O(ε) and
keeping only lowest order terms, leads to the scalar FP
equation 
∂t = −V ∂u
V = ⟨v⟩+ O(ε2), D = ⟨D0⟩+ εvT θ + O(ε2).(4.43)
In order to compute the O(ε) contribution to D, the rank
deﬁcient Eqs. (4.41) can be solved numerically using the
full singular value decomposition of the matrix A, see
below. The probability density function u is the total
probability of being in any motor state at position x and
time t. Suppose that the particle was initially injected on
to the track at x = 0 and σm = pss
m in equation (4.17) so
that the initial state lies in the slow manifold. The initial
condition for u is then u(x, 0) = δ(x). Similarly, typical
boundary conditions for u on a ﬁnite track of length L
will be V u −D∂xu |x=0= 0 (reﬂecting) and u(L, t) = 0
(absorbing). These boundary conditions follow from substituting p = upss+εw1 into the corresponding boundary
conditions of Eq. (4.34).
QSS reduction of 3–state model.
In the case of the 3–state
model given by Eq. (4.18), the steady–state probability
distribution is
The resulting 2-rank system of equations for the 3-vector
w1, Eq. (4.38), can be solved up to the arbitrary element
[w1]0 using Gaussian elimination:
[w1]± = ∓1 ∓⟨v⟩
±γ ∂xu + αΩ
Ωis determined by imposing the condition ψT w = 0:
Substituting equations (4.45) and (4.46) into (4.35) yields
the FP Eq. (4.42) with (to O(ϵ2))
(v −⟨v⟩)2
+ (v + ⟨v⟩)2
QSS reduction of tug-of-war model.
The reduction of the
tug–of–war model presented in Sec.
IV.B is more involved . In particular, it
is necessary to compute the vector θ by solving equation
(4.41), which has the general form Aθ = b. The standard numerical method for solving a rank deﬁcient linear
system using singular valued decomposition (SVD) must
be modiﬁed slightly. The Fredholm-Alternative theorem
implies that a solution to equation (4.41) exists but is
not unique. In the case of a standard least squares solution, uniqueness is obtained by requiring the solution
to be orthogonal to the nullspace of A. However, in this
case a unique solution must be obtained by requiring the
solution be orthogonal to the nullspace of AT . The following procedure may be used. Let UΣHT = A be a
full singular value decomposition of A. Let z = U T b and
y = HT θ so that Σy = z. It follows that yi = zi/σi,
i = 1, ..., n −1, where σi are the non-zero singular values
of A. The last component yn is arbitrary since σn = 0.
The standard least squares solution is obtained by setting yn = 0. To determine yn here, one requires that
i=1 θi = 0. Since θ = Hy,
hijyj + hinyn.
where hij are the components of the matrix H. Since
i=1 θi = 0, it follows that
The QSS reduction determines the generic parameters
V, D of the scalar FP equation (4.42) as functions of the
various biophysical parameters of the tug–of–war model.
These include the stall force Fs, the detachment force Fd,
the maximum forward and backward velocities vf, vb, and
the single motor binding/unbinding rates γ0, π0. These,
in turn will depend on environmental factors such as the
concentration of [ATP] and various signaling molecules,
see also Sec. IV.H.2.
D. Fast and slow axonal transport
Axons of neurons can extend up to 1m in large organisms but synthesis of many of its components occur in the cell body. Axonal transport is typically divided into three main categories based upon the observed
speed : fast transport
(1 −9µm/s) of organelles and vesicles and slow transport (0.004 −0.6µm/s) of soluble proteins and cytoskeletal elements. Slow transport is further divided into two
groups; actin and actin-bound proteins are transported
in slow component A while cytoskeletal polymers such as
microtubules and neuroﬁlaments are transported in slow
component B. It had originally been assumed that the
diﬀerences between fast and slow components were due
to diﬀerences in transport mechanisms, but direct experimental observations now indicate that they all involve
fast motors but diﬀer in how the motors are regulated.
Membranous organelles, which function primarily to deliver membrane and protein components to sites along
the axon and at the axon tip, move rapidly in a unidirectional manner, pausing only brieﬂy. In other words,
they have a high duty ratio – the proportion of time a
cargo complex is actually moving. On the other hand,
cytoskeletal polymers and mitochondria move in an intermittent and bidirectional manner, pausing more often
and for longer time intervals, as well as sometimes reversing direction. Such transport has a low duty ratio.
Neuroﬁlaments are space-ﬁlling cytoskeletal polymers
that increase the cross-sectional area of axons, which
then increases the propagation speed of action potentials. Radioisotopic pulse labeling experiments provide
information about the transport of neuroﬁlaments at the
population level, which takes the form of a slowly moving Gaussian-like wave that spreads out as it propagates
distally. A number of authors have modeled this slow
transport in terms of a unidirectional mode similar to
the 3–state model of Eqs. (4.18) . For example,
Blum and Reed considered the following system
on the semi-inﬁnite domain 0 ≤x < ∞:
where p1 represents the concentration of moving neuroﬁlament proteins, and pi, i > 1 represent the concentrations
in n −1 distinct stationary states. Conservation of mass
implies that Ajj = −P
i̸=j Aij. The initial condition is
pi(x, 0) = 0 for all 1 ≤i ≤n, 0 < x < ∞. Moreover
p1(0, t) = 1 for t > 0. Reed et al. carried out an
asymptotic analysis of Eqs. (4.50) that is related to the
QSS reduction method of Sec. IV.C. Suppose that p1 is
written in the form
p1(x, t) = Qϵ
where u is the eﬀective speed, u = vpss
j , and pss
is the steady-state solution for which Apss = 0. They
then showed that Qϵ(s, t) →Q0(s, t) as ϵ →0, where Q0
is a solution to the diﬀusion equation
Q0(s, 0) = H(−s)
with H the Heaviside function. The diﬀusivity D can
be calculated in terms of v and the transition matrix A.
Hence the propagating and spreading waves observed in
experiments could be interpreted as solutions to an eﬀective advection-diﬀusion equation. More recently, Friedman and Craciun have developed a more
rigorous analysis of spreading waves.
stationary
FIG. 19 Transition diagram of ‘stop-and-go’ moldel for the
slow axonal transport of neuroﬁlaments. See text for deﬁnition of diﬀerent states.
In contrast to the above population models, direct observations of neuroﬁlaments in axons of cultured neurons
using ﬂuorescence microscopy has demonstrated that individual neuroﬁlaments are actually transported by fast
motors but in an intermittent fashion . Hence, it has been proposed
that the slow rate of movement of a population is an
average of rapid bidirectional movements interrupted by
prolonged pauses, the so-called stop-and-go hypothesis
 .
Computational simulations of an associated system of
PDEs shows how fast intermittent transport can account
for the slowly spreading wave seen at the population level.
One version of the model assumes that the neuroﬁlaments
can be in one of six states :
anterograde moving on track (state a), anterograde pausing on track (a0 state), anterograde pausing oﬀtrack
(state ap), retrograde pausing on track (state r0), retrograde pausing oﬀtrack (state rp), and retrograde moving
on track (state r). The state transition diagram is shown
in Fig. 19.
E. Active transport on microtubular networks
In the case of axonal or dendritic transport in neurons, the microtubles tend to be aligned in parallel so that one can treat the transport process as eﬀectively 1D. On the other hand, intracellular transport within the soma of neurons and most
non–polarized animal cells occurs along a microtubular
network that projects radially from an organizing center
(centrosome) with outward polarity .
This allows the delivery of cargo to and from the nucleus.
Moreover, various animal viruses including HIV take advantage of microtubule-based transport in order to reach
the nucleus from the cell surface and release their genome
through nuclear pores . In contrast, the delivery of cargo
from the cell membrane or nucleus to other localized cellular compartments requires a non–radial path involving
several tracks. It has also been found that microtubules
bend due to large internal stresses, resulting in a locally
disordered network. This suggests that in vivo transport
on relatively short length scales may be similar to transport observed in vitro, where microtubular networks are
not grown from centrosomes, and thus exhibit orientational and polarity disorder . Another example where a disordered microtubular network exists is within the Drosophila oocyte
 . Kinesin and dynein motordriven transport along this network is thought to be one
of the mechanisms for establishing the asymmetric localization of four maternal mRNAs - gurken, oskar, bicoid
and nanos- which are essential for the development of the
embryonic body axes.
A detailed microscopic model of intracellular transport
within the cell would need to specify the spatial distribution of microtubular orientations and polarity, in order
to specify which velocity states are available to a motorcargo complex at a particular spatial location. However,
a simpliﬁed model can be obtained under the “homogenization” assumption that the network is suﬃciently
dense so that the set of velocity states (and associated
state transitions) available to a motor complex is independent of position.
In that case, one can eﬀectively
represent the active transport and delivery of cargo to
an unknown target within the cell in terms of a two– or
three-dimensional model of active transport . This also provides motivation for extending the QSS analysis of Sec.
IV.C to higher–dimensions .
For simplicity, consider a disordered 2D microtubular
FIG. 20 Active transport on a disordered microtubular network. (a) Random orientational arrangement of microtubles.
(b) Eﬀective 2D random intermittent search in which a particle switches between diﬀusion and ballistic motion in a random direction.
network as illustrated in Fig.
(The extension to
3D networks is relatively straightforward). Suppose that
after homogenization, a molecular motor at any point
r = (x, y) in the plane can bind to a microtubule with any
orientation θ, resulting in ballistic motion with velocity
v(θ) = v(cos θ, sin θ) and θ ∈[0, 2π). If the motor is unbound then it acts as a Brownian particle with diﬀusion
coeﬃcient D0.
Transitions between the diﬀusing state
and a ballistic state are governed by a discrete Markov
process. The transition rate β from a ballistic state with
velocity v(θ) to the diﬀusive state is taken to be independent of θ, whereas the reverse transition rate is taken
to be of the form αQ(θ) with
Q(θ)dθ = 1. Suppose
that at time t the motor is undergoing ballistic motion.
Let (X(t), Y (t)) be the current position of the searcher
and let Θ(t) denote the corresponding velocity direction.
Introduce the conditional probability density p(x, y, θ, t)
such that p(x, y, θ, t)dxdydθ is the joint probability that
(x, y, θ) < (X(t), Y (t), Θ(t)) < (x + dx, y + dy, θ + dθ)
given that the particle is in the ballistic phase. Similarly,
take p0(x, y, t) to be the corresponding conditional probability density if the particle is in the diﬀusive phase.
(For the moment the initial conditions are left unspeci-
ﬁed). The evolution of the probability densities for t > 0
can then be described in terms of the following 2D system
of PDEs :
∂t = −∇· (v(θ)p) −β
ϵ p(r, θ, t) + αQ(θ)
∂t = ϵD0∇2p0 + β
p(r, θ′, t)dθ′ −α
ϵ p0(r, t).
In the case of a uniform density, Q(θ) = 1/(2π), Eqs.
(4.51a) and (4.51b) reduce to the 2D model considered by
Benichou et. al. . In order to carry out a quasi steady–state
(QSS) reduction of Eqs.
(4.51a) and (4.51b), see Sec.
IV.C, we have ﬁxed the units of space and time according
to l = 1 and l/v = 1, where l is again a typical run
length. Furthermore, for the given choice of units, we
have assumed that there exists a small parameter ϵ ≪1
such that all transition rates are O(ϵ−1), the diﬀusivity
is O(ϵ) and all velocities are O(1).
In the limit ϵ →0, the system rapidly converges to
the space-clamped (i.e. ∇p = ∇p0 = 0) steady–state
distributions (pss(θ), pss
pss(θ) = αQ(θ)
α + β ≡aQ(θ).
The QSS approximation is based on the assumption that
for 0 < ϵ ≪1, solutions remain close to the steady–state
solution. Hence,
p(r, θ, t) = u(r, t)pss(θ) + ϵw(r, θ, t)
p0(r, t) = u(r, t)pss
0 + ϵw0(r, t),
p(r, θ, t)dθ + p0(r, t),
w(r, θ, t)dθ + w0(r, t) = 0.
Furthermore, the initial conditions are taken to be
u(r, 0) = δ(r −r0),
w(r, 0) = w0(r, 0) = 0,
which are equivalent to the following initial conditions
for the full probability densities:
p(r, θ, 0) = δ(r−r0)pss(θ), p0(r, 0) = δ(r−r0)pss
0 . (4.58)
Thus, the initial internal state of the motor (diﬀusive or
ballistic with velocity v(θ)) is generated according to the
steady–state distributions pss(θ) and pss
0 . In other words,
the motor starts on the slow manifold of the underlying
dynamics. If this were not the case, then one would need
to carry out a multiscale analysis in order to take into
account the initial transient dynamics transverse to the
slow manifold .
Perturbation and projection methods can now be used
to derive a closed equation for the scalar component
u(r, t) .
First, integrating
equation (4.51a) with respect to θ and adding equation
(4.51b) yields
∂t = ϵD0∇2p0 −⟨⟨v · ∇p⟩⟩
= ϵbD0∇2u −a ⟨v⟩· ∇u −ϵ ⟨⟨v · ∇w⟩⟩+ O(ϵ2),
where ⟨f⟩=
Q(θ)f(θ)dθ and ⟨⟨f⟩⟩=
f(θ)dθ for
any function or vector component f(θ).
Next, substituting equations (4.53) and (4.54) into equations (4.51a)
and (4.51b) yields
∂t = −v(θ) · ∇[aQ(θ)u + ϵw] −βw
+ αQ(θ)w0.
∂t = ϵD0∇2 (bu + ϵw0)
+β ⟨w⟩−αw0.
Now substitute (4.59) into (4.60) and (4.61). Collecting
terms to leading order in ϵ and using Eq. (4.56) then
w0(r, t) ∼
α + β [⟨v⟩· ∇u] ,
w(r, θ, t) ∼Q(θ)
 a2(1 + b) ⟨v⟩−av(θ)
Finally, substituting equations (4.63) and (4.62) into
(4.59) yields to O(ϵ) the FP equation
∂t = −∇· (Vu) + ϵbD0∇2u + ϵ∇· (D∇u).
The diﬀusion tensor D has components Dkl, k = x, y, l =
 ⟨vkvl⟩−⟨vk⟩⟨vl⟩+ b2 ⟨vk⟩⟨vl⟩
to lowest order in ϵ, whilst the eﬀective drift velocity is
given by V ∼a ⟨v⟩.
In the case of a uniform direction distribution Q(θ) =
1/(2π), the diﬀusion tensor reduces to a scalar.
follows from the fact that vx = v cos θ, vy = v sin θ so
⟨vx⟩= ⟨vy⟩= ⟨vxvy⟩= 0 and to leading order
generally,
suﬃciently
smooth, we can expand it as a Fourier series,
(ωn cos(nθ) + ˆωn sin(nθ)).
Assume further that ω1 = ˆω1 = 0 so there is no velocity
bias i.e. ⟨vx⟩= ⟨vy⟩= 0. Then
cos2(θ)Q(θ)dθ = av2
2β (1 + ω2)
sin2(θ)Q(θ)dθ = av2
2β (1 −ω2) , (4.68)
sin(θ) cos(θ)Q(θ)dθ = av2
FIG. 21 Random velocity model of a microtubular network
with quenched polarity disorder. Particles move ballistically
along parallel tracks in a direction determined by the polarity
of the given track. They also hop between tracks according
to an unbiased random walk.
It follows that only the second terms in the Fourier series
expansion contribute to the diﬀusion tensor.
An alternative formulation of transport on disordered
microtubular networks has been developed by Kahana
et al. in terms of random velocity ﬁelds . In order to
describe the basic idea, consider the simpliﬁed model analyzed by Zumofen et al. . The latter model consists of a set of equally spaced parallel tracks along the
x-axis, say, see Fig. 21. The tracks are assigned random
polarities ±1 with equal probabilities corresponding to
quenched polarity disorder. A particle undergoes a random walk in the y–direction, whereas when a particle
attaches to a certain track it moves ballistically with velocity ±1 according to the track’s polarity. It is assumed
that when a particle hops to a neighboring track it binds
immediately. Let X(t) denote the displacement of a random walker in the longtitudinal direction at time t:
v[y(t′)]dt′.
Taking the continuum limit in the y direction means that
where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and the velocity
ﬁeld is δ–correlated ⟨v(y)v(y′)⟩c = v2ξδ(y −y′).
averaging is taken with respect to the quenched polarity disorder and ξ is the inﬁnitesimal spacing between
tracks. Now consider the second moment ⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩of the
stochastic process averaged with respect to the quenched
disorder and realizations of the random walk:
⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩= 2
dt2⟨⟨v[y(t1)]v[y(t2)]⟩⟩, (4.70)
⟨⟨v[y(t1)]v[y(t2)]⟩⟩=
dy2⟨v(y1)v(y2)⟩c
× p(y2, t2)p(y1 −y2, t1 −t2).
Using Laplace transforms and the velocity correlation
X2(s)⟩⟩= 2v2ξ
ep(y, s)dy,
ep(y, s) =
Performing the integration with respect to y thus shows
X2(s)⟩⟩= v2ξD−1/2s−5/2, which on inverting the
Laplace transform gives
⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩=
An equivalent formulation of the problem is to treat
⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩as the solution to the diﬀerential equation 
dt2 ⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩= 2v2ξyp(0, t),
where ξp(0, t) is the probability of turn to the origin at
time t within a single lattice spacing ξ, and p(0, t) =
4πDt. In conclusion, the random velocity model supports anomalous superdiﬀusion in the x direction.
Kahana et al. extended the above construction to 2D (and 3D) disordered networks where there
are parallel tracks in the x and y directions. The distribution of polarities are unbiased in both directions. A
self-consistent description of the dynamics is obtained by
dt2 ⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩= 2v2ξpy(0, t), d2
dt2 ⟨⟨Y 2(t)⟩⟩= 2v2ξpx(0, t),
where px and py are the probability densities of the x
and y coordinates. From the symmetry of the network,
px(0, t) = py(0, t).
Hence, assuming that px(0, t) =
C⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩−1/2 for some constant C, and setting φ(t) =
⟨⟨X2(t)⟩⟩gives
dt2 φ = 2Cv2ξ.
It follows that φ(t) ∼t4/3 so that the diﬀusion is less
enhanced than in the case of parallel tracks in one direction. Finally, note that active transport on the randomly oriented network of Fig. 20 exhibits normal rather
than anomalous diﬀusion. A major diﬀerence from the
random velocity model is that the latter has quenched
polarity disorder, whereas the former has dynamical polarity disorder.
F. Virus traﬃcking
An interesting example of active transport in 2D or 3D
is given by virus traﬃcking. An animal virus typically
invades a mammalian cell by ﬁrst undergoing membrane
endocytosis from the exterior to the interior of the cell.
It then has to navigate the crowded cytoplasm without
being degraded in order to reach a nuclear pore and deliver its DNA to the cell nucleus . Single particle tracking has established that virus
trajectories within the cytoplasm consist of a succession
of free or conﬁned diﬀusion and ballistic periods involving active transport along microtubules or actin networks
 . A macroscopic computational model of the traﬃcking of a population of
viruses has been developed based on the law of mass
action, which takes into account cell geometry but neglects stochastic eﬀects . More
recently, in a series of papers, Holcman and collaborators have developed a stochastic model
of a single virus traﬃcking inside a cell, which involves
reducing an intermittent search model (see Sec. IV.H)
to an eﬀective Langevin equation, and using the latter
to calculate the mean time to reach a nuclear pore based
on a narrow escape problem (see Sec. II.C). The basic
structure of a 2D version of the latter model is shown in
Following , the cell is
treated as a radially symmetric disc consisting of an annular region of cytoplasm of outer radius R and inner
radius δ, surrounding a central nuclear disc. N microtubules radiate outwards from the nucleus to the cell
membrane, and are assumed to be distributed uniformly
so that the angle between two neighboring microtubules
is Θ = 2π/N. (A two-dimensional description of a cell
would be reasonable in the case of cultured cells that are
ﬂattened due to adhesion to the substrate). The motion
of a virus particle alternates between diﬀusive motion
within a wedge region bΩsubtending an angle Θ at the
origin, and binding to one of the two microtubules at
the boundary of the wedge. Suppose that a virus particle starts at some radius r0 < R and arbitrary angle
within such a wedge. Let τ(r0) denote the MFPT for the
particle to bind to a microtubule, and let ρ(r0) be the
mean radial position on the microtubule. Suppose that
the particle moves with a ﬁxed speed v for a time T towards the nucleus before being released to a new position
with radius r1 and arbitrary angle within another wedge.
It follows that r1 = ρ(r0) −vT. Treating the domain bΩ
as an open wedge by ignoring the reﬂecting boundary at
r = R, it can be shown that if Θ ≪1 then 
ρ(r0) ≈r0(1 + Θ2/12).
The reduction method of . Diagram of
a 2D radially symmetric cell with radially equidistant microtubles. A virus trajectory is shown that alternates between
ballistic motion along a microtubule and diﬀusion the cytoplasm. Trajectory starts at the cell membrane and ends at a
nuclear pore.
gache and Holcman, 2008) is to assume that on a coarsegrained time-scale the random intermittent motion of the
virus can be approximated by a Langevin equation with
a radial drift vector:
dt = b(r) r
In order to estimate the drift function b(r), the MFPT
bτ(r0) for the eﬀective Langevin particle to start at r0
and end at r1 is calculated using the standard theory of
ﬁrst passage times ),
and then compared to τ(r0).
First, bτ(r0) satisﬁes the
D∇2bτ −b(r)∇bτ = −1,
with boundary conditions
dr (r) = 0,
bτ(r1) = 0.
As a further simpliﬁcation, it is assumed that b(r) varies
slowly with r so that b(r) ≈b(r0), leading to the solution
ue−b(r0)[u−v]/D
Assuming that D ≪1 the Laplace method can be used
to evaluate the integral with respect to u, giving bτ(r0) ≈
(r0 −r1)/b(r0). Finally, setting bτ(r0) = τ(r0) + T yields
τ(r0) + T =
d −r0Θ2/12
A more detailed calculation of the eﬀective drift function
b(r) under less restrictive assumptions can be found in
 .
Having reduced the eﬀective motion of the virus to a
Langevin equation, the probability that the virus arrives
at a nuclear pore before being degraded at a rate k0 can
now be calculated by solving a narrow escape problem.
The assocated FP equation takes the form
∂t = D∇2p(r, t) −∇· b(r)p(r, t) −k0p(r, t)
on the annular region Ωof Fig. 22, together with the
boundary conditions
p(r, t) = 0, r ∈∂Na,
J(r, t) · n = 0, r ∈∂Ω−∂Na.
The boundary ∂Ωof the annulus is taken to be reﬂecting everywhere except for the surface ∂Na of the nucleus
occupied by nuclear pores, which are taken to be perfect
absorbers. Asymptotic analysis then shows that the hitting probability P and conditional MFPT T are 
b(δ) + 2δk0ν ,
2δk0ν + b(δ),
where ν = log(1/ϵ) with ϵ the fraction of the nucleus
covered by nuclear pores.
G. Exclusion processes
So far we have considered a single molecular motor
or motor/cargo complex moving along a ﬁlament track.
However, in practice there could be many active particles
moving along the same track, which could interact with
each other and exhibit some form of collective behavior.
This has motivated a number of studies that model the
movement of multiple motor particles as an asymmetric
exclusion process (ASEP) . In
the simplest version of such models, each particle hops
unidirectionally at a uniform rate along a 1D lattice;
the only interaction between particles is a hard-core repulsion that prevents more than one particle occupying
the same lattice site at the same time. This so–called
totally asymmetric exclusion process (TASEP) is combined with absorption/desorption (Langmuir) kinetics,
in which individual particles can bind to or unbind from
the track, see Fig.
The TASEP has become the
paradigmatic model of non-equilibrium stochastic processes, and a variety of analytical methods have been
developed to generate exact solutions for the stationary
state, see and references therein. However, when Langmuir kinetics or other biologically motivated extensions of TASEP are included, it is no longer
possible to obtain exact solutions so that some form of
mean-ﬁeld approximation is required.
1. Asymmetric exclusion process and the hydrodynamic limit
Let us consider in more detail the system shown in
Fig. 23, which consists of a ﬁnite 1D lattice of N sites
labeled i = 1, . . . , N. The microscopic state of the system is given by the conﬁguration C that speciﬁes the
distribution of identical particles on the lattice. That is,
C = {n1, . . . , nN} where each occupation number ni = 1
if the i-th site is occupied by a single particle and ni = 0
if the site is vacant. Exclusion eﬀects preclude more than
one particle at any site. Thus, the state space consists
of 2N conﬁgurations. Let P(C, t) demote the probability
of ﬁnding a particular conﬁguration C at time t.
evolution of this probability distribution is described by
a master equation:
[WC′→CP(C′, t) −WC→C′P(C, t)] .
The transition rate WC→C′ from conﬁguration C to C′ is
determined from the following set of rules :
(a) at sites i = 1, . . . , N −1, a particle can jump to site
i + 1 at a unit rate if the latter is unoccupied;
(b) at site i = 1 (i = N) a particle can enter (exit) the
lattice at a rate α (β) provided that the site is unoccupied
(occupied);
(c) in the bulk of the lattice, a particle can detach from
a site at a rate ωD and attach to an unoccupied site at a
Rules (a) and (b) constitute a TASEP with open
boundary conditions, whereas rule (c) describes Langmuir kinetics. It follows that the evolution of the particle
densities ⟨ni⟩away from the boundaries is given by the
exact equation
= ⟨ni−1(1−ni)⟩−⟨ni(1−ni+1)⟩+ωA⟨1−ni⟩−ωD⟨ni⟩.
Here ⟨ni(t)⟩= P
C niP(C, t) etc. Similarly, at the boundaries
= −⟨n1(1 −n2)⟩+ α⟨1 −n1⟩−ωD⟨n1⟩, (4.83a)
= ⟨nN−1(1 −nN)⟩+ ωA⟨1 −nN⟩−β⟨nN⟩.
FIG. 23 Schematic diagram of TASEP with Langmuir kinetics, in which particles can spontaneously detach and attach
at rates ωD and ωA, respectively.
Note that in the absence of any exclusion constraints, Eq.
(4.82) reduces to a spatially discrete version of the unidirectional PDE Eq. (4.18a), with p+(ni∆x, t) = ⟨ni⟩,
β+ = ωD, and p0α = ωA and v+/∆x = 1. The goal is
to ﬁnd a non- equilibrium stationary state for which the
current ﬂux J along the lattice is a constant.
follows that J has the exact form
J = α⟨1 −n1⟩= ⟨ni(1 −ni+1)⟩= β⟨nN⟩,
i = 1, N −1.
Eqs. (4.82) and (4.83) constitute a non-trivial manybody problem, since in order to calculate the time evolution of ⟨ni⟩it is necessary to know the two-point correlations ⟨ni−1(1 −ni)⟩. The latter obey dynamical equations involving three–point and four-point correlations.
Thus, there is an inﬁnite hierarchy of equations of motion. However, progress can be made by using a mean-
ﬁeld approximation and a continuum limit in order to
derive a PDE for the density of particles . The mean–ﬁeld approximation consists of replacing two-point correlations by
products of single–site averages:
⟨ninj⟩= ⟨ni⟩⟨nj⟩.
Next introduce the inﬁnitesimal lattice spacing ϵ and set
x = kϵ, ρ(x, t) = ρk(t) ≡⟨nk(t)⟩. The continuum limit
is then deﬁned according to N →∞and ϵ →0 such
that the length of the track L = Nϵ is ﬁxed. (Fix length
scales by setting L = 1). Expanding ρk±1(t) = ρ(x±ϵ, t)
in powers of ϵ gives
ρ(x ± ϵ, t) = ρ(x) ± ϵ∂xρ(x, t) + 1
2ϵ2∂xxρ(x, t) + O(ϵ3).
Finally, rescaling the absorption/desorption rates according to ωA = ΩAϵ, ωD = ΩDϵ, and rescaling time τ = ϵt,
Eq. (4.82) becomes to O(ϵ)
∂x2 −(1 −2ρ)∂ρ
∂x + ΩA(1 −ρ) −ΩDρ. (4.84)
Similarly, Eq. (4.83) reduces to the boundary conditions
ρ(0) = α, ρ(1) = 1 −β. In the continuum limit the ﬂux
takes the form
J(x, t) = −ϵ
∂x + ρ(1 −ρ).
Note that it is also possible to extend the mean-ﬁeld approximation to ASEP with slowly spatially varying hopping rates, although now the eﬀective diﬀusivity in the
hydrodynamic limit now depends on the density .
The next step is to ﬁnd a stationary non equilibrium
state for which the current J is constant, and to determine the corresponding stationary density proﬁle. This
then generates a phase diagram with respect to the parameters α, β and ﬁxed ΩA, ΩD. In the case of a pure
TASEP, the phase diagram can be calculated explicitly
 . Set ΩA = ΩD = 0
(4.84), and consider constant current solutions
J(x, t) = J. Rewrite Eq. (4.85) in the form
ϵ (ρ −r+)(ρ −r−),
Eq. (4.86) is easily integrated from the left-hand boundary, say, to give
(ρ(x) −r+)(ρ(0) −r−)
(ρ(x) −r−)(ρ(0) −r+) = e−2(r+−r−)x/ϵ.
with ρ(0) = α.
The unknown current J is obtained
by setting x = 1 and using the boundary condition
ρ(1) = 1 −β. The stationary density proﬁle can then
be constructed explicitly by carrying out an asymptotic
expansion with respect to the small parameter ϵ. First,
suppose that J < 1/4 so r± are real. Denote the O(1)
approximation of the current by J0. If r+ ≈1 −β so
that J0 = β(1 −β) and r−≈β, then the bulk of the
domain is in a high density (HD) phase. Since r+ > r−
it follows that β < 1/2. Eq. (4.86) implies that the density proﬁle is ﬂat except for a boundary layer close to
x = 0. Similarly, there exists a low density (LD) phase
when r−≈α, for which J0 = α(1 −α), ρ+ ≈(1 −α) and
α < 1/2; there is now a boundary layer at x = 1. Finally, in the case J > 1/4 (so r± are complex) one ﬁnds
that the density proﬁle consists of a ﬂat region at the
centre of the domain where ρ ≈1/2 and J0 = 1/4 with
boundary layers now at both ends.
Moreover, writing
J = 1/4 + ∆J it can be seen that r+ −r−= i
order to avoid fast spatial oscillations in the proﬁle (4.88),
one requires ∆J = O(ϵ2). Carrying out a perturbation
expansion of Eq. (4.85) in powers of ϵ then establishes
that ρ(x) −1/2 varies as 1/x as one moves away from
the left-hand boundary. A schematic illustration of the
phase diagram for pure TASEP is shown in Fig. 24.
2. Method of characteristics and shocks
(4.84) is mathematically similar in form to the
viscous Burger’s equation with additional source terms
 . Thus, one expects singularities
such as shocks in the density ρ to develop in the inviscid
or non-dissipative limit ϵ →0+. This can be investigated
more directly by setting ϵ = 0 in Eq. (4.84), which then
takes the form of a standard quasilinear PDE
∂τ + (1 −2ρ)∂ρ
∂x = ΩA(1 −ρ) −ΩDρ.
FIG. 24 Mean-ﬁeld phase diagram for the TASEP showing
the regions of α, β parameter space where the low-density
(LD), high-density (HD) and maximal-current (MC) phases
Schematic illustrations of the density proﬁles in the
various regions are shown in red.
A well known method for studying such equations is to
construct characteristic curves x = x(τ) along which
ρ(τ) ≡ρ(x(τ), τ) satisﬁes
Comparison with Eq.n (4.89) leads to the characteristic
equations 
dτ = 1 −2ρ,
dτ = ΩA(1 −ρ) −ΩDρ.
These equations can be interpreted as kinematic waves
that propagate changes in density that move at a variable
speed 1 −2ρ.
density profile ρ(t)
density profile ρ(0)
FIG. 25 Formation of a shock for Eq. (4.91). The characteristics are straight lines of speed 1 −2ρ with ρ constant
along a characteristic. The initial density proﬁle evolves into
a stationary shock solution.
In order to illustrate the basic method of analysis, let
us return to a pure TASEP where ΩA = ΩD = 0. Eq.
(4.89) then simpliﬁes to the kinematic wave equation
∂τ + ∂J0(ρ)
J0(ρ) = ρ(1 −ρ)
and the characteristic become straight lines along which
ρ is constant. Ignoring boundary eﬀects for the moment,
the density proﬁle at time t is determine by the propagation of the initial density ρ(x, 0) along characteristics as
illustrated in Fig. 25. Since higher densities propagate
more slowly than lower densities, an initial linear density
proﬁle steepens until a shock is formed at the points of intersection where pairs of characteristics meet. In general,
a shock propagates with a speed vS determined by the
so called Rankine-Hugonoit condition (Ockendon et al.,
vS = J0(ρ2) −J0(ρ1)
= 1 −ρ1 −ρ2
where ρ1, ρ2 are the densities on either side of the shock.
For the particular initial density proﬁle shown in Fig.
25, ρ1 = 0 and ρ2 = 1 so that the shock is stationary
(vS = 0). The possibility of stationary shocks reﬂects the
fact that the current J0(ρ) = ρ(1 −ρ) has a maximum,
which means that two diﬀerent densities can have the
same current on either side of the shock.
The method of characteristics and kinematic wave theory yields insights into the dynamics underlying the formation of the various stationary phases shown in Fig. 24
 = α and ρ(1) = 1 −β.
A kinematic wave propagates from the left-hand (righthand) boundary with speed 1 −2α (2β −1). Hence, if
α < 1/2, β < 1/2, both waves propagate into the interior of the domain and meet somewhere in the middle to
form a shock that propagates with speed vS = β −α. If
β > α then the shock moves to the right-hand boundary and the bulk of the domain is in a low-density (LD)
state with ρ ≈α < 1/2. On the other hand, If β < α
then the shock moves to the left-hand boundary and the
bulk of the domain is in a high-density (HD) state with
ρ ≈1 −β > 1/2. Note that the line separating the HD
and LD phases, α = β < 1/2, is a coexistence line. The
system consists of a low density region separated from
a high density region by a shock.
Once higher order
dissipative eﬀects are included, this shock diﬀuses freely
between the ends of the domain, so that the average density proﬁle is linear. In the case α > 1/2 or β > 1/2,
the kinematic wave associated with that boundary does
not propagate into the interior so that the density associated with the other boundary dominates. Finally, if
both α > 1/2 and β > 1/2 then the steady-state bulk
solution has the maximal current density ρm = 1/2. In
order to show this, and to determine how bulk solutions
match the boundary conditions, it is necessary to include
dissipation eﬀects as in the previous section.
The above analytical arguments can be extended to
the full molecular motor model that combines TASEP
with Langmuir kinetics . When ΩA, ΩD ̸= 0 the characteristics
are curves in the x −t plane. For example, consider the
propagation of density ﬂuctuations along a characteristic starting at the left boundary with ρ = α < 1/2 and
α < K/(K + 1), where K = ΩA/ΩD. It follows from
Eq. (4.90) that initially the ﬂuctuation propagates along
the characteristic with decreasing speed and increasing
density. If K/(1 + K) < 1/2 then ρ will approach the
constant value ρ = K/(K + 1) and the speed approaches
a constant value.
However, if K/(1 + K) > 1/2 then
after a ﬁnite time the density reaches ρ = 1/2 and propagation ceases. A similar analysis holds for characteristics propagating from the right boundary. Furthermore,
characteristics propagating from opposite boundaries can
again intersect, implying multivalued densities and thus
a breakdown of the quasilinear equation. The resulting
shock has the same wave speed as pure TASEP. Of particular interest are stationary solutions for which the current J = ρ(1 −ρ) is constant so that any shock solution
is stationary (vS = 0). To a ﬁrst approximation, these
can be obtained by ﬁnding steady–state solutions of the
mean-ﬁeld Eq. (4.89):
∂x −ΩD[K −(1 + K)ρ] = 0.
The occurrence of stationary shocks is consistent with the
observation that this is a ﬁrst–order ODE but there are
two boundary conditions. One thus proceeds by integrating from the left boundary where ρ(0) = α to obtain a
density proﬁle ρL(x) and then integrating from the right
boundary where ρ(1) = 1 −β to obtain a second density
proﬁle ρR(x). The full solution is constructed by matching the two proﬁles at a shock whose position also has to
be determined. If the shock lies outside the unit interval, then it is necessary to include at least one boundary
layer. A detailed analysis of the steady-state solutions
with coexisting low and high density phases, and the
corresponding phase-diagram with respect to the parameters (α, β, ΩD, ΩA) can be found in .
If the eﬀects of dissipation
are also taken into account then the sharp interfaces and
boundary layers become smooth fronts of size O(1/ϵ).
3. mRNA translation by ribosomes
One of the ﬁrst examples of a TASEP model in biology
was proposed by Gibbs and collaborators in their study of
FIG. 26 Diagram showing how the translation of the mRNA
and the synthesis of proteins is made by ribosomes. [By LadyofHats (Public domain), via Wikimedia Commons]
the translation of messenger RNA (mRNA) by ribosomes
during protein synthesis . Proteins are macromolecules
formed from chains of amino acids, and the blueprint for
how these proteins are synthesized is contained in the
DNA of the cell nucleus. Protein synthesis involves two
stages: transcription of genetic information from DNA
to messenger RNA (mRNA) by RNA polymerase, and
translation from mRNA to proteins through ribosome
translocation. The mRNA carries genetic information,
encoded as triplets of nucleotides known as codons. Since
there are four nucleotides (A, U,C, G), there are 64 distinct codons, e.g., AUG, CGG, most of which code for a
single amino acid. The process of translation consists of
ribosomes moving along the mRNA without backtracking (from one end to the other, technically known as the
5’ end to the 3’ end) and is conceptually divided into
three major stages: initiation, elongation and termination. Each elongation step invokes translating or ‘reading’ of a codon and the binding of a freely diﬀusing transfer RNA (tRNA) molecule that carries the speciﬁc amino
acid corresponding to that codon. The basic translation
machinery is illustrated in Fig. 26.
The simplest model of translation is a pure TASEP.
However, as originally highlighted by MacDonald and
Gibbs. ; MacDonald et al. and recently reviewed by Chou et al. ; Zia et al. , this considerably oversimpliﬁes the biology. For example, ribosomes are large molecules so that they extend over several
codons or lattice sites (around l = 12). In order to extend
TASEP to multi-site particles, it is ﬁrst necessary to spec-
FIG. 27 A TASEP with extended particles of size l = 3.
ify the rules for entry and exit of a ribosome. One possibility is ’complete entry, incremental exit’, which assumes
that a ribosome enters completely provided the ﬁrst l lattice sites are vacant, whereas it exits one step at a time
 .
Inclusion of extended objects considerably complicates the analysis even though
the basic structure of the phase diagram is preserved
 .
In contrast to pure TASEP, there does not currently exist an
exact solution, although mean ﬁeld approximations do
provide useful insights. A second biologically motivated
modiﬁcation of TASEP is to include site–dependent hopping rates . This is motivated by the fact that the local hopping rate depends
on the relative abundance of speciﬁc amino-acid carrying
tRNA. Using a combination of Monte Carlo simulations
and mean ﬁeld theory it can be shown, for example, that
two defects (regions of slow hopping rates) decrease the
steady-state current more when they are close to each
other. Finally, note that a number of researchers have developed models that take into account intermediate steps
in the translocation of a ribosome along the mRNA, including the binding of tRNA to the ribosome and hydrolysis .
H. Motor transport and random intermittent search
So far we have considered models of motor-driven intracellular transport without any reference to the process
whereby the cargo or load carried by one or more motors
is delivered to the correct location within a cell. It is
unlikely that a target is selected according to where a
mictrotubular track terminates, since a cargo could be
released from its associated motors at any point along
the track.
Moreover, targeted delivery probably uses
the same microtubular “highway” as more general, non–
targeted intracellular traﬃcking.
It would also be dif-
ﬁcult to establish global chemical concentration gradients aimed at guiding a motor–driven cargo to a speciﬁc target, as such signals would be drowned out by the
many other signals originating from additional intracellular targets. Therefore, instead of thinking of motordriven cargo transport as a direct path to a given target,
the random intermittent motion of motor–driven cargo
observed in experiments suggests that the cell maintains
a distribution of mobile cargo throughout its interior, and
that delivery of a cargo to a speciﬁc target is a stochastic process . Some of the molecular mechanisms that cause a cargo to attach or detach
from a molecular motor have been identiﬁed . In most cases, a protein dissolved in the cytosol reacts with an adaptor protein that binds a cargo
to the motor, causing the cargo to be released.
However, when a cargo is pulled at a relatively high velocity
it doesn’t have much time to explore local space and is
therefore much less likely to participate in such a reaction. Therefore, one possible interpretation of the frequent pauses observed during motor transport is that it
provides a mechanism to improve the reaction kinetics
required to localize the cargo to its target by giving it
more time to explore local space. This then leads to a
simple model of cargo delivery in which there are transitions of the internal state of the motor complex between
directed movement states and stationary or slowly diffusing searching states. If the transitions between these
states are governed by chemical reactions under the in-
ﬂuence of thermodynamic ﬂuctuations, then the model
becomes a random intermittent search processs.
Random search has recently been used to model a wide
range of problems , including the
behavior of foraging animals 
and the active transport of reactive chemicals in cells
 . The
facilitated diﬀusion of protein-DNA interactions can also
be thought of as a random intermittent search process,
see Sec. II.E. Random intermittent search falls within a
class of random processes characterized by a particle with
both an ‘internal’ and ‘external’ state. The external state
typically represents the spatial location or position of the
particle, and one or more boundary conditions may apply to the process that represent the physical domain in
which it moves. The motion of the particle depends on its
internal state, which can be continuous but is usually discrete. For example, the tug-of-war model from Sec. IV.B
is a process where the position, or external state, changes
deterministically at a constant velocity, while the velocity
depends upon the discrete internal state, the randomly
changing number of motors bound to the microtubule.
In general, the external state need not change deterministically, but could also ﬂuctuate. For example, one could
include diﬀusion of the cargo and add a continuous noise
term whose amplitude depends on the internal state.
In order to formulate motor-cargo transport as a random intermittent search process, consider a single particle moving on a 1D track of length L as shown in Fig.
28. In contrast to the models considered in Sec. IV.A-
IV.G, we now assume that there exists a hidden target
of width 2l centered at X within the interior of the domain. We also assume that if the particle is within range
of the target and is in a slowly moving search state then
it can ‘ﬁnd’ the target at a rate k. Within the context
of motor-driven cargo transport, it is assumed that when
the target is found the particle is immediately removed
from the system, that is, the cargo (with or without its
associated set of molecular motors) is delivered to the target. Hence, the target is treated as a partially absorbing
trap. One possible application of a 1D model would be to
vesicular transport along the axons and dendrites of neurons, where microtubules are aligned in parallel with the
(+) end oriented away from the cell body. (In the case
of dendritic domains close to the cell body, the polarities may be randomly distributed). The hidden target
could then be a synapse, an intracellular compartment
such as an endosome, or the growth cone of an elongating axon, see Sec. IV.D. In general, the transport process
is expected to be biased, with newly synthesized macromolecules transported away from the cell body (anterograde transport) whilst products requiring degradation
are transported back to the cell body (retrograde transport).
It is straightforward to incorporate a hidden target into
the general n-state PDE model (4.20) of a motor complex
moving in a 1D domain by taking
∂t = Ap + L(p),
where A ∈Rn×n again speciﬁes the transition rates between each of the n internal motor complex states, and
the diagonal operator L now has the modiﬁed form
Lj = [−vj∂x + D0,j∂2
x + kjχ(x −X)].
As before, vj is the velocity of internal state j and D0,j is
the corresponding diﬀusivity. The additional term takes
into account the probability ﬂux into the target with kj
the rate for internal state j and χ is the indicator function
if |x| < l
0, otherwise.
In general kj will only be non-zero for a subset of states.
For example, in the 3-state model of Eqs. (4.18), kj =
kδj,0, that is, the unbound stationary or diﬀusing state
is identiﬁed as the search state.
In the case of the more biophysically realistic tug-ofwar model, see Sec. IV.B, the identiﬁcation of the search
motor-cargo
microtubule
FIG. 28 Diagram depicting a motor-cargo complex performing a random intermittent search for a hidden target on a
one–dimensional track of length L.
The motor-cargo complex is transported along a microtubule by two populations
of molecular motors with opposing directional preferences.
When equal numbers of each type of motor are bound to
the microtubule, the motor-cargo complex is in a slowly moving search state and can ﬁnd the target provided that it lies
within the target domain of width 2l centered at x = X.
Target detection rate is k.
states is more complicated. The simplest scenario is that
the cargo locates its target after it becomes fully detached from the microtubule and diﬀuses within distance
of its target, where it binds to scaﬀolding proteins and is
separated from its molecular motors. However, if many
molecular motors are bound to the cargo, the waiting
time between diﬀusive searching events can be too large
to reliably deliver the cargo. Moreover, if the cargo is
large so that its diﬀusivity is low or the cargo is moving
through a crowded and conﬁned domain, diﬀusive motion
may be restricted, preventing the cargo from reaching the
target. Another possibility is that subcellular machinery
is present to detach the cargo from its motors or inhibit
the activity of the motors so that scaﬀolding proteins can
bind to and sequester the cargo. Delivery then changes
from a diﬀusion limited reaction to a waiting time that
depends on a reaction occurring between the motor-cargo
complex and biomolecules (either freely diﬀusing or anchored) local to the target while its moving along the
microtubule. If details of the localization mechanism are
unknown then the simplest model is to assume that this
waiting time is approximately exponential and to associate a target detection rate kj with each motor state.
The model can be simpliﬁed further by assuming that
detection is unlikely while only one species of motors is
engaged and pulling the cargo at its maximum (forward
or backward) velocity. This suggests assigning a single
target detection rate k to those states that have suﬃciently low speeds . Thus,
k(n+,n−) = kΘ(vh −v(n+, n−)), where v(n+, n−) denotes
the velocity when n+ kinesin and n−dynein motors are
attached to the track and vh is a velocity threshold.
The eﬃciency of a given search process can be characterized in terms of two important quantities. The ﬁrst
is the hitting probability Π that a particle starting at x0
at time t = 0 ﬁnds the target, that is, the particle is absorbed somewhere within the domain X −l ≤x ≤X + l.
The second is the conditional MFPT T for the particle
to ﬁnd the target given that it is eventually absorbed by
the target. Let J(t) denote the probability ﬂux due to
absorption by the target at X,
pj(x, t)dx,
where we have suppressed the initial conditions. It follows that
In the case of the 3-state model, it is possible to calculate these quantities directly from the system of PDEs
(4.94) . For more complicated models, the QSS
reduction technique presented in Sec. IV.C can be used
to reduce the system of PDEs to a scalar FP equation.
The target detection terms then lead to an inhomogeneous term in the reduced FP equation:
∂x(V p) + ∂
−λχ(x −X)u,
with λ = Pn
j , and the vector pss
is the spaceclamped steady-state distribution (see Sec. IV.C). For
the three-state model,
1/β+ + 1/β−+ 1/α
There are then three eﬀective parameters that describe
the random search process: the drift V , the diﬀusivity D,
and the target detection rate λ. Each of these parameters
are themselves functions of the various cargo velocities,
transition rates, and target detection rates contained in
the full model. The hitting probability and MFPT are
still given by Eqs. (4.98) except that now the ﬂux is
u(x, t)dx.
1. Mean-ﬁeld model
Further simpliﬁcation can be obtained by considering
a population of searchers and taking a mean-ﬁeld limit
 .
That is, consider N independent, identical searchers that all start at the origin at time t = 0. Each searcher evolves according to
the system of PDEs (4.94) or the corresponding FP Eq.
Denote the FPT to ﬁnd the target of the jth
searcher by Tj, j = 1, . . . , N, with each Tj an independent, identically distributed random variable drawn
from the single searcher ﬁrst passage time distribution
F (1)(t) =
0 J(s)ds. The random time T to ﬁll the trap
is then given by T = min(T1, T2, ..., TN), and the distribution for T is
F (N)(t) = Prob(T < t) = 1 −Prob(T > t)
= 1 −Prob(T1 > t, T2 > t, ..., TN > t)
= 1 −(1 −F (1)(t))N.
Furthermore, suppose that the rate of detection for a
single searcher in internal state j scales as kj = κj/N
with κj independent of j. Set J(t) = J0(t)/N with J(t)
given by Eq. (4.94). It follows that
F (N)(t) = 1 −
In the limit N →∞, the detection rates kj →0 so that
the probability density functions pj(x, t) decouple from
the target.
Moreover, taking the large N limit shows
that the FPT distribution for a population of identical
searchers is
F∞(t) ≡lim
N→∞F (N)(t) = 1 −e−µ(t),
pj(x, s)dxds.
The corresponding hitting probability that at least one
particle ﬁnds the target in the mean-ﬁeld limit is
t→∞F∞(t) = 1 −e−µ(∞).
Thus, Π < 1 if µ(∞) < ∞. The corresponding conditional MFPT is
tµ′(t)e−µ(t)
Combining the mean-ﬁeld approximation with the QSS
reduction leads to the FPT distribution (4.103) with
u(x, s)dxds
and bλ = Pn
j . Here u(x, t) is the solution to the
FP Eq. (4.99) with λ = 0. On a semi-inﬁnite domain
with a reﬂecting boundary at the origin, the method of
images can then be used to obtain the explicit solution
e−(x−V t)2/(4Dt)
2DexV/Derfc(x + V t
Unfortunately, it is not possible to derive an explicit analytical solution for µ(t), although the integral expressions
can be evaluated numerically. Nevertheless, it is possible
to determine the hitting probability Π and the large-time
behavior of the waiting time density f∞(t) = dF∞(t)/dt
under the approximation l ≪X for which
u(X, s)ds,
First, taking the Laplace transform of u(x, t) gives
 
eu(x, s) = e−[Γ(s)−V/2D]x
Γ(s) + V/2D
(V/D)2 + 4s/D.
Assuming that l ≪X, it follows that
µ(∞) ≈2lbλ lim
s→0 eu(X, s) = c
Thus the corresponding hitting probability Π < 1 for
V > 0 and Π = 1 for V = 0 (pure diﬀusion). Second,
the large-time behavior of the waiting time density can
be obtained by using the following asymptotic expansion
of the complementary error function:
erfc(z) = e−z2
Applying this to Eq. (4.108) with z = (x+V t)/(2
D) for large t and V > 0, leads to the approximation
πt3 e−V 2t/(4D),
which is independent of target location X. Substituting
this expression into Eq. (4.109) gives
µ(t) ∼µ(∞) −
e−V 2t/(4D),(4.113)
On the other hand, for V = 0,
e−X2/(4Dt) ∼2c
assuming that e−X2/(4Dt) ∼1 for large t. The largetime asymptotic approximation for µ(t) determines how
the waiting time density, f∞(t), scales with time. For
f∞(t) ∝t−1/2e−ˆc
with ˆc = 2c/
πD, and for V > 0
f∞(t) ∝t−1/2e−V 2t/(4D).
For the sake of illustration, consider the 3-state model
of Eqs. (4.18), for which V, D, λ are given by Eqs. (4.47)
and (4.100).
In the case of a single random intermittent searcher on a ﬁnite track of length L with reﬂecting boundary conditions at both ends x = 0, L (so that
Π = 1) and unbiased transport (β+ = β−= β), it can
be shown that there exists an optimal search strategy in
the sense that there exists a unique set of transition rates
α, β for which the MFPT is minimized . On the other hand, for directed intermittent search (β+ > β−) on a semi–inﬁnite domain
or a ﬁnite domain with an absorbing boundary at x = L
(so that Π < 1), a unique optimal strategy no longer
exists . One ﬁnds that a similar situation holds if there is
a population of N independent searchers . First, consider an unbiased random intermittent search process in the mean–ﬁeld population
model, for which N →∞and β+ = β−= β (V = 0). In
Fig. 29(a) the MFPT is plotted as a function of (i) the
FIG. 29 (a) Unbiased (β+ = β−= β) random intermittent
search in the mean–ﬁeld population model. The MFPT vs (i)
the average search time 1/α with β = 1/ϵ and (ii) the average
duration 1/β of the moving (forward and backward) state
with α = 2/ϵ. Each curve has a minimum MFPT for a given
value of α and β. Parameter values used are ϵ = 0.1, k = 5/N,
X = 50, and l = 0.25. (b) First passage time density for an
unbiased search with same parameters as (a). The solid curve
shows the analytical density function in the mean ﬁeld limit
and the remaining curves are histograms obtained from 104
Monte-Carlo simulations for diﬀerent numbers of searchers
N. ( c) Corresponding ﬁrst passage time density for a biased
search with α = 1/ϵ, β+ = 1/ϵ, β−= 2/ϵ, ϵ = 0.1, k = 5/N,
X = 50, and l = 0.25. (d) The MFPT vs hitting probability
for population model. Each curve is parameterized by 0 ≤
Analytical results are shown as lines, with the
single searcher in grey and the mean ﬁeld limit (N = ∞)
in black. Averaged Monte Carlo simulations (104 simulation
each) are shown as symbols, sets ranging from grey to black,
with a diﬀerent value of N used in each set. From grey to
black there are six sets of simulations with N = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 25,
respectively. Parameter values are the same as c).
average duration of the search phase, 1/α, and (ii) the
average duration of the ballistic phase, 1/β. In both cases
there exists a minimum MFPT for a particular choice of
α, β, consistent with the single-searcher regime.
Next, consider how the search process changes as more
searchers are added. In particular, the ﬁrst passage time
density is approximated by Monte-Carlo simulations for
diﬀerent values of N, and the results are compared to
the analytical mean ﬁeld results. This illustrates how the
single-searcher process (N = 1) is related to the mean-
ﬁeld population search process (N →∞). In Fig. 29(b)
the unbiased case is shown.
The most signiﬁcant difference is found in the large time behavior, with powerlaw scaling t−3/2 for the single search and the so-called
stretched exponential scaling e−ˆc
t (see Eqn. (4.115)) for
the mean ﬁeld N →∞limit. A similar plot showing the
ﬁrst passage time density for a biased search (β+ < β−
so that V > 0) is shown in Fig. 29c). In this case, adding
more searchers has little qualitative eﬀect on the ﬁrst
passage time density, each case having the same exponential large time scaling (see Eqn. (4.115)). In both cases,
the results, show that adding more searchers decreases
the mean search time and the variance. The analysis of
the mean-ﬁeld model showed that the hitting probability is less than unity when the velocity bias is positive
when β+ < β−so that V > 0).
In Fig. 29(d),
the MFPT is plotted against the hitting probability for
diﬀerent values of N. Each curve is parameterized by
β+, the rate of leaving the forward-moving state, with
0 < β+ < β−. By changing the value of β+, any hitting
probability can be achieved. As β+ →β−the searcher’s
motion becomes unbiased, and the hitting probability increases to unity. However, as the searchers become more
unbiased the MFPT also increases, in other words, an optimal search strategy no longer exists. Analytical results
for the single searcher case (N = 1) and the mean-ﬁeld
limit (N = ∞) are shown as solid curves (black and grey,
respectively) and to connect the two, averaged Monte-
Carlo simulations are shown (as dots) for diﬀerent values
of N = 1, 2, 3, 4, 25 (each dot is colored in greyscale from
N = 1 in black to N = 25 in light grey). Ten diﬀerent
sets of Monte-Carlo simulations are run corresponding
to ten diﬀerent values of β+, and in each set the hitting
probability decreases and the MFPT increases as more
searchers are added.
2. Local target signaling
In the case of directed intermittent search there is a
playoﬀbetween minimizing the MFPT and maximizing
the hitting probability.
One way to enhance the eﬃciency of the search process would be for the target to
generate a local chemical signal that increases the probability of ﬁnding the target without a signiﬁcant increase
in the MFPT. This issue has recently been explored using
the QSS reduction of the tug-of-war model . Two potential signaling mechanisms
were considered by the authors, the second of which we
will review in more detail here. The ﬁrst was based on
the observation that the stall force and other single motor parameters are strongly dependent on the level of
[ATP], see Sec. IV.B. Since ATP concentration ([ATP])
is heavily buﬀered, a small region of intense ATP phosphorylation around a target could create a sharp, localized [ATP] gradient, which would signiﬁcantly slow down
a nearby motor complex, thus increasing the chances of
target detection.
The second signaling mechanism involved microtubule associated proteins (MAPs). These
molecules bind to microtubules and eﬀectively modify the
free energy landscape of motor-microtubule interactions
 . For example, tau is a MAP found in the axon of neurons and is
known to be a key player in Alzheimer’s disease (Kosik
V (µm/sec)
D(µm2/sec)
(N+, N−) = (2, 1)
(N+, N−) = (3, 2)
(N+, N−) = (4, 3)
FIG. 30 Eﬀects of tau concentration on the tug-of-war model
with N+ kinesin motors and N−dynein motors. The stall
force FS, forward velocity vf and unbinding rate γ0 are given
by Eqs. (4.31)-(4.33) with [ATP] = 103µM. The other single
motor parameters are : Fd = 3 pN,
γ0 = 1 sec−1, π0 = 5 sec−1, and vb = 0.006 µm/sec. The
corresponding parameters of the FP Eq. are obtained using
a QSS reduction and plotted as a function of τ. (a) Eﬀective
capture rate λ. (b) Drift velocity V . (c) Diﬀusivity D.
et al., 1986). Another important MAP, called MAP2, is
similar in structure and function to tau, but is present
in dendrites ; MAP2
has been shown to aﬀect dendritic cargo transport . Experiments have shown that the presence
of tau or MAP2 on the microtubule can signiﬁcantly alter the dynamics of kinesin; speciﬁcally, by reducing the
rate at which kinesin binds to the microtubule . Moreover, the tau- and MAP2-dependent
kinesin binding rate have the same form . It has also been shown that, at the low tau concentrations aﬀecting kinesin, dynein is relatively unaﬀected
by tau .
Newby and Bressloﬀ modeled the eﬀects of tau
by introducing into the tug-of-war model, Sec. IV.B, the
tau concentration-dependent kinesin binding rate
1 + e−γ(τ0−τ) ,
where τ is the dimensionless ratio of tau per microtubule
dimer and πmax
= 5s−1. The remaining parameters are
found by ﬁtting the above function to experimental data
 , so that τ0 = 0.19 and γ = 100.
Carrying out the QSS reduction of the tug-war-model
then leads to the FP Eq. (4.99) with τ-dependent drift V ,
diﬀusivity D and capture rate λ as illustrated in Fig. 30.
The most signiﬁcant alteration in the behavior of the
motor-complex is the change in the drift velocity V as
a function of τ. The drift velocity switches sign when τ
is increased past a critical point. That is, by reducing
the binding rate of kinesin, the dynein motors become
dominant, causing the motor-complex to move in the opposite direction. The eﬀects of local changes in τ concentration on the eﬃciency of random search can now be
determined by assuming that within range of the target,
|x −X| < l, τ = τ1 > τ0, whereas τ = τ0 outside the
target, |x −X| > l. Carrying out the QSS reduction of
the tug-war-model then leads to the FP Eq. (4.99) with
x-dependent drift and diﬀusivity:
V (x) = V0 + ∆V χ(x),
D(x) = D0 + ∆Dχ(x), (4.118)
where χ(x) is the indicator function deﬁned in (4.96),
V0 = V (τ0), D0 = D(τ0), ∆V
= V (τ1) −V0, and
∆D = D(τ1) −D0.
Solving the piecewise-continuous
FP equation then determines the hitting probability Π
and MFPT T as functions of τ1 for ﬁxed τ0. In Fig. 31,
the hitting probability Π and the MFPT T are plotted
as a function of τ1. As τ1 is increased above the critical
level τ0 = 0.19, there is a sharp increase in Π but a relatively small increase in the MFPT, conﬁrming that τ can
improve the eﬃcacy of the search process.
Another interesting eﬀect of a local increase in τ is
that it can generate stochastic oscillations in the motion
of the motor-complex . As a
kinesin driven cargo encounters the tau-coated trapping
region the motors unbind at their usual rate and can’t
rebind. Once the dynein motors are strong enough to
pull the remaining kinesin motors oﬀthe microtubule,
the motor-complex quickly transitions to (−) end directed transport. After the dynein-driven cargo leaves
the tau-coated region, kinesin motors can then reestablish (+) end directed transport until the motor-complex
returns to the tau-coated region. This process repeats
until the motor-complex is able to move forward past the
tau-coated region. Interestingly, particle tracking experiments have observed oscillatory behavior during mRNA
transport in dendrites . In these experiments, motor-driven mRNA
( N + , N −) = (2, 1)
( N + , N −) = (3, 2)
( N + , N −) = (4, 3)
FIG. 31 Eﬀect of adding tau to the target on the capture
probability Π and MFPT T using parameters from Fig. 30. a)
The analytical approximation P (solid line) and results from
Monte-Carlo simulation. b) The analytical approximation T
along with averaged Monte-Carlo simulations. The synaptic
trap is located at X = 10µm, the trapping region has radius
l = 2µm, and the MT track has length L = 20µm.
capture rate is taken to be k0 = 0.5s−1.
FIG. 32 Diagram showing the eﬀective potential well created
by a region of tau coating a MT, and a representative trajectory showing random oscillations.
granules move rapidly until encountering a ﬁxed location
along the dendrite where they slightly overshoot then
stop, move backwards, and begin to randomly oscillate
back and forth. After a period of time, lasting on the
order of minutes, the motor-driven mRNA stops oscillating and resumes fast ballistic motion. The duration
of the oscillations can be estimated by noting that the
FP equation obtained by carrying out the QSS reduction
describes a Brownian particle moving in an eﬀective potential well Ψ(x) =
X−l V (x′)dx′, where the drift V (x)
of Eq. (4.118) is reinterpreted as a piecewise constant
force, see Fig. 32. Depending on the length of the region inﬂuenced by the trap, and the magnitude of the
drift velocities, the time spent in the potential well can
be quite long. Suppose that a Brownian particle starts
at the bottom of the potential well. The corresponding
mean exit time (MET) (see (2.30)) is
where ν = −V22l is the depth of the well. In general, the
MET will be an exponentially increasing function of the
depth of the well. This means that any error generated
by the QSS approximation will also grow exponentially.
This is typical of large-deviation behavior in a stochastic
process where it is well known that diﬀusion approximations break down. One can still obtain an approximation
of the MET using perturbation methods, but they must
be applied to the full CK equation .
I. Active transport on DNA
So far we have considered the case where ATP hydrolysis by a molecular motor facilitates active transport along
a ﬁxed track. However, it is also possible for ATP hydrolysis by a track to facilitate active transport. Active
transport occurs when waves of ATP hydrolysis along
the track push a passive element much like ocean waves
push a surfer toward the shore. Several studies have examined track-induced transport . Here, we discuss directed transport of a Holliday junction along DNA .
A Holliday junction is a site where two segments of
double stranded DNA (dsDNA) bind and exchange one
of their strands in what is known as genetic recombination. Strands with complimentary base pairs bind and
form a junction. The junction then moves along both
segments until it reaches a termination point. It is well
known that translocation of this junction is an active
transport process, requiring energy from ATP hydrolysis.
A protein called RecA forms a helical polymer
wrapped around a segment of DNA, and interactions between the RecA polymer and the dsDNA drive junction
translocation .
RecA monomers hydrolyze ATP, the nucleoprotein ﬁlament shifts into a diﬀerent conformational state where
the two strands rotate around each other. We refer to
this as the activated state.
One possibility for how the Holliday junction moves
along dsDNA is by hydrolysis waves along the nucleoprotein ﬁlament. This reaction proceeds in waves because
activated RecA preferentially catalyzes ATP hydrolysis
by the adjacent monomer on the 3′ side.
That is, a
monomer hydrolyses ATP much more rapidly when its
neighboring monomer (on the 5′ side) is activated. This
asymmetry creates waves of hydrolysis, with a resulting
mechanical eﬀect, from the 5′ to the 3′ end (hereafter
speciﬁed as the forward direction) of the DNA strand. It
is the mechanical stretching and unwinding of the DNA
induced by the hydrolysis wave that propels the junction
forward. Consider a model of Holliday junction transport
along an inﬁnite lattice of RecA monomers surrounding
a dsDNA. Each lattice site can be in one of two states:
activated or unactivated. Let Sj be a random variable associated with the jth lattice site. In the activated state
Sj = 1, and in the unactivated state Sj = 0. Transitions between these two states are governed by a Markov
switching process,
The rate of transitioning to the activated state depends
on the state of the lattice site to the left, that is, α(0) =
k−and α(1) = k+, with k+ > k−(see Fig. 33).
Because of the coupling between neighboring lattice sites,
one must consider transitions between states of the full
system. If the track contains a ﬁnite number of n sites
then the total number of states in the system is 2n, with
each possible state given by the diﬀerent sequences of 0s
and 1s. In other words, the state space corresponds to
all of the possible binary words of length n.
As a ﬁrst step, before including the motion of the junction on the track, one would like to characterize the
FIG. 33 Diagram describing stochastic hydrolysis dynamics.
steady state properties of the hydrolysis waves on the
track. However, analytical solutions are only possible in
thermodynamic equilibrium, where directed transport is
not possible. Therefore an approximation must be found,
and one approach is to use a mean ﬁeld approximation.
From the Master equation governing the process, one
can derive a hierarchy of equations for the moments of
This system of equation is not closed so that the
equation for the mean, σj ≡⟨Sj⟩, depends upon terms
such as ⟨Sj−1Sj⟩. The mean ﬁeld approximation assumes
that ⟨Sj−1Sj⟩≈σj−1σj, and with this assumption, one
obtains a system of n equations for each σj. However,
since we must consider the n →∞limit, solving the
system of nonlinear diﬀerential equations is impractical.
The simplest mean-ﬁeld approximation is to assume that
σj−1 ≈σj = σ, which yields
σ = k+ −2k−−k0 +
(k+ −k0)2 + 4k−k0
When compared to Monte-Carlo simulation results, this
approximation is only in qualitative agreement, which
suggests that accounting for correlations between adjacent sites is necessary to correctly capture the steadystate behavior.
It is a reasonable assumption that the correlations between sites is short ranged. This motivates an approach
called the ﬁnite segment mean ﬁeld theory (FSMFT) approximation .
Consider a small
segment within the track containing m sites so that the
number of states in the system is M = 2m. Clearly, It is
much simpler to enumerate the Master equation for this
segment than for an inﬁnite lattice. Deﬁne the probability density vector p = (p0, · · · , pM−1)T where each pj
corresponds to a diﬀerent state of the track segment. The
master equation is dp/dt = Ap. The simplest mapping
of the binary state to the index j is the binary representation of base-ten numbers. For example, if m = 2 then
j = 0 corresponds to the state (0 · 0), j = 1 corresponds
to (0 · 1), j = 2 ↔(1 · 0), and j = 3 ↔(1 · 1). In this
example, the matrix of transition rates is
−k0 −k−−σ∆
where ∆= k+ −k−. Recall that the rate of activation
for each site depends upon the state of its neighbor to
the left. The approximation made by the FSMFT is to
set the activation rate of the leftmost site in the ﬁnite
segment to k−(1 −σ) + k+σ, where 0 ≤σ ≤1 is the
mean activation level of the site immediately to the left
of the segment. One way to determine σ is to set it equal
to the mean activation level of the rightmost site in the
segment. This results in the auxiliary equation,
To ﬁnd the steady state hydrolysis activity, one ﬁrst
solves the linear system of equations for the nullspace
of A using standard methods. Then, combining the result with (4.121) results in a nonlinear equation to solve
for σ. Notice that the simplest mean ﬁeld approximation
(4.120) is recovered by setting m = 1.
The movement of the Holliday junction can be incorporated into the model by considering a segment (with
m odd), centered on the position of the junction, that
moves with the junction. For simplicity take m = 3. The
frame shifts whenever a wall passes through the junction.
When the frame shifts, the state of the new site is determined by the far ﬁeld mean activity, σ. This requires
modiﬁcation of transition from states (1 · 0 · 0), (1 · 0 · 1),
and (0 · 0 · 1) to appropriate frame-shifted states after
activation of the center cite. Let the master equation be
dq/dt = ˆAq, where q(t) is the probability distribution
for the activation state of the sites surrounding the junction, with indexing the same as for p. Assume that the
only way to reach the (1 · 1 · 1) state, where the center
cite is activated, is from (1·0·1); this transition does not
result in movement of the junction. Note that transitions
where the shifted segment has the same state as the original do not apear in the modiﬁed transition-rate matrix.
For example, suppose a wall moves the junction to the
right via a transition from (1 · 0 · 0) when the center cite
is activated. The shifted segment can be either (1 · 0 · 1)
or (1 · 0 · 0). Transition to state (1 · 0 · 1) occurs at a rate
k+σ, and transition to (1 · 0 · 0) at a rate k+(1 −σ), but
the transition to (1 · 0 · 0) does not apear in the modiﬁed
transition rate matrix because it has the same activation
state as the pre-shifted segment.
Let q+ correspond to state (1 · 0 · 0) and q−to state
(0·0·1) (or the sum of qj over appropriate states if m > 3).
Then, the steady state velocity and eﬀective diﬀusivity of
the junction is V = k+q+ −k−q−and D = k+q+ +k−q−.
As long as m is chosen large enough so that σ is close
to the far-ﬁeld bulk value, the FSMFT approximation
accurately captures the correlations near the junction; in
practice the authors ﬁnd the m = 5 is a good choice. One
expects the velocity of the junction to depend strongly
upon the catalyzed hydrolysis rate, k+. As this rate is increased, the asymmetry should increase the speed of the
forward hydrolysis waves.
While this is true for small
values of k+, the velocity begins to decrease after a critical value of k+ where the velocity is maximal. This is
due to an increase in the total fraction of activated sites.
A high fraction of activated sites means that the junction is more likely to be trapped within a long segment
of purely activated sites where it does not move.
V. TRANSPORT AND SELF-ORGANIZATION IN CELLS
A. Axonal elongation and cellular length control
During neural development, the formation of synapses
involves the elongation of an axon of one cell to locate
the dendrites of another cell. Axon elongation is a consequence of the interplay between force generation at the
growth cone that pulls the axon forward, pushing forces
due to microtubule and actin polymerization and depolymerization, the rate of protein synthesis at the cell body,
and the action of cytoskeletal motors . Several models of axonal elongation have
focused on the sequence of processes based on the production of tubulin dimers at the cell body, the active
transport of these proteins to the the tip of the growing axon, and microtubule extension at the growth cone
 . One motivation for identifying the polymerization of microtubules as a rate limiting step is that
axonal growth occurs at a similar rate to the slow axonal
transport of tubulin, namely, around 1mm per day. ). For the sake of illustration, consider a continuum
model of the active transport of tubulin . Let c(x, t) denote the
concentration of tubulin at position x along the axon at
time t. Suppose that at time t the axon has length l(t)
so that x ∈[0, l(t)]. The transport of tubulin is modeled
macroscopically in terms of an advection-diﬀusion equation with an additional decay term representing degradation at a rate g:
∂t = D ∂2c
Such a model can be derived from a more detailed
stochastic model of active transport as detailed in Sec.
(IV.C), with V the eﬀective drift due to motor-driven
transport and D the eﬀective diﬀusivity. It is assumed
that there is a constant ﬂux of newly synthesized tubulin
from the cell body at x = 0 so that
∂x = −ϵ0c0 at x = 0.
The ﬂux at the growing end x = l(t) is equal to the
diﬀerence between the ﬂuxes associated with microtubule
assembly and disassembly:
∂x = −ϵlc + γl at x = l(t).
Finally, the rate of growth is also taken to be proportional
to the diﬀerence between these two ﬂuxes according to
dt = Ω[ϵlc −γl] ,
The constant Ωdepends on the size of each tubulin dimer,
the number of microtubules at the tip and the crosssectional area of the axon.
It is straightforward to determine the steady-state
length L of the axon . First,
dl/dt = 0 implies that c(L) = cL ≡γl/ϵl and and
∂c/∂x = 0 at x = L.
The steady-state concentration proﬁle takes the form c(x) = Aeλ+x + Beλ−x with
λ± = (V/2D)
and h = Dg/V 2. The coeﬃcients A, B are determined from the boundary conditions at x = L. Finally, a transcendental equation for
the steady-state length L is obtained by imposing the
boundary condition (5.2):
F(L) ≡e−λ−L −e−λ+L = Dϵ0
having used λ+λ−= −g/D.
For small L, the exponentials can be Taylor expanded to give L ≈
whereas for large L the ﬁrst exponential is dominant and
. The last equation follows from taking h ≪1 so that λ+ ≈V/D and λ−≈−g/V . In the
ﬁrst regime diﬀusion is dominant, whereas in the other
active transport is dominant. Numerical simulations of
the full time-dependent model show that these steadystates are stable and in both regimes the approach to
steady-state is overdamped. On the other hand, for intermediate values of L damped oscillations occur resulting
in overshoot .
There are a number of simpliﬁcations assumed in the
above model .
First, the rate of elongation is based on the average rate
of assembly and disassembly of a bundle of microtubules,
which neglects the stochastic switching between periods
of of elongation and rapid contraction exhibited by individual microtubules .
Second, tensile forces acting on the microtubules within
the growth cone due to interactions with the actin cytoskeleton are neglected . Third,
there are a number of other processes that could act as
rate limiting steps in axonal growth, namely, the recycling of lipid membrane and the maintenance of the energy needs at the growth tip via the transport of mitochondria . A recent stochastic model incorporates a number
of these features . First, the rate
of growth of the axon tip is determined by the rates at
which newly delivered membrane proteins are inserted
into the tip via exocytosis and are removed via endocytosis. Meanwhile, microtubules grow via polymerization
until they reach the axon tip, where they are stabilized
by interactions with the actin cytoskeleton. This in turn
reduces the rate of endocytosis of membrane vesicles.
Axonal length control is one example of how cells regulate the size of their organelles and internal structures.
Size control mechanisms, which are critical for proper
cell function, can be distinguished according to whether
the underlying structure is static ) or dynamic.
Dynamic structures are constantly turning over so that
in order for them to maintain a ﬁxed size, there must be
a balance between the rates of assembly and disassembly. If these rates depend on the size in an appropriate
way then there will be a unique balance point that stabilizes the size of the organelle. Recent experimental work
suggests that such a dynamic mechanism may also occur in eukaryotic ﬂagella .
These are microtubule–based structures that extend to
about 10 µm from the cell and are surrounded by an extension of the plasma membrane. They are at least an
order of magnitude longer than bacterial ﬂagella. Flagellar length control is a particularly convenient system for
studying organelle size regulation, since a ﬂagellum can
be treated as 1D structure whose size is characterized by
a single length variable. The length of a eukaryotic ﬂagellum is important for proper cell motility, and a number
of human diseases appear to be correlated with abnormal
length ﬂagella .
Radioactive pulse–labeling has been used to measure
protein turnover in the ﬂagella of Chlamydomonas, a unicellular green alga with genetics similar to budding yeast
 . Such measurements
have suggested that turnover of tubulin occurs at the
distal + end of ﬂagellar microtubules, and that the assembly part of the turnover is mediated by intraﬂagellar
transport (IFT). This is a motor-assisted motility within
ﬂagella in which large protein complexes move from one
end of the ﬂagellum to the other .
Particles of various size travel to the
ﬂagellar tip (anterograde transport) at 2.0 µm/s, and
smaller particles return from the tip (retrograde trans-
IFT particle
degradation
FIG. 34 Schematic diagram of intraﬂagellar transport (IFT),
in which IFT particles travel with speed v± to the ± end
of a ﬂagellum. When an IFT particle reaches the + end it
releases its cargo of protein precursors that contribute to the
assembly of the ﬂagellum. Disassembly occurs independently
of IFT transport at a speed V .
port) at 3.5 µm/s after dropping oﬀtheir cargo of assembly proteins at the + end. A schematic diagram of
IFT transport is shown in Fig. 34. Immunoﬂourescence
analysis indicates that the number of IFT particles (estimated to be in the range 1–10) is independent of length
 .
If a ﬁxed number of transport complexes M move at a
ﬁxed mean speed ¯v, then the rate of transport and assembly should decrease inversely with the ﬂagellar length L.
On the other hand, measurements of the rate of ﬂagellar
shrinkage when IFT is blocked indicate that the rate of
disassembly is length–independent. This has motivated
the following simple deterministic model for length control :
where a is the size of the precursor protein transported
by each IFT particle and V is the speed of disassembly. Eq. (5.6) has a unique stable equilibrium given by
L∗= a¯vM/2V . Using the experimentally based values
M = 10, ¯v = 2.5 µm/s, L∗= 10 µm and V = 0.01 µm/s,
the eﬀective precursor protein size is estimated to be
a ≈10 nm. A stochastic version of a model for ﬂagellar
length control has also been developed using the theory
of continuous time random walks 
B. Cooperative transport of proteins in cellular organelles
The extensive secretory pathway of eukaryotic cells
provides an alternative system for transporting newly
synthesized lipids and proteins along axons and dendrites
 .
One major organelle of the
secretory pathway is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
which tends to be dispersed throughout the cytoplasm
of a cell , see Fig. 35.
Proteins and lipids destined for the plasma membrane
enter the ER from the nucleus as they are translated
by ER-associated ribosomes, where they fold into their
FIG. 35 LEFT: Diagram of secretory pathway including nucleus, ER and Golgi apparatus.
Nuclear membrane; 2.
Nuclear pore; 3. RER; 4. SER; 5. Ribosome; 6. Protein;
Transport vesicles; 8.
Golgi apparatus; 9.
Cis face of
Golgi apparatus; Trans face of Golgi apparatus ; 11 Cisternae of Golgi apparatus; 12.
Secretory vesicle; 13.
membrane; 14. Exocytosis; 15 Cytoplasm; 16. Extracellular domain.
[Public domain image from WikiMedia Commons].
RIGHT: When two compartments continually exchange products via vesicular transport, a symmetry breaking
mechanisms is needed to maintain nonidentical compartments
(C1 ̸= C2).
proper 3D structure.
The ER can be partitioned into
the rough ER (RER), which is rich in ribosomes, and
the smooth ER (SER), which has only a few sparse ribosomes and tends to form a tubular structure. In neurons,
the RER is present in the soma and proximal dendritic
compartments, whereas the SER is distributed in distal
dendrites (including some dendritic spines) and axons.
The diﬀusivity of proteins within the tubular-like SER is
3-6 times smaller than within the cytoplasm. However,
the ER is constantly being remodeld by motor-driven
sliding along microtubules, for example, which could add
an active component to protein transport . Moreover, the thin
tubular structure of the SER reduces the eﬀective spatial dimension of diﬀusion, thus enhancing progression
along a dendrite. Another important aspect of the secretory pathway is that it is tightly regulated . Proteins accumulate at speciﬁc
exit sites and leave the ER in vesicles that transfer the
cargo to organelles forming the Golgi network where ﬁnal
packaging and sorting for target delivery is carried out.
In most eucaryotic cells the Golgi network is conﬁned
to a region around the nucleus known as the Golgi apparatus, whereas in neurons there are Golgi “outposts”
distributed throught the dendrite.
Thus it is possible
that some proteins travel long distances within the SER
(rather than via active transport along microtubules) before being sorted for local delivery at a synapse.
One of the signiﬁcant features of the secretory pathway
is that there is a constant active exchange of molecules
between organelles such as the ER and Golgi apparatus,
which have diﬀerent lipid and protein compositions. Such
an exchange is mediated by motor-driven vesicular transport. Vesicles bud from one compartment or organelle,
carrying various lipids and proteins, and fuse with another compartment. Transport in the anterograde direction has to be counterbalanced by retrograde transport
in order to maintain the size of the compartments and
to reuse components of the transport machinery. Since
bidirectional transport would be expected to equalize
the composition of both compartments, there has been
considerable interest in understanding the self-organizing
mechanisms that allow such organelles to maintain their
distinct identities while constantly exchanging material
 , see Fig. 35. One model for generating
stable, non-identical compartments has been proposed
by Heinrich and Rapoport , ; Dmitrieﬀand Sens ; Gong et al. ;
Klann et al. ), based on the observation that vesicular transport involves a complex network of molecular
interactions between vesicles, transported molecules and
recipient organelles . That is, the rates of
vesicle exchange between compartments are inﬂuenced
by their composition. An inutitive understanding of the
basic mechanism can be obtained by considering the exchange of four types of protein (SNARES), X, U, Y, V
say, between two compartments. Suppose that in steadystate many vesicles with a low content of X, U move in
one direction (from the ﬁrst to the second compartment),
whereas a few vesicles with a large content of X, U move
in the opposite direction so that the total protein ﬂuxes
are balanced. This would reﬂect diﬀerences in composition of X, U in the two compartments. However, lipid
balance would not be maintained because there would
be a net ﬂux of vesicles in one direction.
balance of lipid ﬂuxes can also be achieved by having
a complemetary transport of Y, V molecules in the opposite direction. The asymmetric states are stablilized
by taking the rates of budding and fusion to depend on
interactions between vesicles and compartments mediated by the protein pairs (X, U) and (Y, V ) .
C. Cell polarity
Many cellular processes depend critically on the stable
maintenance of polarized distributions of signaling proteins on the plasma membrane. These include cell motility, epitheleal morphogenesis, embryogenesis, and stem
cell diﬀerentiation. In many cases cell polarity can occur
spontaneously in the absence of pre-existing spatial cues.
Various experimental studies suggest that there are at
least two independent but coordinated positive feedback
mechanisms that can establish cell polarity . One involves the reinforcement of
spatial asymmetries by the directed transport of signaling molecules along the cytoskeleton to speciﬁc locations
on the plasma membrane , whereas the other involves the coupling of membrane diﬀusion with bistable
enzymatic dynamics .
One example of the ﬁrst class of model is shown in
Fig. 36. Here the asymmetric distribution of a signaling
molecule within the plasma membrane ∂Ωand the orientation of actin ﬁlaments are mutually enhanced through
a positive feedback loop . Let u(r, t)
denote the concentration of signaling molecules within
the plasma membrane. Then u depends on six physically
interpretable quantities: (i) the membrane diﬀusivity D;
(ii) the index function χ(r) indicating the region of the
plasma membrane to which cytoskeletal tracks are attached, that is, the cluster within which u is high; (iii)
the total amount of signaling molecule Ntot; (iv) the rate
of directed transport h; (v) the endocytosis rate k within
the cluster; and (vi) the endocytosis rate K outside the
cluster with K < k. The density u evolves according to
the macroscopic equation 
∂t = D∆u −[kχ + K ¯χ] u + hNcyt
where ∆is the Laplace-Beltrami operator for diﬀusion
in the membrane, ¯χ(r) = 1 −χ(r), and Ncyt is the total
amount number of signaling molecules within the cytoplasm: Ncyt = Ntot −
∂Ωudr. The cytoplasmic pool is
assumed to be homogeneous due to the fast dispersion
of vesicles in the cytosol.
Numerical simulations show
that a stable spatially asymmetric distribution of signaling molecules within the plasma membrane can be
maintained. Moreover, the degree of polarization can be
optimized by varying the rates of endocytosis. One limitation of the model, however, is that the packaging of
signaling molecules into discrete vesicles is ignored, that
is, the model treats transport as a continuous ﬂux of
proteins. As highlighted by Layton et al. , incorporating vesicular transport into the model makes cell
polarization more diﬃcult to sustain.
A simple argument for this proceeds as follows. Exocytic vesicles need
to have higher concentrations of the signaling molecule
than the polarization site in order to enhance the concentration. A dynamic equlibrium of recycling can only be
maintained if endocytic vesicles also have an enhanced
concentration of signaling molecules.
This appears to
put unrealistically strong constaints on the mechanisms
for loading vesicles with cargo prior to transport.
The second basic mechanism for establishing cell polarity does not depend on active transport, and can be modeled in terms of a reaction–diﬀusion system. One example of such a model is described in Fig. 37 . Consider a macroscopic version of the model, in which φ± denote the concentration
of activated and inactivated signaling molecules within
actin filaments
membrane diffusion
endocytosis
FIG. 36 Model of Marco et al. . Signaling molecules
can attach and orient actin ﬁlaments that deliver vesicles carrying the signaling molecule from the cytoplasm to the plasma
membrane. The additional signaling molecules orient more
actin ﬁlaments that transport more molecules in a positive
feedback loop. The local orientation of actin ﬁlaments also
increases the rate of endocytosis within the cluster.
the plasma membrane. Let xc, yc be the concentration
of the counteracting enzymes in the cytosol (which is
assumed to be homogeneous), let x′, y be the concentrations of membrane associated enzymes activated by Φ+
and Φ−, respectively, and let x′′ denote the concentration
of membrane associated enzyme activated by a distribution of receptors s. The model equations take the form
 
∂φ±/∂t = D∆φ± ± g(φ+, φ−, x′, x′′, y)
∂x′/∂t = k′
∂x′′/∂t = k′′aφ+xc −k′
∂y/∂t = kaφ−yc −kdy.
Here ∆is the Laplace-Beltrami operator, k′
d, kd are the forward and backward reaction rates of
the signaling and feedback pathways, and
K′ + φ−+ k′′
K′′ + φ−−kc
is the enzymatic conversion rate of Φ+ to Φ−. The total
amount of Φ+ and Φ−is conserved, φ+ + φ−= c, as are
the total amounts of each enzyme X, Y . Using a timescale separation in which the equilibria for the concentrations x′, x′′, y, xc, yc are reached much faster than the
equilibria for the surface distributions φ±, the dynamics
for the concentration diﬀerence φ = φ+ −φ−reduces to
the system 
∂t = D∆φ + V ′(φ),
V ′(φ) = (c2 −φ2)[Γ′(φ) + Γ′′(φ) + Γ(φ)],
(2K′ + c −φ)(c + φ), Γ′′ = 2(k′′
2K′′ + c −φ
Γ = 2(kcka/kd)yc
2K + c −φ .
extracellular
Φ - rich domain
Φ - rich domain
FIG. 37 Model of Semplice et al. . (a) A set of receptors
transduce an external distribution of chemotactic cues into
an internal distribution of activated enzymes X that catalyze
the switch of a signaling molecule from an unactivated state
Φ−to an activated state Φ+.
A counteracting enzyme Y
transforms Φ+ back to Φ−.
Amplifying feedback loops, in
which Φ+ activates X and Φ−activates Y , result in chemical
bistability. The signaling molecules are permanently bound
to the plasma membrane, where they exhibit lateral diﬀusion,
whilst the enzymes are free to move between the membrane
and the cytosol. (b) Cell polarization occurs when there is
phase separation into two stable chemical states.
Under the adiabatic approximation, the dynamics can be
written in the variational form
∂t (r, t) = −δF[φ]
with F an eﬀective energy functional
D(∇φ)2 + V (φ)
Here integration is with respect to the membrane surface. Stable homogeneous solutions correspond to minima of the potential V (φ) for which V ′(φ) = 0. One ﬁnds
that for a range of parameter values, the system exhibits
bistability. That is, there exist two stable equilibria ϕ±
corresponding to phases enriched in Φ± separated by an
unstable equilibrium.
The polarization of the cell membrane can now be understood in terms of the theory of phase separation kinetics familiar from the study of condensed matter systems
 .
A polarized state will exist when the cell membrane is divided
into two complementary regions, see Fig.
37(b), that
correspond to two distinct stable chemical phases, separated by a thin diﬀusive interface. Such a spatially inhomogeneous solution has to minimize both terms in the
functional (5.13).
One condition for stability is phase
coexistence, that is,
∆V = V (ϕ+) −V (ϕ−) =
V ′(φ)dφ = 0.
A second condition is that the diﬀusive “energy” associated with the interface is minimized. Even when a stable
polarized state exists, the evolution to such a state involves a complex process of nucleation and competitive
growth of heterogeneous patches. Suppose, for example,
that the membrane is initially in a metastable state consiting of the ϕ−phase. External stimulation may make
the ϕ+ phase energetically more favorable but there is
an energy barrier to overcome, which blocks a continuous transition to the ϕ+ phase. Instead, patches of the
ϕ+ phase are nucleated by thermal ﬂuctuations and start
expanding due to front propagation, see also . In fact, one ﬁnds that only patches larger than a
critical size rc ∼1/∆V can expand into the backgound
ϕ−phase with a front velocity ∼∆V .
However, the
growth of the ϕ+ phase decreases xc and increases yc, resulting in a reduction of the barrier height. Thus, growth
slows, the critical radius increases, and large patches
grow at the expense of smaller patches until only a single ϕ+ patch remains, which coexists with the ϕ−phase.
A microscopic version of the model has also been developed , in which the cell membrane
is represented by a 2D lattice with sites populated by
a discrete number of molecules of each chemical species.
The probability distribution of the discrete populations
evolves according to a master equation that keeps track
of all possible chemical reactions and diﬀusive jumps.
VI. DISCUSSION
In this review we have focused on analytically tractable
microscopic and macroscopic models of intracellular
transport. A complementary approach is to develop more
biologically realistic multi-scale computational models,
which include details of the structure of individual macromolecules, the biochemical network of signaling pathways, the acqueous environment of the cytoplasm, the
mechanical properies of the cytoskeleton, and the geometry of the cell. One major challenge in stochastic simulations is how to eﬃciently couple stochastic chemical
reactions with diﬀusion in complex environments . Many approaches are based on spatial extensions
of the Gillespie algorithm for well-mixed chemical reactions .
Several stochastic simulation packages have also been
developed including MCell 
and smoldyn .
In addition to the example of phase separation during cell polarity, macroscopic reaction-diﬀusion systems can exhibit complex
spatiotemporal dynamics including coherent oscillations,
wave propagation and Turing pattern formation .
These are thought to play an important role in a variety
of cellular processes including morphogenesis, cell division, and embryogenesis . Understanding
the aﬀects of noise at the microscopic level on reactiondiﬀusion dynamics is an active area of current research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This publication was based on work supported in part
by the National Science Foundation (DMS-1120327) and
by Award No KUK-C1-013-4 made by King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology (KAUST).