The advantages of metalenses over
diffractive lenses
Jacob Engelberg
1 & Uriel Levy
Optical elements play a crucial role in many modern systems, from cellphones to
missiles. The miniaturization trend poses a challenge to optics, since classical
lenses and mirrors tend to be bulky. One way of dealing with this challenge is
using ﬂat optics. For many years ﬂat optics has been implemented using diffractive optics technology, but in the last two decades a new technology called
metasurfaces has emerged. This technology does not replace diffractive optics,
but rather expands on it, leveraging the new ability to manufacture subwavelength features on optical substrates. For imaging and focusing applications, diffractive lenses and metalenses are used, as a subset of diffractive optics
and metasurfaces, respectively. Recently there has been debate over whether
metalenses offer any real advantages over diffractive lenses. In this commentary
we will try to gain some insight into this debate and present our opinion on the
What are metalenses?
The term ‘metamaterial’, referring to subwavelength-level artiﬁcially engineered 3D material
with desired effective bulk optical parameters, was coined around the year 2000. Metasurfaces
and metalenses were invented even before that1–3, although these terms, which derive from
viewing them as metamaterials with dimensionality reduced to 2D, were introduced more than a
decade later4. Metalenses have recently gained popularity, with many papers published on this
subject in leading journals5,6.
If we take the example of a positive (focusing) lens, a diffractive lens is an optical element that
mimics a plano-convex refractive lens (Fig. 1a), but in which the convex surface is “ﬂattened” by
breaking it down into radial zones (Fig. 1b). The penalty is strong chromatic aberration, i.e., at
wavelengths other than the design wavelength the focal point shifts linearly with the inverse of
the wavelength. From a physical optics point of view one can say that the phase delay in a
diffractive lens is introduced modulo 2π (or a multiple thereof). For the purpose of this commentary we deﬁne a diffractive lens by this phase wrapping feature, i.e., the phase is limited to a
maximal value, thus producing a quasi-periodic structure.
In a metalens, which is a type of metasurface, the phase is induced via the response of
nanostructures (called nanoantennas) built on the surface of the substrate material (Fig. 1c). This
contrasts with a conventional diffractive lens (CDL) where the phase inducing mechanism is still
like that of a refractive lens—based on the length of the ray path inside the lens material. Three
main methods have been used to introduce the phase delay in dielectric metasurfaces: Truncated
 
1 Department of Applied Physics, The Faculty of Science, The Center for nanoscience and nanotechnology, The Hebrew University Jerusalem, 91904
Jerusalem, Israel. ✉email: 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:1991 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1234567890():,;
waveguide3,7, geometrical phase8–10, and more recently resonant
or Huygens11,12 nanoantennas (Fig. 2).
Since the phase induced by the nanoantennas is limited in
magnitude to about 2π, a metalens of any signiﬁcant optical
power can be considered as a diffractive lens, as it also induces
phase modulo 2π. Note that the classical deﬁnition for optical
power of a lens is the inverse of the focal length, but here we
prefer to relate to power as the Fresnel number of the lens,
which is the maximum induced phase (of the “unwrapped”
wavefront) in units of π. The Fresnel number gives a far more
accurate indication of how much “work” the lens is doing in
redirecting the ﬂow of light.
We have established that a metalens is a type of diffractive lens,
albeit nonconventional in its physics of phase accumulation.
However, not every diffractive lens is a metalens. For a lens to be
considered a metalens it must have a subwavelength quasiperiodic structure, as opposed to a CDL which is based on a
super-wavelength quasi-periodic structure.
Consider the more general case of a metasurface: What can
metasurfaces do that conventional diffractive surfaces cannot? As
an example, metasurfaces can manipulate the polarization of
light, while diffractive surfaces cannot. Metasurfaces can also
show resonant behavior, i.e., their properties can be a strong
function of wavelength. As such, it is now well established that
metasurfaces possess unique properties that cannot be achieved
by conventional diffractive surfaces13. Yet, going back to the more
speciﬁc case of a metalens, it is typically only the phase of the
light that is manipulated. As this can seemingly be done equally
well by a diffractive lens, the advantage of a metalens as compared
to a CDL is a subject of debate. Recently, Banerji et al. have taken
the position that anything metalenses can do—diffractive lenses
can do equally well or better14. Metalenses have claimed
numerous advantages over CDLs. In the following sections we
will look at these individually.
Reduced thickness
There are questions over whether there is a signiﬁcant advantage
to a ∼100 nm layer (characteristic of a metalens) compared to a
∼1 µm layer (characteristic of a diffractive lens), since they
are both constructed on top of a much thicker substrate, typically
∼1 mm thick14. This is certainly true from the end-user point of
view. From a manufacturing point of view, there is an advantage
to thinner structures, but often what determines the manufacturing challenge is the aspect-ratio (height to width) of the
structures, which is not necessarily lower in metalenses than
Binary structure. It is claimed by some in the diffractive community that the manufacture of a multilevel diffractive lens (i.e., a
surface proﬁle consisting of several discrete surface heights) is
easier than that of a binary (two-level surface height) metalens, as
the feature size of the diffractive lens is larger14. On the other
hand, the metalens community claims that it is simpler to
manufacture a binary metalens structure than a multilevel diffractive15. It seems to us that “easy” and “hard” to manufacture
are subjective terms that depend on the equipment and expertise
available to the speciﬁc research group or fabrication facility.
Clearly both approaches are challenging.
CMOS compatibility. From a materials point of view, CMOS
compatibility is not a distinguishing factor, as there are
Fig. 1 Artistic cross-sectional sketch of lens types. a Conventional bulky refractive lens b Diffractive lens showing ﬂattening by division into radial zones
c Metalens showing nanoantennas for phase control.
Fig. 2 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of several metalens antenna forms. a Nano-ﬁns used for geometrical phase, reproduced with
permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2016 AAAS. (b) Nano-rods used as truncated waveguides, reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Springer Nature and
c Nano-disks used for Huygens metalens, reproduced with permission from ref. 12, De Gruyter. Scale bar is 1 µm.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:1991 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
metalenses that are not CMOS compatible (such as TiO2 based),
and CDLs that are (such as Si based). Generally speaking, the
dimensions of a metalens (small transverse dimensions and
depth) are more compatible with a CMOS fabrication line,
whereas those of CDLs (larger transverse dimensions and depth)
are more compatible with a MEMS fabrication line. Potentially,
both can be manufactured in large scales and at low cost. CMOS
compatibility is important for any lens that is intended to be
incorporated in the manufacturing process of a sensor or other
on-chip system that is manufactured using CMOS technology.
However, with current advances in wafer stacking technology, the
lens wafer can be stacked on the photo sensor wafer at the 12″
wafer scale, so the advantage may not be so crucial.
High-numerical aperture capability. It has been claimed that
high-NA diffractive lenses were demonstrated more than a decade ago, and therefore metalenses offer no advantage in this
respect14. However, the demonstrated lens16 was a binary (twolevel) diffractive, and the efﬁciency of the lens was not reported
(the theoretical limit being 40.5%). In addition, it is interesting to
note that the fabrication of this lens was performed using a
process similar to the process that is used for metalenses (SiN
deposition, e-beam write and lift-off), so this example does not
support the argument that CDLs can give the same performance
as metalenses, with a simpler manufacturing approach. Higher
efﬁciencies can be obtained by using a multilevel diffractive element, with a blaze optimized using the rigorous diffraction
grating theory17,18. However, this raises the following question:
Assuming a moderately high NA, say of 0.5, the smallest period of
the diffractive lens turns out to be 2λ (λ being the central working
wavelength of the lens). With 4 phase levels, providing efﬁciency
of ∼70%13, the minimum feature size is 2λ/4 = λ/2 –i.e., it is
subwavelength. So, is this a CDL or a metalens? Even if one still
deﬁnes this lens as a CDL (as the subwavelength features are not
quasi-periodic), the advantage of easy fabrication as a result of
large super-wavelength features cannot be claimed.
As of today, there are demonstrations of metalenses with
signiﬁcant optical power and NA > 0.97,9,11 with good efﬁciency,
equivalent
demonstrated
experimentally.
Chromatic correction. Chromatic correction of diffractive lenses
was demonstrated long ago using multi-order diffractive optics19.
This was achieved by a diffractive lens operating around a high
diffraction order m (∼10) instead of the usual ﬁrst order, which
allows several wavelengths to be focused at the same plane. The
price paid is the zone depth, which is m times larger than that of a
standard ﬁrst-order diffractive. This method has been extended,
using numerical optimization methods, to obtain maximum
performance at minimum increase in etch depth14.
In metalenses, there have been many recent demonstrations of
chromatic correction. The most common method used is
dispersion engineered nanoantennas20. The advantage of the
method is that it provides color correction over a continuous
wavelength range. However, the method is limited to small
optical powers and/or wavelength ranges20. Other methods of
chromatic correction demonstrated in metalenses are cascading21
and transverse multiplexing22. These methods can provide
correction at several discrete wavelengths, typically at the expense
of efﬁciency.
As chromatic correction can be achieved using diffractive
optics, one may argue there is no point in exploring it in
metalenses. However, the mechanisms for providing the chromatic correction are physically different. In addition, the number
of degrees of freedoms available in a metalens design to tackle
chromatic aberrations is much higher than in CDLs. Therefore,
we think it is too early to say that metalenses cannot provide
better polychromatic performance than what has been achieved
with CDLs.
Regarding chromatic correction, we would like to point out
that the methods used in both CDLs and metalenses are not
scalable, i.e., the fact that good correction was achieved with a
small metalens (e.g., 10–100 µm aperture/focal length), does not
mean that this concept can be applied to the same metalens when
scaled up (to 1–10 mm aperture/focal length). All the achromatic
metalenses demonstrated to date are small, thus there is still room
for innovation in this ﬁeld.
Tunability. There have recently been many demonstrations of
tunable metasurfaces and metalenses. In the case of metalenses
this is important mostly for focus adjustment, but perhaps also
relevant for creating a zoom effect or correcting aberrations.
Some of the tuning methods, such as mechanical stretching23,
may also be applicable to diffractive lenses. However, some are
applicable only to metalenses24. It seems that metalenses have an
advantage in this respect.
Polarization selectivity. Polarization sensitivity is manifested
mostly in geometrical phase based metalenses (where the induced
phase is deﬁned by the orientation of otherwise identical
nanostructures) and is generally looked upon as a drawback, as it
reduces efﬁciency for unpolarized light. However, in some cases it
can be exploited to focus right- and left-circularly polarized light
at different lateral6 or longitudinal8 positions. In principle, it is
possible to design various polarization-sensitive functionalities
with metalenses. This degree of freedom is not found in CDLs.
Outlook. In summary, it is true that many metalens applications
that have been demonstrated could be achieved equally well with
CDLs. Nevertheless, metalenses have already outperformed CDLs
high-efﬁciency
applications7,9). Metalenses have more degrees of freedom than
CDLs, as their nanostructures come in unlimited forms. There is
still room for innovation in CDLs, and metalens research should
not overshadow this. However, is seems inevitable that the more
mature ﬁeld of diffractive optics, which has already been successfully transferred to industry, will take a backseat in academic
research with respect to the newer ﬁeld of metasurfaces and
metalenses, which has yet to prove itself in the ﬁeld.
Many applications have been suggested for metalenses, in the
spectroscopy,
color/polarization
tunable focusing, and augmented reality. There may be still
unexplored advantages in terms of applications for metalenses.
We believe that eventually metalenses will make it into industry,
when the appropriate application meets commercial manufacturing capability. However, we do not think they will replace
diffractive lenses, since for many applications CDLs are sufﬁcient
and more cost effective. As of today, one of the stages metalenses
must traverse on the path to commercialization is adoption of
good engineering practice, for example the use of relevant
performance ﬁgures of merit that will allow comparison of
different types of lenses. We conclude that the importance of the
research does not depend on what buzzword is used, but on its
contribution to scientiﬁc understanding and potential industrial
applications.
Received: 25 February 2020; Accepted: 6 April 2020;
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:1991 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications