HAL Id: hal-00190571
 
Submitted on 23 Nov 2007
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for
Roy D. Pea
To cite this version:
Roy D. Pea. Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. Gavriel Salomon. Distributed cognitions Psychological and educational considerations, Cambridge university press, pp.47-
87, 1993. ￿hal-00190571￿
Learning in doing: Social, cognitive, and computational
perspectives
GENERAL EDITORS: ROY PEA
JOHN SEELY BROWN
The construction zone: Working for cognitive change in school
Denis Newman, Peg Grrfin, and Michael Cole
Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine
interaction
Lucy Suchman
Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation
Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger
Street mathematics and school mathematics
Terezinha Nunes, Anahria Dim Schliemann,
and David William Carraher
Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and context
Seth Chaiklin andJean Lave (editors)
Distributed cognitions
Psychological and educational
considerations
GAVRIEL SALOMON
University of Ha$, Israel
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge
The Pin Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RI'
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia
0 Cambridge Universify Press 1993
First phlished 1993
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Conqcsr Catalo@n~-in-Publicdion Data
Disaibuted cognitions : psychological and educational considerations
/ edited by Gavriel Salomon.
cm. - (Learning in doing)
Includes index.
ISBN 0-521-41406-7 (hard)
1. Cognition and culture.
2. Knowledge, Sociology of.
3. Cognition - Social aspects. 4. Learning. Psychology of - Social
aswcts. I. Salomon. Gavriel. 11. Series.
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 0-521-41406-7 hardback
List of contribufon
Series foreword
1 A cultural-historical approach to distributed
MICHAEL COLE AND YRJO ENGESTR~M
2 Practices of distributed intelligence and designs
for education
ROY D. PEA
3 Person-plus: a distributed view of thinking and
D. N. PERKINS
4 No distribution without individuals' cognition:
a dynamic interactional view
GAVRlEL SALOMON
Living knowledge: the social distribution of
cultural resources for thinking
I.UIS C. MOLL, JAVIER TAPIA, AND
KATHRYN F. WHITMORE
6 Finding cognition in the classroom: an expanded
view of human intelligence
THOMAS HATCH AND HOWARD GARDNER
Michael Cole and Yji; Engestrom
Miinsterberg, H. . Psychology: G m n d and applied. New York: Appleton.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. . Reciprocal teaching of comprchension-
fostering and monitoring activities. Cognition and Instrudion, 1, 117-75.
Rubin, J. Z., Provezano, F. J., & Luria, Z. . The eye of the beholder: Parents'
view on sex of newborns. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 44, 5 12-19.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. . Fostering the development of self-regulation
in children's knowledge processing. In S. F. Shipman, J. W. Segal, & R.
Glaser (Eds.), Thinking and learning skills: Research and opm questions (pp.
65-80). tlillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schwartz, T. . The size and shape of culture. In F. Barth (Ed.), Scale andsorial
mgnniia!ion @p. 215-52). Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
 . The structure of national cultures. In P Funke (Ed.), Undmtanding thc
USA @p. 110-49). Tiibingen: Gunter Narr.
Shorter, E. . Bedri& mannm: 7 % ~
troubled histoy of d
and paticn~s. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Stocking, G. . Rue, ml~urc, and mlution. New York: Free Press.
'I'oulmin, S. . Toward reintegration: An agenda for psychology's second cen-
tury. In R. A. Kasschau & C. N. Coter (Eds.), Psychology? second crntury:
d u r i n g issues @p. 264-86). New York: Pneger.
Valsiner, J. . DcuelopmmtaIpsycholo~ in the Souid Union. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. . The problem of the cultunl development of the child, 11.
Journal of Gmctic Psyrholo~, 36, 415-34.
 . 7 % ~
dcvclopmrnt of hixher psychological /undions (in Russian). Moscow:
Izdael'stov Akademii Pedagogicheskikh Nauk.
 . Mind in sodefy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 . 'Ihinking and speech. New York: Plenum. 
Wertsch, J. . 771c swial f ~ i o n
of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
White, L. . On the use of tools by primates. 3urnol of Comparative psycho lo^,
34, 369-74.
 . The concept of culture. A m n h n Anthropologist, 61, 227-51.
Wundt, W. . Elonrnlr offilkpsyrholo~. London: Allen & Unwin.
Practices of distributed intelligence
and designs for education
Roy D. Pea
Introduction
Widespread conceptions of learning and reasoning invoke
"intelligence" largely as a property of the minds of individuals. This
belief is prevalent in educational settings, which are concerned
largely with solitary intelligence. Intelligence, they say, is what testing
firms test and, increasingly commonly, what schools need to be held
more accountable to measuring and improving.
Problems lurk in these assumptions. Anyone who has closely ob-
served the practices of cognition is struck by the fact that the "mind"
rarely works alone. The intelligences revealed through these practices
are distributed - across minds, persons, and the symbolic and phys-
ical environments, both natural and artificial. Gregory Bateson re-
marked that memory is half in the head and half in the world. In this
chapter, I will first lay out the central ideas of the distributed-
intelligence framework and then provide a background to its devel-
opment, before closing with considerations of some implications for
education. How we think about these relations may change what we
Portions of this chapter were originally slated to appear in a book edited by David
Perkins and Becky Simmons of Harvard University's Educational Technology Cen-
ter. Plans for that book subsequently foundered, and portions of my essay 
appear here as a necessary pretext to subsequent work. Previous papers on this theme
were first presented in April 1988 to the First Annual Cognition and Education
Workshop, Bolt, Beranek and Newrnan, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusens, and at the
1988 Cognitive Science Society Meetings. Related work was described at the 1989
Social Science Research Council Conference on Social Aspects of Computing (in
which Gawiel Salomon and David Perkins participated) and in the 1990 American
Educational Research Association Symposium on Distributed Intelligence, which
led to the plan for this book. I am indebted to Christina Allen for provocative dis-
cussions of distributed intelligence, especially concerning design and the roles of hu-
man desires.
R q D. Pea
do with technologies in education - not only computational media,
but also social technologies for supporting learning such as guided
participation or peer collaboration and learningheaching materials
more broadly. While providing few answers, I hope to provoke new
questions and inquiries, for distributed intelligence is not a theory of
mind, or culture, or design, or symbol systems and their impact on
human thought so much as it is a heuristic framework for raising
and addressing theoretical and empirical questions about these and
other topics.
While the relevance of these concepts is not restricted to learning
in mathematics, science, and technology, I will often use examples
and issues in these fields for making my points, since the roles for
distributed intelligence perhaps stand out in greater relief in these
domains than in other areas of learning, education, and work.
The nature and concepts of distributed intelligence
Knowledge is commonly socially constructed, through col-
laborative efforts toward shared objectives or by dialogues and chal-
lenges brought about by differences in persons' perspectives.
Intelligence may also be distributed for use in designed artifacts as
diverse as physical tools, representations such as diagrams, and com-
puter-user interfaces to complex tasks. In these cases, intelligence is
often distributed by off-loading what could be elaborate and error-
prone mental reasoning processes as action constraints of either the
physical or symbolic environments.
On close inspection, the environments in which humans live are
thick with invented artifacts that are in constant use for structuring
activity, for saving mental work, or for avoiding error, and they are
adapted creatively almost without notice. These ubiquitous mediating
structures that both organize and constrain activity include not only
designed objects such as tools, control instruments, and symbolic
representations like graphs, diagrams, text, plans, and pictures, but
people in social relations, as well as features and landmarks in the
physical environment. Imagine the absence of the following resources
and the detrimental effects of that absence on the activities to which
they may contribute intelligence: keyboard letters, labels on instru-
ment controls, everyday notes, weli-placed questions, the use of space
Distributed intelligence and &signs fir education
to organize piles of materials on a desktop, the emergent text in a
mitten composition one is constructing. These everyday cases show
the active and evolving structuring of the material and social environ-
ments to make them a repository of action mediators. Unlike other
species, such as Simon's ant on the beach, whose complexity
of behavior is determined more by the shape of its environment than
by its mental contents, humans have desires that lead them to recraft
their environments to cany out aspects of reasoning, to make remind-
ers for action, and to get help from others. When talking about dis-
tributed intelligence, then, 1 mean that resources in the world are
used, or come together in use, to shape and direct possible activity
emerging from desire. This is not to claim, of course, that all intelli-
gence is or can be so distributed, but that there is a constitutive trend
in this direction to be found in cultural history, ontogenesis, and the
microgenesis of activity.
The distributed-intelligence orientation that I describe, which
takes these observations as central data about cognition, stands in
sharp contrast to the common focus on "intelligence" as an attribute
of individuals, carried primarily in internal transformations of mental
representations of symbols for goals, objects, and relations. Theories
of education building on these notions are concerned largely with sol-
itary intelligence, decontextualized from its uses in activities beyond
the educational. Analyses of our designs for such distributions may be
more revealing for understanding cognition than are studies of the
formation and transformation of mental representations that have
come to define cognitive science and educational studies based on
this field.
Some key interrelated concepts I will use require clarification.
These include "intelligence," "activity," "distributed," "means-end
adaptivity," "affordances," and "desire!'
Intelligence as distributed and manifest in activity
The primary sense of distributed intelligence arises from
thinking of people in action.' We begin with activity, expressing
' I take the work of Leont'ev on activity theory as arguing forcibly for the
centrality of people-in-action, activity systems, as units of analysis for deepening our
understanding of thinking. On related philosophical grounds, Wartofsky's historical epistemology also highlights eaernal action, or praxis, as the focus of
understanding for psychological development.
I leave designed obiects such as "artificially intelligent" computer software aside
for the moment, concentrating on noncomputational objects. Whether computer pro-
grams engage in cognition is not a topic of this chapter.
Dislribuled in felligence and designs for educahon
the generic folk value sense, so I reject "distributed foolishness"
or "stupidity" as antonyms of "distributed intelligence." These are
values at the evaluation level of the action itself (e.g., "Bank rob-
bing is a stupid and not an intelligent act") or in terms of norms re-
garding, for example, the efficiency of means-end adaptivity, as in
"Using a rock to hammer a nail is stupid; using a hammer is more
intelligent."
How do tools serve as artifacts of distributed intelligence,
carrying along with them new opportunities for contributing to ac-
tivity, as defined by a community of users of such tools? 1 begin this
inquiry by noting the focal relevance of works by Vygotsky, Simon,
and Gibson. Each of these theorists considered questions about the
distribution of intelligence between the world and the mind to be
fundamental. Vygotsky placed great emphasis on the ways in
which the character of social interactions and externally mediated
action makes explicit certain processes that come to be internalized
in the private thought of the individual. In Simon's seminal
work, TheSciencrs oftheArlrficia1, he questions whether what we often
consider the complexity of some act of thought may have more to
do with the complexity of the environment in which action takes
place than with the intrinsic mental complexity of the activity. In
pointing to the mind-environment interface, Simon suggests looking
at problem solving as distributed between mind and the mediational
structures that the world offers. In Gibson's work on
the ecology of perception, the notion of "affordances" of objects that
link perception and action is central. "Affordance" refers to the per-
ceived and actual properties of a thing, primarily those functional
properties that determine just how the thing could possibly be used.
Less technically, a doorknob is fir turning, a wagon handle is $r
Research examining the concept of affordances is critical if we are
to build a science of distributed intelligence and a more flexible de-
sign orientation to the practices of education. For many of the hoped-
for goals of education, we presuppose the success of the social
constructability of affordances - that one can get a learner to attend to
Roy D. Pea
the pertinent properties of the environment, or the designed object,
or the inscriptional notations, such that the learner can join in to con-
tribute to distributed intelligence in activity. For a given activity, and
the various means for its achievement, there can be considerable vari-
ation in the ease with which one can show a learner how to exploit
those means to form a system of distributed intelligence for achieving
that task. This will vary with the learner's background experiences,
the obviousness of the mapping between the learner's desire or goal,
and the assimilation of the artifact as means toward it. Such a meet-
ing of intentionality and artifact in activity is thus not simply the direct
perceptual pickup of the affordance structure of the object or nota-
tion, as radical Gibsonians would have it. Culture and context con-
tribute to its achievement.
Norman has done a great service both to the field of design
and to psychology in developing Gibson's insights on affordances
(which largely underplayed the cultural factors involved in learning to
use humanly designed objects) into what he calls a "psychology of ev-
eryday things." Norman offers many examples - microwave ovens,
videocassette recorders, car instrument panels, slide projectors, even
water faucets - to show how affordances of objects deeply and often
unnecessarily restrict their accessibility to the ordinary human. The
point is that better design of artifacts would make it easier to accom-
plish certain functions. One would like to be able just to look and see
what to do, and then do it, without instruction, without manuals,
without complex deductions. Such "efficiency" of action is also a
tacit objective of cognition in practice. Everyone can imagine a few
examples of powerful representational tools that are not obvious in
function (e.g., the static x-y coordinate graph, static ray diagrams in
optics) and make apparent that what Norman calls the "psychopa-
thology of everyday things" may carry over only too well to an account
of the psychopathology of instructional artifacts and representations
in mathematics and science.
Lave offers many examples of "smart tools" that we may
point to as illustrations of the everyday presence of such distributed
intelligence. She describes how measurement activities are often
achieved with special-purpose "stashes" of numerical information
embodied in measuring instruments. Examples include such invisible
cases as the dime-store thermometer, yardstick, auto speedometer,
Distributed intelligmce and &signs fir education
and home thermostat. Many of these objects have become "mythic,"
as Roland Barthes uses this term, in that they have become so
deeply a part of our consciousness that we do not notice them.
Turned from history into nature, they are invisible, un-"remarkable"
aspects of our experiential world. A large number of such "smart ob-
jects," especially for measurement and for calculation, but also as re-
minding devices, are appearing. They are becoming especially
prevalent as microprocessors enter the fabric of everyday activities by
the tens of millions. Finding marketable niches for such efficiency,
many of these devices reify common problem formats and automate
solution-finding procedures. Examples include jogger pulse meters,
automatic street locators, currency exchange calculators, world-time
clocks, and weight-loss calculators.
These tools literally cany intelligence in them, in that they repre-
sent some individual's or some community's decision that the means
thus offered should be reified, made stable, as a quasi-permanent
form, for use by others. In terms of cultural history, these tools and
the practices of the user community that accompany them are major
carriers of patterns of previous reasoning. They may contribute to
patterns of distributed intelligence configured in activity. They may
now be used by a new generation with little or no awareness of the
struggle that went into defining them and to adapting their charac-
teristics to the tasks for which they were created. The inventions of
Leibniz's calculus and Descartes's coordinate graphs were startling
achievements; today they are routine content for high school mathe-
matics. But as such tools become invisible, it becomes harder to see
them as bearing intelligence; instead, we see the intelligence "resid-
ing" in the individual mind using the tools. This encapsulation of dis-
tributed intelligence, manifest in such human activities as measuring
or computing, may arise because we are extraordinarily efficient
agents, always trying to make what we have learned works usable
again and again. We deploy effort-saving strategies in recognition of
their cognitive economy and diminished opportunity for error .
The individual still has a primacy in activity, of course. But the
distributed-intelligence framework sees a much more substantial
haze around the boundary of the person and shines the light of at-
tention on the more invisible intelligence in the artifactual, physical,
R q D. Pea
Distributed intellkence and &s~@jrir education
symbolic, and social surrounds, as brought into relief in the config-
urations of distributed intelligence by which activity is achieved.
To sum up, knowledge is often carried in artifacts as diverse as
physical tools and notational systems such as algebraic equations.
This knowledge may come to be exploited in activity by a new learner
through a variety of genetic paths: through observations of use by
other humans and attempts to imitate it, through playful discovery of
its affordances in solitary activity, and through guided participation in
its use by more knowledgeable others. And the affordances of such
artifacts may be more or less difficult to convey to novice users of
these artifacts in the activities to which they contribute distributed
intelligence.
Our last major concept is "desire." What initiates activities
and designs of distributed intelligence? I find it useful to begin with
Norman's approximate model of the structure of activity. His
account of seven stages of action proceeds through four stages of ex-
ecution - forming a goal, forming an intention, specifying an action-
sequence plan, and executing an action, and three stages of
evaluation - perceiving the world state after the action, interpreting
the world state, and evaluating an outcome of action in relation to the
goal. Since I believe that the concept of "goal" common in cognitive
science presupposes commitment to greater articulateness and men-
tal representation than the diffusely specified desires that often lead to
a ~ t i o n , ~
it will be important to develop some basic account of desires
in order to think about the shapes of distributed intelligent activity
that emerge for people.
How do people's desires for a particular situation shape both their
interpretation and their use of resources for activity? Human use of
distributed intelligence in the designed environment to achieve ac-
tivity goes far beyond either situational determinism or a decoding
' Agre (in press), Suchman , and Winograd and Flores have provided
compelling arguments on this point, rooted in phenomenological works by
Heidegger, Husserl, and Schutz. Their arguments on the primacy of situated action
and the derivative nature of mental representation also rest on a shift of anention
toward person-acting-in-sening-with-others-and-artifacts-with-cultunl-histories
the to-be-explained rather than individual knowledge.
of the intentions behind the design of obiects.While one who is using
a hammer to strike a nail is, in the achievement of that activity, in an
important sense collaborating with its designer, there is more to it
than this. The process also involves the interpretation of resources
and relationships for creative and novel activity . Re-
sources of the world offer potential relationships, constrained by their
affordances, that may not at all be mentally represented prior to a sit-
uational perception of their meaning. Their functional roles as com-
ponents of a configuration of distributed intelligence may arise only
in the course of desire-driven initiatives by an actor. This observation
is profoundly true for designers, who are continually creating new ob-
jects and environments, interpreting their meaning, and revising their
designs accordingly . Intelligence is contributed in each
moment by the ways in which people interpret the things they are ex-
periencing. We need to understand more fully the genesis of human
desires, because people create, invent, and innovate as they create or
act in designs for distributed intelligence. They do not simply act in
habitual, static ways. The interpretation, relevance, and meaning of
resources available for activity are shaped by the desires with which
people come to situations.
Some basic distinctions are valuable for beginning to think through
a useful taxonomy of desires. We can identitjl a small set of basic de-
sires, not intended to be exhaustive, each of which constitutes a kind
of experiential "moment" that a person brings to a situation for
achieving activity:
1. With a task desire, one has a clear goal and intention, and the need
is to specif) an action with a particular means. If I am freezing in
a cabin, my task desire for warmth may make the affordance of a
chair for burning much more salient than its affordance for sitting.
If my task desire were different, different properties of the chair
would matter.
2. With a mapping desire, one falls short of mapping the achievement
of projected activity back into the specific action to be taken with an
available means. I know this tool may be used to achieve the activity,
but I am uncertain of how the distributed-intelligence resources
need to come together in design. In Norman's terms, this is a gap
to be closed from intention to specification of action. I have avail-
able an outline processor instead of a typewriter for writing - my
Roy D. Pea
Distributed intelligence and &signs /or education
task of writing and tool are known, but now the desire is to find the
ways in which this outline processor is useful for the writing task.
To close this gap between desire and action may require reflective
cognition, as suggested in accounts of the breakdown of "concern-
full action" .
3. With a circums~antial desire, one has no specific goal or intention in
approaching the situation. Instead, the desire arises opportunisti-
cally in response to one's noticing properties of the situation that
emerge during action. A rubber band becomes a musical instru-
ment; a steering wheel emerges as a percussion device for the driver
listening to a song. For circumstantial desire, the role of play, of ex-
ploration of potential relations into which the object can enter, can-
not be underemphasized.
4. With a habituaf desire, one merely repeats a familiar course of action
incorporating the distributed-intelligence resources of the world or
other persons into one's activity. Winognd and Flores 
follow Heidegger in calling such unreflective, action-embedded
knowledge "ready-to-hand." The blind man tapping his cane on
the pavement treats it as an extension of self; it becomes invisible in
its properties as means, since it is so well integrated in activity4
The seven stages of action are cycled with minimal notice.
In these examples, we can see creativity emerging from situated in-
terpretations of resources in the environment based on desires. Cre-
ativity often consists of novel interpretations in activity of desire-
situation resource pairs. While more kinds of desire surely exist than
the ones described,' we can see the importance of the concept by not-
ing how designs for distributed intelligence are reliant upon the spe-
cific desires in an activity.
Beginnings
How did this view of distributed intelligence arise? I can ex-
plain what it seeks to account for in terms of the paths that led to its
' An example often used by Wingenstein and Merleau-Ponty, and later by Bateson
'For example, Ford and Nichols define a broad variety of human goals, in-
cluding goals directed toward transactional accomplishments such as those of safety,
sex and reproduction, self-esteem, establishing social relationships, and hunger sat-
isfaction, and what they describe as internally oriented goals such as experiencing a
sunset, having fun, feeling joy, avoiding stress, and spirituality.
development. As a developmental psychologist in the early 1980s with
a long-term interest in the social foundations of cognitive growth, I
became very intrigued with the increasingly prevalent use of technol-
ogies in society, including the widely hyped developments in artificial
intelligence systems of the time. What consequences would this have
for rethinking human development, learning, and educational goals
practice? I developed a cultural-historical perspective, influenced
by the works of Vygotsky, Luria, and Cole and rooted in the theories
of Vico, Hegel, Marx, and Engels, for addressing these questions.
Cole and Engestrom (Chapter 1, this volume) provide some historical
context for this work, so I will not do so here. A fundamental aspect
of this perspective is a view of human nature that, while acknowledg-
ing biological and environmental contributions, emphasizes that hu-
mankind is "reshaped through a dialectic of reciprocal influences:
Our productive activities change the world, thereby changing the
ways in which the world can change us. By shaping nature and how
our interactions with it are mediated, we change ourselves" . Just as the use of physical machinery in farm labor
came to mediate human interaction with nature in increasingly dif-
ferent ways, so too do computer technologies mediate human inter-
actions with nature, information, and other persons in distinctly
different ways. This argument is an extension of Vygotsky's arguments in "Tool and Symbol," in which he emphasized that
both physical tools and symbol systems culturally 'mediate human
This perspective on the sociohistorical construction of human na-
ture is also reflected in studies of the child as a "cultural invention,"
in which it is argued that the concept of "child" is a social and his-
torical kind rather than a natural kind, and that children become what
they are taken to be by others .
1 took up these issues in several different essays. In one , 1 argued that computer tools serve not as they are often
construed - as "amplifiers" of cognition - but as "reorganizers of
mental functioning." The distinction highlighted the functional or-
ganization, or system characteristics, of human activity. Whereas
amplification suggests primarily quantitative changes in accomplish-
ments, what humans actually do in their activities changes when the
functional organization of that activity is transformed by technologies.
R q D. Pea
Disrributed intelligence and &sips h r education
(1 explicate some of these functional shifts later in a section on Polya
and distributed intelligence.)
In another essay speculating on integrating human and computer
intelligence, I took a Vygotskian perspective on this question , asking whether future computer systems could serve inter-
actively, as adults and more able peers do now, to help guide children
through zones of proximal development (ZPD), co-constructing with
children their latent developmental capabilities. The central idea that
emerged from these considerations was a radical one - that of con-
sidering the child-computer system as the developmental unit. 1 sug-
gested an extension of the Turing test for assessing computer
intelligence by means of an inability to differentiate interactive dia-
logues with the output of a human and that of a computer. In this ex-
tension, applied to the developmental level of the child-computer
system outputs rather than the unsupported child, one would look for
answers to queries concerning tasks defined to represent thinking of
particular developmental levels for a child-computer system versus a
child alone.
I further distinguished between "pedagogic systems," or uses of
computers that focus on achieving the cognitive self-sufficiency of
their users, and "pragmatic systems, which allow for precocious in-
tellectual performances of which the child may be incapable without
the system's support" . More recently, Salomon,
Perkins, and Globerson have echoed this distinction in their
characterization of effects of technology and effects with technology, a
contrast to which I will return.
Getting to distributed intelligence
Since those essays were written, there has been a substantial
increase in the density and novelty of computer technologies that play
important roles in augmenting human activities, in science, industry,
and education. Of special relevance to distributed intelligence is the
increasing use of visualization techniques in scientific inquiry.
Augmenting intelligm~-4 with compu~ing
In the case of science visualization, throughout many univer-
sity and industrial research laboratories, groups and individuals are
achieving their desired activities through the use of high-resolution
qaphics programs, often involving supercomputers, which provide
manipulable "virtual realities" for
modeling and reasoning about domain phenomena in science, engi-
neering, mathematics, and design . In this paradigm,
p p h i c computer representations have "direct manipulation" inter-
faces with action properties
analogous to their real-world counterparts. Human intuitions about
how to act are exploited in communication with the machine in order
to narrow gaps between desires and actions.
From such labs as that of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, VPL Research, National Center for Supercomputing
Applications at University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and NASA
AMES Research Center, scientific visualization examples include
topics as diverse as molecular "docking" in molecular engineering
 , travel
through virtual buildings before they are constructed ,
and a study of a numerically modeled severe storm . Furthermore, modeling and interpretation of patterns
in complex empirical data in biomedical research, space exploration,
geophysics, molecular modeling, and robotics have come to depend
on three-dimensional (3-D) graphic rather than numerical data
displays, and new 3-D designs for structuring information displays
exploit human visualization skills as well . The veridicality of many of these aesthetically elegant in-
terfaces to complex knowledge are so striking that they have come to
be designated as "virtual realities" in which highly complex phenom-
ena can be modeled, explored, and experienced in lush color and dy-
namics well suited to the categorizing and pattern recognition
capabilities of the human visual system and, in some cases, the proprioceptive feedback that is pro-
vided. For example, take the following description of a 1991 SIG-
GRAPH course by Richard Becker of AT&T Bell Laboratories:
Consider for example, measurements of temperature, humidity, barometric pressure,
percentage of cloud cover, solar radiation intensity, and wind speed at a particular
location at noon on 100 different days. The data on these six non-spatial variables
consist of 100 points in a six-dimensional space. In this course, participants peer into
such six-dimensional spaces, see the configuration of points, and visualize them to
understand their complex relationships.
R q D. Pea
Distributed intellipce and designs h r education
Note in applications of advanced computing such as these how syrn-
biotic are the contributions of the scientist formulating the problems
and comparisons of interest, the designers of visualization algorithms,
and the contributions of computation and display technologies.
While such applications are beyond most K-12 senings, nonethe-
less dynamic 2-D and, occasionally, 3-D graphic interfaces contrib-
ute to learning and reasoning in mathematics and science education.
Perhaps most striking is the use in thousands of classrooms of
microcomputer-based laboratories with which students can investi-
gate real-world phenomena by means of data collection using probes
that plug into the computer for such variables as temperature, pres-
sure, light, and sound, with the generation of graphs to be interpreted
as the results of these investigations . Again, consider the contributions
made by the teacher and curriculum materials to the framing of the
learner's investigations, the learner's perceptual and interpretive pro-
cesses for looking at graphs, the technology collecting data and trans-
forming them into data displays, and the designers behind these
innovations. Similarly striking advances have been made in develop-
ing computer tools for learning statistics in middle schools and high
schools through building and manipulating statistical models of pop-
ulations ; or for
learning Newtonian physics in elementary schools . In each case, researchers and educators
have been surprised at the young age at which learners can partici-
pate in treatments of complex subject matter.
Augmenting intelligenu with guided participation
There has also been much work on designing new social ar-
rangements and activity structures to support human learning, much
of it inspired by Vygotskian and neo-Vygotskian conceptions
of the ZPD, which argue that development occurs as the "internal-
ization" of socially distributed cognitive processes in a "zone of
Spatial location, shape, color, brightness, and motion are used in commercial sta-
tistics programs such as Data Desk, MacSpin, Statview, and Systat for visualizing
complex empirical phenomena and equations.
proximal development," toward autonomous performance . In these conceptions of social contexts of cognitive develop-
ment, adults often provide supported situations for children to per-
form more complex tasks than their current knowledge and skills
alone would allow. Such "guided participation" distributes the intelligence required to carry off the
activity across child and adult. Affiliated work has elaborated a model
of learning through reciprocal teaching and cognitive apprenticeships
in which intelligence required to do an activity (e.g., interpret a text)
is distributed across a group of peers, or a learner-mentor system
 , as exemplified by instructional studies in reading , text composition , col-
lege mathematics problem solving , and learning
how to reason in geometrical optics (Pea, in press; Pea, Sipusic, &
Allen, in press).
Augmenting intelligence with inscriptionul systems
It is widely recognized that external representational systems,
dependent on inscriptional technologies such as paper and pencil,
computer and display, have made major contributions to the socio-
historical development of science, mathematics, and other disciplines
 . I use the phrase "inscrip-
tional systems" rather than "symbol systems" or "representational
systems" for two reasons. First, I want to stress their external, in-the-
world status, which allows for construction, review, deconstruction,
and the emergence of completed structures of inscriptions that have
little relation to their patterns of temporal development . Second, both "symbol" and
"representation" have taken on the cognitive sciences interpretation
of mental representation, deemphasizing the sociohistorical fact that
many of the kinds of notations that are considered to be among the
languages of "thought" - such as mathematical language, written
language, and scientific symbols - began their existence ontogenet-
ically as external inscriptions whose conventions ofconstruction, inter-
pretation, and use in activities had to be acquired in cultural activities.
R q D. Pea
We know that inscriptional systems often pose vast problems for
the learner. Mapping relations between objects in the world and the
written number system are problematic for many learners, as in
the well-documented difficulties of place-value subtraction or, for
older learners, between algebra equations or linguistic descriptions of
situations and their representation in the notation of Cartesian coor-
dinate graphs . inscriptions rarely reveal their affor-
dances for activity. It is too rarely recognized that inscriptional
systems, while allowing for efficient achievement of certain goal-
directed activities, also make those very activities opaque to persons
not privy to the conventions for their interpretation and use, an un-
fortunate circumstance for learning mathematics and science. The
affordances of many inscriptional systems are deeply cultural in the
following sense: A person has to have been introduced to, and pref-
erably to have participated in, the activities that give meaning to these
inscriptions. After such initiations, one may have the sense of directly
perceiving the patterns the inscriptional system was designed to make
"obvious," but before such initiation, the conventions and uses of the
inscriptions are usually obtuse. Mature users of an inscriptional sys-
tem know the kinds of tasks it is good for - the questions it enables
them to answer, the inferences it enables them to make - as well as its
limitations. Much of this is invisible to the initiate, since such social
practice does not lie "in" the representation itself, but in its roles in
relation to the activities of persons in the world.
People often invent inscriptional systems for local purposes, to
achieve activities that would be harder to accomplish without them.
For example, in describing a microgenetic study of adolescents' in-
vention of a notational scheme for describing velocity and accelera-
tion, di Sessa et al. characterized the increasing sophistication
of the notation as one of "transparency" or obviousness to their in-
tended purpose. He described the talents the students revealed in de-
scribing the pros and cons of the inscriptional systems that different
students invented during the several-hour session as "metarepresen-
tational knowledge." He demonstrated how the different kinds of in-
scriptional systems the students invented required more or less
explanation for peers to be able to interpret the mapping from in-
scription to the situation depicted. 1 argue that we see the concept of
efficiency of action, and the closing of the gap from desire to achieve-
Distribured intellipce and ahips fi)r educa~ion
ment, as important contributors to the normative assessments of
"better" inscriptional systems .
Augmenting intelligence with situated cognition
Diverse studies, primarily on the basic mathematical reason-
ing that is embedded in such activities as the order loading of dairy
workers , grocery shopping , and
home dieting measurement activities and various
street-life activities, such as street candy selling by Brazilian children
 , be-
gan to reveal the powerful ways in which people use structural prop-
erties of the physical environment to carry some of the weight of what
is traditionally "mental" activity in school-based mathematics tasks
 . For example, in
grocery store best-buy shopping, when mathematics is used at all, it is
virtually always correct and creative in its uses of material features of
unit sizes to save "mental" work in computation .
Similar findings on exploitation of the environment to help in the do-
ing of intelligence are provided by work on ecological memory in re-
petitive work tasks such as those involved in barhopping and waiting
on tables . Such studies highlight how intelli-
gence efficiently uses resources, drafting, or crafting the environment
to achieve activity with less mental effort if necessary. These studies
highlight the situated properties of everyday cognition, which is
highly inventive in exploiting features of the physical and social situ-
ation as resources for performing a task, thereby avoiding the need for
mental symbol manipulations unless they are required by that task.
Empirical domains in which these conceptions have been further de-
veloped include reasoning about algebraic functions on a physical
winch , team navigation of a large ship , and carrying out photocopying tasks .
The work on situated cognitive theory by Lave, Scribner, and oth-
ers was richly descriptive and revealed aspects of human preference
structures for relying on intelligence in the world in functional sys-
tems of activity. But that work did not go far enough in my opinion.
It fell short in not acknowledging the fundamental roles of design in
the activities of these reasoners and designers, in the achievement of
R q D. Pea
action through situated cognition. These studies also did not move
from "is" to "ought" - for example, by recommending that learners
be prepared by education to more deeply exploit situated knowledge
for action in the world; nor did they, as Norman's work came
to do, exhort designers to help learners function more effectively in
the world.
Rich phenomena mithoul a framework
1 was struck by the lack of adequate conceptions of intelli-
gence and its development to account for what was exciting and
seemed to be working in new computer-enhanced work and learning
environments, those studies involving new social arrangements for
supporting learning, and accounts of the situated properties of ev-
eryday cognition. But what was the link?
The missing orientation came to me as I was reflecting on a story
told by Seymour Papert at a meeting of National Science Foundation
project officers in 1987. Papert had provided extensive neo-
Piagetian arguments that when, in instruction-centered learning, one
directly teaches a learner something, one robs that learner of the op-
portunity to discover it for him- or herself. This constructivist
argument7 has been quite influential in designs for educational tech-
nology use in schools and in other curricular approaches. A version of
this argument was made at this 1987 meeting by Papert concerning
Logo-LEG0 research. In this research, students built LEGO
machines that could be controlled by Logo programs they wrote
 . Papert described what marvelous machines
the students had built, with very little "interference" from teachers.
On the surface, this argument was persuasive, and the children were
discovering important things on their own. But on reflection, I felt
this argument missed the key point about the "invisible" human in-
tervention in this example - what the designers of LEGO and Logo
crafted in creating just the interlockable component parts of LEGO
machines or just the Logo primitive commands for controlling these
machines. For there are only so many ways in which these compo-
nents can be combined. Considerable intelligence has been built into
' The MIT Epistemology and Idearning Group now designates its pedagogical per-
spective as one of "constructionism" .
Distributed intelligence and designs for education
these interpart relations as a means of constraining what actions are
~ossible with the parts in combination. What I realized was that, al-
though Papert could "see" teachers' interventions (a kind of social
distribution of intelligence contributing to the child's achievement of
activity), the designers' interventions (a kind of artifact-based intel-
ligence contributing to the child's achievement of activity) were not
seen, were somehow not viewed as affecting the terms of the con-
structionist argument. But, of course, in either case the child was not
engaged in solitary discovery, in keeping with the Piagetian metaphor
of "child as scientist" - he or she could be scaffolded in the achieve-
ment of activity either explicitly by the intelligence of the teacher, or
implicitly by that of the designers, now embedded in the constraints of
the artifacts with which the child was playing.
Distributed intelligence mediated by design
What was thus missing, in my view, was an explicit recogni-
tion of the intelligence represented and representable in design, spe-
cifically in designed artifacts that play important roles in human
activities. This led me to work on concepts and research explicitly
concerning the notion of distributed intelligence around 1987 and described in the present chapter.
Polya on problem solving and distributed intelligence
As an illustration of the ways in which conceiving of activity in
terms of distributed intelligence reorients our perspectives on famil-
iar phenomena, let us look at a set of familiar assumptions about the
nature of problem solving from cognitive psychology. Specifically, let
us briefly turn to a familiar model of problem solving from Polya's
How to Soh It and explore how the concept of distributed intelligence
relates to it. The standard problem-solving model, introduced by
John Dewey early in the century and revised and popularized
by the mathematician George Polya , has been assimilated into
the mainstream of cognitive psychology, appearing in most textbooks
and accounts of problem solving. Many theorists have found its de-
piction in a six-stage model convenient (Figure 2.1). Research has
shown the applicability ofthis model to writing, algebra word problem
Ray D. Pea
FINDING THE PROBLEM
REPRESENTNGTHE PROBLEM
PLANNING A PROBCEM SOCUTEN
EXECUTING THE PLAN
CHECKING THE SOLUTW
REFLECTWG TO CONSOLIDATE LEARNING
Figure 2.1. Six-stage problem-solving model.
solving, reading comprehension, electronics troubleshooting, pro-
gramming, decision making, and many diverse tasks educators would
like students to be able to do. It is important to note that these are not
linear stages in a top-down process, but comprise a more cyclic system
in which each new set of constraints created by materials the problem
solver produces makes for new opportunities to be exploited in its
next developments . This was the
fint mylh to dissolve about the stages of problem solving.
The distributed-intelligence perspective provides reasons to ex-
plode a second and third myth intrinsic to the problem-solving model.
Each involves dissolving the "boundaries" around the boxes.
The second myrh is that the boxes in the model are constructions of
the individual mind. Each phase may be, but is often not, the result of
individual achievement. The role of others is crucial. In neo-
Vygotskian research by Wertsch, McNamee, McLane, and Budwig
 , we can see even "problem finding" as a social construction of
the child with other agents, such as the mother who guides the child
to "see" goals in the task of jigsaw-puzzle making. Similarly, in re-
cent work on "anchored instruction," the Cognition and Technology
Distributed intellipce and designs /or education
Group at Vanderbilt uses teacher guidance and carefully
scripted videotapes of everyday problem solving to help students
"see" the utility of concepts and strategies in mathematics and sci-
ence for achieving activities in the world.
The third myrh is that the different boxes in the model are mental
constructions. They may be, but they are often not "tool-free." Cru-
cial roles in mediating such phases of problem solving are played by
external representations, features of the environment, and artifacts.
"Planning a problem solution" is often mediated by external repre-
sentations such as written language in lists or charts, or in diagrams
serving as qualitative models of the problem situation. "Plan execu-
tion" is even automatically achieved through tools designed to save
effort and to spare reliance on error-prone procedures .
So as we begin to ask, "What is distributed in distributed intelli-
gence?" the boxes begin to crumble, and more complex formations of
activity emerge:
1. Different whole-component processes of the problem-solving
model (e.g., problem finding or problem representation) may be
distributed in the environment, tools, or other persons. Whole task
components are typically distributed during mllaburativc activities
(e.g., one person may draft a topical plan as another finds materials
to allow for writing) and apprenticing .
2. Parts of a whole-component process may be distributed as social
constructions or as a result of processes of human-tool symbiosis
(e.g., an outlining program and I work together to plan for text com-
position). In the social construction of plan execution during the
single-word period, mother and child may build together a sentence
that describes the present situation (Keenan, Schieffelin, & Plan,
Let us look more specifically at some of the ways intelligence is dis-
tributed with respect to the problem-solving model.
Problemfinding.
Goal cues are distributed in one kind of "problem
finding." The need to recall what to do at an appropriate time or to
cope with an overload of goals one wishes to maintain in working
overcome by the use of artifacts (e.g., alarms, lists),
strategies using environmental features (such as reminder
objects put in key locations), or other persons. A software program
timely cues to the different subtasks of writing or to
planning a project development and delivery schedule. And in some
structured curricula, "problem-finding" aspects of distributed intel-
ligence are distributed in the text as adjunct questions to the reader.
Humans often opportunistically use available
objects, artifacts, or notes in representing problems - for example,
milk crates are used by dairy loaders as calculating units . A few examples will provide an illustration. In the well-known
"cottage cheese" example, a weight watcher in the kitchen multiplies
2/, by 3/+ through physical objects and divisions rather than symbol
multiplication . Requiring specification of units,
the software program Semantic Calculator helps students represent
problems in appropriate terms. As a social distribution of "problem
representation," a teacher suggests that a student draw a diagram
model of a problem before constructing equations to solve it. And
rather than requiring the meation of representations, computer tools
often offer different representations for selection. Mapping between
problem representations may be done automatically instead of by the
student (e.g., automatic graphing of algebraic functions is now avail-
able on inexpensive calculators).
Planning a problem solution. This is often made unnecessary as the
gap between plan and plan execution is reduced to perceptual choice
by severely reducing the number of choices. To save error and effort,
algorithms for repetitive measurement or computations can be built
into the artifact used to measure, so that applying the tool to the task
is the needed action and "planning" becomes unnecessary. "Plan-
ning" a problem solution for riding a bicycle for the first time without
falling over becomes unnecessary when training wheels are mounted.
Research on learning to compose texts shows that it is easier to write
well when one uses planning aides such as "completion" sentences:
"My most important point was . . . " .
Dis fributed inte1I;Rence and designs fir education
Executing the plan.
This is often distributed. Effortful, repetitive ac-
tivities of "clerical cognition" are automated as algorithms, macros,
and templates for execution with minimal thought or off-loaded onto
tools or machines . A typical word-
processing macro might be to "find all occurrences of 'mind'; replace
each with 'society of minds' in italics." Autochecking and autocorrec-
tion of typing mistakes are now features of many spell-checking pro-
grams. Social allocation of the part-component process of plan
execution takes place in apprenticeship learning, too, and is used by
analogy in recent work in artificial intelligence that sends computer
"agents" off to do information retrieval. Prominent examples already
in schools are strategy-supporting and outlining programs for writing
and microcomputer-based laboratories that provide hardware-
software systems for measuring and graphing changes over time in
temperature, light, or sound. For a few hundred dollars there are pro-
grams that provide equation-solving "workbenches" that automati-
cally do complex symbol manipulations, which are prone to error
when carried out with paper and pencil.
Error checks ofsolutions. These are commonly distributed. The need
to check for errors (e.g., in calculations or programming) is often ob-
viated by blocking the very possibility of error. Error-prone activities
are made impermissible to carry out in many systems of human-com-
puter interaction (e.g., the computer queries whether I really want to
throw away my word processor when I accidentally act to delete it).
With this introduction in mind, let me offer an unfamiliar but typ-
ical example of intelligence "embodied" in artifacts, distributed for
use across history and minds.
An illurninuring case
An example of distributed intelligence comes from the PBS
television show "Square One" on mathematics for children. A forest
ranger is being interviewed. Each year she measures the diameters of
trees in the forest to estimate the amount of lumber contained in a
plot of land. With a conventional measuring tape she
Roy D. Pea
I. measures the circumference of the tree (6 feet);
2. remembers that the diameter is related to the circumference of an
object according to the formula circumference/diameter equals 22/
7 (or pi);
3. sets up the formula, replacing the variable circumference with the
value of 6 feet;
4. cross-multiplies, getting 22(diameter-unknown) = 42;
5. isolates the diameter by dividing by 22, obtaining 42/22;
6. reduces the fraction 42/22 to 1.9 feet.
Note that to do this she has to remember the formula, set it up cor-
rectly, and then correctly do her substitutions and calculations. This
procedure is error- and effort-prone. She could learn to do this au-
tomatically. She could even ask someone nearby who happens to be
good at estimating. But something different happens: A new measur-
ing tape is invented. I call it a special-purpose "direct calculation"
tape for tree-diameter measures. The numbers have been scaled so
that the algorithm for these calculations is built inlo the tool. She
wraps it around the tree and reads off "1.9 feet" directly. The only
possible errors are perceptual ones (if she does not see the number
clearly) or ones caused by the use of the tape for measuring purposes
to which it was not adapted.
The work done by the new measuring tape helps explain why it is
wrong to say that the person using it "represents the problem," "plans
a problem solution," and "checks the solution." These three phases
of the intelligent activity of measuring trees are distributed in the ob-
ject used for measuring, its social history of practices for engaging
that embodied intelligence, and the user's memory for how to engage
that tool in activity.
This example illustrates that activity is a product not of intelligence
in the individual mind, but of one's memory, the structure of the re-
sources available in the environment at hand, and one's desires, which
guide the interpretation of these structuring resources. Through pro-
cesses of design and invention, we load intelligence into both physi-
cal, designed artifacts and representational objects such as diagrams,
models, and plans. We exploit intelligence from objects when we use
them instrumentally in activities. And we often need to decouple in-
telligence from such objects to reuse them in novel ways. Once such
intelligence is designed into the affordance properties of artifacts, it
Distributed intelligence and desips j;lr educution
both guides and constrains the likely contributions of that artifact to
distributed intelligence in activity. Obviously the measuring tape,
once the formula has been compiled into its design, cannot readily be
adapted to linear measurement without recrafting its scale.
Issues in distributed intelligence
A focus on distributed intelligence is now rare in learning or
educational research. The common assumption of solo intelligence
as a central goal of education guides the investigation of learning, the
cultivation of mental abilities, information processing, the role of
misconceptions in the acquisition of new knowledge, and the design
of classroom instruction, with relative disregard for the social, phys-
ical, and artifactual surroundings in which such activities take place.
Many schools, technology developers, and researchers now use tech-
nologies to "enhance" education by making the achievement of
traditional objectives more efficient. Many intelligent tutors and soft-
ware programs in mathematics and science fit together under this
strategy. Objectives for education are not reconceptualized; the com-
puter is conceived of as a means for "delivering" key components of
instructional activity - not for redistributing intelligence and new
uses of students' potentials for activity and participation.
Yet the phenomena of distributed intelligence make apparent how
the exploitation of external resources changes the functional systems
from which activity emerges. New resources, and changing attitudes
toward the integrity of their use, change the properties of what one
"needs to know." Culturally valued designs for distributed intelli-
gence in which a learner participates to achieve a specific goal will
change throughout history. Stated with a different focus, and as but
one example, what is considered to be the curriculum will vary when
the technologies used for reasoning in a domain change .
These shifts are particularly dramatic for mathematin. As one may
observe in the new curriculum and evaluation standards proposed by
the National Council of Teachers in Mathematics (NCTM), the sup-
port of computer technologies has dramatically transformed the ob-
jectives and timing of the entire course of mathematics education
OUCTM, 1989). For example, in K-4 mathematics, a focus on long-
division operations and paper-and-pencil fraction computation has
been diminished, the availability of calculators is assumed, and atten-
tion is shifted to estimation activities and a focus on the meaning of
operations and the selection of appropriate calculation methods. In
grade 9-12 mathematics, the presumed use of calculators, graphing
utilities, statistical programs, and computer-based exploration of 2-D
and 3-D figures and uses of coordinate and transformation ap-
proaches to geometry leads to recommendations for decreased atten-
tion to such activities as hand graphing of functions, paper-
and-pencil solution of trigonometric equations, and axiomatic
treatments of Euclidean geometry. The treatment of entirely new top-
ics in statistics, probability, and discrete mathematics is made possible
at these grade levels by visual and dynamic technological support for
reasoning and learning in these areas. The NCTM standards go on
to note that "calculators, computers, courseware, and manipulative
materials are necessary for good mathematics instruction; the teacher
can no longer rely solely on a chalkboard, chalk, paper, pencils, and a
text" .
While the distributed nature of intelligence is everywhere notice-
able, what consequences should these observations about distributed
intelligence have for the design and practice of education? If we treat
distributed intelligence in action (rather than the individual's knowl-
edge structures alone) as the scientific unit of analysis for research
and theory on learning and reasoning, new questions arise:
1. What is distributed (i.e., different components of the problem-
solving process as well as the product)?
2. What constraints govern the dynamics of such distributions in dif-
ferent time scales (e.g., microgenesis, ontogenesis, cultural history,
phylogenesis)?
3. Through what reconfigurations of distributed intelligence might
the performance of an activity system improve over time?
4. What distributions and their changes over time are effective for
specific goals of education?
When we think about intelligence as manifest in activity and as dis-
tributed in nature, we may wish to ask a descriptive question for
learning: How do learners enact the cultural practices for designing,
constructing, and displaying distributed intelligence in activity? We
must also ask the prescriptive version of this question for education:
Dislributed intelligence and designs /or education
How should learners acquire such cultural practices? To answer the
latter question, we will need to examine trade-offs in the design of
distributed intelligence that may influence our considerations.
Trade-offs in the design of distributed intelligence
It is important to observe and acknowledge distributed in-
telligence because successful learning (that which eventuates in
the achievement of activities) often involves it and learning beset
with failures often does not. Education often results in making far
too many people look "dumb" because they are not allowed to use
resources, whereas outside of education we all use resources. To get
close to empowering more learners to do the activities that educa-
tion should be enabling, intelligence should be recognized as dis-
tributed and education should elaborate the design consequences of
that fact.
I have said much about design, perhaps too much for many psy-
chologists and educators. But one central aspect of work in design is
that it is very commonly posed, or at least thought about, in terms of
[rude-ofi. A designed thing is, of course, but one choice among many
possibilities that were considered, and even more possibilities that
were never considered. Designers often are quite articulate about
trade-offs .
Why is a focus on trade-offs important? Because much of the crit-
ical discussion around distributed intelligence takes an extreme
position on one or two dimensions of a design trade-off and over-
emphasizes it at the cost,of acknowledging the more basic point that
trade-offs are inevitable in design. What we quickly come to see is
that we have a long way to go in working on our own design space for
considering the ways in which distributed intelligence relates to
learning and education. There are no easy or obvious answers. And
recourse, much less reliance, on existing practice is one of the weak-
est arguments of all. It makes it seem as if there is little choice but to
yield to existing practice, when quite different arrangements may be
possible, preferable, and even practical. It does not follow that they
would be easy to achieve.
Let us consider several important trade-offs in thinking about de-
signs of distributed intelligence as examples of these issues.
Rqy D. Pea
Trade-off 1: access to adivity versus understanding ifs /ioundafions.
central trade-off is that between urns and undmtanding that may
come from focusing on either tool-aided cognition or tool-unaided
cognition. What opportunities are lost for learner participation in
higher-level activities, and meaningful contributions rather than basic
skills practice, if one does not allow for distributed-intelligence sup-
port for those activities involving artifacts and other persons? Tools
may grant greater accessibility to complex mentation. More universal
access among learners to participation in complex thought and activ-
ities may be gained at the expense of low-level understanding. An
emphasis on learning activities requiring tool-unaided cognition may
grant deeper understanding, but at the cost of blocking many indi-
viduals from engaging in meaningful whole-task problem solving be-
cause of the learning "overhead" of knowledge needed to get to the
tool-unaided problem-solving process.
Whatever we find as scientists about how the dynamics of distrib-
uted intelligence work, we are still faced with the moral question of
educational aims - whether they are to foster intelligence that it ex-
ecuted "solo," is tool-aided, or is collaborative, or in what combina-
tion for what content domains and activities. We are at a point in
cultural history where these issues of tool-aided, socially shared cog-
nition must be examined and debated on empirical grounds. What
designs of distributed intelligence are effective to what ends? What
are our assumptions about the patterns of distributed intelligence in
society into which students must enter and productively use what they
have learned?
In describing the theoretical significance of learner development
being aided by both social and computational "scaffolds" to achieve
more than the learner could alone, 1 argued some time ago:
Self-suBiciency is lnot assumed to be] the telos of such learning activities. Many
forms of cognitive activity may require the continuing intervention of an intelligent
computer system, for effectiveness or because of their complexity. Similarly, not all
cognitive tasks for which ZPDs can be arranged should be ones that the child is ex-
pected to internalize for subsequent solo performances. Solo performances are not
realistic in terms of the ways in which intelligent activities are organized and accom-
plished in the real world. They are often collabontive, depend on resources beyond
an individual's long-term memory, and require the use of information-handling
tools. . . . The level of task understanding necessary for the child alone is an em-
pirical question that remains to be answered, domain by domain. 
Dis~ribufed in~elligmce and &signs jir educahn
There has been a common objection to this intelligence-disuibution
intensive orientation h a t wishes to import the "efficiency drive" of
everyday cognition into the classroom. For doesn't one get access to
distributed intelligence at the cost of understanding and solo cogni-
tion? Doesn't such distributed intelligence make us look smarter
than we are by building the clever constraints that guide the display of
intelligent action as features of the social, computational, or repre-
sentational environments? Along these lines, Salomon et a]. 
distinguished two kinds of cognitive effects of technologies on intel-
ligence: "Effects mith technology obtained during intellectual part-
nership with it, and effects g i t in terms of the transferable cognitive
residue that this partnership leaves behind in the form of better mas-
tery of skills and strategies" (p. 2). They argue for the educational
utility of emphasizing effects of rather than with, so that autonomous
intellectual performance can be achieved. For if not, they argue, the
student is dependent on the technology, without which he or she does
not understand.
The invisible nature of many tools and the support of social net-
works in collaboration, even those now used in the classroom, makes
it apparent that this antisupport argument will not do. Pencils are al-
lowed as memory aids, so why not have to do mathematics orally or
reinvent measurement scales used in instrumentation? In the world
outside school, part of knowing how to learn and solve complex prob-
lems involves knowing how to create and exploit social networks and
h e expertise of othen, and to defily use the features of the physical
and media environments to one's advantage - like using principles of
leverage and balance in judo. Socially scaffolded and externally me-
diated, artifact-supported cognition is so predominant that its dis-
avowal in the classroom is detrimental to the transfer of learning
beyond the classroom .
Salomon et al. broach the issue of their potential conser-
vatism in wedging the distinction between effects with and effects
since with the widespread availability of intelligent computer
tools "the question of what residues the partnership with the
technology leaves might be moot" (p. 5). But they consider such
tools not sufficiently prevalent yet, so "how a person functions
away from intelligent technologies must be considered" (p. 5), and
emergent dilemmas in the world "need an independent and capable
thinking mind" (p. 5). This insistence profoundly misses several
R q D. Pea
critical points concerning distributed intelligence. 1 have never
argued that "all we should aim at are effects with a technology
whereby intelligence is truly distributed" (p. 5). One neglected
point is that distributed intelligence is largely invisible throughout
life, but is broadly considered, as I have argued, to include not only
computer tools, as they emphasize, but materials in the environment
and the expertise available from other human beings. A second point
is that this distributed intelligence is quite commonly designed,
with consequences described in a later section. A third is that we
may all want to exert a greater voice in the design of distributed in-
telligence, both in and out of schooling, once we recognize the de-
signedness of intelligence. And a fourth point is that a central goal
for an empowering education is to nurture the learners' attitudes and
talents in designing distributed intelligence for their use and that of
others, not only to participate in the designs of distributed intelli-
gence provided by others. Finally, the general argument attributed to
me that is tacit in their critique - that all thinking should be distrib-
uted - is wildly wrong. Of course, there will not be intelligent com-
puter tools for every kind of task achievement conceivable, nor should
Trade-off 2: static &finition of tasks versus evolving conupts of tasks.
One potential misunderstanding of the concept of distributed intel-
ligence must be guarded against. It is the notion of distribution as
reallocation, of dividing up cognition among mind, setting, and
artifacts, or a "division of labor" among contributions to distributed
intelligence. This limited notion is that there is a fied quantity of
intellectual work for the doing of some task and that this quantity
can then be differentially distributed across persons and environment.
The concept we are concerned with is that of expanding intelligence
rather than reallocating it. We want to ask where the capacity for
innovation exists in the concept of distributed intelligence, how we
may engender ever more useful designs for distributed intelligence -
whether we are considering shared activities such as cooperative
learning or an individual's uses of a tool for augmenting mathe-
matical problem-solving ability. I have argued that there is a natural
tendency for humans to aspire to greater efficiency in distributing
intelligence through the design and use of the physical, symbolic,
Distributed inrellijpce and &sips jn education
and social environments in order to cope with the complexity of
"mental activities." But this does not lead to a situational deter-
minism. The flip side of this efficiency drive is the freedom thereby
attained to explore and seek the new. Having achieved a greater
efficiency by off--loading thinking into the design of the world, one
then is freed up to continue to invent and innovate. Whether
learning conditions foster these new opportunities is an issue of
cultural choice.
Salomon et al. make an interesting contrast between two
ways of evaluating intelligence for parmerships between people and
technologies: systemic and analytic. The systemic attends to the aggre-
gate performance of the person-computer system, while the analytic
articulates the specific contributions made by the person and the
technology to that performance. They caution against the possibilities
of human deskilling and disinterest in tasks if analytic analyses reveal
minimal contributions of the person to the system performance.
However, this analysis appears to buy too deeply into the fied-
quantity concept.
Further, they argue mistakenly that the analytic approach is "more
oriented toward the study of human potential and toward educational
concerns" (p. 5) than the systemic approach, which "appraises the
products of the joint abilities of person and tool." This is simplistic in
at least two ways. One is in terms of the access-understanding trade-
off discussed earlier - the systemic approach may be profoundly
suited to education by enabling all learners to do things that would be
accessible to only some learners if the analytic approach had its way.
The second is that the learner may be not just the recipient of the in-
tellectual tool, which contributes to high-level systemic achievement,
but its designer - and that learner may minimize the need to contrib-
ute his or her mental activities to that performance by design. In
the former case, a too conscious reliance on the analytic approach
may bode ill for enabling poorly motivated and low-achieving stu-
dents to engage successfully in high-level tasks to which the com-
puter contributes. In the latter case, a too restrictive use of the
analytic approach may lead to a neglect of the mindful process by
which the learner designs distributed intelligence so as to make min-
imum use of mental process for system performance involving the
computer tool.
There are various ways to overcome the deskilling problems men-
tioned as well, even if one were (which I am not) inclined to accept a
fixed-quantity concept of intelligence contributing to task achieve-
ment by a human-computer system. First, one could treat design se-
riously and rotate the component activities (as in the six-phase
problem-solving process described earlier) contributed by the human
and the computer, with the objective of avoiding the possibilities of an
entrapping and boring contribution of the same component activities
to that task by the human. Unfortunately, some of those phases, such
as problem finding and problem representation, may prove im-
mensely difficult for the computer to contribute to the system per-
formance. Second, I have already stressed the design aspect of
distributed intelligence, one normative consequence of which in-
volves an increasingly recognized phenomenon in the world of work -
the need to "informate"
(rather than automate) the workplace
 , thereby providing important opportunities for work-
ers to contribute to the redesign of their working conditions and tools
 . Finally, taking a lesson from Kusterer's findings of in-
dividual differences in knowledge on the job among "unskilled work-
ers," we would design activities that allowed participation in diverse
tasks for knowledge utilization, and with as few routinized tasks as
possible. Kusterer finds broader working knowledge for workers who
often need to learn new things to resolve emergent dilemmas in their
nonroutine work functions.
Why does the static versus dynamic definition of tasks exemplify a
trade-off? Because it may be easier to develop learning materials and
teacher education programs for helping students achieve static tasks,
whereas if the very tasks learners undertake evolve as the tools and
designs for distributed intelligence change over time, static materials
and teacher preparation methods for the "delivery" of curriculum will
not suffice. The trade-off becomes one of automating the delivery of
standard materials and practice to the neglect of the dynamic nature
of distributed intelligence versus providing continually renewable,
flexibly adaptive materials and practices.
Evolving telos: new aims of development
One of the central implications of the dialectical perspective
on human nature arises when we look at the concept of development
L)istribured intelli~ce and desips f i r educalion
itself. Piaget sketched a view that was neo-Kantian in nature and
rooted in a well-defined endpoint of formal operations . By contrast, the implications of the sociohistorical view
of human nature, which is manifest in a focus on the design of
distributed intelligence, are more profoundly open-ended. When
"development" is seen not as a descriptive concept standing in for
"time" or "history," but as a nonnative concept involving the eval-
uation of means-end adaptations , and an activity-
person system is defined as more or less highly developed with re-
spect to the achievement of these ends, it becomes apparent that the
system's developmental status is sociohistorically defined in terms of
society's evolving metrics of evaluating means-end relations and in
the ends selected themselves.
Developmental psychology thus takes on a different character when
considered from this orientation. Whether under Piagetian influ-
ences or those of an information-processing approach, developmental
studies have typically targeted changes in the mental structure and
processes of the individual. Although social scaffolding of develop-
ment is a definite emphasis in research influenced by the sociohis-
torical school of Vygotsky, Luria, and Leont'ev, more attention has
been paid in the recent incarnations of that work to social scaffolding
than to the roles of cultural artifacts and representations as carriers of
intelligence . This is a par-
ticularly important omission in light of arguments such as those
of Wartofsky that the artifact is to cultural evolution what
the gene is to biological evolution - the vehicle of information
across generations. Answers to the question of what develops may
fundamentally change in the face of a distributed-intelligence
perspective, for systems of activity - involving persons, environment,
tools - become the locus of developmental investigation.
What I have been stressing throughout is a focus on intelligence as
manifest in a~ivity - dynamics, not statics. The language used by Sa-
lomon et al. to characterize the concepts involved in how they
think about distributed intelligence is, by contrast, entity-oriented - a
language of containers holding things. "Cognitive residues" are "left
behind" by interactions with technologies or "carried away" from
human-computer partnerships. Abilities and intelligence are "in"
persons or tools. When one views intelligence as in activity, which
I argue for in this chapter - rather than in agents or tools - the kind
R q D. Pea
of clean, pure, solo intelligence of the independent and capable
thinker that Salomon et al. seek to produce from education is
but a theoretician's fantasy. Persons are situated in the physical,
artifactual, and social worlds and continually use and redesign them
to achieve the activities they desire. The distributions they so chose
to design or participate in may change over time, cultural as well
as ontogenetic, How social models and social pressures, and individ-
ual desires and aesthetics, come to shape these changing patterns
of distribution over time is a reformulation of the basic question of
developmental psychology.
There are some other noteworthy consequences of this
perspective on intelligence beyond education. The scope of coverage
is intentionally broad and recasts a broad variety of contemporary
and historical issues . These include the impacts of
text literacy on thinking, the influences of symbol systems in math-
ematics, logic, and science on forms of thought and activity; rela-
tions among changes in science, technology, and society (e.g., the
effects of industrialization on work and the distribution of control),
and new paradigms in computing, publishing, and telecommuni-
cations . These are critical issues, since few
technological inventions besides computers (and affiliated tech-
nologies involving microprocessors) have had or will continue to
have as profound an impact on how people spend their time in
work and on how new educational objectives are defined .
Seeking to understand distributed intelligence may be important
because it yields sociohistorical links beyond the confines of today's
cognitive science of education. For example, its results will tie into
design more generally. Architects and designers are often sensitive to
how human activities emerge and flow by the shapes that an envi-
ronment affords . I have highlighted the sociohistorical
fact that the world has been shaped by the intelligence that has been
"left behind" through the activities of past persons (in artifacts, con-
ventions, practices) and that is continually being transformed by so-
Distributed inteIl@ce and &sips Jir education
cia1 agents forming the current collectivity of intelligence, mediated
by the individual and situated interpretation of meaning that forms
the fabric of creativity and development.
Learning and design are fundamentally connected with an orien-
tation toward distributed intelligence. Exploration and play, basic hu-
man capacities used long before the invention of today's education,
are seen as important, as particular desires leading to designs of dis-
tributed intelligence. Learning can be viewed as much more than
"problem solving" and more broadly in terms of each of the desires.
For example, the activities of play as much create and find problems
as they "solve" them. Technology design and development are also
viewed differently. New technologies can support human activities by
serving as experimental platiorms in the evolution of intelligence - by
opening up new possibilities for distributed intelligence. They are
not serving, in any simple sense, as "amplifiers of intellect" or as
ways to "mechanize" existing desires (e.g., off-loading particular
kinds of activity in work).
Conclusions
When we look at actual human practices, we see that human
cognition aspires to efficiency in distributing intelligence - across
individuals, environment, external symbolic representations, tools,
and artifacts - as a means of coping with the complexity of activities
we often call "mental."
Since such aspirations do not inevitably lead to the fulfillment of
culturally valued goals of invention and innovation in the face of to-
day's rapid societal and global change, a principal aim of education
ought to be that of teaching for the h i g n of distributed intelligence.
Learning to create and willfully regulate distributed intelligence
should be an aim of education for students and teachers. We should
reorient the educational emphasis from individual, tool-free cogni-
tion to facilitating individuals' responsive and novel uses of resources
for creative and intelligent activity alone and in collaboration. Such an
education would encourage and refine the natural tendency for peo-
ple to continually re-create their own world as a scaffold for their ac-
tivities. For example, in mathematics and science education, one
might develop a metacurriculum oriented to learning about the role
R q D. Pea
Distributed intellipce and &sips for education
of distributed intelligence in enabling complex thought. Students
would come to understand and deploy heuristics for inventing cog-
nitive technologies as participants in a knowledge-using community.
They would see through their activities where the bottlenecks of
complex mentation reside. They would recognize how physical, sym-
bolic, and social technologies may provide the supports necessary for
reaching conceptual heights less attainable if attempted unaided.
This goal might be achieved through the examination of living, ev-
eryday examples (building from cases where they already do distrib-
uted intelligence in the world) and, perhaps, through case studies of
the roles of information structures (e.g., matrices, flow charts, tem-
plates) and social structures (work teams, apprenticeships) in medi-
ating learning and reasoning as activity systems of distributed
intelligence. Students would be empowered both through the reflec-
tive use of new tools and through the invention of new tools and social
distributions of activities.
In sum, we should strive toward a reflectively and intentionally
distributed intelligence in education, where learners are inventors of
distributed-intelligence-as-tool, rather than receivers of intelligence-
as-substance. In the court of worldly experience, such learners may
be far more ready not only to adapt to change but to contribute sub-
stantially to it.