Calibrating a coalescent simulation of human
genome sequence variation
Stephen F. Schaffner,1,5 Catherine Foo,1 Stacey Gabriel,1 David Reich,1,2 Mark J. Daly,1
and David Altshuler1,2,3,4
1Program in Medical and Population Genetics, The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA; 2Department of
Genetics and 3Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; 4Department of Molecular
Biology and Diabetes Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA
Population genetic models play an important role in human genetic research, connecting empirical observations
about sequence variation with hypotheses about underlying historical and biological causes. More specifically, models
are used to compare empirical measures of sequence variation, linkage disequilibrium (LD), and selection to
expectations under a “null” distribution. In the absence of detailed information about human demographic history,
and about variation in mutation and recombination rates, simulations have of necessity used arbitrary models,
usually simple ones. With the advent of large empirical data sets, it is now possible to calibrate population genetic
models with genome-wide data, permitting for the first time the generation of data that are consistent with empirical
data across a wide range of characteristics. We present here the first such calibrated model and show that, while still
arbitrary, it successfully generates simulated data (for three populations) that closely resemble empirical data in
allele frequency, linkage disequilibrium, and population differentiation. No assertion is made about the accuracy of
the proposed historical and recombination model, but its ability to generate realistic data meets a long-standing need
among geneticists. We anticipate that this model, for which software is publicly available, and others like it will have
numerous applications in empirical studies of human genetics.
The search for inherited influences on human disease and the
effort to understand the history of human populations rely on a
detailed knowledge of human genome sequence variation. Population genetic models serve as important tools in this quest. By
simulating variation under neutral evolution, they provide background expectations about genetic variation, for example, for the
frequency distribution of disease alleles and for patterns of linkage disequilibrium. They also serve as a tool to evaluate evidence
for evolutionary selection, and to infer the history of populations.
A primary difficulty in using such models lies in deciding
which ones to employ. Given the complex history of human
populations and the wide variety of plausible model parameters,
as well as considerable uncertainty about how mutation and recombination rates vary, it is impossible rigorously to infer from
data a single “correct” model: The problem is badly underdetermined. Until comparatively recently, in fact, genome-scale data
were scarce enough that they provided few constraints on models. As a result, a common practice in simulating human variation has been to use a set of simple models that are easy to
implement. The most basic model is the standard Wright-Fisher
neutral model of a freely mixing, constant-sized population, with
uniform rates of recombination and mutation across the genome. This model has been (and continues to be) widely used, as
have other simple models (e.g., island models).
Simple models have been of enormous utility as heuristics.
In some respects, they have also offered surprisingly good fits to
empirical data (see, e.g., Fig. 1C,D). As empirical data have accumulated, however, disagreements between expectation and observation have become clear. Perhaps the most obvious discrepancy occurs in predictions of linkage disequilibrium, the nonrandom association of nearby alleles . Human heterozygosity
(given measured mutation rates) suggests an effective population
size (Ne) of 10,000 or perhaps 20,000. A simple version of the
standard neutral model with this size population and with measured recombination rates, however, predicts far less LD than is
observed (Fig. 1A,B) in most populations; the disagreement is
particularly severe for non-African populations. Despite its other
virtues, therefore, the standard neutral model is not a good
model of human LD, and simulations based on that model are
unlikely to have great utility for applications where LD is important.
Given the prevailing ignorance about the details of human
demographic history, and because of the evident inconsistencies
between simple models and empirical data, working models of
human genetic variation are increasingly including a range of
additional features ;
the same is also true for studies of other species . Commonly used features include recent
population expansion, past bottlenecks, population structure,
and “hotspots” of recombination.
What have not been published to date, however, are models
that have been calibrated by comparison to many aspects of
large, multilocus empirical data sets. As a result, despite all of the
work done on modeling (much of it quite sophisticated), no tool
currently exists for creating simulated human genetic data that is
a good approximation to real, empirical data. It is to address this
lack that we have carried out the model calibration described
here. We have two goals in doing so: First, to create, for our and
others’ use, a simulation package that can produce realistic ge-
5Corresponding author.
E-mail ; fax (617) 252-1902.
Article and publication are at 
gr.3709305. Freely available online through the Genome Research Immediate
Open Access option.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
15:1576–1583 ©2005 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/05; www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
netic data; and second, to encourage the development of similar
(and better) calibrated models.
In order to carry out our simulations, we implemented a coalescent population genetic model in software. Conceptually, the program is similar to Richard Hudson’s widely used
program , but with one additional feature: The
recombination rate can vary (to any extent the user cares to
specify) within the locus being simulated. The simulation software was validated by comparison with standard predictions of
the Wright-Fisher model. The program generates multimarker
haplotype data for large chromosome segments (500,000 to 1
million base pairs, Mb) and permits a wide range of demographic
histories for multiple populations (population splits, admixture,
changes in size, bottlenecks, and migration); a simple model of
gene conversion is also included. The simulation package can be
obtained from 
As the basis for calibrating our model, we used a set of empirical observations from numerous genomic loci studied in
population samples from three continental regions: West Africa,
Europe, and East Asia (see Methods for details of the empirical
data sets used). Since our goal was to create simulated data that
simultaneously matches many aspects of empirical data, we compared the results of simulation to a broad set of empirical measures: (1) the frequency distribution of alleles, (2) the relationship
between the frequency of an allele and the probability that it is
the ancestral allele (estimated for empirical data from the chimpanzee allele), (3) a measure of the genetic distance between current populations (FST), (4 and 5) two measures of the extent of
linkage disequilibrium (r2 and the fraction of marker pairs with
D = 1), and (6) the total diversity (measured as heterozygosity, or
). We used data from autosomal loci to tune the model parameters, and also compared model predictions to a second data set of Xchromosome markers. To our knowledge, no previous study has attempted
simultaneously to match this wide range
of statistics.
Since our simulated data are intended for a variety of applications,
there is no single natural choice of a
metric for assessing how closely the
simulated results match empirical observations. We therefore adopted a simple
statistical framework that incorporated
all of our statistical measures. For each
measure (e.g., allele frequency, r2), we estimated the root-mean-square (RMS) deviation between simulated values and
the mean empirical value, calculating it
for each of the distributions shown in
Figure 2 (see Methods). Four of the measures (minor allele frequency, ancestral/
chimpanzee fraction, and the two LD
measures) contribute three distributions
each, one for each population; treating
each of the pairwise FST values as a separate distribution, we have a total of 15
distributions. While the choice of this
particular combination of measures was
arbitrary, the goal of the procedure was to produce a model yielding adequate simulations of all measures, making it useful for a
variety of applications. We compared the statistical uncertainty
(standard error on the mean, see Methods for details) of our training data set to the distance between the mean values of the prediction and the empirical data. That is, our goal was to achieve an
agreement between the prediction and the data that was comparable to the statistical uncertainty in a large empirical data set
such as ours; for this purpose, we set our threshold for acceptable
performance at 1.5 times the statistical uncertainty. As an overall
composite measure of statistical fit, we calculated the RMS error
(RMSE) for all 15 distributions together, normalizing each by its
empirical statistical uncertainty.
We started our calibrated model from what was essentially a
standard neutral model, modified to incorporate an “Out of Africa” scenario for the origin of our three test populations. In the
base model, each population was a Wright-Fisher population of
effective size 10,000; dates for the splitting of the populations
were set to 3500 generations (before the present) for the separation between the African and non-African populations, and to
2000 generations for the separation of the two non-African populations (see Fig. 3). Predictions for this simple model, assuming a
constant recombination rate of 1.3 cM/Mb, matched the empirical data quite poorly (Fig. 2): the RMSE was 4.7, that is, the disagreement between empirical measures and model prediction
was almost five times larger than the statistical uncertainty in our
empirical data set.
To this base model we introduced additional parameters and
tuned them until the overall match between simulation and empirical data met our criterion. Where possible, we tried to make
choices that were demographically and biologically plausible.
The resulting parameters, however, represent a mechanism for
producing realistic-looking data, not an inference about the actual history of human populations or about details of recombi-
Fit of standard neutral model to empirical data. Comparison of simulated data under
standard neutral model to empirical data on autosomes. Error bars represent one standard error. (A,B)
Linkage disequilibrium (measured by r2 and D) as a function of distance. (Solid line) Standard neutral
model; (squares) West African data; (triangles) European data. (A) r2 as a function of physical distance.
(B) D as a function of genetic distance. (C,D) Genetic distance (FST) and allele frequency spectrum for
data and standard neutral model. (White) Data; (gray) model. (C) FST between European and West
African populations. (D) European allele frequency spectrum.
Calibrating a human coalescent simulation
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
nation rate variation. Since the potential search space among
many parameters is large, we took a stepwise approach: first
choosing a set of parameters to add to the model, optimizing
them by minimizing the RMSE, and then iterating the procedure
by adding further parameters until the model fit was acceptable.
At each step, fitting first used coarse step sizes , and then finer ones, in an effort to avoid local
Beginning with the base model described above, we first
altered parameters that affect single-locus features of the data,
which are influenced only by demography (not recombination):
specifically, heterozygosity, allele frequency spectrum, fraction
of ancestral/chimpanzee alleles, and FST. Of these, we first fit the
West African allele frequency spectrum, since it is generally accepted that the human population originated in Africa, finding
that models with a historical population expansion resulted in an
improved fit to the data by increasing the fraction of lowfrequency alleles. Next, we considered the remaining single-locus
measures, and successively added parameters (primarily population bottlenecks, but also small amounts of continuing migration
between populations, which served to reduce the genetic distances between populations) until the RMSE for the single-locus
measures was 1.15. That is, based solely on the characteristics of
single markers, the model fit the data nearly as well as the sampling error within the empirical observations, and much better
than our base, standard neutral, model. Finally, the mutation
Comparison of best-fit model with empirical data, autosomes. Error bars represent one standard error. (A,B,C) Allele frequency spectrum.
(White) Data; (black) model. (A) West African. (B) East Asian. (C) European sample. (D,E,F) Fraction of alleles that are ancestral/chimpanzee, binned by
allele frequency. (White) Data; (black) model. (D) West African. (E) East Asian. (F) European. (G,H,I) Linkage disequilibrium (r2) versus physical distance.
(Points) Data; (line) model. (G) West African. (H) East Asian. (I) European. (J,K,L) Fraction of marker pairs with perfect LD (D = 1.0) versus genetic
distance. (J) West African. (K) East Asian. (L) European. (M) Genetic distance (FST). (White) Data; (black) model.
Schaffner et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
rate in the model was tuned to match the observed heterozygosity (see Methods) .
We then turned to the recombination model. In order to
generate the considerable extent of LD seen in empirical data, we
held the demographic parameters fixed and introduced variation
in recombination rates, first by including observed large-scale
variation, as measured in the deCODE genetic map , and then by adding fine-scale variation, including localized hotspots of recombination. The need for non-uniform recombination to obtain sufficient extent of LD is consistent with
a range of observations indicating non-uniform recombination
in the human genome .
In total, approximately 2 billion coalescent trees were generated in the fitting process. The best-fitting set of parameters
(Table 1; Fig. 2) yielded good agreement with all aspects of the
observed data listed above. Agreement was not perfect: The RMSE
between predicted values and the mean empirical values was on
average 1.35 (that is, the disagreement was 35% larger than what
would be seen solely based on random sampling of the empirical
data). The agreement was, however, far superior to the discrepancy of 4.7 found with the standard neutral model. We explored
the effects of re-estimating the parameters once all had been
added to the model (i.e., iterating the fit); we found further improvements of the fit to be negligible. To our knowledge, this is
the first time population genetic simulations have produced data
that agree with multiple aspects of empirical data from multiple
parts of the genome and in more than one population sample.
Having tuned our simulation, we next examined how well it
predicted aspects of the data not used in the tuning process. First,
we used the model to generate predictions for the same measures
as above, but for the X-chromosome instead of the autosomes.
We compared the results to an X-chromosome data set, derived
from the same population samples as the autosomal data. Results
for both our best-fitting model and the standard neutral model
are shown in Figure 4. The statistical power of this data set for
evaluating simulations is limited, but it is sufficient to demonstrate that the calibrated model does perform visibly better than
the standard neutral model (RMSE = 0.97 for the best-fit model
vs. 1.51 for the standard neutral model). The smaller effective
population size of the X-chromosome (three-quarters that of the
autosomes) makes it a useful test of how well the simulation
models genetic drift, which is dependent on population size: The
effect of the smaller population can be clearly seen in the larger
genetic distances and the high fraction of X-linked markers that
are monomorphic. Second, we looked at how well the calibrated
model simulated haplotype blocks, contiguous stretches of chromosome observed to have very low rates of historical recombination and low haplotype diversity (Fig. 4L,M). Again the model
performed very well (within the statistical limits of our ability to
measure it), and much better than the standard neutral model
 .
Finally, we show in Figure 5 an application of our calibrated
model to a study of human genetic variation, a search for evidence of positive selection in a set of ∼100 genes . The empirical data consisted of SNPs in and near genes
with a density of 1 per 4 kb, genotyped in samples from three
populations; since the three populations were similar to those
used in calibrating our model, simulation results could be compared directly with data. Several statistics were calculated from
the genotype data as possible indicators for the occurrence of
selective sweeps around the genes; shown are the mean FST and
the mean heterozygosity for each population. While the distributions differ between populations, in all three cases the agreement with simulation is excellent. Since this is a neutral simulation, there appears to be no need to invoke selective explanations
even for the outliers, at least for these statistics.
Discussion
We have described the development of a particular calibrated
model. Since this was not an exhaustive survey, it is certain that
Parameters of best-fitting model
Variable parameters
Best-fit model
Ne (ancestral)
Ne (African)
Ne (non-African)
T (African expansion) (gens)
OoA bottleneck (F)
Asian bottleneck (F)
European bottleneck (F)
African bottleneck (F)
Africa ↔Europe migration rate (per chromosome)
3.2  105
Africa ↔Asia migration rate (per chromosome)
0.8  105
Recombination hotspot spacing (bp)
Hotspot spacing shape parameter
Fraction of recombination in hotspots
Gene conversion (initiation prob/bp)
4.5  109
Fixed parameters
Mutation rate (per base pair per generation)
1.5  108
Ne (post-agriculture)
T (out of Africa) (gens)
T (Eur/Asia split) (gens)
T (Asian agriculture) (gens)
T (European agriculture) (gens)
T (African agriculture) (gens)
Demographic model. N1: ancestral population size. (N2) African population size. (N3) non-African population size. (Texp) Time of
ancestral population expansion (if any). Bottlenecks are indicated by constrictions. (Not shown: recurring migration between African and European populations, and between Asian and African populations.)
Calibrating a human coalescent simulation
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
better-fitting parameters can be found even within the same
model framework, and it is likely that a broad array of different
models would also perform acceptably. The model parameters,
therefore, do not represent inferences about real-world processes,
but values that happen to generate useful simulations. Nevertheless, our experience in developing our model suggests, but does
not prove, that some of its features are likely to recur in any successful simulation. In particular, we found that substantially increased coalescence in our non-African lineages was a necessary
component. Thus, our best-fitting model had a probability of
European coalescence of 22% (equivalent to a bottleneck with an
inbreeding coefficient of 0.22 relative to the source population)
 ; we were unable to find models in which this
parameter was outside the range of ∼0.20–0.25. More detailed
features of the model (e.g., migration rates, or the attribution of
inbreeding into population size and discrete bottleneck), on the
other hand, are likely to be quite variable between successful
models. Similarly, a substantial non-uniformity in recombina-
Comparison of best fit-model with empirical data, X-chromosome. Error bars represent one standard error. (A,B,C) Allele frequency
spectrum. (White) Data; (black) best-fit model; (gray) standard neutral model. (A) West African. (B) East Asian. (C) European sample. (D,E,F) Fraction of
alleles that are ancestral/chimpanzee, binned by allele frequency. (White) Data; (black) best-fit model; (gray) standard neutral model. (D) West African.
(E) East Asian. (F) European. (G,H) Linkage disequilibrium (r2) versus physical distance. (Points) Data; (solid line) best-fit model; (dashed line) standard
neutral model. (G) West African. (H) European. (East Asian omitted because of poor statistics.) (I,J) Fraction of marker pairs with perfect LD (D = 1.0)
versus genetic distance. (I) West African. (J) European. (Points) Data; (solid line) best-fit model; (dashed line) standard neutral model. (East Asian omitted
because of poor statistics.) (K) Genetic distance (FST). (White) Data; (black) best-fit model; (gray) standard neutral model. (L,M) Fraction of sequence in
haplotype blocks of different sizes. (White) Data; (black) best-fit model; (gray) standard neutral model. (L) West African. (M) non-African (European +
East Asian).
Schaffner et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
tion rate was required, but the specifics of how the nonuniformity was implemented are not likely to be very meaningful.
The justification for this kind of model, therefore, is not that
it enables us to draw conclusions about human history. There
are, instead, two reasons for developing it. First, the ability to
produce realistic-looking data is itself useful, regardless of the
historical accuracy of the underlying model. It is true that there
are many applications for which simple models of human genetic variation serve admirably. For many other applications,
however, it is important to be able to produce simulated data that
bear a close resemblance to empirical data. For example, simulated data sets for comparing haplotype-phasing algorithms, or
for assessing the density of markers needed to provide good coverage for disease studies, are only useful if they accurately reflect
LD patterns in human populations. In these cases, a calibrated
model is greatly preferable to something like the standard neutral
model, and the model presented here is already in use for studying haplotype phasing. We anticipate that it (and similar models,
when they appear) will continue to be used, and will continue to
be refined as additional comparisons with empirical data are
Second, while the model is unlikely to reflect accurately the
details of either demographic history or recombination, it does
represent one of the many models that is consistent with what is
currently known about human genetics. While it would be preferable to have the true model, for many purposes it is better to
have one model that is consistent with data than to have none.
For example, consider the X-chromosome data presented earlier
(Fig. 4). In the absence of any model, or with only the standard
neutral model as guidance, there is no way to interpret the differences between the X data and that from the autosomes. Are
the increased monomorphism in non-African populations and
the increased FST values to be expected from the smaller effective
population of the X, or are they suggestive of positive selection
acting on these loci? Given that our model, a randomly selected
instance drawn from the space of consistent neutral models, predicts such features, there seems little need to invoke selection.
Clearly, for more robust inference, especially in the case that
model and data disagree, a broad range of calibrated models
would be preferable, and we anticipate that such additional models will be developed in the near future.
The autosomal data set contained 3738 markers distributed in 54 regions across
the genome. The X-chromosome set contained 250 markers in 16
roughly equidistant regions; it excluded regions homologous to
the Y pseudoautosomal regions. For both sets, SNPs were selected
from TSC (The SNP Consortium) SNPs in dbSNP, the public SNP
database, without regard to genes or other genomic features. The
autosomal regions averaged 250 kb in length. Two of the X regions were of comparable size, and the remainder were 80 kb in
length; LD measurements for the X sample were therefore confined to distances <80 kb. All SNPs were genotyped in 31 parent–
offspring trios (93 individuals) of European ancestry from the
CEPH pedigrees, 42 unrelated individuals of Japanese and Chinese origin, and 30 parent–offspring trios from Nigeria (Yoruba).
Gender was determined for Asian individuals by genotyping a
Y-linked SNP. Ancestral allele status was taken to be that found
by genotyping one chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes); chimpanzee alleles were not available for the X markers. Genotyping for the X
markers was as described in Gabriel et al. .
Samples and genotyping for the genes shown in Figure 5 are
described in Walsh et al. , as are the genes studied. Long
genes were broken into ∼120-kb regions, and the regions were
treated as independent; regions with <10 working SNPs were
dropped. The remaining set consisted of 52 regions in 40 genes.
Comparison of best-fit model with data: 52 gene regions. Here 40 genes are genotyped in three populations; long genes were subdivided
into smaller regions. The mean FST and heterozygosity are shown (black), and compared to the same measures for simulated data (gray); simulated
regions were 120 kb long with 30  10 SNPs per region. (A) Yoruba sample. (B) Chinese sample. (C) CEPH sample.
Calibrating a human coalescent simulation
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Simulated regions were 120 kb in length and contained 30  10
Empirical measures
Allele frequencies and the fraction of ancestral/chimpanzee
markers were calculated only for markers for which both alleles
appeared somewhere in the three data samples. LD measures (D
and r2) were calculated only for markers with a minor allele frequency (MAF) >0.20. Statistical uncertainty for all autosomal
measures were estimated by bootstrap (random sampling of the
available regions, with replacement). Because two of the X regions had a disproportionate number of markers, where possible
(allele frequencies and FST), X-based measures were calculated
separately for each region, and then means and variances were
calculated over the set of regions; for measures with too little data
in each region (ancestral/chimpanzee fraction and LD), bootstrap
estimates were used.
Simulation software
The simulation program implements a coalescent model, loosely
based on Hudson’s program , written in C. It generates an ancestral tree for a hypothetical data sample and randomly places mutation on the branches. The coalescent simulation was validated by comparison with standard predictions for a
constant-sized, neutral population (distribution of times to the
most recent common ancestor, allele frequency distribution, ratio of external to total branch length). Two versions of the simulation were written. A fast, two-locus version was used to optimize model parameters, and the full-sequence version was used
for studying haplotype blocks and simulating gene loci; the latter
is being made publicly available. The demographic model for the
coalescent simulator is defined at run time via a parameter file;
any number of populations can be simulated, and any combination of population size, bottlenecks, splits or extinctions, admixture, continuing migration between populations, and instantaneous or exponential changes in population size can be specified
by parameters. The local recombination map is defined in an
input file; our recombination model is implemented in a second
program, which is also driven by a parameter file.
Demographic model
All models were based on an ancestral population that split to
form a modern West African population and a Eurasian population, which subsequently split into European and East Asian
populations. Dates of the splits were left fixed. All non-African
populations were given the same effective population size. Population bottlenecks and changes in size were treated as instantaneous. Late expansion to a large size, roughly coincident with the
advent of agriculture, was included for the sampled populations
in all calibrated models, but had little effect on results; see Table
1 for the parameters used. X-chromosome simulations used the
same parameter values as autosomal simulations, except for parameters that are intrinsically different on the X-chromosome:
Population sizes, bottleneck intensities, and migration rates were
scaled for the smaller effective population size of the Xchromosome, while regional recombination rates were drawn
from an X-based distribution, and were corrected for the lack of
recombination in males.
Recombination model
The recombination model was hierarchical. First, a regional rate
was chosen from the observed distribution of rates for these regions, based on the deCODE genetic map . A
variable fraction of this recombination rate was distributed uniformly (the background fraction listed in Table 1); the rest was
clustered into hotspots. A local rate was drawn randomly from a
gamma distribution with a fixed shape parameter of 0.3, with a
mean equal to the regional rate; this additional variation is included to model changes in recombination rate at scales of hundreds of kilobases, which are smoothed out by the ∼2-Mb resolution of the genetic map. The local rate was then used to create
individual hotspots. These had random spacing (gamma distribution with shape and mean as variable parameters, listed in
Table 1) and random intensity (gamma distribution with fixed
shape parameter of 0.3 and with mean determined by the local
rate). Note that, in this model, most “hotspots” are weak and
closely spaced; only the high end of the distribution corresponds
to reported hotspots observed in human data. Gene conversion
was treated as a double recombinant, with a tract length of 0.5
kb, parameterized by a (uniform) probability of initiation.
SNP ascertainment
When simulating genotype data, accurate modeling of the ascertainment process for the markers is essential. The SNPs in our
data sets (all from TSC) were ascertained by two methods, alignment of whole-genome shotgun
(WGS) reads and alignment of reduced-representation (RRS)
reads, both with the public genome sequence; in each case reads
were drawn from an ethnically mixed pool of 48 chromosomes
 . WGS ascertainment (60% of all SNPs) was
modeled as the comparison of a single pair of chromosomes,
while RRS ascertainment (40%), which involved multiple overlapping reads at the same locus, was modeled by comparison of
four chromosomes to a single reference chromosome. In practice,
the only difference created by the two ascertainment schemes
was a modest shift toward lower allele frequency for the RRS set.
A pool of ascertainment chromosomes was included in the coalescent simulation, but withheld from the simulated output data.
Ascertainment chromosomes were selected at random from the
sampled populations, with the probability of selection based on
the ethnic composition of the discovery resources (known in the
case of the NIH panel, estimated based on allele frequencies in
the case of the public genome); the fraction of chromosomes
identified by the NIH as Native American was treated for this
purpose as Asian (the effect of this approximation was tested by
explicitly modeling a Native American population, and was
found to be negligible). Different ascertainment chromosomes
were selected every 500 bp (the approximate length of a TSC
sequence read) for one chromosome and every 150,000 bp (the
approximate length of a Human Genome Project clone insert).
All sites that differed between the ascertainment chromosomes
were defined to be identified polymorphisms. These comparisons
also provided a measurement of heterozygosity, which was used
to set the overall mutation rate in the model; the rate was set so
that the simulated heterozygosity matched that measured by the
TSC project using the same methodology . When simulating our empirical data sets, markers were
randomly dropped from the simulation to match the mean
marker density and the distribution of marker spacing in the
empirical data.
Sensitivity to details of ascertainment modeling was tested
by (1) varying the source-population composition of the public
genome model by 20% for each population, and (2) carrying
out the simulation with only 1 or only 4 coverage. Variation
in the source population, and keeping all model parameters
fixed, resulted in RMS deviations of 1.36–1.40 (vs. 1.35 for the
original model), and incorrectly specifying the coverage resulted
in deviations of 1.39 and 1.45. Such modest changes—all results
met our threshold requirement for acceptable results—suggest
that details of the ascertainment model are not of great importance.
Schaffner et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Parameter fitting
Model parameters were optimized by grid searches over two to
four parameters at a time. Goodness of fit was evaluated by calculating the total RMS discrepancy, tot, between predicted values and the empirical means:
where i is the RMSE for one of the 15 distributions (1 per population for r2, D, allele frequency spectrum, and fraction ancestral/chimpanzee; and 1 for each of the three genetic distances). i
is defined as
n Xij −Xij2
where Xij is the model’s predicted value for the j-th bin of the i-th
distribution, Xij is the empirical mean for the same value, 2
the standard error on the empirical mean, and the sum runs over
the n bins in the distribution i. Note that, with these definitions,
tot calculated from a random resampling (rather than from
model predictions) of the empirical data is 1.0.
Not all parameters were of equal importance in the model.
Setting the three least important parameters (the migration rates
and the African bottleneck) to zero yielded agreement only
slightly worse than our threshold value (1.55 times the standard
error). In contrast, eliminating bottlenecks in the non-African
lineages (whether supplied by an explicit bottleneck or by a small
population size) produced discrepancies at least a factor of 2
larger than those seen in the full model. In the recombination
model, eliminating either the regional variation or the discrete
hotspots produced roughly the same loss of performance (discrepancy ∼2.7).
Acknowledgments
We thank David Cutler for helpful comments, members of the
Broad Institute’s Program in Medical and Population Genetics for
useful discussions, and the International Haplotype Map Consortium for financial support.
References
Akey, J.M., Eberle, M.A., Rieder, M.J., Carlson, C.S., Shriver, M.D.,
Nickerson, D.A., and Kruglyak, L. 2004. Population history and
natural selection shape patterns of genetic variation in 132 genes.
PLoS Biol. 2: e286.
Anderson, E.C. and Slatkin, M. 2004. Population-genetic basis of
haplotype blocks in the 5q31 region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 40–49.
Ardlie, K.G., Kruglyak, L., and Seielstad, M. 2002. Patterns of linkage
disequilibrium in the human genome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 3: 299–309.
Collins, F.S., Brooks, L.D., and Chakravarti, A. 1998. A DNA
polymorphism discovery resource for research on human genetic
variation. Genome Res. 8: 1229–1231.
Crawford, D.C., Bhangale, T., Li, N., Hellenthal, G., Rieder, M.J.,
Nickerson, D.A., and Stephens, M. 2004. Evidence for substantial
fine-scale variation in recombination rates across the human
genome. Nat. Genet. 36: 700–706.
Cullen, M., Perfetto, S.P., Klitz, W., Nelson, G., and Carrington, M. 2002.
High-resolution patterns of meiotic recombination across the human
major histocompatibility complex. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 759–776.
Frisse, L., Hudson, R.R., Bartoszewicz, A., Wall, J.D., Donfack, J., and Di
Rienzo, A. 2001. Gene conversion and different population histories
may explain the contrast between polymorphism and linkage
disequilibrium levels. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 831–843.
Gabriel, S.B., Schaffner, S.F., Nguyen, H., Moore, J.M., Roy, J.,
Blumenstiel, B., Higgins, J., DeFelice, M., Lochner, A., Faggart, M., et
al. 2002. The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome.
Science 296: 2225–2229.
Hudson, R.R. 1990. Gene genealogies and the coalescent process. In
Oxford surveys in evolutionary biology (eds. D.J. Futuyma and J.
Antonovics), pp. 1–44. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
———. 2002. Generating samples under a Wright-Fisher neutral model
of genetic variation. Bioinformatics 18: 337–338.
Jeffreys, A.J., Kauppi, L., and Neumann, R. 2001. Intensely punctate
meiotic recombination in the class II region of the major
histocompatibility complex. Nat. Genet. 29: 217–222.
Kauppi, L., Sajantila, A., and Jeffreys, A.J. 2003. Recombination hotspots
rather than population history dominate linkage disequilibrium in
the MHC class II region. Hum. Mol. Genet. 12: 33–40.
Kong, A., Gudbjartsson, D.F., Sainz, J., Jonsdottir, G.M., Gudjonsson,
S.A., Richardsson, B., Sigurdardottir, S., Barnard, J., Hallbeck, B.,
Masson, G., et al. 2002. A high-resolution recombination map of the
human genome. Nat. Genet. 31: 241–247.
Marth, G.T., Czabarka, E., Murvai, J., and Sherry, S.T. 2004. The allele
frequency spectrum in genome-wide human variation data reveals
signals of differential demographic history in three large world
populations. Genetics 166: 351–372.
May, C.A., Shone, A.C., Kalaydjieva, L., Sajantila, A., and Jeffreys, A.J.
2002. Crossover clustering and rapid decay of linkage disequilibrium
in the Xp/Yp pseudoautosomal gene SHOX. Nat. Genet. 31: 272–275.
McVean, G.A., Myers, S.R., Hunt, S., Deloukas, P., Bentley, D.R., and
Donnelly, P. 2004. The fine-scale structure of recombination rate
variation in the human genome. Science 304: 581–584.
Phillips, M.S., Lawrence, R., Sachidanandam, R., Morris, A.P., Balding,
D.J., Donaldson, M.A., Studebaker, J.F., Ankener, W.M., Alfisi, S.V.,
Kuo, F.S., et al. 2003. Chromosome-wide distribution of haplotype
blocks and the role of recombination hot spots. Nat. Genet.
33: 382–387.
Pritchard, J.K. and Przeworski, M. 2001. Linkage disequilibrium in
humans: Models and data. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1–14.
Reich, D.E., Cargill, M., Bolk, S., Ireland, J., Sabeti, P.C., Richter, D.J.,
Lavery, T., Kouyoumjian, R., Farhadian, S.F., Ward, R., et al. 2001.
Linkage disequilibrium in the human genome. Nature 411: 199–204.
Reich, D.E., Schaffner, S.F., Daly, M.J., McVean, G., Mullikin, J.C.,
Higgins, J.M., Richter, D.J., Lander, E.S., and Altshuler, D. 2002.
Human genome sequence variation and the influence of gene
history, mutation and recombination. Nat. Genet. 32: 135–142.
Sabeti, P.C., Reich, D.E., Higgins, J.M., Levine, H.Z., Richter, D.J.,
Schaffner, S.F., Gabriel, S.B., Platko, J.V., Patterson, N.J., McDonald,
G.J., et al. 2002. Detecting recent positive selection in the human
genome from haplotype structure. Nature 419: 832–837.
Sachidanandam, R., Weissman, D., Schmidt, S.C., Kakol, J.M., Stein,
L.D., Marth, G., Sherry, S., Mullikin, J.C., Mortimore, B.J., Willey,
D.L., et al. 2001. A map of human genome sequence variation
containing 1.42 million single nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature
409: 928–933.
Tenaillon, M.I., U’Ren, J., Tenaillon, O., and Gaut, B.S. 2004. Selection
versus demography: A multilocus investigation of the domestication
process in maize. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21: 1214–1225.
Wakeley, J. and Lessard, S. 2003. Theory of the effects of population
structure and sampling on patterns of linkage disequilibrium applied
to genomic data from humans. Genetics 164: 1043–1053.
Wakeley, J., Nielsen, R., Liu-Cordero, S.N., and Ardlie, K. 2001. The
discovery of single-nucleotide polymorphisms—and inferences about
human demographic history. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1332–1347.
Wall, J.D. and Pritchard, J.K. 2003a. Assessing the performance of the
haplotype block model of linkage disequilibrium. Am. J. Hum. Genet.
73: 502–515.
———. 2003b. Haplotype blocks and linkage disequilibrium in the
human genome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4: 587–597.
Wall, J.D., Andolfatto, P., and Przeworski, M. 2002. Testing models of
selection and demography in Drosophila simulans. Genetics
162: 203–216.
Walsh, E.C., Sabeti, P., Hutcheson, H., Fry, B., Schaffner, S.F., de Bakker,
P.I.W., Varilly, P., Roy, J., Cooper, R., Zeng, Y., et al. 2005.
Large-scale survey of variation and signals of selection in 168
immunological genes. Human Genetics (in press).
Wiuf, C. and Posada, D. 2003. A coalescent model of recombination
hotspots. Genetics 164: 407–417.
Web site references
 authors’ Web site.
Received January 17, 2005; accepted in revised form May 17, 2005.
Calibrating a human coalescent simulation
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
10.1101/gr.3709305
Access the most recent version at doi:
2005 15: 1576-1583
Genome Res.
Stephen F. Schaffner, Catherine Foo, Stacey Gabriel, et al.
Calibrating a coalescent simulation of human genome sequence