User Model User-Adap Inter 22:125–150
DOI 10.1007/s11257-011-9108-6
ORIGINAL PAPER
Critiquing-based recommenders: survey and emerging
Li Chen · Pearl Pu
Received: 8 September 2010 / Accepted in revised form: 20 May 2011 /
Published online: 19 October 2011
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011
Critiquing-based recommender systems elicit users’ feedback, called critiques, which they made on the recommended items. This conversational style of
interaction is in contract to the standard model where users receive recommendations
in a single interaction. Through the use of the critiquing feedback, the recommender
systems are able to more accurately learn the users’ proﬁles, and therefore suggest
better recommendations in the subsequent rounds. Critiquing-based recommenders
have been widely studied in knowledge-, content-, and preference-based recommenders and are beginning to be tried in several online websites, such as MovieLens. This
article examines the motivation and development of the subject area, and offers a
detailed survey of the state of the art concerning the design of critiquing interfaces and
development of algorithms for critiquing generation. With the help of categorization
analysis, the survey reveals three principal branches of critiquing based recommender
systems, using respectively natural language based, system-suggested, and user-initiated critiques. Representative example systems will be presented and analyzed for
each branch, and their respective pros and cons will be discussed. Subsequently, a
hybrid framework is developed to unify the advantages of different methods and overcome their respective limitations. Empirical ﬁndings from user studies are further
presented, indicating how hybrid critiquing supports could effectively enable endusers to achieve more conﬁdent decisions. Finally, the article will point out several
future trends to boost the advance of critiquing-based recommenders.
L. Chen (B)
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
e-mail: 
Human Computer Interaction Group, School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
e-mail: 
L. Chen, P. Pu
Critiquing-based recommenders · Survey · Preference elicitation ·
Example critiquing · Dynamic critiquing · Hybrid critiquing · User evaluations
1 Introduction
As online product catalogs have evolved to a second generation where users increasingly search and buy high-risk products such as apartments, laptops or cameras in
online environments, the task of locating a desired choice among a large set of options
is indeed becoming intimidating for the average customer. Recommender technology can help users ﬁnd ideal products by exploiting user similarity . So far collaborative ﬁltering techniques have been used to suggest highly
rated items from users who have experienced the products to similar users. However,
for high-risk product domains, users are likely to search and buy products for the
ﬁrst time. This means the system cannot establish a meaningful proﬁle for many of
its recommendation seekers. To overcome such cold start problems, critiquing-based
recommender systems have emerged and been broadly recognized as an effective
preference based search and recommender technology, employing a distinct feedback
mechanism called critiquing. In critiquing based systems, the initial user proﬁle model
does not inﬂuence the accuracy of the decision. Rather, it is the subsequent process
of incremental critiquing that assists users in making more informed and accurate
decisions.
Essentially, the critiquing-based recommender system simulates an artiﬁcial
salesperson which will ﬁrst recommend options based on users’ current preferences
and then elicit users’ feedback in form of critiques (such as “I would like something cheaper” or “with faster processor speed” when the product is Laptop). For a
user to ﬁnally reach her ideal product, a number of such cycles are often required.
Indeed, users are likely to construct their preferences in a context-dependent and
adaptive fashion during the decision process . A typical buyer has many constraints
and preferences that are not stated up front. He or she becomes aware of these
latent preferences only when proposed solutions violate them . The system’s main component
is thus the recommendation-and-critiquing, which has been variously named tweaking
 , candidate/critiquing , criteria editing and later example critiquing , pro-
ﬁling by examples , navigation by proposing , and critiquing feedback .
Typically, a critiquing-based recommender system follows the system-user
interaction model as depicted in Fig. 1.
Critiquing-based recommenders
User’s initial
preferences are
One or multiple
outcomes are
No more effort
Natural conversational
dialog, system-suggested, or
user-initiated critiquing
Fig. 1 The typical interaction model between users and a critiquing-based recommender system
Step 1: the user is asked to ﬁrst specify a reference product as the starting point;
alternatively, she or he can give some speciﬁc value preferences on product
features (e.g., their criteria on the apartment’s price, size, etc.);
Step 2: the system then returns one or multiple recommended items according to the
user’s initial preferences;
Step 3: at this point, the user can select an item as her ﬁnal choice and terminate
the interaction. However, in most cases, a user is likely to choose a nearly
desirable item and make critiques on the item. The speciﬁc types of critiques
she makes depend on the system’s critiquing support. As we will discuss
later, critiquing supports fall into three major types: natural conversational
critiques, system-suggested critiques, or user-initiated critiquing. The latter
two methods have been more popularly deployed in existing systems;
Step 4: once the critiques are made, the system will update its recommendations and
return them in the next interaction cycle.
This interaction process continues until the user decides that she has found her most
preferred product.
As an example, we consider a simple apartment ﬁnder interface that illustrates how
critiquing-based recommenders generally work (Figs. 2, 3, 4). In Fig. 2, a user starts
the search by specifying one or several preferences in the “search panel” area. Based
on this initial preference model, the search engine will ﬁnd and display a set of matching results. For example, seven matching apartments were displayed in this interface
 .
When a user is ready to select an apartment to put in the basket, the critiquing
interface will be shown (see Fig. 3) where he/she can compare his/her current selection with others and perform critiquing analysis. For instance, suppose that the current
selection is apartment 34. In the comparison window, the user can specify his/her
desire for a bigger apartment by clicking on the checkbox next to the “bigger area”
label. However, knowing that he/she may sacriﬁce something for a bigger apartment,
he/she speciﬁes “compromise” for both distance and kitchen attributes. Compromise
means that a user is willing to accept a less satisﬁed value of the respective attribute.
Once a set of critiques has been composed, the system will show another set of
matching examples (see Fig. 4). At this moment, apartment 31 seems quite interesting: it is around the same price and is 5 square meters bigger; however, it requires 10
L. Chen, P. Pu
Fig. 2 System showing a set of 7 results after a user’s query
more minutes of commuting time and the bathroom is shared. This example illustrates
that the system does not resolve the tradeoffs for the user; it rather provides relevant
information for him/her to understand the decision context. The ﬁnal choice is left to
This recommendation-and-critiquing hence completes one cycle of interaction,
which can continue as long as the user desires more of the critiquing process.
In the last decade, as more researchers have become interested in this area, three
types of critiquing methods have been established: (1) natural language dialog based
critiquing support, which acts as an artiﬁcial sales agent to communicate with the customer in a dialog interface, such as ExpertClerk and Adaptive Place
Advisor ; (2) system-suggested critiquing, which proposes a
set of critique suggestions for users to select, such as Dynamic Critiquing
 and MAUT-based Compound Critiques ; and
(3) user-initiated critiquing, which aims at providing facilities to stimulate users to
create critiquing criteria on their own, such as Example Critiquing 
and Flat Finder .
In this article, we would like to provide a survey of the start-of-the-art of critiquing
systems as well as indicating the emerging trends for the future. We organize the rest
of this article as follows: in Sect. 2, we will describe several recent and reprehensive
critiquing-based recommender systems in the three respective branches; in Sect. 3, a
hybrid framework will be presented, which aims at unifying the advantages of different methods and overcoming their respective limitations. Empirical ﬁndings from user
studies will follow, indicating how the hybrid critiquing supports can effectively lead
Critiquing-based recommenders
Fig. 3 Critiquing support to guide users to critique the current example product for comparing it with the
other tradeoff alternatives
end-users to achieve more conﬁdent and accurate decisions. Finally, via the development and analysis of taxonomy of the existing critiquing methods, we are able to
indicate several future research and deployment directions in this area (Sects. 4–6).
2 Three types of critiquing systems
2.1 Natural language dialog based systems
The natural language method engages users in a conversational dialog and prompts
them to provide preference feedback to the current recommendation. Two systems can
illustrate how this process works.
2.1.1 ExpertClerk 
ExpertClerk is an agent system imitating a human salesclerk. It interacts with shoppers
in natural language and narrows down the set of matching goods by asking effective
questions (Navigation by Asking). Then it shows three contrasting samples with explanation of their selling points (Navigation by Proposing) and observes the shopper’s
reaction. This process repeats until the shopper ﬁnds an appropriate good. Thus, the
interaction obeys the critiquing model.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Fig. 4 System showing a new set of alternatives after the user’s critiques
More specifically, after getting users’ initial preferences via the conversational dialog, the system translates them into a SQL query and passes it to the database. If too
many matching goods exist, the Navigation by Asking function would calculate the
information gain of possible questions and then ask appropriate questions to the shopper for narrowing down the matching goods. After merchandise records are narrowed
down to a pre-deﬁned threshold number, the Navigation by Proposing function will
show three significantly different samples. The ﬁrst sample good is the good record
closest to the center point of all matching goods. Its selling points directly reﬂect the
customer’s request. The second sample good is the record positioned farthest away
from the center point, and the third sample good is the one positioned farthest away
from the second sample. The explanation of the sample’s selling point is given like
“this is twice as expensive as those because it is made of silk and the other two are
made of polyester”. While seeing the explanation, the shopper could easily exclude
one of the three proposed goods with a speciﬁc reason, such as “this one is too dark
for me compared with the other two”. The system will then modify the sample picking
strategy accordingly.
2.1.2 Adaptive place advisor 
This system employs natural language dialog for giving personalized place recommendations. Consider the following conversation between the inquirer (i.e., the user)
and the advisor (i.e., the system):
Critiquing-based recommenders
1. Inquirer: Where do you think I should eat tonight?
2. Advisor: What type of food would you like?
3. Inquirer: What types are there?
4. Advisor: You can say things like Chinese, Indian, and Mediterranean.
5. Inquirer: Oh, maybe a cheap Indian place.
To ﬁnd items to recommend to the user, the Place Advisor carries out an augmented
interactive constraint-satisfaction search. The goal of the entire conversation is to present an item that will be acceptable to the user. A probabilistic representation of the
user’s preferences, i.e., the query, is expanded considering both the long-term (over
many conversations) and short-term (within a conversation). The system incrementally reﬁnes this query in the course of the conversation with the user, based on the
user’s critiques to the attributes and items offered during a conversation.
2.1.3 Discussion: pros and cons
The natural language dialog approach is especially suitable for generating recommendations that need to be delivered by speech interfaces, rather than visual platforms
(e.g., while the inquirer is driving, etc.). This system also seems ideal, independent of
modality, for practical tasks like destination selection or help-desk support, for which
users need to converge on a few items.
However, since dialog interaction models demand precise natural language processing and high involvement of users, they are not so ideal to help an online user when they
search for a product to buy in the e-commerce environment. Thus, some researchers
have been engaged in the design and development of interactive critiquing in graphical user interfaces in order to better facilitate the process in such environments. These
research works have resulted in two major types of approaches: system-suggested
critiques and user-initiated critiquing.
2.2 System-suggested critiquing systems
The system-suggested critiquing system has been developed mainly to pro-actively
generate a set of knowledge-based critiques that users might accept as ways to improve
the current recommendation. The system produces the critiques according to its knowledge of the product domain, users’ current preferences, or the availability of remaining
products. For example, one of the earlier system-suggested critiquing systems was
called FindMe. It helps users search through a large multi-dimensional information
space using its knowledge about the product domain . A
distinct interaction element in FindMe is its tweaking feature which allows users to
critique the current recommendation by selecting one of the system’s pre-designed
tweaks (e.g., “cheaper”, “bigger” and “nicer”). When a user responds to a tweak, the
remaining candidates will be ﬁltered to leave only those satisfying the tweak. Burke
 provides a detailed review of the FindMe systems. Another earlier example is
ATA (Automated Travel Agent) developed by Linden et al. . Its main aim was
to help users select the ideal solution among conﬁgurable products, such as ﬂights.
L. Chen, P. Pu
The main interaction element of ATA is called candidate/critique, which proposes a
candidate solution and several critiques (e.g., “the best non-stop trip”). Through the
critiques, the system elicits additional preferences from the user and then proposes
better candidates in the next interaction cycle.
In recent years, the system-suggested critiquing mechanism has been largely
improved by researchers in order to make the critiques more dynamically generated
and being more accurately matched to users’ needs.
2.2.1 Dynamic critiquing 
The motivation of developing dynamic critiquing was because of the limitations of
FindMe system : (1) its critique suggestions are pre-designed and
ﬁxed within a user’s whole interaction session, so they are unable to reﬂect the user’s
changing needs and the status of remaining available products; (2) each of its critiques can only constrain over a single feature at a time (so called the unit critique).
Therefore, Reilly et al. have proposed an alternative strategy with the aim to
suggest a set of dynamic compound critiques, each of which is essentially a combination of multiple unit critiques that can operate over multiple features simultaneously
(for example, a compound critique is “Different Manufacture, Lower Processor Speed
and Cheaper”). Concretely, the Dynamic Critiquing interface (see Fig. 5) presents both
unit and compound critiques to users as feedback options.
The system is essentially based on the association rule mining technique to discover frequent sets of value differences between the current recommendation and the
remaining un-recommended products. The Apriori algorithm, a broadly applied association rule mining tool , was chosen to fulﬁll the task. More
specifically, they use the Apriori algorithm to discover highly recurring compound
critiques that are representative of a given dataset. They then ﬁlter all possible compound critiques by using a threshold value, favoring those critiques with lower support
values (“support value” refers to the percentage of products that satisfy the critique).
Such selection criterion was motivated by the consideration that presenting critiques
with lower support values provides a good balance between their likely applicability
to the user and their ability to narrow the search. Once the user selects a critique,
a product satisfying the chosen critique as well as being most similar to the current
recommendation is returned as a new recommendation in the next cycle.
A live-user trial (with 38 subjects) showed that the total number of recommendation
cycles decreases from 29 to 6 when users actively selected the compound critiques
 . On the other hand, the proposed dynamic critiques can
perform as explanations, exposing to users the recommendation opportunities in the
remaining dataset .
In their follow-up work, the system was extended to Incremental Critiquing, which
particularly records the user’s critiquing history (i.e., critiques that the user picked in
the past cycles), and hence is able to avoid repeatedly endorsing attribute value(s) that
the user already stated dislike . A user evaluation revealed that the
extended version can save users’ interaction cycles by up to 34%, in comparison with
the original system .
Critiquing-based recommenders
Fig. 5 The Dynamic Critiquing interface with system suggested compound critiques for users to select
 
2.2.2 MAUT-based compound critiques and visual critiquing 
However, the Dynamic-Critiquing method (including its extension) is still limited,
in that it only reveals what the system can provide, but does not take into account
users’ interest in the suggested critiques. Given this limitation, Zhang and Pu 
have proposed an approach with the purpose of adapting the generation of compound
critiques to user preferences. Formally, they model each user’s preferences based on
the multi-Attribute Utility Theory (MAUT), which is a theory taking into account
of conﬂicting value preferences and producing a sore for each item to represent its
overall satisfaction degree with the user preferences . Thus,
during each recommendation cycle, according to the user’s current preferences, the
top k products with maximal MAUT values are retrieved. The ranked ﬁrst item is then
taken as the top candidate, and for each of the others, its detailed value differences
from the top candidate will be presented as a compound critique (e.g., “same brand
with lower price, but slower CPU speed, smaller screen, smaller memory and smaller
hard disk”).
Relative to Dynamic Critiquing methods, these MAUT-based compound critiques
were proven with significantly higher recommendation quality, inferring that they can
L. Chen, P. Pu
Fig. 6 An example of the compound critique with its original textual interface (above) and its new visual
interface design (below) 
be better matching to the user’s intended critiquing criteria .
In their later work, Zhang et al. modiﬁed their critiquing interface by means
of a visual design, where originally text-only critiques were replaced with meaningful
icons. For example, “cheaper” was replaced with a value-augmented icon. The green
border represents positive change and the down arrow represents the decreasing direction (see Fig. 6). This interface was favored by more users and stimulated them to
more actively apply the suggested critiques.
2.2.3 Preference-based organization interface 
Although MAUT-based compound critiques and its visual design were proven more
effective than Dynamic Critiquing systems, it is still in nature limited, in that each
MAUT-based compound critique corresponds to one product only and not much recommendation opportunities can be exposed to users. Moreover, each critique contains
too many attributes which will likely cause information overload to the user.
Thus, preference-based organization technique was proposed to compensate for the
above-mentioned limitations . It was designed not only dynamically generating critiques adaptive to users’ MAUT based preference model, but also
applying the association rule mining tool to discover compound critiques that can be
representative of the remaining dataset. In addition, the critiques and their contained
products are diversiﬁed so as to assist users in reﬁning and accumulating their preferences more effectively. Brieﬂy speaking, the algorithm contains three main steps
 : (1) it establishes the user’s preference model
by representing her initial preferences as a weighted additive sum of value functions
according to MAUT; (2) it computes the recommendations based on the user’s preference model, and each of them (except the top candidate) is converted into a tradeoff
vector, comprising a set of (attribute, tradeoff) pairs; the tradeoff in essence indicates
the improved or compromised property of the product’s attribute value being compared
to the same attribute of the top candidate; for the attributes without explicitly stated
preferences, the default properties are suggested (e.g., the cheaper, the better); (3) it
organizes the tradeoff vectors into categories through the Apriori algorithm . The algorithm helps discover the recurring subsets of (attribute, tradeoff)
pairs as candidates of system-suggested critiques. Since a large amount of subsets
Critiquing-based recommenders
are usually produced by this association rule mining tool, these candidates are further
ranked and diversiﬁed, and the ones with higher tradeoff utilities (i.e., gains vs. losses
relative to user preferences) are ﬁnally presented in the organization interface. In the
interface, after a user selected one of the suggested critiques and furthermore a reference product from the set of recommendations that satisfy the selected critique, her
preferences will be accordingly reﬁned. Formally, the weight (i.e., the relative importance) of improved attribute(s) that appears in the selected critique will be increased,
and the weight of compromised one(s) will be decreased. All attributes’ preferred values will be also updated based on the selected product’s values. This reﬁned preference
model will then be inputted to the recommendation engine to generate a new set of
critique suggestions in the next cycle. This process continues till the user makes the
ﬁnal choice.
Figure 7 shows the sample interface, where multiple products that satisfy the suggested critique are recommended together. This interface was favored by most of
the interviewed users since it could potentially save their interaction effort and give
them high control over the process of making choice. A comparative study assessed its
algorithm accuracy, by comparing it to FindMe, Dynamic Critiquing and MAUT-based
compound critiques. The experimental results showed that it can achieve significantly
higher critique prediction accuracy and recommendation accuracy. It was also proven
to be most effective in terms of saving users’ interaction effort.
2.2.4 Discussion: pros and cons
It can be seen that the pros of system-suggested critiques are mainly their ability of
educating and guiding users to provide feedback criteria, so that the system can better
understand users and enhance its recommendation power. It has also been proven that
the critique suggestion accuracy can be highly improved if they take into account of
users’ current and potential interests. This infers that if the critiques optimally match
to what users are prepared to make, the system will likely save users’ interaction effort
and accelerate their decision performance. On the other hand, the critique suggestions can perform as explanations and help users be familiar with the product domain
and the relationship between attributes. Users can be then stimulated to express more
preferences and/or be prevented from making retrieval failures .
Althoughthecritiquepredictionaccuracywas significantlyimprovedinrecent studies, the accuracy is still not so ideal ). It hence indicates
that the critique suggestions are unable to precisely match to users’ intended criteria
all the time. In the failure situations, because users have no chance to build critiques on
their own, they would have to take more effort in order to locating target choice. For
example, consider a user who is looking for a digital camera with higher resolution
and more optical zoom than the current recommended product. Suppose there is no
suggested critique matching to this criterion. At this point, she may either sacriﬁce
her requirement on resolution and optical zoom by selecting the current product, or
be involved in longer interaction session by pursuing other ways to locate the desired
product. In both cases, the user would perceive that the system is not so competent in
helping her make quick and accurate decision.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Fig. 7 The preference-based organization interface where category titles behave as suggested compound
critiques 
2.3 User-initiated critiquing systems
Instead of suggesting critiques for users to choose, the user-initiated critiquing
approach focuses on showing examples and stimulating users to make self-motivated
critiques. It does not limit the critiques a user can manipulate during each cycle, so that
users can post either unit or compound critiques over any combination of features with
freedom. In fact, the target of this kind of system is to assist users in freely executing
tradeoff navigation, which is a process shown to significantly improve users’ decision
accuracy and conﬁdence .
Precisely, the tradeoff navigation involves ﬁnding products that have more optimal
values on important attributes, while accepting compromised values for other less
important ones. With the user-initiated critiquing interface, the user can conveniently
start the tradeoff navigation from one item (called the reference product), specify
her tradeoff criteria in terms of improvement and compromise regarding the product’s attributes, and then see a new set of products that are nearly approaching to her
ideal choice. The unit and compound critiques are respectively termed as simple and
complex tradeoffs in such systems .
Critiquing-based recommenders
Fig. 8 The Example Critiquing interface that turns the critiquing process into a decision tradeoff process
 
2.3.1 Example Critiquing 
The Example Critiquing agent is a purely user-initiated critiquing system. It originated from ATP, which was an online preference-based search tool for ﬁnding ﬂights
 .
The Example Critiquing system mainly consists of a user interface and a search
engine. A user initially starts the search by specifying a few preferences in the query
area. Each preference is composed of one acceptable attribute value and its corresponding degree of importance (i.e., weight). Behind, a MAUT-based preference model will
be built. Based on the initial preference model, the search engine will rank all alternatives by their matching scores and return the top k ones that suggests the optimal number). The user either
accepts a result, or takes a near solution and activates the tradeoff navigation panel
(i.e., the critiquing panel, see Fig. 8) where she can post critiques to the near solution. For instance, as shown in Fig. 8, three radio buttons are next to each attribute,
respectively under “Keep” (default), “Improve” and “Take any suggestion” labels,
thus facilitating users to critique one attribute by either improving its current value
(i.e., selecting “Improve”) or accepting a compromised value suggested by the system
(i.e., via “Take any suggestion”). More notably, users can freely compose compound
critiques by combining critiques on any two or more attributes.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Once a set of critiques is composed, the system will reﬁne the user’s preference
model and adjust the relative weights of all critiqued attributes. Formally, the weight
of improved attribute(s) will be increased and that of compromised attribute(s) will be
decreased. The search engine will then compute and return a new set of recommendations based on the reﬁned preference model.
Besides modeling user preferences based on MAUT, for conﬁgurable products
(e.g., ﬂight planning), the search engine employs sophisticated constraint satisfaction
algorithm . Formally, the question was deﬁned as a constraint
satisfaction problem (CSP) that includes both hard constraints (i.e., the criteria that
should not be violated) and soft constraints. Solving a CSP involves ﬁnding solutions
that are optimally preferred. For this purpose, the weighted CSP was utilized because
it can ﬁnd the optimal solution to minimize the weighted sum of preferences and
considers tradeoffs.
Increasing users’ decision accuracy has uniquely motivated Example Critiquing
research in the past several years . In a set of more than 10 trials that
involves real users, researchers showed that Example Critiquing systems were able to
increase users’ decision accuracy , save their cognitive decision effort
 and improve users’ preference certainty and decision conﬁdence
in their search task .
2.3.2 Flat Finder 
Based on the Example Critiquing infrastructure, Viappiani et al. centered their research
on how to help users express more preferences, by means of returning more predictive
product recommendations. They developed Flat Finder which is based on the lookahead principle to provide product suggestions . The main idea
is that, besides showing products that best match to the user’s current preferences, it
also returns products that will become optimal if the user adds a new preference. Technically, they considered Pareto-optimality to build a probability model for predicting
users’ new preferences: an option is Pareto-optimal if there is no other option that is
better or equally preferred regarding all preferences, and strictly better w.r.t. at least
one preference. Products are then evaluated according to their probability of becoming Pareto-optimal. Through series of simulation and user studies, they demonstrated
that their method prompted users to articulate more preferences, and enabled users to
achieve a higher level of decision accuracy .
2.3.3 Discussion: pros and cons
The main advantage of user-initiated approach is that it allows for a higher level of
user control. Users might feel at ease to create critiques in their own desires, whereas
in the system-suggested system, they can only “select”, but not “create”. In addition,
the system is more ﬂexible because more critiquing facilities can be provided on the
interface for users to specify their criteria. Prior works have also discovered these systems’ positive effects on improving users’ decision accuracy and quality, given their
support to tradeoff navigation .
Critiquing-based recommenders
However, users perceived less cognitive effort while using these systems, although
their objective interaction effort is almost equivalent, and sometimes even higher, than
their effort using the system suggested critiquing systems . The
previous user study also found that users normally required a warm-up period to be
familiarized with this system, since these user-initiated critiquing facilities were not
so easily grasped at their ﬁrst glance. Thus, the main challenging issue for this type
of system is how they could reduce users’ effort consumption, while still maintaining
high level of user control and decision accuracy.
2.4 Summary
In a summary, the systems described in this article can be generally classiﬁed in terms
of their critiquing supports: natural dialog involves users in a conversational mode to
state the criteria in natural languages, system-suggested critiques propose a set of critique options for users to select, and user-initiated critiquing stimulates users to freely
create critiques on their own. Under this classiﬁcation, we have further reviewed these
systems from others aspects, such as the number of items that they recommended
at a time for users to critique. As summarized in Table 1, each surveyed system is
additionally characterized from the following dimensions:
Critiquing coverage concerns the number of recommendations that are returned in
each cycle for users to provide feedback. Most of user-initiated critiquing systems,
such as Example Critiquing , returned multiple items during each
recommendation cycle, so that users have the freedom to choose their desired critiquing object. On the contrary, system-suggested critiquing systems, including FindMe
 and Dynamic Critiquing , present one recommendation at a time and they base it to produce the suggested critiques. This simple
display strategy should have the advantage of not overwhelming users with too much
information, but it deprives users of the right to select the interested product, and hence
potentially brings the risk of engaging users in longer interaction session.
Critiquing modality determines the type(s) of critiques that users can actually state
to a product. Looking into above systems in this regard, we come up with three major
types. The ﬁrst one is similarity-based critiquing such as “Find a camera similar to
this one.” This type of feedback is also called preference-based feedback in , and regarded as the least demanding approach w.r.t. user effort,
domain expertise and interface complexity. The second is quality-based critiquing
such as “Find a similar camera, but cheaper.” This type of critiquing is suitable for
users who desire improvement on speciﬁc attributes (e.g., price), but are unable to
specify the exact amount to be improved. The third type is quantity-based critiquing,
e.g., “Find something similar to this camera, but at least $100 cheaper.” It applies
when users have exact value preferences, and this kind of critiquing can be efﬁcient
for users to ﬁlter out irrelevant items. Because the critiques from system-suggested
critiquing systems are pre-formulated or dynamically generated, most of them support
only quality-based critiques. They claimed that such critiques provide a compromise
between the detail provided by value elicitation (i.e., quantity-based critiquing) and
the ease of feedback associated with preference-based methods 
Dialog-based
Multiple products (p = 3)
Clothes, wines
Adaptive Place Advisor
 
Dialog-based
One product
Restaurants
FindMe 
System-suggested k
critiques (k = 7
critiques in RentMe)
One product returned for
users to critique
Quality-based
Unit critiques
Apartments, restaurants,
ATA 
System-suggested k
critiques (k = 2)
Multiple products (p = 5)
returned for users to
select their critiquing
Quality-based
Unit critiques
Flight tickets
Dynamic Critiquing
 
System-suggested k
critiques (k = 3)
One product
Quality-based
Compound critiques
PCs, Digital cameras
MAUT-based Compound
Critiques (Zhang and Pu
System-suggested k
critiques (k = 5)
One product
Quality-based
Compound critiques
Apartments, PCs
Preference-based
Organization (Chen and
System-suggested k
critiques (k = 4)
Multiple products (p = 6)
Quality-based
Compound critiques
Laptops, digital cameras
Example Critiquing
 
User-initiated
critiquing aid
Multiple products (p = 7)
Similarity-based;
quality-based;
quantity-based
Simple and complex
tradeoffs (i.e., unit and
compound critiques)
Apartments, laptops,
digital cameras,
ﬂight planning
Flat Finder 
User-initiated
critiquing aid
Multiple products (p = 6)
Simple and complex
Apartments
Critiquing-based recommenders
critiquing) . In comparison, due to the ﬂexibility of user-initiated critiquing interfaces, they are capable of facilitating different types of modalities,
especially the quantity-based ones. For example, in Example Critiquing interface (see
Fig. 8), the option “$100 cheaper” is listed in the pull-down menu of “price”.
Critiquing unit refers to the number of product features that users are allowed to
specify critiquing criteria each time. As noted before, system-suggested critiquing
systems commonly classify their supports as either unit critique (i.e., the critique is
made on only one feature, e.g., “cheaper” in FindMe), or compound critique (i.e., on
multiple features simultaneously, such as MAUT-based compound critiques), or both
(such as in Dynamic Critiquing). In Example Critiquing , since it
does not limit the type and unit of critiques a user can manipulate during each cycle,
both unit critique and compound critique are supported in form of simple tradeoff and
complex tradeoff respectively. For example, the user can improve or compromise a
single feature and leave the others unchanged (i.e., unit critique), or combine multiple
unit critiques into a compound critique.
3 Towards hybrid critiquing systems
As discussed before, each type of the systems inherently possesses certain pros and
cons. In particular, it seems that the respective strengths of system-suggested critiquing
and user-initiated systems could well compensate each other. Driven by this observation, a comparative user evaluation was conducted, which empirically revealed the
two approaches’ combined as well as individual merits. To follow-up, two variations
of hybrid critiquing systems were developed.
3.1 User-initiated critiquing versus system-suggested critiques
In an experiment that involved 36 participants, two example systems, Example Critiquing (EC) and Dynamic Critiquing (DC) were compared, which respectively represented user-initiated and system-suggested critiquing systems. The results show that
EC achieved significantly better results in terms of users’ decision accuracy, cognitive
effort perception and decision conﬁdence . Further analysis of
users’ written protocols uncovered that the primary factor that led to EC’s success
is its combination of multi-product critiquing coverage strategy and a user-initiated
critiquing aid. This combination gave users a higher degree of control when they
compared products and composed tradeoff criteria. However, some users (36.1%) still
subjectively preferred the system-suggested DC, because they found it intuitive to use,
and the critique suggestions motivated them to provide feedback to the current recommended product. Indeed, the majority of these 36.1% users were able to accelerate
their decision process when the system suggested the critiques that they were prepared
to accept.
This study motivated researchers to develop a new type of critiquing interface which
could well combine both approaches’ advantages, so as to maximally improve users’
decision performance and subjective preference. The so called hybrid critiquing-based
recommender system was hence proposed, and it is believed that in such system, people
L. Chen, P. Pu
The product being
System-suggested
compound critiques
User-initiated
critiquing facility
Fig. 9 Hybrid critiquing system (version 1): the combination of system-suggested compound critiques and
user-initiated critiquing facility 
can not only obtain knowledge of the domain and easily perform critiquing via the
suggested critiques, but also have the opportunity to freely compose critiques on their
own with the self-initiated critiquing support.
3.2 Hybrid Critiquing
Two hybrid critiquing systems have been developed so far. One was the combination
of Example Critiquing facilities with Dynamic Critiquing based compound critiques
on a single screen. The second version integrated the preference-based organization
interface (which shows system-suggested critiques and their
associated products on a separate page) with Example Critiquing (the EC interface is
evoked only when users activate it). Series of user studies were conducted on the two
3.2.1 Version 1
Figure 9 shows a sample interface of the ﬁrst type of hybrid critiquing system, where
DC compound critiques are displayed with EC facilities on the same screen . Specifically, the current recommendation is displayed at the top and
followed by multiple suggested critiques. The self-initiated critiquing area is placed
below, which provides functions to facilitate various types of critiquing modality
Critiquing-based recommenders
(e.g., similarity-based, quality-based, or quantity-based) and critiquing unit (e.g., unit
or compound critiques). In this interface, users can freely choose to pick the suggested
compound critiques, or create their own critiquing criteria. For example, when a user
is looking for some products with higher resolution and more optical zoom relative to
the current recommended camera, if one of the suggested critiques exactly matches
the requirements, she can undoubtedly select it. Otherwise, she can specify the criteria
in the self-initiated critiquing panel (i.e., by “improving” the resolution and optical
zoom simultaneously). Besides, she can also choose to compromise some of other
attributes that are less important for her, so as to guarantee the intended gains.
After each critiquing process, a set of tradeoff alternatives that best match to the
user’s critiques will be returned by the system for users to compare. The search algorithm is accordingly chosen to adapt to the type of critiques users posted. For example,
it applies similarity and compatibility selection measures if the DC-based critique is
picked, and employs elimination-by-aspect (EBA) plus weighted additive sum rule
(WADD) ranking mechanism if the user self speciﬁed critiques. Among the recommended items, if the user ﬁnds her target choice, she can proceed to check out. Otherwise, if she likes one product but wants something to be additionally improved, she
can come back to the hybrid critiquing interface to resume a new critiquing cycle.
A user study (with 18 participants) studied users’ actual behavior in this hybrid
system . It showed that users behaved more actively in creating
criteria with the self-initiated critiquing panel, relative to their application of the system-suggested critiques. Eventually, users obtained high levels of decision accuracy,
decision conﬁdence and behavioral intentions.
In addition, by comparing this hybrid critiquing system to systems without critique
suggestions or without user-initiated critiquing facility, the two components’ respective roles became much clearer. In fact, both significantly contributed to enhancing
users’ conﬁdence in their decision and intention to return to the hybrid system for
future use.
3.2.2 Version 2
As noted in Sect. 2.2, in comparison with Dynamic Critiquing and MAUT-based compound critiques that generated critique suggestions, the preference-based organization
(Pref-ORG) achieved significantly higher critique prediction accuracy and recommendation accuracy . Moreover, its interface displays multiple sample
products along with a suggested critique. Motivated by these advantages, a new version
of the hybrid critiquing system was designed that combines Pref-ORG and Example
Critiquing .
Figure 10 shows the screenshots. Here we give an example to illustrate how the
system models the user preferences and generates critiques. A user initially starts her
search by specifying one or any number of preferences. Each preference is composed
of one acceptable attribute value and its relative importance (weight). A preference
structure is hence a set of (acceptable attribute value, weight) pairs of all participating main attributes. After a user speciﬁes her initial preferences, the best matching
product computed by the MAUT model will be returned at the top, and followed
by the suggested critiques and sample products as produced by the preference-based
L. Chen, P. Pu
(a) The preference-based organization interface.
(b) The user-initiated example critiquing interface.
If suggested
critiques and
products do not
interest the
user, he/she
could switch to
create critiques
his/herself by
clicking the
button “Self
specify criteria
for ‘Better
Features’.
Fig. 10 Hybrid critiquing system (version 2): the combination of preference-based organization interface
(Pref-ORG) and user-initiated critiquing facility 
organization algorithm (as described in Sect. 2.2). If the user is interested in one of
the suggested critiques, she could click “Show All” to see more products under the
critique. Among these products, the user can either choose one as her ﬁnal choice, or
Critiquing-based recommenders
select a near-target and click “Better Features” to start a new round of critiquing. In
the latter case, the user’s preference model will be automatically reﬁned to respect her
current criteria.
On the other hand, if in the organization interface, no critique and product interest
the user, she could switch to make the self-initiated critiquing by clicking on the button
“Self specify criteria for ‘Better Features”’ (see Fig. 10). At this point, the Example
Critiquing interface will be shown and facilitate the user to create her critiquing criteria. After she creates her own critiques, the system will also reﬁne the user’s preference
model and return multiple tradeoff alternatives that best match to her self-speciﬁed
critiquing criteria (as described in Sect. 2.3).
The user’s action of selecting system-suggested critiques or making self-initiated
critiquing completes one critiquing cycle, and it continues as long as the user wants
to reﬁne the results.
A comparative user study compared this new hybrid design with the ﬁrst version. A
total of 44 volunteers participated in the experiment . This user
evaluation revealed that users more frequently picked suggested critiques in the second
system, and significantly saved their task time and interaction effort. Moreover, both
hybrid critiquing systems obtained high scores regarding participants’ subjective decision conﬁdence and purchase/return intentions, implying that users will likely possess
positive attitude towards a system that comprises both system-suggested critiques and
user-initiated critiquing support.
Above results hence verify the earlier hypothesis that hybrid critiquing systems can
effectively address previous single systems’ respective limitations, and allow users to
reach high level of decision accuracy, while demanding low objective effort in making
the decision. Furthermore, users subjectively prefer such kind of hybrid system, and
intend to purchase the chosen product and even repeatedly use the system in the future.
4 Adoption of crituqing based recommenders in industry
So far we have described researchers’ attempts to develop and test various critiquing
based recommenders. A multitude of user studies also demonstrated that these systems effectively help users’ decision process because they are able to adapt to users’
changing needs and preferences. In this chapter, we describe the application of the critiquing method in two online websites. Since 2009, Amazon provides a new function,
called “Fix this recommendation”, for each item listed in the “recommendation for
you” area. When a user clicks the link,1 a pop-up window opens up and the user can
indicate that “I own it”, “not interested”, or “don’t use for recommendations”. “Fix
this recommendation” thus stimulates users to critique on the book that was suggested
to them. The three subsequent critiquing actions allow users to tell the system how
to improve the current recommendation: “I own it” means that the system should not
ever suggest this book to me, “not interested” indicates that this book does not interest
me, and “don’t use for recommendations” alerts to the system that this book does not
characterize my taste.
1 “Fix this recommendation” is implemented as an embedded link on the interface.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Since 2010, the popular movie recommender Movielens also added an example
critiquing function, called the “Movie Tuner” . With this function, the
user is able to adjust the movies recommended to her by requesting more or less of
particular qualities, for example “more action” or “less violent”. After the critique is
made, the system will recommend movies that meet the user’s new requirements.
5 Future trends
Motivated by the historical review and survey of recent works on critiquing system
development, we are able to suggest several directions for future investigation in this
5.1 Hybrid systems
Given the proven merits of different types of critiquing approaches and their combined effects in the hybrid systems, we believe that the hybrid approach could be
further enhanced in the future. For instance, with recent advance in natural language
processing and speech recognition technologies, the limitations of traditional natural
dialog model could be potentially addressed, and its advantages (e.g., easy to use and
simulating to the natural conversional style with a real salesperson) can be incorporated into existing hybrid systems, so as to further augment the system’s enjoyability
and user adoption degree.
5.2 Adaptive element
Another emerging trend will be further improving the systems’ ability of adapting
the critiquing process to the user’s changing preferences. In this regard, some pioneer researches have started. Viappiani et al. have been attempting to add the
“adaptive suggestions” element in their Flat Finder, by which the system can learn
from the user by observing her reaction to displayed examples. For instance, if the
user is shown an option with value subway for attribute “transportation” and she has
not stated any critique about transportation, the probability that the user has a preference for subway as transportation will decrease. In the next interaction cycle, the
system will choose options with a different value. On the other hand, Chen 
has highlighted two typical preference conditions that a user will be likely involved
during her entire decision process: “incomplete preferences” when the user has not
stated any preferences on the major product features, and “conﬂicting preferences”
when the user’s stated preferences conﬂict with each other so that no product satisﬁes
all of them. Therefore, the paper proposed an adaptive approach to selecting critiques,
so as to explicitly tailor to the two preference conditions. Mahmood and Ricci 
have adopted the Reinforcement Learning (RL) technique to observe the responses of
users in a conversational recommender, with the aim to maximize a numerical cumulative reward function that they use to model how much beneﬁt the user is supposed
to get from each recommendation session.
Critiquing-based recommenders
5.3 Critiquing systems for low-involvement product domains
As shown in Table 1, most existing critiquing-based recommender systems have been
oriented to high-value (or called high-involvement) products such as PCs, digital cameras, and travel planning, since for these products consumers are more motivated to
spend a significant amount of time in making critiques and rely on their own judgment
in the selection process, with the purpose of avoiding any ﬁnancial risks. However,
few have studied whether the critiquing element could also be applicable in the lowinvolvement product domains such as music, movies, perfumes and wines, though
users’ risk avoidance and decision accuracy would not be demanded so high for these
products. To ﬁll in the gap, Pu et al. developed a new system-suggested critique generation tool, called Editorial Picked Critiques (EPC), with the assumption
that users would spend less time in choosing low-risk products and are more likely to
rely on public opinions or experts’ advice to make decisions. The critiques were hence
generated through the data mining technique to combine editorial opinions, popularity
information and preference-based critiques. This method was tested in a perfume recommender, and demonstrated to significantly improve users’ decision conﬁdence. In
the future, it will be interesting to follow this direction to further investigate whether
similar beneﬁts could bring to other kinds of low-risk goods.
6 Conclusion
This article provides a detailed review of the development of critiquing-based recommender systems in the past decade. Particularly, three branches of development were
elaborated: systems with natural language dialogs, system-suggested critiquing systems where users select one of the proposed critiques as the feedback option, and userinitiated critiquing systems where users create critiques based on their own desires.
Following the discussion of their respective pros and cons, we presented experimental
results from comparing different approaches, and the derivation of hybrid critiquing
systems that uniﬁed these approaches’ advantages in a single platform. In particular, most of reported experiments were conducted to identify user experiences with
these types of critiquing systems, which objective is indeed regarded more effective
than purely testing the algorithms for judging the recommender’s practical beneﬁts
 . In the last two Sects. 4 and 5, we described the recent adoption of critiquing recommend systems in online industries and pointed out three major
emerging trends in this area: the incorporation of intelligent conversational elements,
the improvement on systems’ adaptation ability, and the application of critiquing systems in low involvement product domains.