Heidelberg
Texts in Applied Mathematics 20
J.E. Marsden
L. Sirovich
M. Golubitsky
F. John ( deceased)
Texts in Applied Mathematics
Sirovich: Introduction to Applied Mathematics.
Wiggins: Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos.
Hale/Ko{:ak: Dynamics and Bifurcations.
Chorin/Marsden: A Mathematical Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 3rd ed.
Hubbard/West: Differential Equations: A Dynamical Systems Approach:
Ordinary Differential Equations.
Sontag: Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimensional
Systems, 2nd ed.
Perko: Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, 2nd ed.
Seaborn: Hypergeometric Functions and Their Applications.
Pipkin: A Course on Integral Equations.
Hoppensteadt/Peskin: Mathematics in Medicine and the Life Sciences.
Braun: Differential Equations and Their Applications, 4th ed.
Stoer/Bulirsch: Introduction to Numerical Analysis, 2nd ed.
Renardy/Rogers: A First Graduate Course in Partial Differential Equations.
Banks: Growth and Diffusion Phenomena: Mathematical Frameworks and
Applications.
Brenner/Scott: The Mathematical Theory of Finite Element Methods.
Van de Velde: Concurrent Scientific Computing.
Marsden/Ratiu: Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry.
Hubbard/West: Differential Equations: A Dynamical Systems Approach:
Higher-Dimensional Systems.
Kaplan/Glass: Understanding Nonlinear Dynamics.
Holmes: Introduction to Perturbation Methods.
Curtain/Zwart: An Introduction to Infinite-Dimensional Linear Systems
Thomas: Numerical Partial Differential Equations: Finite Difference
Taylor: Partial Differential Equations: Basic Theory.
Merkin: Introduction to the Theory of Stability.
Naber: Topology, Geometry, and Gauge Fields: Foundations.
Poiderman/Willems: Introduction to Mathematical Systems Theory:
A Behavioral Approach.
Reddy: Introductory Functional Analysis: with Applications to Boundary-
Value Problems and Finite Elements.
Gustafson/Wilcox: Analytical and Computational Methods of Advanced
Engineering Mathematics.
Tveito/Winther: Introduction to Partial Differential Equations: A
Computational Approach.
Gasquet/Witomski: Fourier Analysis and Applications: Filtering, Numerical
Computation, Wavelet.
Bremaud: Markov Chains: Gibbs Fields and Monte Carlo.
Durran: Numerical Methods for Wave Equations in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics.
Mark H. Holmes
Introduction to
Perturbation Methods
With 88 Illustrations
Mark H. Holmes
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
Series Editors
J.E. Marsden
Department of
Mathematics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
M. Golubitsky
Department of Mathematics
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-3476
L. Sirovich
Division of Applied
Mathematics
Brown University
Providence, RI02912
Department of Applied Mathematics
Universitat Heidelberg
1m Neuenheimer Feld 294
69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Mathematics Subject Classifications : 35C20, 34E10, 35B27
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Holmes, Mark H.
Introduction to perturbation methods / Mark H. Holmes
(Texts in applied mathematics; 20)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4612-5349-5
e-ISBN-13: 978-1-4612-5347-1
001: 10.1007/978-1-4612-5347-1
1. PerturbatIOn (Mathematics) I. Title.
II. Series.
515' .35-dc20
Printed on acid-free paper.
© 1995 Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
Softcover reprint of the harcover 1st edition 1995
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the
written permission of the publisher (Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 175 Fifth Avenue, New
York, NY 10010, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis.
Use in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is
forbidden.
The use of general descriptive names, trade names, trademarks, etc., in this publication, even if
the former are not especially identified, is not to be taken as a sign that such names, as understood
by the Trade Marks and Merchandise Marks Act, may accordingly be used freely by anyone.
Production managed by Hal Henglein; manufacturing supervised by Jacqui Ashri.
Photocomposed copy prepared using U-TEJX.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
To Colette, Matthew and Marianna
A small family with big hearts
Series Preface
Mathematics is playing an ever more important role in the physical and
biological sciences, provoking a blurring of boundaries between scientific
disciplines and a resurgence of interest in the modern as well as the classical techniques of applied mathematics. This renewal of interest, both in
research and teaching, had led to the establishment of the series: Texts in
Applied Mathematics (TAM).
The development of new courses is a natural consequence of a high level of
excitement on the research frontier as newer techniques, such as numerical
and symbolic computer systems, dynamical systems, and chaos, mix with
and reinforce the traditional methods of applied mathematics. Thus, the
purpose of this text book series is to meet the current and future needs of
these advances and encourage the teaching of new courses.
TAM will publish textbooks suitable for use in advanced undergraduate
and beginning graduate courses, and will complement the Applied Mathematical Sciences (AMS) series, which will focus on advanced textbooks
and research level monographs.
First, let me say hello and welcome to the subject of perturbation methods. For those who may be unfamiliar with the topic, the title can be
confusing. The first time I became aware of this was during a family reunion when someone asked what I did as a mathematician. This is not an
easy question to answer, but I started by describing how a certain segment of the applied mathematics community was interested in problems
that arise from physical problems. Examples such as water waves, sound
propagation, and the aerodynamics of airplanes were discussed. The difficulty of solving such problems was also described in exaggerated detail.
Next came the part about how one generally ends up using a computer to
actually find the solution. At this point I editorialized on the limitations
of computer solutions and why it is important to derive, if at all possible,
accurate approximations of the solution. This lead naturally to the mentioning of asymptotics and perturbation methods. These terms ended the
conversation because I was unprepared for their reactions. They were not
sure exactly what asymptotics meant, but they were quite perplexed about
perturbation methods. I tried, unsuccessfully, to explain what it means,
but it was not until sometime later that I realized the difficulty. For them,
as in Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, the first two meanings for the word
perturb are "to disturb greatly in mind (disquiet); to throw into confusion
(disorder)." Although a cynic might suggest this is indeed appropriate for
the subject, the intent is exactly the opposite. (For a related comment, see
Exercise 3.4.1(d).)
In a nutshell, this book serves as an introduction into how to systematically construct an approximation of the solution of a problem that is
otherwise intractable. The methods all rely on there being a parameter in
the problem that is relatively small. Such a situation is relatively common
in applications, and this is one of the reasons that perturbation methods
are a cornerstone of applied mathematics. One of the other cornerstones is
scientific computing, and it is interesting that the two subjects have grown
up together. However, this is not unexpected given their respective capabilities. When using a computer, one is capable of solving problems that are
nonlinear, inhomogeneous, and multidimensional. Moreover, it is possible
to achieve very high accuracy. The drawbacks are that computer solutions
do not provide much insight into the physics of the problem (particularly
for those who do not have access to the appropriate software or computer),
and there is always the question as to whether or not the computed solution is correct. On the other hand, perturbation methods are also capable
of dealing with nonlinear, inhomogeneous, and multidimensional problems
(although not to the same extent as computer-generated solutions). The
principal objective when using perturbation methods, at least as far as the
author is concerned, is to provide a reasonably accurate expression for the
solution. By doing this one is able to derive an understanding of the physics
of the problem. Also, one can use the result, in conjunction with the original problem, to obtain more efficient numerical procedures for computing
the solution.
The methods covered in the text vary widely in their applicability. The
first chapter introduces the fundamental ideas underlying asymptotic approximations. This includes their use in constructing approximate solutions
of transcendental equations as well as differential equations. In the second chapter, matched asymptotic expansions are used to analyze problems
with layers. Chapter 3 describes a method for dealing with problems with
more than one time scale. In Chapter 4, the WKB method for analyzing
linear singular perturbation problems is developed, while in Chapter 5 a
method for dealing with materials containing disparate spatial scales (e.g.,
microscopic versus macroscopic) is discussed. The last chapter examines
the topics of multiple solutions and stability.
The mathematical prerequisites for this text include a basic background
in differential equations and advanced calculus. In terms of difficulty, the
chapters are written so that the first sections are either elementary or intermediate, while the later sections are somewhat more advanced. Also,
the ideas developed in each chapter are applied to a spectrum of problems,
including ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, and
difference equations. Scattered through the exercises are applications to integral equations, integra-differential equations, differential-difference equations, and delay equations. What will not be found is an in-depth discussion
of the theory underlying the methods. This aspect of the subject is important, and references to the more theoretical work in the area are given in
each chapter.
The exercises in each section vary in their complexity. In addition to the
more standard textbook problems, an attempt has been made to include
problems from the research literature. The latter are intended to provide
a window into the wide range of areas that use perturbation methods. Solutions to some of the exercises are available from the author's home page
located at "'holmes. Also located there is an errata list. Those who may want to make a contribution to one of these files,
or have suggestions about the text, can reach the author at .
I would like to express my gratitude to the many students who took my
course in perturbation methods at Rensselaer. They helped me immeasurably in understanding the subject and provided much needed encouragement to write this book. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the suggestions of
Jon Bell, Ash Kapila, and Bob O'Malley, who read early versions of the
manuscript. I would also like to thank Julian Cole, who first introduced
me to perturbation methods and is still, to this day, showing me what the
subject is about.
Troy, New York
August, 1994
Mark H. Holmes
Series Preface
Chapter 1: Introduction to Asymptotic Approximations
1.1 Introduction................
Taylor's Theorem and l'Hospital's Rule
Order Symbols . . . . . . . . .
Asymptotic Approximations . . . . . . .
Asymptotic Expansions . . . . .
Accuracy versus Convergence of an Asymptotic
Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Manipulating Asymptotic Expansions . . . . .
Asymptotic Solution of Algebraic and Transcendental
Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Introduction to the Asymptotic Solution of Differential
Equations . . . . . .
1.7 Uniformity .....
Symbolic Computing
Chapter 2: Matched Asymptotic Expansions
Introduction ................ .
Introductory Example . . . . . . . ... .
Examples with Multiple Boundary Layers
Interior Layers ....... .
Corner Layers ........ .
Partial Differential Equations
Difference Equations .
Chapter 3: Multiple Scales
Introduction ..... .
Introductory Example
Slowly Varying Coefficients
3.4 Forced Motion Near Resonance
Boundary Layers ....... .
Introduction to Partial Differential Equations
3.7 Linear Wave Propagation
Nonlinear Waves ..
Difference Equations ...
Chapter 4: The WKB and Related Methods
4.1 Introduction......
4.2 Introductory Example . . . . . . . . . .
Turning Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wave Propagation and Energy Methods
Wave Propagation and Slender Body Approximations
Ray Methods . . . . . . .
Parabolic Approximations
Discrete WKB Method. .
Chapter 5: The Method of Homogenization
Introduction ................ .
Introductory Example .......... .
Multidimensional Problem: Periodic Substructure.
Porous Flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chapter 6: Introduction to Bifurcation and Stability
6.1 Introduction...........
Introductory Example . . . . .
Analysis of a Bifurcation Point
Linearized Stability. . . . . . .
Relaxation Dynamics. . . . . .
An Example Involving a Nonlinear Partial Differential
Equation ...................
6.7 Bifurcation of Periodic Solutions . . . . . .
Systems of Ordinary Differential Equations
Appendix AI: Solution and Properties of Transition
Layer Equations
Al.I Airy Functions ............
Al.2 Confluent Hypergeometric Functions
Al.3 Higher-Order Turning Points. . . . .
Appendix A2: Asymptotic Approximations of Integrals
A2.1 Introduction........
A2.2 Watson's Lemma . . . . . . . . .
A2.3 Laplace's Approximation. . . . .
A2.4 Stationary Phase Approximation
Appendix A3: Numerical Solution of Nonlinear
Boundary-Value Problems
A3.1 Introduction. .
A3.2 Examples ...
A3.3 Computer Code