Social Ties and their Relevance to Churn in Mobile
Telecom Networks
Koustuv Dasgupta, Rahul Singh, Balaji Viswanathan,
Dipanjan Chakraborty, Sougata Mukherjea, Amit A. Nanavati
IBM India Research Lab
Anupam Joshi
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Email: 
Social Network Analysis has emerged as a key paradigm in
modern sociology, technology, and information sciences. The
paradigm stems from the view that the attributes of an individual
in a network are less important than their ties (relationships) with
other individuals in the network. Exploring the nature and
strength of these ties can help understand the structure and
dynamics of social networks and explain real-world phenomena,
ranging from organizational efficiency to the spread of
information and disease.
In this paper, we examine the communication patterns of millions
of mobile phone users, allowing us to study the underlying social
network in a large-scale communication network. Our primary
goal is to address the role of social ties in the formation and
growth of groups, or communities, in a mobile network. In
particular, we study the evolution of churners in an operator’s
network spanning over a period of four months. Our analysis
explores the propensity of a subscriber to churn out of a service
provider’s network depending on the number of ties (friends) that
have already churned. Based on our findings, we propose a
spreading activation-based technique that predicts potential
churners by examining the current set of churners and their
underlying social network. The efficiency of the prediction is
expressed as a lift curve, which indicates the fraction of all
churners that can be caught when a certain fraction of subscribers
were contacted.
1. INTRODUCTION
In today’s extremely challenging business environment, many
telecommunications carriers are measuring their success by the
size and growth of their profit margins. As a result, carriers are
under intense pressure to reduce or eliminate the major threats to
these margins which arise from revenue leakage, inaccurate intercarrier billing, fraud, and churn. Carriers rely on analysis of
terabytes of Call Detail Record (CDR) data to help them make
business-critical decisions that will positively affect their bottom
line. High-end data warehouses and powerful Business
Intelligence (BI) solutions are thus becoming essential tools to
help carriers meet profit goals. Analyzing and integrating in-depth
data enables carriers to reduce revenue leakage and churn,
mitigate fraud, optimize network usage and increase profits.
Interestingly, as mobile penetration is increasing and even
approaching saturation, the focus of Telecom BI is shifting from
customer acquisition to customer retention. It has been estimated
that it is much cheaper to retain an existing customer than to
acquire a new one . To maintain profitability, telecom service
providers must control churn, i.e. the loss of subscribers who
switch from one carrier to another. For the particular mobile
operator we consider, annual churn rates in the prepaid segment
average between a significant 50 to 70 percent. This implies that
the operator must offer the right incentives, adopt the right
marketing strategies, and place network assets appropriately to
protect its customers.
Retrieving information from CDR data can provide major
business insights for designing such strategies. A CDR contains
various details pertaining to each call, e.g. who called whom,
when was it made, etc. Based on this information, one can
construct a call graph with customer mobile numbers as nodes and
the calls as edges. The weight of an edge captures the strength of
the relationship (tie) between two nodes. An edge with a high
weight (e.g. call frequency or call volume) signifies a strong tie,
while an edge with a low weight represents a weak one.
Consequently, one can view the call graph as a social network
consisting of n actors (nodes) and a relationship Ri,j measured on
each ordered pair of actors i, j = 1,…,n.
We consider the call graph obtained from CDR data of one of the
largest mobile operators in the world. Our objective is to explore
the local and global structure of the underlying social network in
this massive communication graph, and understand the role of
social relationships as it pertains to the formation of groups (or
communities) in the network. Understanding the structure and
dynamics of social groups is a natural goal for network analysis,
since such groups tend to be embedded within larger social
network structures, growing in a potentially complex fashion . For example, a group that grows through aggressive
recruitment of friends by other friends would appear as a subgraph
branching out rapidly over time, while a group in which the
decision to join depends relatively little on such influence might
appear as a collection of disconnected components growing in a
motley fashion.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
EDBT’08, March 25-30, 2008, Nantes, France.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-59593-926-5/08/0003...$5.00.
The central question that we strive to answer is whether the
decision of a subscriber to churn out of the operator’s network is
dependent on the existing members of the community that the
subscriber has a relationship with (referred to as friends). A social
relationship between two friends, in this context, is based on the
duration of voice calls, call frequency etc. that are exchanged
during a certain period. Our analysis explores the propensity of a
subscriber to churn out of a service provider’s network depending
on the number of friends that have already churned. For example,
consider a subscriber Joshua. His friend has recently churned out
of the operator’s network. What is the probability of Joshua to
churn? How would the probability change if Joshua had another
friend who is also a churner? Some of these questions have been
raised in the context of growth and evolution of communities in
online social networks . We believe that our analysis is a
first of its kind that exploits the underlying social network in a
telecom call graph, and interestingly, indicates that social ties play
an important role in affecting customer churn. Further, we
develop a prediction model that explores the social network of the
churners to identify customers susceptible to churn in the near
1.1 Challenges and Contribution
The problem of churn prediction has been addressed by
academicians as well as BI practitioners. Traditional solutions
have used data mining techniques that create a customer
profile from her calling pattern (often described by hundreds of
variables), and then predict the probability of churn based on
certain attributes of the subscriber. For these customers, there are
various data sources available for modeling including historical
usage, billing, payment, customer service, application, and credit
card data.
However, in our case, the mobile operator was interested in
developing a churn prediction model for its prepaid segment, for
which there exists very little data except for CDR data. What we
could extract from this data, included aggregated call usage
information for each customer, along with the call destination
numbers, and call frequency and duration for each destination.
Thus, any prediction model needed to be purely based on the
available link information. Moreover, business rules and data
availability restrictions imposed by the operator, required us to
use a single month’s CDR data to design and validate any
prediction technique. Such practical limitations certainly make the
problem more challenging, but we will demonstrate how
reasonable prediction accuracy can still be achieved using only
link information. To do so, we explore a diffusion (or spreading
activation)-based approach, which is based on the premise that a
few key individuals (churners) may lead to strong “word-ofmouth” effects, wherein they influence their friends to churn, who
in turn spread the influence to others, and so forth. Such a
diffusion process has a long history in social sciences 
and essentially uses the underlying social network for spread of
influences. We explore the use of this diffusion-based technique
for identifying potential churners and report the success of the
technique in terms of churn prediction accuracy.
Interestingly, a key feature of the proposed technique is that it
allows the operator to pro-actively identify potential churners and
pursue them for retention, based on “early warnings”. For
example, a subscriber Joshua can be identified as a potential target
as soon as a number of his close friends churn. This is different
from existing approaches where typically a customer is flagged
when there is noticeable change in his recent usage profile (e.g.
reduced spending, prepaid card not recharged etc.) - by which
time he might have already decided to churn. Our feedbacks from
multiple telecom operators suggest that this capability can provide
a key value-add, where social network analytics can complement
and enhance existing BI solutions for churn management.
Number of Nodes
Duration (min)
Number of Nodes
10000 100000 1e+06
Number of Calls
Number of Nodes
10000 100000 1e+06
Number of Directed Edges
Duration (sec)
Figure 1. (a) Degree Distribution (b) Call Volume Distribution
(c) Call Frequency Distribution (d) Call Duration Distribution
of the Mobile call graph
2. DATA SET
We consider the Call Detail Record (CDR) data of one of the
largest mobile operators in the world between 1st March and 31st
March 2007. The data set is about 60 Gigabytes large and
contains detailed information about voice calls, SMS, value-added
calls etc. of users. Our analysis is based on a representative region
in the operator’s network and all intra-region (local) calls made
during the specified period.
The raw CDR data contained 3.1X106 nodes and 12.3X106 edges.
Calls within 5 seconds are assumed to be accidentally dropped
and filtered out. Further, we include a pair of nodes A and B, if
and only if, A calls B and B calls A. While a single call between
two individuals may not carry much information, reciprocal calls
of long duration (or high frequency) serve as a signature of a
social relationship. Therefore, in order to translate the data into a
network representation that captures the characteristics of the
underlying communication network, we consider a directed edge
<A,B> if there has been at least one reciprocated edge <B,A>
between them, i.e., A called B, and B called A. We refer to two
individuals as friends if they are connected by a pair of reciprocal
edges. The weight WAB of a directed edge <A,B> is the aggregate
of all calls made by A to B.
During pre-processing, we also excluded the service numbers, e.g.
the operator’s customer service number, number for retrieving
voice mail, and numbers similar to 1-800 numbers. We observed
that these numbers greatly skewed the call distributions in the
operator’s network. The omission of these numbers resulted in the
removal of about 450 nodes and 1.2X106 edges. The final
(reciprocal) call graph contained 2.1X106 nodes and 9.3X106
directed edges. Overall, the reciprocal graph contains 32.1 X106
calls and total call duration of 955X103 hours.
The rest of our analysis is based on this social network. Our
objective is two-fold. First, we wish to extract characteristics of
customer churn as it relates social influence in the underlying
network. Second, we wish to address the fundamental question
whether churn can be modeled as a diffusion process 
that spreads through the network.
3. MEASUREMENTS
We begin by summarizing the overall characteristics of the
call graph, referred to as GMarch. Next, using churner data available
from the operator, we highlight the role of social ties (influences)
in affecting churn in the prepaid customer segment
3.1 Basic Call Graph Properties
Figure 1 summarizes the basic structural properties of the call
graph. As expected, the call graph is found to be characterized by
presence of a highly heterogeneous topology, with degree
distribution characterized by wide variability and heavy tails.
Observing the log-log plot in Fig. 1(a) we can see that degree
distribution fits well to a power law distribution. The power law
exponent, in specific, is 2.91. The trend implies that most pre-paid
customers call a relatively smaller number of people (friends),
while a small number of individuals have relationships with a
large group of people. Such a skewed distribution is also observed
for the (node) call volume and (node) call frequency distributions,
as shown in Fig. 1(b) and 1(c), respectively. In Fig. 1(d), we plot
the distribution of call durations, obtained from the call duration
of each directed edge in the graph. The plot shows that most calls
in the mobile network are short-lived, while a few dozens of calls
last for hours. Interestingly, the distribution exhibits a peak at
around 1 minute. This reflects a caller’s tendency to finish a
conversation within 60 seconds (which is the pulse rate of the
operator for charging voice calls in prepaid segment).
3.2 Analyzing the Churner Community
We next turn to the community of churners in the mobile network.
Our analysis is based on the churners between the months of April
and July, as provided by the operator, and their observed
interactions in the call graph of March. The observation period is
a month ahead of the churn period and hence contains a large
portion of churner calls, which can be used to approximate the
social network(s) of these churners. Table 1 gives the number of
churners in different months. Note that, there are quite a few
subscribers who have churned but not captured in the CDR data,
simply because they did not make or receive calls in March. Since
our objective is to gauge the role of social influences w.r.t churn,
we evaluate our findings strictly based on churners with CDR data
Table 1: Churner Population during April to July
Churners with CDRs
To understand the characteristics of churn behavior and relate it to
a diffusion process, we first need to find out whether there is any
evidence of influences in affecting a customer to churn. The
underlying premise, in this case, is that an individual’s
probability of adopting a new behavior increases with the number
of friends that have already engaged in the behavior—to be
specific, the number of friends who have churned in an earlier
period (e.g. the previous month). In Fig. 2(a), we show this
relationship. We compute the probability P(k) as suggested in .
For the churners of May, we consider churners of April. Then we
find all triples <u,C,k> such that C is the set of churners, u is a
user who has not churned in April, and u has k friends in C. P(k),
for a given k, is then the fraction of all such triples <u,C,k>, such
that u belongs to C in May (and not in April). Similarly, for June
churners we can compute P(k) by considering April and May
churners, and so on.
Surprisingly, the curves indicate that the probability of churn is
significantly influenced by the number of friends who have
churned in previous months. In fact, the probabilities increase if
an individual has these friends churning over subsequent months,
hinting towards a cascading effect of these influences. To gain
further insight, we also measured the probability of churning as a
function of the internal connectedness of friends who have
churned. While the details of the technique are omitted for the
sake of brevity (refer to for details), our results reveal that
individuals whose churner friends are linked to each other are
significantly more likely to churn (in Fig. 2(b)). Stated otherwise,
the probability of churn is not only affected by the number of
churner friends that one has, but also the local topology
connecting these friends. This result is strikingly consistent with
the growth of online communities observed in . In fact, it forms
the basis of our hypothesis that churn as a “behavior” could be
attributed to diffusion models that posit very simple dynamics by
which influence is transmitted in a (highly) connected social
Role of Strong and Weak Ties in Diffusion. In order to build on
this hypothesis, we must explore the role of social ties in driving a
global diffusion process.
Figure 3(a) shows the distribution of tie strengths in the mobile
network, where tie strength is defined as the sum of the weights of
the edges <A,B> and <B,A>. The tie strengths show wide
variability and a heavy-tail, indicating that while majority of ties
correspond to a few minutes of air time, a small fraction of users
spend hours chatting with each other. Interestingly, the
distribution is similarly skewed (w.r.t strong and weak ties), when
we consider churner pairs only (Fig. 3(b)).
At this point, we allude to sociological principles that suggest that
the strength of a tie could depend only on the dyad, i.e. the
relationship between two individuals (independent of the
network), or alternatively, be dependent on the network i.e.
friendship circles, resulting in the importance of the weak ties in
connecting communities . To understand the implications of
this relationship between tie strength and the local network
structure, one needs to explore the network’s ability to withstand
the removal of either strong or weak ties. We measure the relative
size of the giant component, providing the fraction of nodes that
can all reach each others through connected paths as a function of
the fraction of removed links f. Fig. 3(c) demonstrates the effect of
removing links in order of strongest (or weakest) link. We also
measure the relative topological overlap of the neighborhood of
two users A and B, representing the proportion of their common
friends, as OAB = NAB/((KA-1)+(KB-1)-NAB), where NAB is the
number of common neighbors of A and B, and KA (KB) denotes
the degree of node A(B).1 Fig. 3(d) demonstrates the effect of
removing links in order of strongest (or weakest) overlaps. In both
cases, we find that removing ties in rank order of weakest to
strongest ties will lead to a sudden disintegration of the network.
In contrast, reversing the order shrinks the network without
precipitously breaking it apart.
Probability
Number of Churner Neighbours
May Churners
June Churners
July Churners
Probability
Proportion of Pairs Adjacent
3 Churners
4 Churners
5 Churners
6 Churners
Figure 2. Probability of churning when (a) k friends have
already churned (b) adjacent pairs of friends have already
This result is broadly consistent with the strength of weak ties
hypothesis , offering one of its first confirmations in mobile
networks. Accordingly, tie strength is driven not only by the
individuals involved in the tie, but also by the network structure
in the tie’s immediate vicinity. Further, given that the strong ties
are predominantly within communities, their removal will only
1 If A and B have no common acquaintances we have OAB =1.
locally disintegrate a community, while the removal of the weak
links will delete bridges that connect different communities,
leading to a network collapse. Further, we believe that the
observed local relationship, between network topology and tie
strength affects any global information diffusion process (like
churn). In fact, we opine that churn as a behavior can be viewed
less as a dyadic phenomenon (affected only by strong churnerchurner ties), but more as a diffusion process where both strong
and weak ties play a significant role in spreading the influence
through the network topology.
4. PREDICTING CHURNERS IN THE
CALL GRAPH
We next discuss how to exploit social ties to identify potential
churners in an operator’s network. Our approach is as follows. We
start with a set of churners (e.g. for April) and their social
relationships (ties) captured in the call graph (for March). Using
the underlying topology of the call graph, we then initiate a
diffusion process with the churners as seeds. Effectively, we
model a “word-of-mouth” scenario where a churner influences
one of his neighbors to churn, from where the influence spreads to
some other neighbor, and so on. At the end of the diffusion
process, we inspect the amount of influence received by each
node. Using a threshold-based technique, a node that is currently
not a churner can be declared to be a potential future one, based
on the influence that has been accumulated. Finally, we measure
the number of correct predictions by tallying with the actual set of
churners that were recorded for a subsequent month (e.g. for
May). The diffusion model is based on Spreading Activation
(SPA) techniques proposed in cognitive psychology and later used
for trust metric computations . In essence, SPA is similar to
performing a breadth-first search on the call graph GMarch=(V,E).
The basic steps are outlined below:-
Node Activation: During each iterative step i, there is a set of
active nodes. Let X be an active node which has associated energy
E(X,i) at step i. Intuitively, E(X,i) is the amount of (social)
influence2 transmitted to the node via one or more of its
neighbors. A node with high influence has a greater propensity to
churn. Let N(X) be the set of neighbors of X. Active nodes for
step i+1 comprises of nodes which are neighbors of currently
active members. Further, a currently active node X transfers a
fraction of its energy to each neighbor Y (connected by a directed
edge <X,Y>), in the process of activating it. The amount of
energy that is transferred from X to Y depends on the Spreading
Factor d and the Transfer Function F, respectively.
Spreading Factor: SPA starts with a set of active nodes (seed
nodes) each having initial energy E(X,0). At each subsequent step
i, an active node transfers a portion of its energy d· E(X,i) to its
neighbors, while retaining (1 − d) · E(X,i) for itself, where d is
the global Spreading Factor. The spreading factor concept is very
intuitive and, in fact, very close to real models of energy
spreading. Observe that the overall amount of energy in the
network does not change over time, i.e. ∑X E(X,i) = ∑X∈V E(X,0) =
E0, for each step i. The spreading factor determines the amount of
2 The terms “energy” and “influence” are used interchangeably in
this context.
importance we wish to associate on the distance of an active node
from the initial seed node(s). Low values of d favor influence
proximity to the source of injection, while high values allow the
influence to also reach nodes which are further away. We discuss
the choice of values for d in the next section.
1000 10000 100000 1e+06
Duration (min)
Number of Pairs
Duration (min)
Number of Pairs
Relative size of largest component
Fraction of nodes removed
Relative size of largest component
Fraction of nodes removed
Figure 3. Tie Strength Distribution for (a) All Pairs (b)
Churner-Churner Pairs; Stability of call graph w.r.t removal
of links based on (c) Tie strengths (d) neighborhood overlap
Energy Distribution: Once a node decides what fraction of
energy to distribute, the next step is to decide what fraction of the
energy is transferred to each neighbor. This is controlled by a
Transfer Function F. In our case, we use a linear edge weight
normalization, i.e., the energy distributed along the directed edge
<X,Y> depends on its relative weight WXY compared to the sum of
weights of all outgoing edges of X. In other words, E(X→Y) = d ·
F· E(X,i), where F = W(X,Y)/∑<X,S>∈E W(X,S). We believe that this
definition of the Transfer Function blends intuitively with how
influence spreads through a call graph. People may be believed to
exert a much stronger influence on those to whom they speak for
longer durations of time.
Termination Condition: Since the directed call graph contains
cycles, the computation of energy values for all reachable nodes is
inherently recursive. Several iterations for all nodes are required
in order to make computed information. Suppose Vi ⊆ V
represents the set of nodes that have been discovered (activated)
until step i. Then the algorithm terminates when both of the
following conditions are satisfied:
(a) Vi = Vi−1
(b) ∀X ∈Vi : E(X,i+1) - E(X,i) ≤ ET
i.e. when no new nodes have been activated and when changes in
influence w.r.t. prior iteration are not greater than accuracy
threshold ET.
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We next proceed to validate our approach using real churner data.
We consider the directed call graph GMarch, with the churners as
seed nodes. The weight of each directed edge in the graph is
normalized between , using a function of the base form F(x)=
2/(1+e^-x) – 1.
Table 2: SPA Parameters for Churn Prediction
Initial Energy E0
Spreading Factor d
Accuracy Threshold ET
Next, we run the iterative SPA routine on this directed graph.
After termination, each node in the network accumulates a certain
energy value (influence). If not a already a churner, this value
reflects the propensity of the node to churn.
Since decision making ultimately requires a “churn” (i.e. likely to
churn) or “no churn” (i.e. not likely to churn) prediction, the
continuous energy measure must be thresholded to obtain a
discrete predicted outcome. To this end, we use a simple
threshold-based technique which works as follows: Fix a
threshold TC. Label a node X as “churn” if its energy is greater
than the threshold, else label it as “no churn”.
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
Figure 4. (a) Illustrative Lift Curves (b) Effect of the
Spreading Factor on performance of SPA
Having predicted a list of potential churners, we now need to
quantify the accuracy of prediction. In the telecommunications
industry the outcome is often expressed using a lift curve. The lift
curve is related to the ROC curve of signal detection theory and
the precision-recall curve in information retrieval. The lift curve
plots the fraction of all churners having churn probability above
the threshold TC against the fraction of all subscribers having
churn probability above the threshold. The lift curve indicates the
fraction of all churners can be caught (retained) if a certain
fraction of all subscribers were contacted. Note that, an operator’s
customer services center only has a fixed number of personnel to
contact some fraction of all subscribers Hence, the lift curve,
which can estimate the fraction of churners that can be caught
given limited resources, is very useful. For ease of understanding,
we illustrate two sample lift curves in Fig. 4(a) - the lift curve
representing perfect discrimination of churners from non-churners
(best case), and that representing no discrimination (worst case).
In general, the more bowed the curve is to the upper-left corner of
the graph, the better the predictor. Note that, in SPA, the fraction
of subscribers contacted can be increased (decreased) by setting a
low (high) threshold TC.
For the sake of comparison, we also consider a simple churn
prediction heuristic, based on ties strengths, which works as
follows: Consider the top K-percentile of churners, in terms of
total call duration (incoming and outgoing). For each of these
high-volume churners, and for a given variable k, identify the
nodes which constitute the top k-percentile of the churner’s tie
strengths, i.e., the neighbors with whom the churners interact for
longest duration. Label each of these neighbors as “churn”. We
Figure 5: Performance of SPA and K-Ties heuristic for different observation and validation periods
refer to this as the K-Ties heuristic. As before, by setting a large
(or small) k, the heuristic can contact more (or less) subscribers.
We report the lift curves obtained by using representative values
of K and k and compare them with SPA. Table 2 lists the
parameters used by SPA.
Effect of Spreading Factor: We first try to understand the how
the Spreading Factor d affects the performance of SPA. As
discussed earlier, this determines the diffusion process in the
network. A low value of d would facilitate rapid spread of the
influence. A higher value, on the other hand, would imply that the
influence takes a while to spread, often being trapped in highly
connected localities (e.g. communities) of the network , before
finding an escape to other parts of the network. We present the
results for three representative values, i.e. d = 0.3, 0.72. 0.9, in
Fig. 4(b). The experiments were performed with April churners as
the observation set, i.e. churners marked as seed nodes in the call
graph. Further, the May-July churners were treated as the
validation set, i.e. each “churn” prediction made by SPA was
validated against the churner logs from these months to determine
if the node actually churned in one of these months. Interestingly,
we find that while the lift curve improves by using a higher value
of spreading factor, it is not beneficial to use very large values of
d. In fact, we found that the best predictor was obtained by using
a value of d = 0.72. For the rest of the experiments, we report
results with a spreading factor of 0.72.
Predicting Churners over Time: We present results from three
sets of experiment. In each experiment, we compare the
performance of SPA with the K-Ties approach. In fact, we
consider two instances of the K-Ties approach. In the 60-Ties
heuristic, we consider the top 60th–percentile of churners and then
predict future churners, based on subscribers who fall within the
top k (= 10, 20,….90, 99) percentile of the churner ties. Similarly,
for the 90-Ties heuristic, we consider the top 90th – percentile of
churners and their strongest ties. In Figs. 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c), we
demonstrate the relative performances of SPA and K-Ties
approaches for the following sets of experiments, respectively.
April churners as observation set, and May churners as
validation set in Fig. 5(a).
April-May churners as observation set, and June
churners as validation set in Fig. 5(b).
April-May-June churners as observation set, and July
churners as validation set in Fig. 5(c).
From the plots we observe that, SPA consistently outperforms K-
Ties heuristic, in terms of the lift curve. This result agrees with
our hypothesis that churn as a behavior is affected not only by
strong ties between pairs of individuals (in particular, between an
existing churner and a potential one), but more importantly, by the
network topology and its local relationship with strong and weak
ties. There are a number of additional observations that are worth
considering. First, we note that the 60-Ties heuristic performs
much better than 90-Ties. In fact, we found that 60- Ties performs
the best among all values of K (= 10, 20,…,90, 99) that we
considered. Further, we observe that the relative differences
between the lift curves obtained from SPA and 60(90)-Ties
heuristics, increase noticeably as the observation set becomes
larger. Intuitively, this points to the underlying social network in
the call graph, which grows richer (denser) over time, and can
then be exploited to reason about interesting behavioral processes,
like churn. Finally, the lift curves saturate beyond a certain point
simply due to the inherent limit imposed by the number of ties
(and influences) that can be explored, by starting from a set of
seed churners.
Taking a closer look at the lift curves, we observe that SPA is
generally successful in making correct predictions about 50-60%
of future churners, by contacting a relatively small fraction (10-
20%) of the subscribers. At the same time, the numbers are not
remarkable by themselves and leave scope for improvements. We
remind the readers that the main objective of this study was to
demonstrate to the operator, how ties in an underlying social
network can be used to analyze and predict churn behavior in a
telecom network. Going forward, we plan to extract additional
CDR information (e.g. inter-region calls, SMS records, etc.), as
well as, graph-theoretic properties (e.g. cliques, hubs, and
authorities, etc.) that can be incorporated within the SPA to
potentially enhance the lift curves.
Hit Rate: We define hit rate to be the number of correct “churn”
predictions, as a percentage of the total number of nodes labeled
“churn”. A low hit rate implies a large number of “false
positives”, and vice versa. We observe (Fig. 6) that the hit rate of
all approaches usually reduces as the number of subscribers
contacted increase. As expected, 60-Ties has a low hit rate, while
SPA (with spreading factor of 0.72) performs best. What is
interesting to note is that SPA, with d = 0.9, starts with a high hit
rate (influence spreading rapidly through the network), but also
suffers from rapidly diminishing returns as more subscribers are
contacted. In fact, at one point, it falls even below 60-Ties. This
also explains why very large values of d lead to inferior lift curves
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
in Figs. 5(a)-(c). Finally, as before, we note that hit rate of SPA
can be potentially improved by incorporating other properties
and/or additional information (from CDR data or other data
sources) in the decision making process.
6. DISCUSSIONS
Our results demonstrate that a good prediction accuracy can be
achieved by using a simple, diffusion-process that exploits social
influences affecting churn. However, there exists scope for further
improvements by either optimizing the SPA parameters and/or
learning from similar flavored models. In particular, it is
imperative to examine how well the notion of social influences
can be captured in prevalent classification techniques. In this
section, we briefly discuss some of these issues. Most of these
form a part of our future deliverables’ roadmap for the telecom
To start with, we revisit Fig. 2 that estimates the probability of a
customer churning given on a single feature, i.e. the number of
friends who have actually churned. While this is a single feature,
we can derive a range of other features related to the individuals
themselves (extracted from CDR data), as well as features related
to social ties in the underlying network. By constructing a
decision-tree model, one of the most common classification
techniques, one can then estimate the probabilities of an
individual to churn. Further, the predictions can be validated
using churner information to compute a lift curve.
Table 3 summarizes a broad range of features (attributes) that we
have used in our experiments. As mentioned in the table, some of
these attributes (i.e. usage attributes) are based purely on
information extracted from CDR data. The second set of attributes
(i.e. connectivity attributes) is based on the social ties of a
(labeled) individual with existing (labeled) churners. Finally, the
interconnectivity attributes are derived from the structural ties
between these churners. We use the J48 classifier implemented as
part of WEKA3 to obtain the predictions. The WEKA
implementation of J48 uses information gain to select attributes
while growing the tree. Our data set comprises of nodes in the
March call graph, along with their attributes and “churn”/”nochurn” labels. As is common, part of this data is used for training,
after which we classify unlabeled data in the test set.
Fig. 7 compares the lift curves obtained from a decision-tree
based approach with SPA. Note that, the features described above
are intentionally chosen to understand which ones among the
activity/structural features are more relevant. For obtaining better
accuracy, there are possibly other features that are of less
importance for our current purpose. The results show that using a
decision-tree technique with only usage attributes, i.e. DT-1,
performs the worst. This simply implies that usage information
based on prepaid CDR data is highly insufficient to perform any
meaningful churn prediction. On the other hand, using the
connectivity attributes along with usage attributes (DT-2),
improves the lift curve by exploiting knowledge about direct or
indirect relationships of an individual with the churner
community.
noticeable
interconnectivity attributes, i.e. DT-3, significantly improves the
performance of the lift curve. Note that, these features relate
exclusively to the structure of the social network among the
3 
churners themselves – once again, corroborating the fact that
churn depends not only on the relationships of an individuals
with churners, but more importantly, on the structural
relationships that are present between them in a social network
setting. However, a traditional (label) attributes-based classifier
loses out to SPA because it fails to adequately learn all the ties in
the network neighborhood. To be more precise, links among the
unlabeled data (or test set) can provide information that can help
with classification. Similarly, links between labeled training data
and unlabeled (test) data induce dependencies that should not be
This leads us to believe that further gains in the prediction
accuracy can be potentially achieved by applying link mining
techniques, based on collective classification . Link-based
classification, unlike traditional classification, focuses on
predicting the category (churn/no-churn) of a node, based not just
on its attributes, but on the links it participates in, and on
attributes of nodes linked by some path of edges. Going forward,
it would be important to measure the efficiency (both in terms of
complexity and prediction accuracy) of an iterative link-based
classification algorithm (e.g. ) for churn prediction in a
telecom call graph. We have started to investigate this as part of
our current agenda, and plan to implement a pilot solution with
the telecom operator in near future.
Hitrate (Percentage)
Fraction of Subscribers
SPA, d = 0.30
SPA, d = 0.72
SPA, d = 0.90
Figure 6. Hit Rates for SPA and K-Ties
Percentage of Churners
Percentage of Subscribers
Figure 7. Performance of Decision Tree-based approach
compared to SPA
Table 3: Feature set
7. RELATED WORK
Social network analysis (SNA) as a theme has been studied for
years. There is a significant amount of work on mining a number
of real world graphs (e.g. Internet, email, citation graphs, and
email graphs) that are formed by interactions amongst individuals
of a social network. One of the main areas of focus has been on
degree power laws, showing that the set of node degrees has a
heavy-tailed distribution . Other properties include the
small-world phenomenon, popularly known as “six degrees of
separation”, which states that real graphs have small (average or
effective) diameters . With the web growing, much
social network data is available and recent efforts try to leverage
social ties for expertise location , viral marketing ,
and online social networking sites . The well known link
analysis algorithms, such as PageRank and HITS , can
also be viewed as social network analysis on the web. While
initial studies were limited to identifying patterns in static graphs,
more recent work has focused on studying the temporal evolution
of real-world graphs. Some interesting time-varying properties,
related to densification and diameter shrinkage, have been
observed for a number of real-world social networks , There
has been a considerable amount of work devoted to finding
(connected) communities in graphs . A particular area of
interest has been to study how online communities evolve over
time . Based on the findings, a number of generative models
have been proposed to generate graphs that resemble social
communities (see for a detailed review).
Network models have been widely used to represent relational
information (ties) between interacting units. The emphasis has
been on random graph models where nodes represent the
actors and edges represent relationships between them. Recently,
generalized models have been proposed to capture changing
relationships over time. In the same spirit, a number of models
have been explored to explain how a new influence, idea or
epidemic spreads in a social network using the relationships. 
introduced a cellular automaton based model for simulating the
spread of information in a social network. In , a model of
information diffusion is proposed where a node gets converted
when the fraction of its infected neighbors crosses a certain
threshold. In a similar vein, showed how actors can exploit the
existence of structural holes in order to gain advantage in a
competitive or cooperative scenario. The Bass diffusion model
 and the game-theoretic model are other notable efforts
in this area. Recent research has concentrated on how to utilize
diffusion-based models for viral marketing . An
approximate algorithm for solving the problem of “influence
maximization” in this setting has also been proposed in .
Trust (distrust) also has an intuitive connotation in social
networks. A person can only believe and propagate a piece of
information conveyed to it by some other person depending on
how much it trusts the source of information. Trust management
has been an important research issue stemming from the areas of
cryptography and authentication . Computation of trust
metrics is central to the issue of trust management. A P2P-based
Feature Set
Feature Name
Total Call Frequency
Number of outgoing calls
Number of incoming calls
Total Call volume (seconds)
Total Incoming call duration (seconds)
Total Outgoing call duration (seconds)
Number of unique incoming, outgoing edges
Number of unique neighbors
Number of incoming, outgoing calls to/from a different operator’s network
Total Incoming call duration from a different operator’s network (seconds)
Total Outgoing call duration to a different operator’s network (seconds)
Total Incoming, Outgoing edges to/from a different operator’s network
Total number of neighbors in a different operator’s network
Call volume percentage (w.r.t total) to/from a different operator’s network
Call frequency percentage (w.r.t total) to/from a different operator’s network
Connectivity
Total call frequency to/from churner neighbors
Total call volume to/from churner neighbors (seconds)
Call volume and frequency percentages (w.r.t total) to/from a churner
Maximum call volume, frequency to/from a churner neighbor
Number of unique churner neighbors
Percentage of churner neighbors (w.r.t total neighbors)
Number of non-churner neighbors who have churners as neighbors
Maximum call volume and frequency with any of these non-churners
Call volume and frequency percentages (w.r.t total ) to/from these non-churners
Interconnectivity
Number of adjacent pairs in the set of churner friends i.e., connected by an edge
Number of pairs in the set of churner friends connected by a path length of 2
Number of pairs of churner friends connected by a path that only includes churners
Total call frequency on edges connecting adjacent churner friends
Total call volume on edges connecting adjacent churner friends
reputation system called EigenTrust is presented in . In ,
the issue of trust computation is addressed in a semantic web
setting. presents a broad taxonomy of schemes through which
trust and distrust may propagate in a web of trust. Finally, a
spreading-activation based technique is employed for computation
of trust metrics in .
8. CONCLUSIONS
Social Network Analysis (SNA) has emerged as an important
paradigm for studying real-world, complex networks. In this
paper, we provide substantial evidence that social relationships
play an influential role in affecting churn in the operator’s
network. We also demonstrate a simple, yet effective, diffusionbased approach that exploits these influence to identify a
significant fraction of churners in the network.
Influences, in the current framework, are purely derived from call
volumes between individuals. However, there are a number of
graph-theoretic properties of nodes (edges) in the network that
can be used to guide the diffusion process. For example, it would
be interesting to study how the transfer function in SPA can be
varied based on node/edge properties, and its effect on the lift
curve. A related interesting problem is that of (budgetconstrained) churn prevention, where only a subset of potential
churners is contacted, based on the value of the churner and cost
of contacting the churner. Finally, there are a number of telecom
analytics problems including customer segmentation, targeted
advertising, and fraud detection, which are worth pursuing using
SNA techniques.
9. REFERENCES
 W. H. Au, K. C. Chan, X. Yao. A novel evolutionary data
mining algorithm with application to churn prediction. IEEE
Transaction on Evolutionary Computation, 7, 6 , pp.
 L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, J. Kleinberg, X. Lan. Group
Formation in Large Social Networks: Membership, Growth
Evolution.
Proceedings
 .
 A.-L. Barabasi, R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random
networks. Science, 286 , pp. 509-512.
 S. Brin, L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual
Web search engine. In Proceedings of Seventh International
WWW Conference .
 R. Burt. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of
Competition. Harvard, 1992.
 A. Clauset, M.E.J. Newman, C. Moore. Finding community
structure in very large networks. Physical Review E, 70,
066111 .
 P. Domingos, M. Richardson. Mining the Network Value of
Customers. In Proceedings of ACM CIKM .
 Euler, T. Churn prediction in telecommunications using
Miningmart. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Data
Mining and Business .
 M. Girvan, M. E. J. Newman. Community structure in social
and biological networks. In Proceedings of Natl. Acad. Sci.
99 , pp. 7821-7826.
 J. Goldenberg, B. Libai, E. Muller. Talk of the Network: A
Complex Systems Look at the Underlying Process of Wordof-Mouth. Marketing Letters,12:3 , pp.211-223.
 M. Granovetter. The Strength of Weak Ties. American
Journal of Sociology, 78(6), 1973, pp. 1360-1380.
 R. Guha, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, A. Tomkins. Propagation
of Trust and Distrust. In Proc. of WWW Conference .
 P. Hoff, A. Raftery, M. Handcock. Latent space Approaches
to social network analysis. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 97 .
 S. Kamvar, M. Schlosser, H. Garcia-Molina. The EigenTrust
algorithm for reputation management in P2P networks. In
Proceedings of WWW Conference , pp. 63-66.
 D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, E. Tardos. Maximizing the Spread
of Influence through a Social Network. In Proceedings of
ACM CIKM .
 J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked
environment. In Proceedings of ACM SODA .
 R. Kumar, J. Novak, A. Tomkins. Structure and Evolution of
Online Social Networks. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD
 .
 R. Levien, A. Aiken. Attack-resistant trust metrics for public
key certification. In Proceedings of USENIX Security
Symposium .
 Q. Lu, L. Getoor. Link-based Classification. In Proceedings
of 20th International Conference on Machine Learning .
 S. Macskassy and F. Provost. Classification in Networked
Data: A toolkit and a univariate case study. Journal of
Machine Learning Research. 8(May):935--983, 2007.
 V. Mahajan, E. Muller, F. Bass. New Product Diffusio0
Models in Marketing: A Review and Directions for
Research. Journal of Marketing, 54:1 PP. 1-26.
 S. Milgram. The small world problem. Psychology Today,
Vol. 2 , pp. 60-67.
 M. Mozer, R. Wolniewicz, D. B. Grimes, E. Johnson, H.
Kaushanky. Predicting Subscriber Dissatisfaction and
Improving Retention in Wireless Telecommunications
Industry. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 11 ,
pp. 690-696.
 A.Nanavati, S. Gurumurthy, G. Das, D. Chakraborty, K.
Dasgupta, S. Mukherjea, A. Joshi. On the Structural
Properties of Massive Telecom Call Graphs: Findings and
Implications. In Proceedings of ACM CIKM, .
 M.Newman. The structure and function of complex
networks. SIAM Review, 45 , pp.167–256.
 H. Peyton Young. The Diffusion of Innovations in Social
Networks. Santa Fe Institute Working Paper.02-04-018
Richardson,
management for the semantic web. In Proceedings of the
Second International Semantic Web Conference .
 M. Richardson, P. Domingos. Mining Knowledge-Sharing
Sites for Viral Marketing. In Proceedings of ACM CIKM
 .
 P. Sarkar, A. Moore. Dynamic social network analysis using
latent space models. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter
Volume 7, Issue 2 pp: 31 – 40.
 Wasserman, Stanley and Katherine Faust. 1997. Social
Network Analysis: Methods and Applications: Cambridge
University Press.
 C. Ziegler, G. Lausen. Spreading Activation Models for
Trust Propagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on e-Technology, e-Commerce, and e-Service
 .