A HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY IN EUROPE
GENERAL EDITOR
WALTER RUEGG
A HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY IN EUROPE
General editor and Chairman of the editorial board: Walter Riiegg (Switzerland)
Editorial board
Asa Briggs (United Kingdom)
Aleksander Gieysztor (Poland)
Notker Hammerstein (Federal Republic of Germany)
Olaf Pedersen (Denmark)
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens (Belgium)
John Roberts (United Kingdom)
Edward Shils (United States of America)
Jacques Verger (France)
Secretary to the editorial board
Alison de Puymege (United Kingdom)
This four-volume series, prepared under the guidance of an editorial board, has been
directed by the Standing Conference of Rectors, Presidents, and Vice-Chancellors of
the European Universities (CRE). The CRE, which is a non-governmental organization
based in Geneva, has over 470 member universities in both eastern and western Europe.
As coordinator of the whole publication, it delegated its assistant secretary general to
ensure the administration of the project and to act as secretary to the editorial board.
The university is the only European institution to have preserved its fundamental
patterns and basic social role and functions over the course of the last millennium. This
History shows how and why the university grew to encompass the whole of knowledge
and most of the world, how it developed an intellectual tradition common to all
Europeans, and how it trained academic and professional elites whose ethos transcends
national boundaries.
Volumes in the series
Universities in the Middle Ages
Editor: Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
Universities in Early Modern Europe (1500-1800)
Editor: Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
Forthcoming 
in Universities in the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries 
In preparation
iv Universities from 1945 to the Present
In preparation
UNIVERSITY IN EUROPE
UNIVERSITIES IN THE MIDDLE AGES
HILDE DE RIDDER-SYMOENS
The right of the
University of Cambridge
to print and sell
all manner of books
was granted by
Henry VIII in 1534.
The University has printed
and published continuously
since 1584.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
PORT CHESTER
PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http ://www. Cambridge. org
© Cambridge University Press 1992
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1992
First paperback edition 2003
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data
Universities in the Middle Ages / editor, Hilde de Ridder-Symoens.
p. cm. - (History of the university in Europe: v. 1)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0 521 36105 2 hardback
1. Universities and colleges — Europe — History. 2. Learning and
scholarship — Europe — History — Medieval, 500—1500. 3. Education,
Medieval — Europe. I. Ridder-Symoens, Hilde de. II. Series.
378.4'09'02-dc20
90-33558 CIP
ISBN 0 521 36105 2 hardback
ISBN 0 521 54113 1 paperback
List of maps
Contributors and editors
Reader's guide
Bibliographical abbreviations used in notes
WALTER RUEGG (General editor)
The university as a European institution
The initiative of the Standing Conference of Rectors of the European
Universities
The objective and conception of the present work
The social role of the European university
Acknowledgements
PART I: THEMES AND PATTERNS
CHAPTER 1: THEMES
WALTER RUEGG
Mythology and historiography of the beginnings
The university: product and shaper of society
Expectations of church, crown, and municipality
Expectations of scholars and students
Origins and limits of faculty organization
Reformatio in melius: the alpha and omega of the university
CHAPTER 2: PATTERNS
JACQUES VERGER
The university as studium generale
The university community: independence and influence
Scholastic pedagogy
The diversity of medieval universities
The birth of the universities
Universities at the end of the Middle Ages
University colleges
List of European universities in the Middle Ages
Select bibliography
PART II: STRUCTURES
CHAPTER 3: RELATIONS WITH AUTHORITY
PAOLO NARDI
Papacy, Empire, and schools in the twelfth century
The contribution of the church in the twelfth and thirteenth
The policy of Emperor Frederick II and the popes
Relations between secular authorities and universities in the
thirteenth century
The growing support of secular authorities in the fourteenth
The consequences of the Great Schism
From studium generale to princely institution
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 4: MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCES
ALEKSANDER GIEYSZTOR
General university structure
Internal government
External government
University buildings
Academic insignia
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 5: TEACHERS
JACQUES VERGER
The doctorate
Teachers' careers
Payment of teachers
Teaching as a profession
The teacher in his school
Relations between colleagues
Knowledge and authority: the teacher's image
The place of teachers in medieval society
Select bibliography
PART III: STUDENTS
CHAPTER 6: ADMISSION
RAINER CHRISTOPH SCHWINGES
The accessibility of universities
Matriculation
Oaths and fees
The frequency of matriculation
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 7: STUDENT EDUCATION, STUDENT LIFE
RAINER CHRISTOPH SCHWINGES
The student: concept and typology
Origins and social structure
Student associations
Student life
Costs of living and learning
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 8: CAREERS OF GRADUATES
PETER MORAW
The interaction between university and society
The beginnings in Italy and France (twelfth century until c. 1200)
The beginnings in England, in the Iberian peninsula, and in
'younger' Europe
The universal age (1200-1380)
The universal age in 'older' Europe
The universal age in 'younger' Europe
The national and regional era in 'older' Europe (i380-1500)
The national and regional era in 'younger' Europe
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 9: MOBILITY
HILDE DE RIDDER-SYMOENS
The medieval love of travel
Nations, colleges, and fraternities
From internationalism to regionalism
The Holy Roman Empire
The Nordic countries and eastern Europe
Great Britain
The Iberian peninsula
Italy and France
Travelling conditions
Select bibliography
PART IV: LEARNING
CHAPTER 10: THE FACULTY OF ARTS
1 THE TRIVIUM AND THE THREE PHILOSOPHIES
GORDON LEFF
The liberal arts in medieval education
The early stage
The impact of the translations
The period of assimilation (thirteenth century)
The course of studies
Late medieval developments
The faculty of arts and the university
Select bibliography
2 THE QUADRIVIUM
JOHN NORTH
Sources of university learning
Arithmetic
The transmission of texts
The quadrivium in context
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 11: THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE
NANCY SIRAISI
The context of medieval university medicine
Origins, distribution, and organization of the medical faculties
Social and economic aspects
Relations between the medical faculty and other faculties
Medical curricula and the content of medical learning
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 12: THE FACULTIES OF LAW
ANTONIO GARCIA Y GARCIA
The origins and early history of law faculties
General characteristics
Legal source-books
Literary genres in legal writing and questions of nomenclature
Methods of teaching law
Students and scholars
Law, the church, and society
Select bibliography
CHAPTER 13: THE FACULTY OF THEOLOGY
MONIKA ASZTALOS
From biblical exegesis towards scholastic theology
The mendicants and the theological faculties: symbiosis and
The curriculum
Theology and philosophy in Paris and Oxford
The end of the Parisian-Oxonian monopoly
The Great Schism and the theological faculties
Via antiqua and via moderna
Select bibliography
THE RISE OF HUMANISM
WALTER RUEGG
The epochal consciousness of humanism
The quest for new symbols of security
The humanistic movement in education
The entry of humanism into the universities
The impact of humanism on the beginnings of the modern
university
The emergence of humanism outside Italy
Book-publishing as the ally of humanism
Select bibliography
Editors' note on the indexes
Name index
Geographical and subject index
Medieval university towns
2 Foundations prior to 1300
3 Universities active in 1300
4 Foundations 1300-1378
5 Universities active in 1378
6 Foundations 1378-1500
7 Universities active in 1500
CONTRIBUTORS AND EDITORS
MONIKA ASZTALOS (Sweden) was born in Stockholm in 1953. She is associate professor of Latin in the Department of classical languages at the University of Stockholm. In 1987, she spent six months as visiting professor at the
Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies in Toronto.
ASA BRIGGS (United Kingdom) was born in Yorkshire in 1921. Provost of
Worcester College, Oxford, Lord Briggs is a former vice-chancellor of the
University of Sussex , president of the British Social History Society
and former chairman of the European Institute of Education and Social Policy
ANTONIO GARCIA Y GARCIA (Spain) was born in Bretofia (province of
Lugo) in 1928. Professor of the history of canon law at the Pontifical University of Salamanca, he is editor of the Kevista Espanola de Derecho Canonico
and of the Synodicon Hispanum series, as well as a member of the Institute of
Medieval Canon Law at Berkeley.
ALEKSANDER GIEYSZTOR (Poland) was born in Moscow in 1916. President
of the Polish Academy of Sciences and director of the Royal Castle in
Warsaw, he is emeritus professor of history at the University of Warsaw.
NOTKER HAMMERSTEIN (Federal Republic of Germany) was born in
Offenbach am Main in 1930. Professor of early modern history at the University of Frankfurt, he edited the History of the University of Frankfurt and is
also a member of the editorial board of History of Universities.
GORDON LEFF (United Kingdom) was born in 1926 and educated at King's
College, Cambridge. He is now professor of medieval history at the University
PETER MORAW (Federal Republic of Germany) was born in Mahrisch
Contributors and editors
Ostrau in 1935. He is professor of medieval history and of German national,
economic, and social history at the University of Giessen.
PAOLO NARDI (Italy) was born in Siena in 1949. Professor of the history of
Italian law at the University of Siena, he is also director of the review Studi
senesi, published by the university.
JOHN NORTH (United Kingdom) was born in Cheltenham in 1934. Formerly
at the University of Oxford, he is professor of the history of philosophy and
the exact sciences at the University of Groningen in The Netherlands, and
permanent secretary of the International Academy for the History of Science.
OLAF PEDERSEN (Denmark) was born in 1920. He is professor of the history
of science at the University of Aarhus and a visiting fellow of St Edmund's
House, Cambridge. He is vice president of the International Union for the
History and Philosophy of Science and president of the Historical Commission of the International Astronomical Union.
HILDE DE RIDDER-SYMOENS (Belgium) was born in Sint-Jans-Molenbeek
(Brussels) in 1943. Professor of medieval history at the Free University of
Amsterdam, she is also a research associate for the Belgian National Fund
for Scientific Research at the University of Ghent. Since 1985, she has been
secretary general of the International Commission for the History of Universities.
JOHN ROBERTS (United Kingdom) was born in Bath in 1928. Warden of
Merton College, Oxford, where he was previously fellow and tutor in
modern history, he was also vice-chancellor of the University of Southampton
for a number of years. From 1967 to 1976 he was joint editor of the English
Historical Review. He is presently a governor of the British Broadcasting
Corporation.
WALTER RUEGG (Switzerland) was born in Zurich in 1918. Emeritus professor of sociology at the University of Berne, and former professor of sociology at the University of Frankfurt, he was rector of the latter from 1965
until 1970. He is the general editor of this History of the University in Europe.
RAINER CHRISTOPH SCHWINGES (Federal Republic of Germany) was
born in 1943. He is now professor of medieval history at the University of
Berne in Switzerland, after having taught at the University of Giessen.
EDWARD SHILS (United States of America) was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1910. Founder and editor of Minerva, he is professor of social
thought and sociology at the University of Chicago. He is also a fellow of
Peterhouse, Cambridge, as well as of the London School of Economics.
NANCY SIRAISI (United States of America) was born in Yorkshire in 1932.
Contributors and editors
Professor of history at Hunter College of the City University of New York,
she is also a member of the editorial board of History of Universities.
JACQUES VERGER (France) was born in Talence in the Gironde in 1943. He
is maitre de conferences in medieval history at the Ecole Normale Superieure
in Paris and vice-president of the International Commission for the History of
Universities.
READER'S GUIDE
This series, although compiled by specialists, is destined for the general
reader. The notes and bibliographies accompanying the different chapters
have therefore been kept to a minimum. The notes are either bibliographical
references to specific sources, generally the most important or recent works
relating to the subject, or they have been introduced to justify quantitative
data or explain any significant difference between two interpretations of a
particular point. A select bibliography follows each chapter. These bibliographies are designed to stimulate further reading and are not exhaustive.
The reader will find more complete bibliographical references in the works
indicated. As a number of well-known works for the period are quoted in
several chapters, abbreviations of the titles of these works have been used in
the notes. A list of bibliographical abbreviations is included. Furthermore, the
reader will find a more general bibliography and some maps at the end of
chapter 2 (Patterns), as this chapter locates the presence and nature of universities during the Middle Ages. In order to avoid too many overlaps between
the various chapters, the editors have made cross-references to other chapters
in the text as well as in the notes, thereby informing the reader that more
ample information on the subject can be found elsewhere in the volume (see
also the geographical and subject index). The standard English version of
proper names has been used throughout; when necessary, a form more commonly used in continental Europe is indicated by means of a cross-reference
in the name index.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN
Cobban, Medieval Universities
A. B. Cobban, The Medieval Universities: Their Development and Organization
 .
H. Denifle and E. Chatelain (eds.), Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, 4 vols.
(Paris, 1889-97).
Denifle, Entstehung
H. Denifle, Die Entstehung der Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400 .
Fournier (ed.), Statuts
M. Fournier (ed.), Les Statuts et privileges des universites franqaises depuis leur
fondation jusqu'en 1789, 4 vols. (Paris, 1890-2).
History of Oxford
J. I. Catto (ed.), The History of the University ofOxford, vol. I, The Early Oxford
Schools (general editor: T. H. Aston) .
d'Irsay, Histoire des universites
S. d'Irsay, Histoire des universites franqaises et etrangeres des origines a nos jours,
2 vols. .
Kaufmann, Deutsche Universitaten
G. Kaufmann, Geschichte der deutschen Universitaten, 2 vols. .
Kibre, Nations
P. Kibre, The Nations in the Mediaeval Universities, Mediaeval Academy of
America, 49 .
Kibre, Privileges
P. Kibre, Scholarly Privileges in the Middle Ages. The Rights, Privileges and
Immunities of Scholars and Universities at Bologna - Padua - Paris - Oxford,
Mediaeval Academy of America, 72 .
Rashdall, Universities
H. Rashdall, The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, 3 vols. ed. F. M.
Powicke and A. B. Emden .
Abbreviations
Renaissance and Renewal
R. B. Benson and G. Constable (eds.), Renaissance and Renewal in the Twelfth
Century .
Schulen und Studium
J. Fried (ed.), Schulen und Studium im sozialen Wandel des hohen und spaten Mittelalters .
Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher
R. C. Schwinges, Deutsche Universitdtsbesucher im 14. und I J . Jahrhundert:
Studien zur Sozialgeschichte des alten Reiches .
Universitd e societd
Universitd e societd nei secoli XII—XVI. Atti del nono convegno internazionale di
studio tenuto a Pistoia nei giorni 20-25 settembre 1979 .
Universites en France
J. Verger (ed.), Histoire des universites en France .
Universities in the Late Middle Ages
J. IJsewijn and J. Paquet (eds.), Universities in the Late Middle Ages, Mediaevalia
Lovaniensia, series 1, studia 6 .
Universities in Politics
J. W. Baldwin and R. A. Goldthwaite (eds.), Universities in Politics: Case Studies
from the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern Period .
WALTER RUEGG
{General Editor)
THE UNIVERSITY AS A EUROPEAN INSTITUTION
The university is a European institution; indeed, it is the European institution
par excellence. There are various reasons for this assertion.
As a community of teachers and taught, accorded certain rights, such as
administrative autonomy and the determination and realization of curricula
(courses of study) and of the objectives of research as well as the award of
publicly recognized degrees, it is a creation of medieval Europe, which was
the Europe of papal Christianity. This is shown in the first volume of our
It is, moreover, the only European institution which has preserved its
fundamental patterns and its basic social role and functions over the course of
history; it has indeed been strengthened and extended in these respects - as
the four volumes will show. Of the three acknowledged powers of medieval
European society - regnum, sacerdotium, and studium — the first, political
power, has undergone profound changes. The second has, in the Roman
Catholic Church, preserved its structure and expanded over the whole planet
but it has lost the monopoly which it once possessed of providing the conditions of salvation. The same may be said for the other institutional and
cultural creations of the Middle Ages, i.e. the distinctively European forms of
organization of a money economy, the plastic arts, architecture, and music.
No other European institution has spread over the entire world in the way
in which the traditional form of the European university has done. The
degrees awarded by European universities - the bachelor's degree, the licentiate, the master's degree, and the doctorate - have been adopted in the most
diverse societies throughout the world. The four medieval faculties of artesvariously called philosophy, letters, arts, arts and sciences, and humanities law, medicine, and theology have survived and have been supplemented by
Walter Ruegg
numerous disciplines, particularly the social sciences and technological
studies, but they remain none the less at the heart of universities throughout
the world. Even the name of the universitas, which in the Middle Ages was
applied to corporate bodies of the most diverse sorts and was accordingly
applied to the corporate organization of teachers and students, has in the
course of centuries been given a more particular focus: the university, as a
universitas litterarum, has since the eighteenth century been the intellectual
institution which cultivates and transmits the entire corpus of methodically
studied intellectual disciplines.
Moreover, the university is a European institution because it has, in its
social role, performed certain functions for all European societies. It has
developed and transmitted scientific and scholarly knowledge and the
methods of cultivating that knowledge which has arisen from and formed
part of the common European intellectual tradition. It has at the same time
formed an academic elite, the ethos of which rests on common European
values and which transcends all national boundaries.
The various efforts which were made after the Second World War to establish 'European' universities were largely unsuccessful because of the resistance of the existing universities, which regarded themselves as European.
Indeed, they pointed out that the diversity of national traditions was a precious European heritage and that, by means of their different national components, they contributed to the European community of scholarship and
It may be asked whether this account does in fact characterize the present
situation. Are not the universities of Europe equally, if not more deeply,
marked by the differences among the European national states which began
to take form in the late Middle Ages and during the Reformation and which,
particularly since the nineteenth century, changed the universities of the
European continent de facto - and often de jure as well - into parts of the
governmental system? Do they perform genuinely European functions when,
in any particular member state of the European community, only about i per
cent of the student body is made up of those who come from any of the other
member states of the community and when, in many European countries,
professors from other countries cannot be appointed or can be appointed
only in exceptional circumstances? Can the existing European universities be
said to be performing their proper social role when the rising generation of
European scientists and scholars prefers to continue its studies in universities
of another country where the European traditions of scientific and scholarly
research and of the academic ethic are pursued with more enthusiasm,
seriousness, commitment, and effectiveness than they are in Europe?
THE INITIATIVE OF THE STANDING CONFERENCE OF RECTORS OF
THE EUROPEAN UNIVERSITIES
The growing significance for the commonwealth of scientific and scholarly
knowledge and understanding and the unprecedented expansion of higher
educational institutions which has flowed from the awareness of that significance have overtaxed the European universities. Despite the difference
between the centrally, governmentally administered university systems of
France, Italy, and Austria, the federal systems of the German Federal Republic
and Switzerland, and the legally autonomous universities of Great Britain,
their problems are essentially the same: the tasks which the universities are
expected to perform are so multifarious, so subject to change, often so
mutually contradictory, and also so immediately pressing that the universities
are under unceasing pressure to deal with them and to bring them into
harmony with their own traditional aims.
In response to this situation, representatives of the universities of fifteen
European countries came together in Cambridge in 1955 for an exchange of
experiences and ideas; in 1964 in Gottingen they formed the European
Conference of Rectors.1 Today more than 470 institutions of higher education
from twenty-seven European countries belong to it. Its members meet every
five years; every six months representatives of each country whose universities
are members of the Conference meet to discuss the problems with which the
universities are confronted owing to the deep social and cultural changes
occurring in their respective societies.2 In the course of these discussions a
desire was often expressed for a more systematic understanding of the history
of universities. The failure of the various attempts to reform the universities in
the decades following the Second World War has shown that really effective
solutions to the problems of the universities are unattainable without a better
knowledge of their development and their long-standing traditions.
But the means of acquiring this better knowledge were lacking. It is true
that there are innumerable works on the history of universities. The history of
universities has over the past few decades become the object of many intensive
investigations and of numerous conferences.3 These have, however, been
1 H.-A. Steger (ed.), Das Europa der Universitdten, Entstebung der Stdndigen Konferenz der
Rektoren und Vize-Kanzler der europdischen Universitdten 1948-1962 .
2 Europdische Rektorenkonferenz, HI. Generalversammlung Gottingen 1964, z vols. ; J. Courvoisier (ed.), Acts of the 4th General Assembly Geneva 1969 ;
J. Roche (ed.), Opening Address and Administrative Part of the 5th General Assembly held in
Bologna September 1-6, 1974 ; CRE, CRE Vlth General Assembly ; A. Barblan (ed.), Actes de la Vile Assemblee Generale tenue a Helsinki du 12 au 17 aout
1979, 2. vols. ; A. Barblan (ed.), Actes de la VHIe Assemblee Generale, tenue a
Athenes du 9 au 14 septembre 1984 ; CRE-Information, quarterly, published by
CRE from 1966, from 1988 onwards under the name CRE-action.
3 S. Stelling-Michaud, 'L'histoire des universites au Moyen-age et a la Renaissance au cours des
vingt-cinq dernieres annees', in Xle Congres international des Sciences Historiques, Rapports,
Walter Ruegg
about various partial aspects of the larger subject: they have dealt with one or
another epoch, with particular countries, universities, and disciplines, with
the legal status of universities, with the statistics of admissions and graduation, with the lives of university teachers, etc. The last comprehensive
history of universities is Stephen d'Irsay's Histoire des universites franqaises
et etrangeres des origines a nos jours, which, for a long time, has been the
standard work and was published in Paris in 1933-5; ^ needs revision in
many of its details and it does not, in any case, go beyond i860.4
For this reason, the Conference of European Rectors decided in 1982 to
organize a collaborative investigation which would deal with the social
setting, the social demands, the structures, and the major problems of the
European universities as they have developed and changed in the course of
their history. It was desired that the work should be performed in accordance
with the highest standards of scholarly research, taking fully into account the
results of the most recent research, and that it would be comparative, coherent, and comprehensive. The first step taken was the formation of a group of
national correspondents who would be in a position to provide reliable information about the conditions of university life in their respective countries.
With the assistance of this group, three programmes were initiated and
carried out. The first was a set of expositions of the most important university problems seen historically in each country,5 the second was the preparation and publication of a historical compendium of European universities,6
and the third was the calling of an international conference, to be held in
1983, at which historians of universities from various European countries
could discuss the changes in the social functions of universities; this conference was also expected to discuss the practical feasibility of a comprehensive,
collaborative history of European universities.7
THE OBJECTIVE AND CONCEPTION OF THE PRESENT WORK
The present work as a comparative history of European universities has only
one precursor. This is Die Geschichte der Entstehung und Entwicklung der
hohen Schulen unseres Erdtheils, written by the British privy councillor and
professor of 'worldly wisdom' at Gottingen, Christian Meiners, and
vol. I (Stockholm, i960), 97-143; Italian translation with an up-to-date bibliography in
G.Arnaldi (ed.), Le origini dell'universitd , 153-217; J.Fletcher (ed.), The
History of European Universities, Work in Progress and Publications, 1 - 5 ; from
1988 onwards the bibliography is published in History of Universities under the title 'Publications on University History since 1977: a Continuing Bibliography', ed. J. M. Fletcher and C. A.
Upton; C. Schmitt and L. V.B. Brockliss (eds.), History of Universities, 1 onwards.
4 S. d'Irsay, Histoire des universites franqaises et etrangeres des origines a nos jours, 2 vols.
 .
5 'Interrogating the Past: in Search of the University', CRE-Information, 69 .
6 L. Jilek (ed.), Historical Compendium of European Universities .
7 'Town and Gown: the University in Search of its Origins', CRE-Information, 62 .
 
'a pragmatic history of universities', 'the most important epochs of their
establishment, their flowering and decay', as well as the 'most notable and
distinctive features of universities in the cultivated states of Europe', and to
do so 'in such a way that their misconduct, deficiencies, and faults would be
recognized and corrected and their merits disclosed and emulated'.8 The
book is accordingly less chronological than thematic in its organization. The
historical treatment of the origins focuses on 'nations' and faculties, the significance of colleges {Kollegien) and hostels (Bursen), the influence of external
factors like the invention of paper, the printing of books, and the Renaissance
and Reformation. Then there follows, in twelve books, the historical development of endowments, funds, privileges, academic courts, committees,
offices, teachers, lecture rooms and classes, the conditions of study, and disciplinary measures. The work rests on a widely ranging but uncritical use of
older monographs; thanks to the richness of its data, it was reprinted in 1973.
It was only after the critical assessment of the sources towards the end of
the nineteenth century that it was possible to begin to write the history of the
medieval universities in a genuinely scholarly way. The co-editor of the documentary sources for the history of the University of Paris, Denifle, presented
in 1885 a historical account of the origins and the constitutional development
of the various universities of Europe up to 1400.9 Georg Kaufmann, a professor at the newly 'Prussianized' University of Strasburg, was charged by
Althoff, the famous head of the Prussian higher education administration, to
write a history of the German universities. In 1888, he showed in the first
volume - which was a 'pre-history' of the German universities - the
institutional development of the Italian 'city universities' (Stadtuniversitaten),
that of the French and English 'chancellor universities' (Kanzleruniversitaten), and that of the 'state universities and Spanish universities' (Staatsuniversitaten und spanische Universitaten), In his concluding chapter, he
attempted to depict the similarities in university development, especially with
respect to academic degrees and founding charters. But he only managed to
finish the first two volumes, both of which dealt with medieval universities.10
Hastings Rashdall adopted a presentation by country and by university in his
standard work in three volumes entitled, The Universities of Europe in the
Middle Ages, first published in 1895 and revised in 1936 by Powicke and
Emden, but he also added a detailed description of student life.11 The only
8 C. Meiners, Geschichte der Entstehung und Entwicklung der hohen Schulen unseres Erdtheils,
vol. I , 3ff.
9 H. Denifle, Die Entstehung der Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400 .
10 G. Kaufmann, Geschichte der deutschen Universitaten, vol. I, Vorgeschichte .
11 H. Rashdall, The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, 3 vols., ed. F. M. Powicke and
A. B. Emden .
Walter Ruegg
comprehensive work going beyond the Middle Ages is that of d'Irsay, which
is an institutional and biographical history arranged according to centuries
and intellectual currents, such as the Reformation, Romanticism, or positivism.
The editorial board appointed by the Conference of European Rectors in
the autumn of 1983 had a more ambitious task. It was to set forth by sociological and comparative analysis the main intellectual and institutional
features of the European academic world, with due attention to regional
differences and historical changes.12 In view of this, a pattern of analysis and
presentation had to be devised which would permit the various periods of
university history to be analysed in a way which enabled one epoch to be
compared with another and which would do justice to the variegated aspects
and changes in the functions of the university.
Accordingly, there are to be four volumes, all adhering systematically to an
identical pattern. The first treats the rise and expansion of the universities in
the Middle Ages, the second treats the regional, religious, and scientific and
scholarly diversifications between 1500 and 1800; the third analyses the development of universities as scientific and scholarly institutions up to the Second
World War; the fourth deals with the unprecedented expansion of scientific
and scholarly research and teaching which has occurred since the end of the
war. The boundaries between the periods are not interpreted as being more
than a chronologically reasonable periodization of university history. Thus
1500 entails no decision regarding the disputed date of the end of the Middle
Ages. It simply follows the periodization which has been applied in the standard works mentioned above on the history of universities. Undoubtedly, the
universities of the sixteenth century, influenced by territorial-political and
religious factors, are very different from those of the preceding period, which,
despite their distinctive regional differences, were much influenced by the
papal claim to universal legitimacy, which gave rise to a corresponding structural pattern. In a similar manner, 1800 marks, in a very general way, the
beginning of two decisive though contradictory lines of development which
are shared by the universities of the nineteenth century. The orientation of
the centrally, governmentally organized educational system, perfected by
Napoleon and aimed at immediate social utility, is one of these. The other
pattern is that inspired by von Humboldt - research without practical ends
and intended to serve the intellectual education of the human race. In the
history of universities, the nineteenth century ends neither at 1900 nor at
1914. It is only after 1945 that the entire European higher educational scene
and the individual universities present a quite different picture. In every
scheme of periodization, the boundaries are always imprecise. That is also
12 A. Barblan in 'Town and Gown' (note 7), 4H. Concerning the concept of the project, see
A. Barblan, A. de Puymege, and W. Riiegg, 'The History of the European University in Society:
a Joint University Research Project', History of European Ideas, 8:2 , 127-38.
the case here, and this will be made clear in the opening and concluding
chapters of each volume as well as in all the others.
Each volume will consist of four major sections over which the fourteen or
fifteen chapters will be distributed. Each will aim to provide the desired comparative analyses of the social functions of the European university as a
whole. There will be no single portrayal of any particular university, but,
through the use of the index, it will be possible to obtain from the various
chapters a detailed idea of the significance of any particular university in the
European situation as a whole.
The first part presents a thematic introduction and a comprehensive
picture of the distribution and development of the universities in the period
under consideration. Part II describes in three chapters the structures of the
university, first, in relation to public authority, then in its internal organization, its financing, its buildings and equipment, its administrative and
governing bodies and their ways of making decisions, and its academic staffand, in the second, third, and fourth volumes, there will be a fourth chapter
on the expansion of the European model of higher education to other continents. Part III deals in four chapters with one main task of the university,
namely, the training of the students in scientific and scholarly knowledge, the
social, economic, and intellectual preconditions of study at universities, the
courses of study and the daily life of students generally, examinations, and
careers. Part IV is devoted to the other main task of the university, namely,
the validation, renewal, and expansion of human knowledge by the use of
critical method. These four chapters are different in each volume corresponding to the prevailing kinds of science and scholarship in each epoch. In the first
volume, attention is centred on the intellectual activities of the four faculties.
In the second volume, the interplay between tradition and innovation within
and outside the universities and the elaboration of the academic disciplines,
the creation of systems in the humanistic subjects, and the significance of the
universities in the 'scientific revolution' are highlighted. The third and fourth
volumes deal with the modern specialized disciplines - from theology
through philosophy, legal studies, and the natural and social sciences, to the
medical and technological faculties, departments, and universities.
Such a work cannot be written by one person; this is self-evident. It was
accordingly necessary to find, for each of fourteen or fifteen chapters, in the
countries which shared the European tradition, an expert who could cover in
a scholarly manner the subject-matter of that chapter. The larger the circle of
collaborators, the greater the danger, in a work organized by themes, that the
outcome would be a collection of unconnected essays, the sole unity of which
would be constituted by their being bound together in a single volume. The
editorial board, to avoid this, chose a rather complicated procedure. It began
by working out, for each volume and for each chapter, an extensive set of
substantive and methodical guidelines for the topics to be dealt with, and
Walter Ruegg
invited persons who expressed their readiness to collaborate on those terms
to a first series of discussions. In these discussions, the prospective authors
agreed on the division of labour, sometimes extending, sometimes contracting the subject-matter proposed for the chapters which they were being asked
to write. In the course of these discussions, the consensus and mutual understanding necessary for such collaborative work were formed. At a second
series of discussions the drafts of the various chapters were scrutinized and
discussed in detail; national correspondents from the countries about which
the editors and authors were insufficiently informed were invited to participate. The second drafts which followed these discussions were then worked
over in detail by the editors in one or more meetings and, to the extent that
this was possible by editorial procedures, the various chapters were coordinated with each other into a unified pattern.
Despite these efforts, the editors and the authors have not succeeded completely in eliminating either the - meaningful - inevitable stylistic and conceptual differences among individuals or the - less valuable - overlappings and
disproportions in the treatments of particular topics. Overlaps could not be
eliminated when a given phenomenon was important for several themes. The
disproportionate attention paid to some regions or topics in relation to others
is, in large part, a result of differences in the state of knowledge and the
progress of research on those subjects. It has been a fundamental principle
of our work that we have attempted to place the knowledge made available
by the present state of research in the new perspective of a comparative
synthesis. In this sense, each of the individual chapters represents a genuine
achievement of research, even though they are not all equally the products of
comprehensive investigations of archival sources.
THE SOCIAL ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY
By social function or role is implied the totality of the actions performed in
response to the expectations of conduct which others direct toward the
incumbent of the particular role. These expectations are based on values
towards which conduct is oriented, and the values are translated into norms
which guide the socially expected conduct. Expectations, values, and norms
are delineated by the explicit and implicit interests of the various social actors
and they are often mutually contradictory.
Conflicts are inherent in social roles, and not least in those of universities.
Their fundamental values and the norms which are binding on their members
are not homogeneous. The values of the universal validity of the criteria,
methods, and results of scientific and scholarly research cannot always be
adhered to in consequence of the limitations on and diversity of the cognitive
powers of individual human beings. The equality of opportunity for admission to and continuance of studies at universities is in conflict with the
inequality in the distribution of social and economic resources and of alternative uses for these resources. The precedence given to leisure and contemplation, which are necessary for scientific and scholarly research, represents
an ideal of the bios theoretikos, which ever since the Greek philosophers has
been contrasted and in conflict with the ideal of the bios praktikos, which
gives precedence to social utility in the application of scientific knowledge
and in the professional training provided by universities. The amor sciendi^
which evaluates highly the search for truth by rigorous scientific and scholarly methods, is associated with indifference to the economic value of the
results of research and teaching, and it stands in contradiction to the ambitio
dignitatis and the individia pecuniae, the social and economic utilization of
the fruits of academic study. Last but not least, the fundamental value of
the academic freedom of the university as a corporate community stands in
potential conflict, on two fronts: internally between the freedom of the individual and the collegial solidarity of the members of the university, and externally between the requirements of the university for autonomy and control by
those who supply the necessary financial resources.
These and other conflicts are inherent in the social history of the university.
To show the various forms which they have taken and the various solutions
which have been attempted is the most important aim of our enterprise.
Indeed, these conflicts, the tensions which arise from them, and the structures
and mechanisms through which they are kept in a state of open equilibrium
explain to a considerable extent the dynamics of the European universities.
When one value becomes too preponderant and shifts the balance too markedly and too long to one alternative and away from the other, for example,
to making the university into a governmental institution or into an ivory
tower or into a vocational school or into a wholly self-contained scientific
institution, the tensions lose their creative power and lead instead to somnolence or excessive superficial and fruitless agitation.
We certainly no longer share the view, which was put forward by Meiners
and which was so characteristic of the Enlightenment, that the history of
European universities can 'lead in part to the recognition and avoidance of
their misconduct, deficiencies, and faults, and in part to the disclosure and
emulation of their merits'.13 Just as a machine can only be repaired and made
operable once more when the significance of its parts and their interdependence is understood and tested, so the university, which is a very
complex social institution, must from time to time be subjected to a fundamental analysis. This fundamental analysis of its structures and functions,
which have developed in the course of history, is indispensable if the deeper
aspects of its social role are to be understood and realistically improved.
13 Meiners, Geschichte (note 8), 4.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The preparatory work for A History of the University in Europe has been
generously supported by the Max and Else Beer-Bra wand Fund of the University of Berne, the Donors' Association for the Promotion of Sciences and
Humanities in Germany (Stifterverband fur die deutsche Wissenschaft) in
Essen, the European Cultural Foundation in Amsterdam, the Konrad Adenauer Foundation in Bonn, the Ramon Areces Foundation in Madrid, the
Portuguese Secretary of State for Higher Education, the National Institute for
Scientific Research, and the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation in Lisbon, the
Antonio de Almeida Foundation in Oporto, the Volkswagen Foundation in
Hanover, and the Fritz Thyssen Foundation in Cologne. We thank these
patrons wholeheartedly. We are no less grateful to the universities at which
our conferences and discussions have taken place, notably the Universities of
Berne, Salamanca, Coimbra, Eichstatt, and Oxford. We should also like to
express our thanks to Professors Grete Klingenstein of the University of Graz
and W. Roy Niblett, emeritus professor at the University of London; as
members of the editorial board in the early stages of the project, they helped
to outline the framework of our History. Furthermore, we acknowledge the
advice and support of Professor Nikolaus Lobkowicz, former president of the
University of Munich and now president of the Catholic University of
Eichstatt, who played a key role in defining and launching the whole undertaking. But, above all, we thank the secretary general, Andris Barblan, and
the assistant secretary general, Alison de Puymege-Browning, of the Standing
Conference of Rectors, Presidents, and Vice-Chancellors of the European
Universities (CRE); it is they who, with tireless devotion and alertness, made
possible the harmonious - indeed friendly - cooperation between so many
European scholars.
THEMES AND PATTERNS
WALTER RUEGG
No period in the history of universities has been more intensively studied
than the Middle Ages.1 Nevertheless, numerous gaps remain. Many archival
documents, innumerable writings, and many of the lecture scripts of university teachers are still unpublished. Biographical accounts of teachers and
students, their social and familial origins, their patterns of association in the
course of their studies, and their subsequent careers are markedly lacking.
Such prosopographical investigations, which have already been taken in
hand for particular universities2 or for certain regions of provenance,3 are indispensable for a genuinely social history of universities.4 Only when such
1 J. M. F. Fletcher and J. Deahl, 'European Universities, 1300-1700, The Development of
Research, 1969—1981 and a Summary Bibliography', in J. M. Kittelson and P. J. Transue (eds.),
Rebirth, Reform and Resilience. Universities in Transition 1300—1700 ,
324-57; P. Denley, 'Recent Studies on Italian Universities in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance', History of Universities, 1 , 198-205.
2 A. B. Emden, A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to 1500, 3 vols. ; D. E. R. Watt, A Biographical Dictionary of Scottish Graduates to AD 1410 ; C. Renardy, Le Monde des maitres universitaires de Liege, 1140—1359. Recherches sursa
composition et ses activites ; C. Renardy, Les Maitres universitaires du diocese de
Liege. Repertoire biographique (1140-1350) ; J. Verger, 'Peut-on faire une prosopographie des professeurs des universites francaises du Moyen-Age?', Melanges de I'Ecole
francaise de Rome, Moyen Age, 100 , 55-62; A. B. Emden, A Biographical Register of the
University of Oxford AD 1501 to 1540 ; H. de Ridder-Symoens, D. Illmer, and
C. M. Ridderikhoff, Le Premier livre des procurateurs de la nation germanique de Vancienne
Universite d'Orleans. Seconde partie: Biographie des etudiants, 3 vols. .
3 S. Stelling-Michaud, 'L'histoire des universites au Moyen Age et a la Renaissance au cours des
25 dernieres annees', in Xle Congres International des Sciences Historiques, Rapports, vol. I
(Stockholm, i960), 121-30. For Switzerland: O. Vasella, 'Untersuchungen iiber die Bildungsverhaltnisse im Bistum Chur mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Klerus vom Ausgang des 13.
Jahrhunderts bis um 1500', in 62. Jahresbericht der Historisch-Antiquarischen
Gesellschaftvon
Graubunden ; K. M. Zahnd, Die Bildungsverha'ltnisse in den bernischen Ratsgeschlechtern im ausgehenden Mittelalter . Further literature in W. Riiegg, Humanistische Elitenbildung in der Eidgenossenschaft zur Zeit der Renaissance. Wolfenbiitteler
Abhandlungen zur Renaissanceforschung, vol. 9 , 95-133.
4 Fletcher and Deahl, 'European Universities' (note 1), 327; L. Stone (ed.), The University in
Walter Rtiegg
studies have been done will it be 'possible to trace the channels of intellectual
currents and influence, to reconstruct the composition and structure of intellectual groups and their connections with each other, and the lines of transmission and diffusion of certain intellectual traditions such as Aristotelianism
in the thirteenth, Roman law in the fourteenth, humanism in the fifteenth,
and the Reformation in the sixteenth centuries'.5
For these reasons, our project can reflect only the present state of research.
The aim of this introductory chapter is to show, with reference to a few
themes, which perspectives have been opened up through studies of medieval
universities, which problems have arisen from those studies, and what knowledge can be drawn from them.
MYTHOLOGY AND HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE BEGINNINGS
In 1988, the University of Bologna celebrated its nine-hundredth anniversary.
However, neither our own investigation nor that of others into the history of
medieval universities has produced any evidence for such a foundation of the
University of Bologna in 1088. Rather, the upshot of these investigations is
that no such event took place in 1088.6 In fact, 1088 was chosen a century ago
as the 'conventional date' by a committee under the chairmanship of the
famous poet Giosue Carducci; 1888 was to be the occasion for a grand jubilee
to be celebrated in the presence of the royal family and rectors of universities
from all over the world were to attend. The aim of the celebration was to
imprint on the consciousness of the Italian people and of the whole world the
knowledge that the recent and still not completely consolidated political unification of Italy could point for its legitimacy to the eight-centuries-long tradition of free research and teaching at the University of Bologna and its
national and world-wide importance.7 The celebration of the eighth centenary of the University of Bologna in 1888 was in fact one of the commemorative celebrations and related symbolic manifestations which were arranged in
the course of the nineteenth century in order to remind the nations of their
Society, vol. I , 4; P. Classen, Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed.
J. Fried , 18; J. Miethke, 'Die Kirche und die Universitaten im 13. Jahrhundert',
in Schulen und Studium, 287; G. F. Lyttle, 'The Careers of Oxford Students in the Later Middle
Ages', in Kittelson and Transue (eds.), Rebirth (note 1), 214; H. Coing (ed.), Handbuch der
Quellen und Literatur der neueren europaischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, vol. I ,
85 ff.; J. Verger, 'A propos de la naissance de l'universite de Paris: contexte social, enjeu
politique, portee intellectuelle', in Schulen und Studium, 88.
Stelling-Michaud, 'Histoire' (note 3), 121.
1 Rashdall, Universities, vol. 1,118; H. Grundmann, Vom Ursprung der Universitat im Mittelalter , 40. Even A. Sorbelli, Storia della Universitd di Bologna,
vol. I, // Medioevo (Sec. XI-XV) , written on the occasion of the 850th birthday, does not mention the date.
U. Eco (ed.), Bologna 1088-1988, Alma MaterStudiorum Saecularia Nona (Milan, n.d. ),
 . W. Tega (ed.), Lo Studio e la citta. Bologna 1888-1988 , 11-61.
past and its historical continuity and to fortify in them a sense of their
national unity.8
Commemorative celebrations focus on a particular date. For that reason, a
particular date had to be found and it had to be one which was as early as
possible so that the politically important, symbolic function of the University
of Bologna as the 'mother of European universities' could not be challenged
on that occasion. Carducci and his medievalist colleagues based their claim
on a document of the thirteenth century. According to this document, the
'famous Irnerius' (1055/60-1125) and an 'unknown' Pepo were the first to
have delivered lectures on law in Bologna. Jubilees in most instances stimulate historical research.9 Such research often corrects the date of foundation
or shows the historical account of the alleged foundation to be a myth. Even
more than the jubilee celebrations of other universities, the celebration of the
eight-hundredth anniversary of the University of Bologna released a flood of
publications on the history of universities. We know now that Pepo was by
no means 'unknown'; he was referred to in 1190 as 'clarum Bononiensium
lumen\10 and presented himself at the court of Emperor Henry IV as an
authority on Roman law.11 In this regard, Carducci would not have chosen
the 'conventional date' badly, if in fact Pepo was the founder, or at least a
member, of a university. The booklet published on the occasion of the celebration of the nine-hundredth anniversary justified 1088 as the date of foundation of the university by the argument that, in that year, there appeared free
arrangements for the teaching of law which were independent of the religious
schools of Bologna and that such independence was the mark of a university.12
Is this argument defensible? No scholar doubts nowadays that, at various
places in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, there existed significant schools
and that successful teachers appeared as independent masters who gathered
around themselves a circle of pupils. In Bologna, legum doctores, who were
8 Cf. T. Nipperdey, 'Nationalidee und Nationaldenkmaler im 19. Jahrhundert', Historische
Zeitschrift, 206 , 528-85; E. Fehrenbach, 'Ueber die Bedeutung der politischen Symbole
im Nationalstaat', Historische Zeitschrift, 213 , 291-357.
9 For the ambiguous relation between jubilees and the historiography of universities: N. Hammerstein, 'Jubilaumsschrift und Alltagsarbeit. Tendenzen bildungsgeschichtlicher Literatur',
Historische Zeitschrift, 238 , 601-33; J- Verger, 'Du bon et du mauvais usage des anniversaires', Histoire, 115 , 78-80. For Bologna: Denley, 'Recent Studies' (note 1),
193; Rashdall, Universities, vol. I, 88. For German Democratic Republic: W. Flaschendrager
and M. Straube, Die Entwicklung der Universitdten, Hochschulen und Akademien im Spiegel
der hochschulgeschichtlichen Forschungen - Literaturubersicht, Informationen
und Studien zur Hochschulentwicklung, 12 .
10 G. Cencetti, 'Studium fuit Bononie', in G. Arnaldi (ed.), he origini delVuniversitd , 101-15.
11 L. Schmugge, '"Codicis Iustiniani baiulus" - Eine neue Quelle zu Magister Pepo von
Bologna', lus Commune, 6 , 1-9. H. G. Walther, 'Die Anfange des Rechtsstudiums und
die kommunale Welt Italiens', in Schulen und Studium, 138-44, does not recognize Pepo as a
Bologna professor of law.
12 Eco, Bologna 1088-1988 (note 7), .
Walter Ruegg
active as lawyers and judges, joined with their pupils to form free corporations. 13 There is also agreement among various investigators - as subsequent
chapters show - that it was the associations of students (in Bologna) or of
teachers and students (in Paris), which were granted special liberties and
privileges in the thirteenth century, that first laid the basis for that form of
higher education which in the Middle Ages was called studium generate and
which later was designated as a university.
For this reason, Abelard, who taught in the first forty years of the twelfth
century at Melun, Corbeil, and Paris, in part in a religious school and in part
as probably the most famous independent teacher, has long since ceased to
be regarded as the founder of the University of Paris.14 Similarly, the medical
school of Salerno has lost its reputation as the oldest European university;15 it
is, at best, regarded as a 'proto-university'.16 This does not, of course, detract
from its scientific significance as a school for physicians in the tenth century,
as a medical centre in the twelfth century, and as a model of medical research
and teaching in the thirteenth century.17
The origin of the first universities is a very complex process, as will be seen
in the next chapter. Bologna or Paris may be called the oldest university
depending on the weight which one attributes to one or another of the
various elements which make up a university. If one regards the existence of a
corporate body as the sole criterion, then Bologna is the oldest, but only by a
slight margin. It was in Bologna that, towards the end of the twelfth century,
the foreign students of law grouped themselves together as 'nations' and
therewith developed a basic organizational form of the medieval European
university. If one regards the association of teachers and students of various
disciplines into a single corporate body as the decisive criterion, then the
oldest university would be Paris, dating from 1208.18
The question of which university is the oldest is of practical importance
only when it has to be decided which rectors should be granted precedence in
academic ceremonies and processions. The date of foundation is more important because of the social and psychological significance of jubilees. Yet, as
the next chapter will show,19 it is very difficult and often arbitrary to assign
13 P. Weimar, 'Zur Doktorwiirde der Bologneser Legisten', in C. Bergfeld (ed.), Aspekte europdischer Rechtsgeschichte. Festgabe fur Helmut Coing zum 70. Geburtstag ,
14 Rashdall, Universities, vol. I, 276-8. Cf. S. C. Ferruolo, The Origins of the University. The
Schools of Paris and their Critics , 24.
15 P. O. Kristeller, 'The School of Salerno, its Development and Contributions to the History of
Learning', Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 17 , 138-94; reprinted in P. O. Kristeller,
Studies in Renaissance Thought and Letters , 495-551.
16 Cobban, Medieval Universities, 37.
17 P. O. Kristeller, 'The Curriculum of Italian Universities from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance', Proceedings of the PMR Conference, 9 , 3.
18 CUP, vol. I, 67, no. 8; Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 86; Ferruolo, Origins (note 14), 5.
I* See pp. 45 tf.
an exact date to the foundation of a particular university. This is true not
only for the oldest universities, which arose only gradually and which are
officially acknowledged in various written documents as having 'grown
through custom', e consuetudine, in a sequence of stages.20 Even where the
foundation of a university has occurred through an explicit decree or enactment, e privilegio, the question arises as to which particular event should be
regarded as the date of foundation. Should it be the decision of a local authority to found a university or to recognize an existing school as a university,
or should it be the recognition or endowment by papal, imperial, or royal
authority, or should it be the executive decision by the local municipal authority, or the beginning of the teaching?
It is easier to answer the question as to whether the medieval university
had forerunners or models. Very much like contemporary universities, the
early universities dated their origins as early as possible. In Bologna, between
1226 and 1234, a founding document was forged, which asserted that the
university was established in AD 423 by Emperor Theodosius.21 The University of Paris thought that it had been founded by Charlemagne, and, through
his action, it was able to see itself as a continuator of the tradition of Roman
higher education.22 Some claimed for Oxford an even earlier origin: when,
following the destruction of their own city of Troy, the Trojans conquered
Albion, it was said that they were accompanied by some philosophers who
found a suitable place for themselves in Oxford. A more modest tradition
contented itself with Alfred the Great (848-99) as the founder of Oxford.23
All of these fictions, which were questioned or refuted by the humanists, may
be traced back to the medieval practice of legitimating an institution by
asserting the antiquity of its origin. The assertion of a line of descent which
traced medieval universities back to antiquity does have some justification,
inasmuch as essential features of their intellectual substance were of classical
origin and then christianized by Saint Augustine and other church fathers.
Medieval scholars regarded themselves as dwarfs who stood on the shoulders
of their gigantic ancient ancestors and who for that reason could see further.24 Nevertheless, the organizational form of the university cannot be
traced to classical antiquity, nor was it influenced by Byzantium.25
20 Cf. Miethke, 'Kirche' (note 4), 290; Denifle, Entstehung,
21 A. Borst, 'Geschichte an mittelalterlichen Universitaten', Konstanzer
Universitdtsreden,
 , 24-30.
22 Stelling-Michaud, 'Histoire' (note 3), 99; Cobban, Medieval
Universities, 14.
23 J. Morris, The Oxford
Book of Oxford
 , 3ff.
24 Cf. R. K. Merton, On the Shoulders
of Giants. A Shandean Postscript
 .
25 Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
2off.; P. Speck, 'Die Kaiserliche Universitat von Konstantinopel. Prazisierungen zur Frage des hoheren Schulwesens in Byzanz im 9. und 10. Jahrhundert',
Byzantinisches
Archiv, 14 , 69—91; C. N . Constaninides, Higher Education
Byzantium in the Thirteenth and Early Fourteenth Centuries (1203-ca 1310), Texts and
Studies of the History of Greece, 11 .
Walter Ruegg
It seems more plausible to derive the organizational pattern of the medieval
university from the Islamic schools of learning. (The importance of the latter
for scholarly activity in philosophy, natural science, and medicine is evident
in chapters 10 and n.) British Islamic scholars give an affirmative answer to
the question: 'Did the Arabs invent the university?' They maintain that
Islamic institutions of learning were the source of the idea of organizing
foreign students into nations and that they were also the source of the ideas of
the universal validity of the qualification for teaching conferred by the venia
docendi, of the academic robe, and of the title of the baccalarius.16 Of course,
the invocation of such affinities often confuses the propter hoc with the post
hoc; it does not demonstrate whether and how the later forms emerged from
the earlier ones. Furthermore, the discernment of such affinities requires an
exact knowledge of both traditions. The term baccalarius could not be an
Islamic importation of the twelfth century because it was already in use in the
ninth century as the Latin designation of a preparatory or auxiliary status in a
variety of social careers. The American Islamicist, Makdisi, who is to be
taken more seriously, has discovered eighteen substantial affinities between
the Islamic and the occidental patterns of the organization of learning and
their transmission through institutional arrangements more or less like
universities. He has concluded, however, that 'the university is a twelfth
century product of the Christian West of the twelfth century, not only in its
organization but also in the privileges and protection it received from Pope
and King'. But the situation is different with regard to the colleges, which he
does derive from Islamic models.27
The borrowings which the university made from other medieval institutions were more important. As the next chapter shows, the very idea of the
universitas is drawn from the term for many kinds of cooperative associations. The term had, however, to be supplemented to refer to the special
features of the university, namely universitas magistrorum et scholarium or
universitas studii. The corporate features, privileges, statutes, seals, and oaths
and the functions and titles of their officials all have a close affinity to contemporaneous legal and organizational forms.28 Taken as a whole, the medieval university, as is apparent in the various chapters of this volume, is part of
and an expression of its social environment.
26 R. Y. Ebied and M . J. L. Young, 'New Light on the Origin of the Term "Baccalaureate"',
Islamic Quarterly,
18:1-2 , 1-7; R. Y. Ebied and M. J. L. Young, 'Did the Arabs invent
the university?' Times Higher Education
Supplement,
2 May 1975.
27 G. Makdisi, The Rise of Colleges, Institutions
of Learning in Islam and the West , 287ft.
28 Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 90; P. Michaud-Quantin, 'Universitas'.
Expression
mouvement communautaire
dans le Moyen-Age
latin .
THE UNIVERSITY: PRODUCT AND SHAPER OF SOCIETY
How is the origin of the university to be explained? Is it a resultant of the
society in which it exists or is it a factor in the formation of society? Answers
to this question are not dependent solely on the progress of research. The
answers are affected by and are raised in the context of existing political
conditions and of the current state of discussions about higher educational
Meiners' comparative history of universities, which has been mentioned in
the 'Foreword', was written in 1802-5, immediately after the publication of
the author's own large book on higher educational policy. In the latter, he
emphasized the greater importance of scientific and theoretical education in
comparison with education aimed at practical utility, and he recommended a
number of reforms which were intended to counteract contemporary efforts
to transform the universities into higher vocational training schools.30
Accordingly, he viewed the earliest universities as 'a manifestation of the
powerful progress of the spirit',31 and he explained their origin in accordance
with the ideas of the Enlightenment about the unceasing advance of the
human striving for knowledge. Thus he explained the origin of the university
by the substantial increase in the number of independent teachers in the
twelfth century and the successful struggle of the scholars, who had achieved
self-consciousness, for the recognition of their rights and privileges. He
enquired, in a way which was astonishingly precise in view of the state of the
sources available to him, into the emergence and development of academic
communities in the Middle Ages. He had no doubt whatsoever that the
universities were not epiphenomenal products of their social environment but
had rather a formative role in shaping it. For this reason, he was really interested only in the benefits conferred and the damages inflicted on the university by its environing society.
This fundamental attitude was also to be seen in the works of Denifle,
Kaufmann, and Rashdall, which were published between 1885 and 1895 anc^
which proceeded in a more critical, scholarly way than did Meiners' own
work. Even as late as 1923, 'the ancient and universal company of scholars'
was at the centre of interest in the work of the American medievalist, Charles
Homer Haskins;32 d'Irsay, too, in his Histoire des universites published in
29 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. 1,12 n. 2, regards Kaufmann's controversy with Denifle as vitiated
by an infusion of ideas suggested by the
Kulturkampf.
30 C. Meiner, Uber die Verfassung und Verwaltung
der deutschen
Universitdten,
2 vols. .
31 C. Meiner, Geschichte der Entstehung
und Entwicklung
der hohen Schulen unseres
Erdtheils,
vol. I , 7.
32 C. H. Haskins, The Rise of Universities
 , 126.
Walter Ruegg
1933-5, regarded the history of universities as being primarily a part of intellectual history.33
According to Marxism,
the thesis, so often and so variously reiterated by bourgeois and imperialistic
historiography, that there is a pure idea of learning and of universities which
has no relationship to classes and to class struggle ... has been shown by
history to be an error and a falsification ... Schools and higher educational
institutions are founded in order to train the persons who are needed to maintain the ruling class domination.34
Grundmann, in a lecture delivered at Jena and Leipzig in 1956, took a clear
position against the somewhat more differentiated thesis that the university is
determined by the 'needs of the ruling classes'. He said that the beginnings of
the universities were favoured, it was true, by the social and economic developments which were concomitant with 'the efflorescence of commerce and
transportation fostered by the crusades, the birth of a money economy or
early capitalism with the growth of cities which had been affected by it,
especially in Italy and France, and with the improvements in agriculture and
in the position of the persons engaged in it'. But these developments in no
way caused the universities.
[Neither the] demand for persons with professional, vocational training or
general education nor governmental, ecclesiastical, and social and economic
demands and motives are the primary, constitutive, or really fundamental and
determinative factors underlying the origin and nature of universities as wholly
novel communities and as seats of teaching and study. Rather the contrary!
Put in a nutshell, the stimulus to the emergence and growth of universities
was scholarly and scientific interest, the desire to learn and to know, the amor
sciendi.35
Grundmann's argument has been criticized as too idealistic or too ideological. Classen said in 1964 that the pure love of knowledge was better
embodied in the cathedral school at Chartres than it was in the University of
Paris; he asked how and why it happened that a university emerged here and
not there. 'It seems that, in addition to the intellectual factors, there were
other forces and motives which made possible the university as a new social
form.' He cites Abelard's confession that he taught only from pecunie et
laudis cupiditas, from greed and ambition, and a sentence of the broadly
learned Peter of Blois, who later became a courtier (c. 1180): 'There are two
33 d'Irsay, Histoire des universite's,
34 G. Steiger and W. Flaschendrager (eds.), Magister undScholaren, Professoren und Studenten,
Geschichte der Universitaten im Uberblick , 12; M. Steinmetz, 'Die Konzeption
der deutschen Universitaten im Zeitalter von Humanismus und Renaissance', in Les Universites europeennes du XlVe au XVHIe siecle, aspects et problemes. Actes du Colloque international a Voccasion du Vie Centenaire de I'Universite Jagellonne, Cracovie 6—8 Mai 1964
 , 115; W. Prahl, Sozialgeschichte der Universitdt , 13.
35 Grundmann, Ursprung
(note 6), 36, 39.
things which drive men hard to the study of jurisprudence; these are the
pursuit of offices and the vain passion for fame [ambitio dignitatis et inanis
gloriae appetitus].' For these reasons, Classen concluded that
The schools of the twelfth century and the universities of the thirteenth century
never set themselves the goal of providing the courts and municipalities with
specialized experts. Nevertheless, the new social pattern which took form in the
university was in part shaped by society, since it was the lively interest of wider
social groups which made it possible for the higher schools to become enduring
and independent institutions. From the very beginning, education was subject
to the tension between the fundamental and primary impulse to seek the truth
and the desire of many persons to acquire practical training. Conversely,
without really wanting to do so, the schools formed the new academic stratum
and changed the whole structure of society, enriching it and making it more
complex.36
Most scholars nowadays share this view - not least as a result of the discussion of Grundmann's thesis.37 Cobban and Esch lay more weight on the
needs of an urbanized society and of an emergent ecclesiastical and governmental bureaucracy.38 Le Goff and Southern lay more stress on the emancipation of the universities from social pressure.39 But simple views are
unacceptable; no serious historian disputes that the university neither
descends on society from the heavens, nor simply emanates from it as a function of the social forces of production. The university and the society which
environs it interact with each other, they influence one another. Without the
intellectual stimulus of the rationally controlled search for knowledge, there
would be no university. 'But the spirit alone cannot create its body.'40 The
new social institution, the university, could have arisen only in the particular
economic, political, and social circumstances obtaining in certain cities of
Europe in the early Middle Ages.
On the basis of the present state of knowledge, we cannot answer the
question of what the decisive factors were or in which constellation they had
to be combined so that beginners and mature scholars could be fused into a
corporate body which would be guaranteed its rights and privileges by public
authorities. Nevertheless, the histories of the foundation of the first universities do offer some suggestions.
The transformation of private schools of law into the university which first
36 Classen, Studium
(note 4), 25.
37 Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 86; A. Seifert, 'Studium und soziales System', in Schulen
6o4ff.; Arnaldi (ed.) Origini
(note 10), i$tf.
38 Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
8; A. Esch, Die Anfdnge der Universitat im Mittelalter.
Rektoratrede Universitat
Bern 1985 , 8ff.
39 J. Le Goff, Les Intellectuels
au Moyen Age, Le Temps qui court, 3 (Paris, n.d. ), 73; J. Le
Goff, 'Les universites et les pouvoirs publics au moyen age et a la Renaissance', in Rapports
Xlle congres internationaldes
sciences historiques,
vol. Ill, Commissions
 , 189;
R. Southern, 'From Schools to University', in History of Oxford, 35.
40 Classen, Studium
(note 4), 4.
Walter Ruegg
occurred in Bologna might have arisen from the confluence of a number of
external factors. These include the fact that Bologna was a nodal point of
commercial routes and of the ways of pilgrimage from the north to Rome, as
well as the interest of the emperor in the elaboration and application of
Roman law as a means of legitimating his imperial claims. This interest
moved Frederick I Barbarossa in 115 5 to issue Authentica Habita,41 and led to
the strengthening of the municipality of Bologna after the decline of the Holy
Roman Empire. All these external factors contributed to making Bologna
into the seat of a university. No less important was the reputation of famous
teachers throughout the entire twelfth century, which attracted students from
various countries to Bologna. But the organization of a university occurred
only when economically, socially, and politically powerful foreign students
came together to protect their interests collectively against the town and their
teachers.42
In Paris, which, with the consolidation of the Capetian monarchy, became
a political, economic, and cultural capital, the competition among many
schools under different religious authorities led, in the course of the twelfth
century, to a concentration of famous teachers and to a corresponding influx
of students. The kings, one of whom, Louis VII, had himself been a student,
favoured these educational developments. The students were well provided
with food but it was less easy for them to find suitable accommodation; in
response to this situation, colleges for poor students were founded in 1180
and 1186.43 As will be seen in the next chapter, the formation of the university
was above all due to the efforts of the masters, supported by the king and the
pope, to loosen local ecclesiastical supervision and, through the exercise of
joint responsibility, to bring order into the anarchic arrangements for studies.
Following fluctuating conflicts with the chancellor, the religious orders, and
the citizens, between 1208 and 1231, this led also to the public recognition of
the university.44
The royal court in London and the English episcopate employed more
masters (magistri) in the twelfth century than the French monarchy and the
church in France.45 English scholars had studied in Europe; they had a special
preference for Paris.46 What led them, when towards the end of the century
they wished to study in England, to decide on Oxford and not London? The
41 See chapter 3, p. 78.
42 Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
43 Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
79-82; Ferruolo, Origins (note 14), 22—6; 250-4; A. L. Gabriel,
'The Cathedral Schools of Notre Dame', in A. L. Gabriel, Garlandia.
Studies in the History
the Medieval
University
 , 4iff.
44 Cf. S. C. Ferruolo, 'The Paris Statutes of 1215 reconsidered', History of Universities,
11; Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 75ff.
45 J. W. Baldwin, 'The Penetration of University Personnel into French and English Administration at the Time of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Century', Etudes
Islamiques,
44 ,
46 A. L. Gabriel, 'English Masters and Students in Paris during the Twelfth Century', in Gabriel,
(note 43), 1-57.
new History of the University of Oxford also asks this question. Oxford was
a small provincial town, not to be compared with cathedral towns, and certainly not with London. But Oxford did acquire in the 1180s a certain strategic political significance as the seat of the royal administration and of the
ecclesiastical courts. This encouraged some learned lawyers to move to
Oxford and it encouraged some of them to offer instruction in the law.
Within a decade, the Oxford school of law was the only one in England
which was able to attract foreign students, even though they came from educationally backward areas like Friesland and Hungary. These developments
also encouraged one of the best-known theologians of his time, Alexander
Neckam, to take up teaching at Oxford. In 1209, the teachers refused to go on
with their teaching in reaction against some excessive actions by the local
authorities; they ceased their strike only in 1214, after the municipality, either
as a result of the mediation of a papal legate or his command, had granted to
the scholars liberties and privileges like those which were provided in Paris.47
In all three cities, the combination of political and economic advantages
and the deference granted to the scholarly reputation of local teachers and
their educational institutions attracted students and teachers in large numbers
and of high quality. This assured both groups the protection of their interests
against the local authorities. In Paris, it was also a means of constraining the
otherwise unregulated competition among various teachers and schools, and
of bringing about their amalgamation into 'universities'. In each city, the
decisive factor was the interest of the teachers and students, first in a formal
pattern of studies in which they could work on their own responsibility, then
in the settlement of their disputes with the local authorities about freedoms
and privileges, and finally in their support by the central authorities.
In Montpellier, where the school of medicine acquired the standing of a
university at about the same time, the circumstances which attended the consolidation into a unitary corporate body are unclear. Nevertheless, this fourth
of the oldest university cities shares with the others certain essential features;
these were its economic importance, as the area of intersection of the Rhone
valley, Spain, and Provence, a cultural efflorescence, and ultimately a flourishing seat of medicine and law schools which drew students from afar, as well
as its special political position as a fief and outpost of the pope, who, in 1220,
granted the university its statutes through the agency of a cardinal legate.
Where one or other feature or property was absent, such as the presence of
famous teachers or royal or papal support, universities arose only later. This
was the case with Pavia and Padua, which, as economically important entrepots, had well-established schools of law.48 The establishment only in 1346 of
the first university in the Holy Roman Empire at Prague, which was at the
47 Southern, 'From Schools' (note 39), 4-36; R. W. Southern, Robert Grosseteste.
The Growth of
an English Mind in Europe , 56.
48 Walther, 'Anfange des Rechtsstudiums' (note 11), 121-35.
Walter Ruegg
eastern periphery of the empire, although there were numerous politically
and economically powerful German cities which had good schools of their
own in the twelfth century but which were without universities, may be attributed to 'the insufficient support and uninterestedness of the dominant strata
of German society'. These strata regarded noble birth as the criterion for
appointment to higher positions in the church as more important than it was
regarded in France, where 'scholarly distinction could enable even foreigners
and non-nobles to become bishops'.49
These are only hypotheses. A conclusive explanation as to why there was
no university in London and why universities were founded later in Rome
(1303), Cologne (1388), and Mainz (1476) than in Bologna, Oxford, Montpellier, and Salamanca (1218-19) can only be given - if it can ever be given after further source materials have been discovered and analysed, as we
mentioned at the very beginning of this introduction.
EXPECTATIONS OF CHURCH, CROWN, AND MUNICIPALITY
What did the various social agents, the popes, the emperors, the territorial
princes, the bishops, the municipal authorities, the aristocracy, the bourgeoisie, and, in the late Middle Ages, the peasantry on the one hand and the
students and teachers on the other, expect of the universities? What defined
their social role, which was a response to these diverse and often controversial expectations, and which cannot be conceived without taking these conflicts into account?
All of them hoped to gain from scholarly and scientific knowledge support
in their struggle for existence; the political and ecclesiastical powers hoped to
gain support and reinforcement of their dominion, the students and teachers
sought knowledge and social advantage, the residents of university towns
wanted improved well-being. But, for these purposes, there was really no
need for universities.
As Frederick I Barbarossa said in 1155, in his fundamental law regarding
academic liberties, it is by learning that the world is illuminated and the lives
of subjects are shaped towards obedience to God and his servant, the
emperor: quorum scientia mundus illuminatur ad obediendum deo et nobis,
eius ministris, vita subjectorum informatur.50 This rhetorical formulation
delineated very precisely the dual expectations of the highest earthly power.
The symbolism of light, so beloved in the Middle Ages, expresses the view
that scholarship enriches knowledge and gives stability to the social order.
49 J. Ehlers, 'Die hohen Schulen', in P.Weimar (ed.), Die Renaissance der Wissenschaften
12. Jahrhundert,
Ziiricher Hochschulforum Universitat Zurich, E. T. H. Zurich, 2 , 72.
50 P. Kriiger and T. Mommsen (eds.), Corpus iuris civilis vol. II (Berlin, 1877), 5IJ> reprinted in
Kaufmann, Deutsche Universita'ten, vol. I, 165.
Pepo was surely not the founder of the University of Bologna but he was
probably the first person to explain to an emperor - Henry IV - what new
support for order the study of Roman law provides. At a criminal trial, conducted in the presence of the emperor, he protested against a ruling which
decreed the usual punishment of the payment of Wergeld proportionately to
the status of the person who had been killed by saying that the 'sacred laws of
the emperor, i.e. Roman law, in accordance with the natural law of the
equality of human beings, forbids the unequal treatment of a free person and
one who is unfree'. However much Pepo impressed Henry IV with his argument, the emperors were more interested in the provisions of Roman law
which strengthened their fiscal and political powers and they adopted them
obviously with enthusiasm.51
Scholarship and scholars fulfilled such and similar expectations of earthly
and ecclesiastical authorities before universities existed. Indeed, the founding
of universities was regarded by some contemporaries as an impediment to the
genuine cultivation and transmission of scholarly knowledge. The noteworthy theologian and poet, Philippus de Grevia, who became a magister at
the University of Paris in 1206, and who was its chancellor from 1218 to 1236,
complained about his colleagues that
At one time, when each magister taught independently and when the name of
the university was unknown, there were more lectures and disputations and
more interest in scholarly things. Now, however, when you have joined yourselves together in a university, lectures and disputations have become less frequent; everything is done hastily, little is learnt, and the time needed for study is
wasted in meetings and discussions. While the elders debate in their meetings
and enact statutes, the young ones organize villainous plots and plan their nocturnal attacks.52
To be sure, Philippus was not an objective witness since he was the spokesman for the interests of the ecclesiastics, whose right of supervision over
scholarly studies had been diminished by the university. Nevertheless, it was
true that the independent teaching activities of individual masters during the
twelfth century were not injurious to scholarship.
What, however, did the popes and monarchs expect when they conferred
legal recognition on the universities which had already 'grown up' and later
founded others by the grant of privilege? Obviously, corporate bodies made
up of scholars who were granted liberties served their interests better than
teachers who were controlled by the religious orders or their local bishops.
The popes were interested in the universities for three reasons. For one
thing, they wished to strengthen the position of a rationally intelligible doctrine amidst the diverse and mutually contradictory beliefs of the various
51 Schmugge, '"Codicis Iustiniani'" (note n ) , 4—8.
52 Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 76 n. 34.
Walter Ruegg
religious orders and scholars; they were particularly concerned to carry on a
battle against the expanding heresies. They were furthermore desirous of
strengthening the central powers of the papacy against the claims and aspirations of the earthly powers and the regional feudal interests. They were also
concerned with the recruitment of persons who could serve as the staff for
their offices. The curia had acknowledged, as early as the twelfth century, the
value of scholarly education for the solution of the dogmatic and legal problems of a consistent ecclesiastical policy. Scholars became cardinals. Two
popes (Celestine II (1143—4) and Celestine III (1191-8)) were pupils of
Abelard. Another pupil of Abelard, Alexander III (1159-81), whether he was
the famous Colognese canonist Rolandus of Cremona or not, was called 'the
first lawyer-pope, who initiated a new epoch in the history of the papacy'.53
From the thirteenth century onward, the popes had in most instances
attended university and they increasingly surrounded themselves with learned
cardinals.54 Thus, the popes looked upon the university as an institution
which, under their direct jurisdiction and protection, could organize and
control studies and could as a result deal with the three tasks in which the
papacy was so interested. The increasing appointment of academically
trained persons to ecclesiastical offices is dealt with in chapter 8 in a detailed
How could the popes draw into their service not only individual university
graduates but the universities as institutions? It was easiest- one would think
- where they themselves had created the universities. This, however, occurred only very exceptionally; it happened for the first time in Toulouse in 1229,
when they imposed on the count, once the war against the Albigensians was
over, in order to build a bulwark against heresy, the founding and the financing of a university as a punishment. As is shown in the next chapter, the new
foundation did not perform this task successfully. The popes acted directly
only in Rome in 1245, when they founded their own curial university. In
contrast with this, in the cases of other university foundations, they presented
themselves by the issuance of a charter as their legal founders and their
protectors; they were thereby able to bring them under their control. This
included the institution of apostolic curators who were intended to protect
the privileges which the popes had granted to the universities from being
abridged or infringed on by local actions.55 The popes also used the universities as a means of diffusion for decretals; they did this by sending their
decrees to the universities for treatment and diffusion through lectures.56
The use of prebends, accorded to incumbents of ecclesiastical appointment
53 P. Classen, 'Rom und Paris Kurie und Universitat im 12. und 13. Jahrhundert', in Classen,
(note 4), 130.
54 Miethke, 'Kirche' (note 4), 294-303; J. Verger, Les Universites
au moyen age, Collection
SUP, PHistorien 14 , 70; R. Avi-Yonah, 'Career Trends of Parisian Masters of
Theology', History of Universities,
6 , 47—64.
55 Miethke, 'Kirche' (note 4), 314.
56 Classen, Studium
(note 4), 292.
for the purposes of study at university, had deeper implications for the affairs
of the church. The popes helped both the universities and the students who
were priests and monks, and at the same time they placed them under obligation to themselves by exempting the recipients of prebends from the obligations of parochial residence ordinarily associated with a prebend. Papal
support for study by the assignment of prebends was given a fixed
institutional form in the fourteenth century by the periodical communication
to the pope of the list of students and graduates, i.e. the rotuli.57 'The entire
material existence of the academic institutions depended on the prebendal
provision for their members by the church.'58
The award of the licentia ubique docendi by the studia generalia which
were recognized by the pope - described in the next two chapters - had
far-reaching historical significance. It is true that, from the very beginning,
the qualification for teaching, which was, in principle, valid throughout the
entire realm of papal Christendom, was, in fact, subject to restrictions and
exceptions. The popes themselves limited the right for the benefit of those
who had been awarded the qualification from Paris and Bologna. In addition
to this limitation on the universal validity of teaching, the professorial
colleges of the various universities sought to protect themselves from outside
competition by the numerus clausus, which limited the appointment of ordinary professorships.59 Furthermore, the authorities of particular universities
refused to grant the right to teach anywhere in order to retain the services of
their masters for their own universities.60 The universal validity did not in
fact apply so much to the appointment to teach as it did to the aptitude to
teach. Even today, this is still the case and it reveals in a literal sense the
fundamental significance of the venia ubique legendi for the university as an
institution and indeed for the modern profession of learning as such.
Through the papally legitimated universality of the validity of its final examinations, the university as an institution acquired the responsibility for the
conduct of courses of study and final examinations according to a standard
which obtained far beyond its own locality. This not only made the universities more autonomous but also had considerable impact on the history of
learning and culture. The universal value of the quest for knowledge and of
the transmission of knowledge, which has been recognized ever since antiquity, was thereby given an institutional setting in the university. It has
remained so ever since then, even down to our own times; it is the common
task, the responsibility - for good or ill - of the universal community of the
57 A. Borst, 'Krise und Reform der Universitaten im friihen 14. Jahrhundert', Konstanzer
fur Hochschulfragen,
9 , 55; Verger, Universites
(note 54), i28ff.; D. E. R. Watt, 'University Clerks and Rolls of Petition for Benefices', Speculum,
34 , zi3ff.
58 G. Ritter, Die Heidelberger
Universita't, vol. I, Das Mittelalter
 , 44.
59 See chapter 5, p. 145. Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, i4ff., comes to the conclusion: 'The
Mastership was reduced to a universally recognized honour, but nothing more.'
60 Borst, 'Krise und Reform' (note 57), 57.
Walter Ruegg
holders of advanced university degrees, i.e. of the scientific and scholarly
community, the community of learning.
Henceforth, conflicts between divergent doctrines, which ever since the
twelfth century had often resulted in the condemnation of philosophical doctrines and teachers, or which two centuries later found expression in the
rivalry between 'the ancients' and 'the moderns',61 were fought out within the
university, even though the external authorities had to put into practice the
judicial consequences and often had also to settle the internal quarrels. Conflicts among scholars with each other and with persons and institutions
outside the universities have contributed to the development of academic
institutions. The fragile structures which emerged from these conflicts were
fortified by the rules and practices for the regulation of conflict within universities and permitted the studium to take its place as the third power alongside
the sacerdotium and the regnum.
The kings of France, England, and Spain, and later Portugal, Austria,
Bohemia, Poland, and Hungary, as well as, following their example, dukes
and princes, expected of their universities effective intellectual and individual
help in establishing and consolidating the governmental and administrative
institutions which they needed to overcome the centrifugal forces embodied
in the landed and urban aristocracies. It is true that they often justified their
founding of universities by reference to their concern for the young persons of
their realms, whom they wished to save from the costly and burdensome
alternative of studying abroad.62 But they were, in fact, much more concerned to associate them with their own territorial policies, as happened in
extreme form in the case of Frederick IPs foundation of the University of
Naples in 1224 and his attempt to dissolve the University of Bologna.63 His
prototype of a state university collapsed after five years and became a widespread institutional model only three centuries later.
What did the cities expect of the universities? The latter defended the collective interests of scholars and masters against the municipal authorities and
citizenry through privileges, exemption from tolls and taxes, the fixing of
maximal rents, and other constraints on municipal interests. Initially, the
municipalities, for their part, did not need the universities to provide them
with the knowledge which was necessary for the intellectual and legal
support of their economic activities, ranging from the elementary arithmetic
and bare literacy needed by merchants to the mastery of the language of
documents by notaries and scribes, and to the higher education needed for
61 See chapter 13, p. 438. In Heidelberg, after 1440 there were heavy discussions and also fighting,
which were concluded by the intervention of the Kurfursten
and the institution of the rival
studies of both viae\ see P. O. Kristeller, 'Scholastik und Humanismus an der Universitat
Heidelberg', in G. Keil, B. Moeller, and W. Trusen (eds.), Der Humanismus
und die oberen
Fakultaten,
Mitteilung XIV der Kommission fur Humanismusforschung , 6.
62 Borst, 'Krise und Reform' (note 57), 55.
63 See chapter 3, p. 54.
the professions and offices of trans-local scope. All these needs could be satisfied without any contribution from the universities.
Where, however, famous masters and their schools had established themselves as useful for municipal policy and economy, the municipal authorities
had an interest in more stable and continuing regulations than were possible
through ad hoc arrangements. From the late thirteenth century on, the big
commercial towns were well aware of the advantage of having universities
which made provision for lawyers who could solve legal problems unknown
to common law, as well as civil servants who could be a match for the
princely authorities. They also had an interest in keeping the sons of citizens
who had chosen an intellectual vocation at their own local university. Thus,
they quickly recognized the advantage of the reliable partnership which was
offered by the universities and they exerted themselves to gain control over
the universities. In the city states, professors were more and more often paid
salaries by the municipal government64 and the university came under the
control of local officialdom.65
Basle offers an interesting example of the expectation which in the late
Middle Ages led to the founding of universities by municipalities. In 1431, the
Council — which convened in Basle - established what was unique in the
history of the medieval universities, namely a conciliar university, which was
later dissolved, together with the Council, in 1449. After Aeneas Sylvius, who
had been a scribe in the Council, became Pope Pius II in 1458, some of the
Basle graduates of the conciliar university thought that it was a propitious
moment to establish a municipal university. It was fairly easy, although not
inexpensive, to obtain papal approval together with the reassignment of the
prebends for professorial salaries. It was more difficult to persuade the sceptical citizenry of the value of a university of their own. They were persuaded
in 1460 to proceed with the foundation of a university less by an appeal to
their pride and the value of such an institution for Christian ideals than they
were by economic and political arguments. They were more interested by the
prospect of facilitating the entry of the sons of the citizens of Basle into the
medical and legal professions and to higher ecclesiastical appointments and
by the improvement in the competitive position of Basle vis-a-vis Freiburg im
Breisgau in regional, political, and economic affairs - Freiburg im Breisgau
had already decided to have a university but had not yet opened it. A not
inconsiderable investment had already been made and they anticipated the
economic benefits of an influx of wealthy students, which might help to offset
the economic decline of Basle. The citizens of Basle were told that, if the
64 H. Koller, 'Stadt und Universitat im Spatmittelalter', in E. Maschke and J. Sydow (eds.), Stadt
und Universitat im Mittelalter und in der fruhen Neuzeit, Stadt in der Geschichte, 3 , 87; T. Bender (ed.)> The University and the City. From Medieval Origin to the
Present , 3-58.
65 See chapter 4, pp. 96-7.
Walter Ruegg
university had one thousand students, they would spend an additional 20,000
guldens there every year.66
The calculation did not work straight away. The prebends which had been
promised by the pope were not all vacated by their local incumbents. The
foreign students who came to Basle were fewer than anticipated and there
were, above all, fewer wealthy ones. This situation is illuminated by a contract of appointment from the first years of the university: it stipulates that
the maximal salary would be paid on the condition that the professor in
question would bring with him three very noble students of canon law and
forty high-born students of civil law - and their attendents.67 It was only a
half-century later that the university, which drew into its immediate environment a very successful book-publishing industry, showed itself to be an
economically viable investment for the city.
EXPECTATIONS OF SCHOLARS AND STUDENTS
What did scholars expect of the university? We have seen that it was not the
amor sciendi, the desire for knowledge as such, but rather the uncertain
status of students and teachers which was the occasion for the foundation of
the first universities. The protection of the rights of the individual scholar,
which imperial legislation assured to foreign scholars, became a dead-letter if
the emperor was unable to enforce it. It was really the organized collective
representation of the interests of the scholars before the local municipal and
ecclesiastical officials, given force in extreme cases by the collective emigration to another town, which gave the individual the freedom and security
from material exploitation and official arbitrariness which he needed for his
scholarly studies. Membership in the university conferred, as has already
been remarked and as is shown in greater detail in chapters 7 and 8, a number
of legal and economic privileges. The rotuli, which have already been mentioned and which were compiled periodically by the university, brought substantial benefits to the members of the university. 'University education then as now - offered the average student primarily an opportunity for a
prospective prebendal income.'68
This exaggerated statement does apply to the large number of students
who aspired to a position in the church or who already held one. But lay
students were not altogether rare in universities of the Bologna type, and in
the fifteenth century they became quite common in all universities, as shown
in chapter 7. They, too, expected from their studies at university better quali-
66 E. Bonjour, Die Universitat
Basel von den Anfdngen
bis zur Gegenwart
1460—1960 (Basle,
i960), 21-38. Cf. Louvain: J. Paquet, 'Bourgeois et universitaires a la fin du Moyen-Age', Le
Moyen-Age,
67 , 312-40.
67 J. Rosen, 'Die Universitat Basel im Staatshaushalt 1460-1530', Easier
Zeitschrift
Geschichte
und Altertumskunde,
72 , 177.
68 Ritter, Heidelberger
Universitat
(note 58), 44.
fixations and - if they did not come from the traditional higher strata improved opportunities for appointment to rewarding public offices. For this
reason, they were very interested in an ordered course of studies such as a
university could offer and they even insisted upon it - in Bologna, for
example, where the student universitates in the beginning appointed the professors and supervised the punctuality and adequacy of their performance of
their teaching obligations through the threat of fines, for the payment of
which professors had to supply guarantees of payment through prior deposits
of security money.
The social role of the medieval university consisted primarily of training
for more rational forms of the exercise of authority in church, government,
and society. This seems to contradict the fact that the courses of study, the
examinations, and the degrees were not oriented to the provision of any
training for occupations other than those of university teachers. The bachelor's degree as the culmination of the first stage of academic training certified
nothing beyond the capacity and the right to serve as an apprentice in the art
of teaching in a particular field under the supervision of a magister. The
master's and doctor's degrees testified to the capacity and, as implied by the
licentia ubique docendi, the formal right to deliver independent academic
lectures, as well as, in many universities, the obligation to deliver such
lectures in one's own faculty for a period of at least two years.69 Thus, university teachers became a status group which transcended local and disciplinary boundaries and which possessed a distinctive corpus of knowledge
and enjoyed a high degree of prestige; they came to conceive of themselves as
a university elite with their own ethos appropriate to their status, and they
were also accepted as such by society and its rulers. Symbolically, this internal university arrangement of academic qualification has persisted, as a
reminder of its medieval origin, in the convocation at the University of
Oxford, the highest governing organ of the university. It still comprises the
teaching staff but it also includes the recipients of the degrees of masters of
arts and doctors of theology, law, and medicine who are not active as
members of the university as well as those recipients of other academic
degrees who apply for it. Nowadays, the powers of this body are limited
mainly to the election of the chancellor and of a professor of poetry.
Outside the universities, academic degrees were not entitlements to the
practice of any particular profession. The study of theology was not a precondition for the priesthood but it could, where noble ancestry or charismatic
qualities were absent, render it easier to enter higher ecclesiastical offices. As
chapter n shows, physicians with university training were a minority in the
Middle Ages but one which regarded itself as an elite; in the physicians' guild,
however, they did not receive precedence over those without academic
69 See chapter 5, p. 147.
Walter Ru'egg
degrees. In certain Italian university cities, it was necessary, in order to gain
an appointment as a judge, to be educated in law, but not necessarily attested
through the possession of an academic degree but rather through evidence of
the possession of the most important law-books.70 In general, the exercise of
judicial office or of the profession of notary or teaching in a learned institution did not require an academic degree. Nevertheless, study at a university
was so attractive to those who wished to engage in such activities as were
practised in the public interest, and which could not be mastered by concrete
experience or by tradition, that only relatively few students aimed to enter the
academic profession as a lifelong career, which was in fact the professional
objective postulated by university education.
At first, it was the knowledge and skill acquired in a faculty - in addition to
social origin - that facilitated access to the performance of a corresponding
practical activity. For the male offspring of the aristocracy and the grande
bourgeoisie - as chapters 7 and 9 show - attendance at a university became in
the fifteenth century a more or less extended episode in the predominantly
knightly education received among peers. But a considerable percentage of
the other students, who were increasingly coming from the middle classes,
because of the high costs did not complete their studies to the point of taking
a degree either. In the fifteenth century, the academic degree was recognized
as evidence of scholarly qualification to such an extent that it became important in the competition for appointment to ecclesiastical and secular posts. In
the filling of important pulpits and offices, the class of the degree was also
taken into account. Thus, university education, at first without a degree and
later with one, became a characteristic mark of professional elites engaged in
the cure of souls, legal practice, governmental administration, medical care,
and education.
Of course, it was not university education alone which determined the
status of a practitioner of a learned profession; membership in a traditional
ruling family or circle, as well as wealth and income and the prestige of the
particular occupation were also relevant to the status of an individual, as is
shown in chapter 8. Nevertheless, academic education by the end of the
Middle Ages, thanks to the universities, became a mark of social distinction,
and the doctorate approximated the noble title as a claim to deference.
With this, we return to the significance of the amor sciendi for the university. The social value of academic education for the professions, which is one
of the chief interests of present-day research, could only be realized by the
university because the learning and teaching of the rational pursuit of truth
were the substance for which institutional regulations and collegially ordered
courses of study provided the context. The heart of the university is the illfamed ivory tower; its manifest function is to provide for the Aristotelian bios
70 Walther, 'Anfange des Rechtsstudiums' (note n ) , 132.
theoretikos, intellectual training for its own sake. That its latent function is
the preparation of professional experts for practical affairs, for the development of the bios praktikos, for which there is such a great demand, cannot
belie the fact - indeed it confirms it - of the social value of the pure striving for
knowledge. This practical function postulates the fundamental importance of
the amor sciendi. Otherwise, the university, as a corporate body serving only
material interests and freedoms, would have shared the fate of other medieval
institutions; it would have long since disappeared. It was the collective
responsibility for the organization and discipline of the striving for knowledge, of the studium, which gave some meaning to the liberties and privileges
of scholars and masters, transcended their immediate material interests, and
assured the persistence of the autonomy of the university in its most distinctive activity, which is that of scholarly and scientific teaching and research.
ORIGINS AND LIMITS OF FACULTY ORGANIZATION
When one seeks the earliest evidence of a collective responsibility exercised by
the governing bodies of universities for the organization and supervision of
the studium, one comes across a feature which down to the very present has
been a criterion for the recognition of institutions of higher education as
universities or their institutional equivalents. This is the award of academic
degrees, and particularly the doctorate, on the basis of a decision by an
academic committee (collegium) to which the responsibility for such a decision has been assigned.
In Paris in 1213, the chancellor issued the 'Magna Charta of the university';
in 1231, it was incorporated in the bull Parens scientiarum by Pope Gregory
IX. It confirms the obligation of the chancellor to obtain the vote of the
professors in matters connected with appointments for the teaching of theology and canon law; there had to be a collegial examination of candidates for
appointment as university teachers.71 It is true that the relationship of the
individual teacher and his pupil remained basic to the medieval university.
Subsequently, as in the past - as shown in chapter 6 - a person could become a
student only in so far as he attached himself to a particular teacher. But, in
contrast with earlier periods, it was no longer left to the individual teacher anymore than to the ecclesiastical authorities - to assess the performance of
his pupils. Henceforward, the teacher had to present his pupil to the colleagues in his discipline and the latter had to decide whether they should
recommend to the chancellor the award of the licentia docendi and the
acceptance of the pupil as a colleague. This could only be done once there was
proof of the candidate's blameless mode of life and his progression through a
proper course of studies.72
71 See, for this and what follows, Verger, 'Naissance' (note 4), 8off.
72 CUP, vol. I, 137, no. 79.
Walter Kuegg
Collegial responsibility for decisions requires a minimum of common
criteria for proper collegial behaviour as well as for the substance and procedure for reaching decisions. The examination for an ordered course of
study was necessarily dependent - as it still is today - on a set of regulations
which specified the required minimal period of study and the substance to be
covered for each degree within each faculty. These regulations also specified
rights and obligations of the teaching corps, the apparel to be worn at examinations, the appropriate ceremonies and burial and memorial services for
deceased students and colleagues, the institutional obligations, the schedule
of 'ordinary' and 'extraordinary' lectures, disciplinary powers, and the right
of professors to strike against interventions by political authorities. Such
collegially enacted and sworn rules of the University of Paris were recognized
by Pope Innocent HI in 1208-9 and then again in 1215 by the papal legate,
Robert of Courson; they were confirmed and specified in 1231 in the bull
Parens scientarium.73
In Bologna, prior to 1219, the collegial collective doctoral examinations by
the teachers of law formed the 'seed around which the community of doctors
became crystallized'.74 They also served in the co-optation into the circle of
professors, but, unlike the first Parisian statutes, through a real examination
by the professors in the presence of the ecclesiastical holders of the licentia
docendi.75 Nevertheless, in universities which followed the Bolognese
pattern, the teachers did not form a corporate body with the power of fixing
the statutes. Rather, it was the student corporations which, by their statutes,
fixed the regulations governing courses of study and punished, by means of
fines, as already noted, the unpunctuality or substantively deficient fulfilment
of teaching obligations. Other obligations were fixed by municipal statutes. It
was only at the beginning of the fourteenth century that colleges made up of a
limited number of teaching and non-teaching doctors were formed; these
colleges were later reserved for citizens of the municipality. The oldest
known statutes of the Bolognese college of lawyers date from the year 1397.76
The problem of why the professorial colleges in the universities of the
Bolognese type were able to establish themselves against the student corporations and the political authorities only relatively late, and then only in a
limited measure, is still unsolved. Various causes have been adduced, which
can all, in the last analysis, be reduced to the fact that in these universities the
scientiae lucrativae, law and medicine, were most prominent and were to a
large extent taught and practised by laymen. The latter were more dependent
on fees and on fixed salaries than were the teachers of the artes, canon law,
73 CUP, vol. I, 67ft, no. 8; 78ft., no. 20; 136-9, no. 79.
74 Weimar, 'Doktorwiirde' (note 13), 433.
75 G. Cencetti, 'La Laurea nelle universita medievali', Studi e memorie per la storia
deWUniversitd di Bologna, 16 , 259.
76 Weimar, 'Doktorwiirde' (note 13), 441
and theology, who drew their income from prebends and who were dominant
in the universities based on the Parisian pattern. Furthermore, the link
between teaching and practice was more direct among lawyers and physicians. 'Medieval legal education was not directed towards the training of law
teachers but of professional legal practitioners.'77 Accordingly, their colleges
of doctors were open to the membership of practitioners and performed professional functions rather than those of collegial responsibility for the
studium. It was the same in medicine, as is shown in chapter n .
Nevertheless, a number of questions remain unanswered. In universities of
the Parisian type as well, the teachers received lecture fees and fixed salaries,
in other faculties as well as those of law and medicine. They, too, trained not
only academic teachers but also future practitioners. In this case, as well as in
the other, the academic degree confirmed nothing else than the capacity, and
partly also the obligation, to teach the acquired knowledge and skills; the
teachers of a faculty were collectively responsible for the assessment of the
capacity to reach. Was it perhaps the lack of a far-reaching collective responsibility which accounts for the powerlessness of the professors in the Bolognese type of university and which led, in the fifteenth century, to the decline
of the law school at Bologna, where nepotism became the rule in the doctors'
colleges?78 Was it, on the other hand, this lack of collegial responsibility for
the studium which explains why new intellectual currents such as Averroism
and humanism met with less resistance in Italian universities than was the
case among universities of the Parisian type? In the latter, the faculties of arts
became firmly attached to certain doctrines so that the composition of the
teaching body was less influenced by social origin and professional interests
than it was by doctrine and the particular form taken by the amor sciendi.
The faculties provided the institutional framework of the collegial responsibility for the studium. 'In the faculties, the teachers, who were assured of
autonomy, and the students in a given discipline were amalgamated into a
common body.'79 The origins, significance, and development of the four
typical faculties of the medieval university, the artes, medicine, law (both
fields), and theology, are analysed in detail in chapter 4 and chapters 10 to
13. Why, however, were these intellectual disciplines taken into the universities and not others?
If 'social needs' had been taken into account, technological sciences like
architecture, military technology, shipbuilding, machine manufacture, and
mining, as well as the applied natural sciences like agriculture, veterinary
.medicine, and pharmacy, would have been taken up in the universities. For
the cultivation of these disciplines, which were fundamental to society in the
77 Walther, 'Anfange des Rechtsstudiums' (note 11), 161.
78 Cf. Cencetti, 'Laurea' (note 74), 273.
79 J. Verger, 'Fakultat, -en', in Lexikon
des Mittelalters,
vol. Ill , cols.
Walter Ruegg
Middle Ages, the politically and economically powerful classes would have
had to have been as interested in the scientific knowledge and developments
and in the training of experts in these fields as they were in the subject-matters
of the four faculties. Once more we see that it was not the demand for socially
applicable knowledge which led to the foundation of the universities so much
as the existence of certain disciplines which had shown themselves to be of
value for dealing with certain social tasks.
What was the reason for the exclusion of the technological disciplines from
the teaching programme of the faculties? At first sight, the explanation seems
to lie in the medieval classification of the sciences, which made distinctions
between the artes liberates and the artes mechanicae, between the 'liberal' and
the 'mechanical' arts. But this is not necessarily derogatory. As early as the
seventh century, mechanics was considered to be 'knowledge or theory in
which, in a subtle manner, the fabrica rerum omnia, the creation of all things,
comes together'.80 In the twelfth century, Hugh of Saint Victor (1096-1141),
attributed an even more subtle meaning to mechanics; in his Didascalion, he
said that mechanics is the science by which man imitates nature in order to
assist him in the satisfaction of his bodily needs. In his classification he
attributed the same standing to the artes mechanicae as he did to the artes
liberates. He distinguished seven sciences in 'mechanical' philosophy (which
he placed alongside natural philosophy, moral philosophy, and the philosophy
of language). Three of these sciences were concerned with things outside the
body. The first was weaving, which dealt with all textiles (all materials used
for clothing); the second dealt with all kinds of apparatus (such as pottery,
stone-cutting, and masonry up to architecture, mining, woodwork, and
metallurgy); and the third was nautics, which included all kinds of commerce.
Four of these mechanical sciences serve bodily needs: the cultivation of the
soil, hunting (including all forms of the preparation of food), medicine, and
the theatrical arts. In 1250, Robert Kilwardby, a magister of the University of
Paris and later archbishop of Canterbury, modified this scheme in his De ortu
scientiarum by excluding 'pagan' theatrical art and assigning a special place of
its own to architecture; at the same time, he replaced the excessively narrow
categories with others which were more accurate in substance. For example,
he substituted the art of textiles for weaving, commerce for navigation,
farming for cultivation of the soil, and cooking for hunting. The artes
mechanicae were regarded by Kilwardby as a part of philosophy, as they were
by Hugh of Saint Victor, and as a part of the study of human things (as distinct
from the study of divine things, which was theology).81 On the basis of this
80 B. Bischoff, 'Eine verschollene Einteilung der Wissenschaften' Archives d'histoire
doctrinale et
litteraire du Moyen-Age
 , 16.
81 R. Kilwardby, De ortu scientiarum,
ed. A. G. Judy , Cap. 34-41, 122-37. Cf.
J. A. Weisheipl, 'The Nature, Scope and Classification of the Sciences', Studia
Medtewistyczne, 18 , 85-101.
way of looking at the various kinds of knowledge, the university could have
incorporated into itself from the very beginning not only the technological
sciences but also the economic and empirical sciences as well as other practical
specialities such as are not unusual in contemporary universities.
As it turned out, only one ars mechanica, namely medicine, became a university subject. As shown in chapter n , medical schools were formed in the
course of the preoccupation with Arabic medicine and with the aid of Arab
and Jewish physicians. A Spanish philosopher and translator of Arabic commentaries on Aristotle, Dominicus Gundissalinus, in his De divisione philosophiae, written in about 1150, proposed that, instead of the distinction
between artes liberates and artes mechanicae, every science should be divided
into a theoretical and a practical part and that medicine, which has to do with
human beings, who are the peak of nature, should be ranked as the highest of
the natural sciences82 and above the artes liberates. But this classification was
not accepted. When it was desired to accord a high rank to medicine, it was
placed among the artes liberates. Thus, in the preamble to the renewal of the
statutes of the medical faculty of the University of Montpellier in 1239, medicine was compared with a star which illuminates the firmament of the sciences
of the artes liberates with especial brightness.83 As is mentioned in chapter 11,
the study of the artes and the study of medicine were closely associated with
each other and, in the Italian universities, they were placed in the same faculty.
Many classifications of the sciences distinguished between practical medicine,
including surgery, which would assign it to the artes mechanicae, and speculative medicine, which was to be regarded as being of the artes liberates,84
Thomas Aquinas, in his commentary on Boethius, De Trinitate, written
between 1255 and 1259, rejected this distinction. Like alchemy, agriculture,
and all sciences of this sort, medicine used the properties of natural things, like
a handmaiden for practical purposes and it was thus subordinate to the natural
sciences. All the mechanical sciences, to which medicine belonged, aimed not
at knowledge but at a practical use and should therefore be considered as activities which belonged to the unfree part of the human being, i.e. to his body.
They should therefore be regarded not as free arts but as servile arts, as artes
serviles.85 This theoretical distinction offered an argument welcome to those
engaged in polemics against medicine. Petrarch, in his polemic, composed in
1355, 'against a physician', contrasted agriculture, as a useful ars mechanica,
with harmful medicine.86 Salutati, in his De nobilitate legum et medicinae of
82 D. Gundissalinus, De divisione
philosophiae,
ed. L. Baur , 84—8.
83 Cartulaire de I'Universite de Montpellier,
vol. I, (Montpellier, 1890), 185, no. 4.
84 Library of Wolfenbuttel, Cod Guelf, 567, chart. XVs., fol. ii3r.
85 Thomas Aquinas, Commentarii in Boethii De Trinitate, Quaest. II, Art. 1, English translation
by A. Maurer, St Thomas
The Division and Methods
of the Sciences
1953; 4th edn 1986), 19-2.2.
86 F. Petrarca, Invectiva
contra medicum,
ed. P. G. Ricci , L. I. Cap. V; L. II, Cap.
Walter Ruegg
1399, based his argument regarding the superiority of jurisprudence on the
attribution of medicine, for which he invoked Averroes (Ibn Rushd), to the
category of the artes mechanicae?7
Why did medicine remain the only ars mecbanica taught in the university?
Even architecture, which was classified with medicine by Varro (116-27 BC)
among the (nine) artes liberates, required a considerable amount of theoretical knowledge, particularly knowledge of mathematics, which was not
inferior to the arithmetic and geometry taught in the quadrivium and which
was superior to them in many respects.88 In a comparison of the styles of
scholastic philosophy and Gothic architecture, Panofsky traced their similarity to the common mental habit, the habitus of the philosophers and the
architects. Panofsky said that the scholastic mode of thought affected the
outlook of architects either through their own experience in schools and
universities or through its absorption from the general cultural life of their
times.89 In fact, it is possible to demonstrate direct relations with the university only for a few master-builders. The latter, in their work in university
towns on the construction of important churches and defence works, had
charge of technologically, artistically, and organizationally demanding enterprises. These responsibilities afforded them a status in society which could
call forth the envy of university teachers. From the thirteenth century on,
there was an unprecedented increase in the amount of building. Masterbuilders became very prominent in the planning and supervision of large projects and enjoyed high social esteem as the heads of the building departments
of municipalities and princely and royal courts. These projects gave rise to a
great demand for architects who possessed not only practical but also theoretical knowledge.90
Neither the demands of society for architects nor the subject itself nor the
classification of the sciences can explain the exclusion of architecture from
the subjects taught in universities and the same is true for the other artes
mechanicae.91 There is no lack of ancient texts which would have permitted a
theoretical justification of their inclusion in the syllabuses and a corresponding provision of teaching. Vitruvius offered the point of departure for a
scientific treatment of the art of building. Such a treatment was indeed under-
87 C. Salutati, Denobilitatelegumetmedicinae,
De verecundia,
ed. E. Garin , 2.4,
88 L. Mojon, St Johannsen,
Saint Jean de Cerlier,
Beitrage zum Bauwesen
Mittelalters
 , 23.
89 E. Panofsky, Gothic Architecture
and Scholasticism,
Wimmer Lectures 1948 , 21—8.
90 Mojon, St johannsen
(note 88), 20—7; M . Warnke, Ban und Klosterbau,
Soziologie
mittelalterlichen
Architektur
nach den Schriftquellen
 , 131-45.
91 For a comprehensive overview of the artes mechanicae
with an extensive bibliography, see
E. Whitney, 'Paradise Restored, The Mechanical Arts from Antiquity through the Thirteenth
Century', Transactions
of the American
Philosophical
80, 1 , 1-169.
taken by the private scholar and artist, Leon Battista Alberti, in his book De
re aedificatoria of 1452. There were also the potentialities for a theoretical
treatment of agriculture in Albertus Magnus's De vegetabilibus et plantis libri
(VII), a botanical work of 1256, as well as in the widely known standard
works on 'agriculture' by Walter of Henley (Horsebonderie, c. 1250) and
Peter of Crescenci's Ruralia commoda (c. 1306), which was based on a discussion of Aristotle, Varro, and Columella. They all presupposed a university education but they did not become the subject-matter of such a programme of studies. This cannot be attributed to their objective, unlike
medicine, of producing material artefacts. After all, the established university
subjects of the quadrivium and physics - as is shown in chapter 10.2 - developed optical, astronomical, and musical instruments, which served practical
purposes as well as research.
Perhaps we should not take the scholastic classification of the different
kinds of knowledge so seriously. They also either made no room at all for the
very important discipline of jurisprudence or made it into a subdivision of the
trivium of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric or alternatively of practical philosophy, neither of which was commensurate with its importance in the structure of the university. It is difficult to relate closely to each other the theoretical classifications of knowledge and the organization of intellectual activities
in the university. This is true even for the artes liberates, which, from late
antiquity through the Carolingian educational reforms and up to the twelfth
century, were thought to be the summum of pagan science and philosophy
and inferior only to theology. In the thirteenth century, the triumphant Aristotelian philosophy expelled them from their prominent position or assigned
to them a subordinate position in the scholastic classification of kinds of
knowledge.92 The latter was utterly inconsistent with the name of the arts
faculty and it became consistent with the programme of teaching of that
faculty only when in 1253 - as is shown in chapter 10.1 - large numbers of the
writings of Aristotle were admitted to the syllabus of the arts faculty of the
University of Paris.
The persistence of the patterns of four faculties of the medieval university
into the nineteenth century cannot be explained by the scholastic classification of types of knowledge or by the distinction between 'free' and
'mechanical' sciences or between 'speculative' and 'mechanical' philosophy.
Rather, the adherence to the scheme of the four faculties is a result of the
fundamental significance of the amor sciendi. Faculties emerged only where
there were previously schools which transmitted knowledge as a public good
and where attendence was basically open to everyone capable of performing
at the required intellectual standard. Even the practically oriented field of
92 R. Mclnerny, 'Beyond the Liberal Arts', in L.Wagner (ed.), The Seven Liberal Arts in the
Middle Ages , 257^; C. La Fleur, Quatre introductions a la philosophie au XHle siecle .
Walter Ruegg
medicine developed into a scientific discipline only when knowledge based on
the study of theories of natural philosophy and medicine drawn from ancient
and Arabic-Jewish texts, and from empirical observation, was introduced.
The same thing happened in the schools of law. They, too, could become so
attractive internationally only to the extent that universities were founded,
when the reception of Roman law opened up their content, so that the derivation and exercise of jurisprudential principles and modes of thought
became more important in teaching than the knowledge of formulae necessary for direct application in the practice of the law.
It was very different in building construction and in other artes mechanicae. In these, admission and training were dominated by guilds or corporate
bodies formed on the basis of status; admission was often limited by connections of kinship. They were, moreover, oriented immediately towards the
formation of practical occupational skills. In these fields, medieval societies
did not provide generally accessible schools from which universities or university faculties could have grown. However much the hierarchical status
system of medieval society affected the social composition of the student
bodies and the profession of university teaching, in comparison with other
spheres of life the universities did display a considerable degree of openness
and even, indeed, of equality. This was not least a consequence of their
manifest occupational objective, which was the acquisition and teaching of
scientific and scholarly knowledge, while the acquisition of a professional or
official qualification for an occupational activity within the framework of the
hierarchical society was only a secondary objective or by-product.
As a matter of fact, a comparison between the socially no less relevant
'mechanical' sciences, which were transmitted through guild-like arrangements, and the subjects taught at university shows the significance for the
development of academic disciplines of the opportunities allowed by the schole
for leisure as an emancipation from the immediate care of gaining one's daily
bread which is characteristic of ordinary occupations. The preoccupation with
the theoretical principles of the divine order of the universe and with the scholarly study of human things, freed from practical interests, was directly derived
from the categories of Greek philosophy. This derivation notwithstanding, the
search for the fundamental forms of the rational interpretation of reality is a
characteristic feature of the scientific and scholarly methods of all the faculties.
This search was also the basis of the peculiar idea of the medieval university
that its fundamental structure was the outcome of a reform.
REFORMATIO IN MELIUS'. THE ALPHA AND OMEGA OF
THE UNIVERSITY
The first statutory regulations of the University of Paris, promulgated in 1215,
arose in connection with the effort 'to reform and improve' the condition of
the Parisian schools (ut statui Parisiensium scholarum in melius reformando
impenderemus operam efficacem). As Classen showed in 1967, reformatio
meant not only the re-establishment of dissolved universities and the reenactment of old statutes but also the act which led to the founding or the
statutory constitution or ordering of a university.93 The officials who exercised supervisory powers over the universities in the Italian city states were
often called the reformatores studii.94 Reformatio had been used ever since
the tenth century for the monastic reforms in its original meaning of the
restoration of the proper or fundamental form. It meant the same for the
universities; from the very beginning they had the task of realizing their
proper form, their underlying idea, in the Platonic sense, or their entelechy, in
the Aristotelian sense.
How could this, in fact, be done? On a very general level, it could be done
by accepting models in which these proper forms had been embodied. This
meant that, for the universities founded later, the patterns and regulations of
either of the two most successful universities, Paris and Bologna, should be
reproduced, at least in part, in detail. As is made clear in the chapters which
follow, this explains the uniformity of the organization into faculties as well
as of the courses of study, the degrees, the programmes of study, and the
modes of teaching, which differ from each other only in minor respects. This
astonishing unanimity as well as the remarkable phenomenon that one can
classify the medieval universities as being of the Bolognese, of the Parisian, or
of a mixed type is not attributable to any external unifying authority. Neither
the emperor nor the pope was in a position, like a contemporary 'university
planner', to lay down an ideal version of a Christian university and to carry it
out in every detail! Rather, the first reformationes were the result of negotiations with various local individuals and institutions, churches, secular
princes, municipal authorities, professors, and students of the various schools
and nations. Later, they quite understandably turned to regulations which,
having proved themselves in one place, might also have been equally applicable elsewhere. They had, however, to work them out with the other parties
to the negotiations or at least to adapt them to local circumstances. The
situation was different in the case of the first universities. These had no
immediately available models. As a result they fabricated, as I mentioned at
the beginning, historical forerunners in order to legitimate themselves, as a
renewal, as the reformatio, of a form of university which they wanted to have
already been realized in the past.
If we now enquire into what these regulations were in detail, in accordance
with which the universities were to be reformed, we look in vain for ideas
drawn from the theory of science, or of educational policy or of organization.
As has already been indicated, the statutes not only fixed the rights and obli-
93 Classen, Studium (note 4), iyoff.
94 See chapter 4, p. 132.
Walter Ruegg
gations of office-holders, the requirements for the award of academic degrees,
the use and prohibition of certain textbooks, and the right of teachers to
strike when their prerogatives were infringed on. They also set forth in very
minute detail who was to be allowed to teach what and when and where,
who might wear what academic robe and what form of academic hat and
when and where, which teachers were to serve in the death vigil for colleagues, how many must participate in the burial services of scholars, etc. The
aim of such regulations - as was already said by Robert of Courson in 1215 was to assure the tranquilitas scholarum, the peace of the university.
However, in contrast with the reforms of universities introduced in recent
decades with the same objective, the medieval prescriptions and prohibitions
were directed at those kinds of actions which would prevent frictions among
colleagues in the university and which would make possible the perfect performance of their tasks. In sermons and disputations they expressed, in the
idiom of their time, ideas and values which were partly implicit and partly
explicit and which are bound up with the ideal of the scientist and scholar.
Alongside amor sciendi — intellectual integrity, broad learning, and conceptual clarity - they sought to sustain virtues like humility, love of one's neighbour, piety, fatherly solicitude towards students, loyalty and collegial solidarity towards the university, and deference towards the ecclesiastical and
earthly incumbents of high university offices.95 Here, too, it was a matter of
reformation of the renewal of fundamental ethical forms in the context of a
university community, which, as Christian and classical virtues and values,
had first taken form in the basic works of the Western traditions.
If one attempts to formulate the essential outlines of an academic ethic in
the process of formation, one may deduce in hypothetical form the following
seven values which in the Middle Ages legitimated, in religious terms, the
amor sciendi and the university which was its institutional form.96 The seven
evaluative propositions are:
(1) The belief in a world order, created by God, rational, accessible to
human reason, to be explained by human reason and to be mastered by it;
this belief underlies scientific and scholarly research as the attempt to understand this rational order of God's creation.
(2)The ancient understanding of man as an imperfect being and the
Judaeo-Christian idea of a creature fallen into sin, and the proposition deriving from these ideas about the limitation of the human intellect, operated in
the Middle Ages as driving forces impelling intellectual criticism and collegial
95 A. C. Gabriel, 'The Ideal Master of the Medieval University', The Catholic Historical Review,
9 , 1-40; G. Lebras, '"Velut splendor firmamenti", le docteur dans le droit de Peglise
medievale', in Melanges offerts a Etienne Gilson , 373-88; J. Leclercq,
'L'ideal du theologien au moyen-age, textes inedits', Revue des sciences religieuses, 21 ,
96 W. Riiegg, 'The Academic Ethos', Minerva,
24:4 , 393-412. Cf. Cobban,
Universities,
i$tf. See also chapter 5, p. 161 ff.
cooperation; they served as the foundation for the translation of general
ethical values like modesty, reverence, and self-criticism into the image of the
ideal scientist and scholar.
(3) Respect for the individual as a reflection of the macrocosm or as having
been formed in the image of God laid the foundation for the gradually
realized freedom of scientific and scholarly research and teaching.
(4) The absoluteness of the imperative of scientific truth already led in
scholasticism to the basic norms of scientific and scholarly research and
teaching such as the prohibition of the rejection of demonstrated knowledge,
the subjection of one's own assertions to the generally valid rules of evidence,
openness to all possible objections to one's own argument, and the public
character of argument and discussion.
(5) The recognition of scientific and scholarly knowledge as a public good
which is ultimately a gift of God had not, it is true, even before universities
existed, prevented study and teaching for the sake of money. Nevertheless,
there has been less interest within the universities in the economic use of
scientific knowledge than there has been in the learned professions outside
the university. This relatively smaller interest in the economic utilization of
scientific knowledge has been an axiomatic value of the university.
(6) Reformation which regarded one's own scientific efforts as the renewal
of previously established knowledge and its further development 'in the cause
of improvement', laid a disproportionate weight in the medieval university on
already established patterns of thought and older authors. Nevertheless, these
were not accepted without criticism; they were critically scrutinized to test
their veracity as the basis of one's own knowledge. They were a stimulus to
new ways of seeing things and to new theories. This, as mentioned above,
was expressed in the image of the later scientist, who, as a dwarf standing on
the shoulders of a giant, sees further than the giant. Scientific and scholarly
knowledge grows in a cumulative process, by building on earlier knowledge.
In this sense, the progress of knowledge is a continuous process of
reformatio.
(7) The equality and solidarity of scholars in confronting the tasks of
science enable the universities to become the institutional centres of the
scientific community. The acknowledgement of the scientific achievements of
those who think and believe differently from ourselves and of those who are
members of social strata different from our own and the readiness to correct
one's own errors in the light of persuasive new knowledge, regardless of its
source, permitted the rise of science. All these things contributed to the
growth of scientific knowledge even before universities came into existence.
The conception of the equality of human beings, which is part of natural law
and which Pepo invoked from Roman law in the criminal trial mentioned on
p. 15, first found an institutional arrangement for scientific and scholarly
discussion in the setting provided by the university. However much modern
Walter Ruegg
sociological historiography may emphasize the social inequalities within the
university - set forth in chapters 6 to 8 - as far as scientific knowledge was
concerned, differences in national and social origins played no role. Indeed,
the more highly equality was evaluated, and the more it was joined to the
common responsibility for the increase of knowledge, the better the university fulfilled its obligations. The less these values were respected, as was often
the case in smaller universities of a local or regional nature, the greater was
the decline in the level of scientific and scholarly activity. As a result, universities became sterile and some of them ceased to exist. This, too, is demonstrated by the history of the medieval universities.
JACQUES VERGER
No one today would dispute the fact that universities, in the sense in which
the term is now generally understood, were a creation of the Middle Ages,
appearing for the first time between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. It is
no doubt true that other civilizations, prior to, or wholly alien to, the medieval West, such as the Roman Empire, Byzantium, Islam, or China, were
familiar with forms of higher education which a number of historians, for the
sake of convenience, have sometimes described as universities. Yet a closer
look makes it plain that the institutional reality was altogether different and,
no matter what has been said on the subject, there is no real link such as
would justify us in associating them with medieval universities in the West.
Until there is definite proof to the contrary, these latter must be regarded as
the sole source of the model which gradually spread through the whole of
Europe and then to the whole world. We are therefore concerned with what
is indisputably an original institution, which can only be defined in terms of a
historical analysis of its emergence and its mode of operation in concrete
circumstances.
THE UNIVERSITY AS STUDIUM GENERALE
This problem of definition naturally arose in the Middle Ages also. A term,
studium generate, was therefore coined, together with a number of juridical
criteria. A studium generate was an institution of higher education founded
on, or, at any rate, confirmed in its status by, an authority of a universal
nature, such as the pope or (less frequently) the emperor, whose members
enjoyed a certain number of rights, likewise universal in their application,
which transcended all local divisions (such as towns, dioceses, principalities,
and states). These rights concerned, first of all, both collectively and individually, the personal status of teachers and students, who were placed under
Jacques Verger
the immediate safeguard of the supreme authority, be it papal or imperial,
which had founded the university in question; more especially, they received
from the pope the right to enjoy the revenues from ecclesiastical benefices
without actually having to take up residence in them. On the other hand,
titles awarded in the universities were guaranteed by the founding authority
and therefore regarded as being universally valid. This meant that the licences
(licentiae docendi) granted by the universities were licences ubique docendi,
entitling the holder to teach throughout Christendom and not merely in a
particular diocese, as was the case with those offered by bishops or their
representatives. As for the titles of doctor or master, the holding of them was
regarded as a sign of the very highest intellectual competence and of equivalent value in all circumstances, no matter which university had granted
them; and, as a consequence, they were supposed to allow access everywhere
to the offices and honours reserved for the holders of this high rank.1 Significantly enough, the pope had reserved for himself the right to grant doctorates in a sovereign manner, by special bull (the term doctores bullati was then
in use), thus illustrating the delegated nature of the authority vested in the
universities.
The truth is that, even though the term studium had acquired, from the
twelfth century on, in addition to its classical and somewhat abstract
meaning of 'study', the further, more institutional one of 'school', the notion
of a studium generale only gradually emerged after the first universities had in
fact already been founded. There are a few rare instances of this term in the
early decades of the thirteenth century but the expression only became a
common one towards the middle of the same century, that is to say, at a time
when the civil and ecclesiastical authorities began to set about creating new
universities from scratch, deriving a universally applicable legal form from
already existing models (Paris and Bologna, in particular). From this time on,
all the founding charters of new universities mentioned that these latter were
in fact studia generalia. Indeed, among the very oldest universities, a number
of them (Montpellier in 1289, Bologna in 1291, and Paris in 1292) nevertheless
received at that date confirmation from the pope of their official status as
studium generale, even though they had for long had all the features of such
an institution, and had in fact played a large part in defining it in the first
place. Admittedly, the University of Oxford never received such a confirmation and can hardly be said to have suffered from the want of it.2
Not only was the notion of studium generale, as it was elaborated in medieval law, a relative latecomer, but it has the additional drawback of being, for
the historian's purposes, too vague. Admittedly, it allows one more or less to
circumscribe the world of the university during the Middle Ages and to dis-
1 G. Ermini, '11 concetto di "Studium generale" ', Archivio giuridico> series V, 7 , 3-24.
2 On the use of the expression studium generale see Cobban, Medieval Universities, especially
tinguish between universities in the strict sense and all the other types of
schools existing in the same period (cathedral or municipal schools, the studia
of the mendicant orders, private law schools, etc.). Some of these establishments, whose teachers were sometimes university graduates themselves,
may have reached, at one time or another in their history, a level, as regards
the actual content of their curricula, comparable to that of some universities.
But the fact that they were exclusively answerable to local authorities,
whether civil or religious, that their pupils did not benefit from the special
privileges accorded to those at universities and therefore could not have their
studies ratified by official degrees, in short, the fact that these institutions
lacked the very qualities to which the adjective 'general' referred, had always
meant that they were confined to a junior position, could not spread their
influence outwards, and enjoyed very little social prestige.
There were in fact a few exceptions to this rule. In the thirteenth century,
especially, pupils at schools that were indisputably not universities might on
occasion be granted one or other privilege that was normally restricted to
members of the studia generalia (for example, exemption from residence for
holders of benefices). In a number of cases, the most famous of which is that
of the schools of medicine in Salerno, one should speak of quasi-universities.3
But these hybrids were rare and had virtually disappeared by the fourteenth
century. From then on, contemporary witnesses seem to be quite clear as to
which were (or were not) the genuine universities; lists of universities were
compiled and chroniclers' descriptions of countries always mention them.
THE UNIVERSITY COMMUNITY! INDEPENDENCE AND INFLUENCE
But what, in more concrete terms, were these universities? If we look more
closely at the vocabulary in use at the time, we find that the commonest term
in texts, especially in the thirteenth century, would seem to be universitas and
not studium generate. An abstract word in classical Latin (meaning 'the
totality' or 'the whole'), universitas had become, for medieval jurists, the
general term used to designate all kinds of community or corporation (a
guild, a trade, a brotherhood, and so on). The term very often had this sense
in medieval Latin, from the twelfth century on, a period which had in fact
been marked by a proliferation of institutions of this sort.4 One had therefore to specify the object to which one was referring so that, if teaching was
the topic, one would talk of 'the university of students' or 'the university of
masters and students' {universitas scholarium or universitas magistrorum
et scholarium) of such and such a place. These expressions may be found
throughout the first university cartularies and there is even some probability
3 See p. 52.
4 P. Michaud-Quantin, Universitas. Expressions du mouvement communautaire dans le Moyen-
Age latin .
Jacques Verger
that fairly early, at any rate in everyday language, the word 'university' was
sometimes used on its own, without any further qualification, with the same
meaning as today.
The interest of formulae such as universitas magistrorum et scholarium
lies in the fact that it places the emphasis upon the human reality of the
medieval universities, which was all the more fundamental given that for a
long time these universities scarcely knew any other reality, remaining
content with the strict minimum, as we shall see, in buildings and finances.
The medieval universities were therefore, first of all, organized communities
of individuals responsible, in certain towns, for higher education, or for the
studium: universitas studii X, as it was sometimes put. This notion of a community would seem to be fundamental to the definition of the medieval university, whatever limitations and mishaps were involved in practice.5 It
implied a degree of independence and internal cohesion. A university was a
group which one freely joined, assuming that one was granted admittance. It
was a moral entity, able to issue deeds sealed with its seal, to sue in a civil
action in its own name, to endow itself with statutes, and to enforce obedience of such statutes on the part of its members. However, we should not
entertain too juridical a view of the university community as a moral entity;
for it already enjoyed such a status as early as the thirteenth century, before
the first written statutes that have survived were drafted (which only date
from 1215-31 in Paris, from 1220 in Montpellier, and from the 1250s in
Oxford, Cambridge, and Bologna), and before the university's official seal
appeared (1246 in Paris, 1276 in Oxford).
Independence of this sort did not of course rule out the interference or
control, more or less strict depending upon circumstances, of the external lay
or religious authorities. Still less did it rule out internal subdivisions and hierarchies within the universities themselves. Almost invariably, only a part of
the members of the universitas, of the university community, would enjoy all
of the rights and prerogatives that this independence established. The others,
who were generally regarded as the mere suppositi of the university, were
subject to its authority, but were unable to take part in the exercise of
responsibilities (participation in assemblies and councils, the holding of university offices). In universities based on the Oxford or Paris model, only the
masters were in this sense full-fledged members of the university. Since,
however, many students in theology, law, or medicine were already masters
of arts, these universities were in fact much less hierarchical than their usual
appellation of 'masters' universities' would lead one to suppose. Indeed, it
was actually these masters of arts, since they were the most numerous, the
youngest, and the most turbulent, who tended to exercise a good part of the
control over the whole of the university. The only people who were really
5 J. Verger, 'Universite et communaute au Moyen Age', CRE-Information, 62. , 21-44.
excluded were plain students of arts, who were often merely children or
adolescents, together with all those (servants of masters or pupils, beadles,
scribes, booksellers, etc.) who, gravitating around the university, were under
its authority and could benefit from its protection, without, however, having
access to its councils.
In the so-called students' universities (Bologna, Padua), on the other hand,
the university consisted only of the students, the teachers simply being hired
through annual contracts that were agreed with the university itself or with
the commune, which did not stop them from fairly rapidly creating their own
organization, the 'college of doctors', whose particular responsibility was for
examinations and the conferring of degrees. To be more precise, one should
also note that, at Bologna or Padua, there were not one but several students'
universities, enrolment at which was determined either by one's geographical
origin or by the subject taught. Thus, students of law belonged to the 'cismontane' universities or to the 'ultramontane' universities, depending upon
whether they were Italian or not; students of the arts or of medicine belonged
to another, wholly independent university. The masters were likewise
organized in distinct doctoral colleges depending upon their particular expertise. These universities did, however, cooperate very closely with each other.
In Padua, the two universities for students of law actually fused in 1473.
In southern France, the Iberian peninsula, and eastern Europe, the universities belonged to a mixed type, in which the students were in control, to a
degree, of certain university offices (councillor, rector), but in which the
colleges of doctors were integrated into the university. The latter was generally a single university but at Montpellier, in spite of a vain attempt at
unification in 1289, a distinction was still made between the university of
medicine (the oldest one, proud of its traditions and of its international prestige) and that of law, which was completely separate, not to speak of a
modest 'university of arts', which would, however, appear not to have kept
its independence for long. At Prague, between 1372 and 1415, the faculty of
law separated off from the others (organized according to the Paris model) in
order to form a 'university of law' with a student rector.
One should note, however, that, no matter what the definition and the
outline, the university communities were generally subdivided into a certain
number of elements, often as old as the university itself, or sometimes even
older. In many universities, especially those with a fairly large recruitment,
the students were divided up in terms of their geographical origin, into
'nations'. Thus, there were some twenty nations at Bologna, ten at Orleans,
four at Paris, and four also at the main universities of the Holy Roman
Empire and of eastern Europe (Prague, Vienna, Leipzig, Louvain, etc.) and at
Salamanca. The geographical denomination of these nations obviously varied
from one university to another and their role was of varying importance,
sometimes being a simple system of organization of electoral colleges, and
Jacques Verger
sometimes being highly structured and fairly independent institutions within
the university.6
Almost all universities were also subdivided into distinct faculties for the
masters and students of a particular discipline. The classical faculties were
those of the 'arts' (i.e. the liberal arts), theology, law (although the faculty of
canon law was often distinguished from that of civil law), and medicine. Yet
there were others. At Toulouse, for example, there was a faculty of grammar
as well as a faculty of arts.
In cities such as Bologna, Padua, or Montpellier, where there were whole
universities devoted to a single discipline, the very notion of faculty had no
real justification. But, in the majority of cases, faculties were essential and
somewhat autonomous units within the university, with their own statutes,
their own council, and often their own dean. Their immediate interests,
which were bound up with a specific recruitment of students and with their
own particular purposes, were not all the same, and relations were therefore
often tense.
There is little point at this stage in the argument in lingering any longer
over this question of the structures and internal subdivisions of the medieval
universities. There was an almost limitless variation as regards matters of
detail; they developed over the centuries and they should not at any rate be
allowed to obscure the fundamental notion: that of an independent university
community. But it must be realized that this community, even if perceived by
contemporaries as a whole, almost invariably had an organization of the
federal kind, in which the reciprocal play of the various constituent elements
could just as well be an essential factor in its dynamism as an ever-present
threat of dislocation. This may be treated as sufficiently general to serve as a
defining feature of the medieval universities.
Another matter to be considered is that of the influence of the universities,
which may more particularly be measured through considering the geographical area from which students were recruited. Admittedly, as we shall
see below, it was very rare in the Middle Ages for universities to attract
students consistently from the whole of Christendom. Only the Universities
of Paris and Bologna, and just possibly that of Padua during the fifteenth
century, could fairly make this claim and, even in those cities, there was
always a core of students recruited from the surrounding regions. Everywhere
else - including universities with a reputation for intellectual achievement
that was not in dispute (Orleans, Oxford, Salamanca, Prague, Louvain, etc.) the area of recruitment was mainly 'national' (in so far as this word had a
meaning in the Middle Ages), or, indeed, regional, or even local. From the
fourteenth century on, university and state took various measures designed
rather to discourage than to favour student mobility.
6 Kibre, Nations.
Nevertheless, it has always been allowed that the universities had, at least
in ideal terms, a universalist vocation. Although of course situated in a particular town or country, they could wield an influence over an area whose
extent was not determined by the limits of any pre-existing ecclesiastical or
political circumscription (diocese, province, principality, or kingdom) but
simply by their intrinsic capacity to attract. This was, in turn, determined by
the fame of their traditions and by the quality of their teaching. The journey
to and the sojourn in a given place of study were regarded as two indissociable parts of university life, during which the student enjoyed to the same
degree the same privileges. Medieval students were, by definition, foreigners.
Moreover, at Bologna, those students who were strictly speaking natives did
not belong to the university since, as citizens of Bologna, they continued to be
members of the city community and enjoyed the rights and freedoms of the
SCHOLASTIC PEDAGOGY
Finally, medieval universities might be defined in terms of the kind and level
of education available. It is not sufficient to speak only of 'higher education'.
We must not elaborate here on questions to be discussed in the chapters of
this history devoted to the various faculties, but it is important to bear in
mind that, for the most part, medieval universities were structured in terms of
pedagogic conceptions and classifications of knowledge which the twelfthcentury schools had bequeathed to them and which were often of a much
more ancient provenance, dating from the Carolingian reformers (Alcuin),
from the church fathers (Saint Augustine, Saint Jerome), and from theorists
of antiquity (Quintilian, Varro, Boethius, Cassiodorus, etc.), who had themselves drawn their inspiration from Aristotle and Cicero.8
This inheritance was a threefold one, involving a classification, a hierarchy,
and a method.
The classification culminated in a fixed list of disciplines, which were
themselves defined, for the most part, by the 'authorities', that is to say, the
basic texts and the most 'authoritative' commentaries which served as their
basis and elements of which, more or less complete by the twelfth century,
would be used almost unchanged for university teaching in the following
centuries. These disciplines were those which gave their names to the various
faculties, namely, theology, law, medicine, and the liberal arts. In practice, a
number of additional disciplines could be taught in the margins, as it were,
and these were under the control of the traditional faculties ; A. Piltz, The World of Medieval Learning (Oxford,
Jacques Verger
alongside law, and surgery alongside medicine, at Bologna, for example);
within particular faculties, one or another secondary branch, especially in the
scientific 'arts' of the quadrivium (astronomy at Bologna and Padua, music at
Salamanca), might also be developed to such an extent as to give rise to
independent teaching or even the conferring of degrees. Such innovations
were, however, rare and did little to alleviate the rigid character of the framework of disciplines and faculties which the universities had inherited and
perpetuated. The main consequence of this way of proceeding was to debar
whole branches of knowledge, which were not recognized by the traditional
classifications, from university teaching. This was true of history, poetry,
customary law, and the 'mechanical arts' (by which we would understand the
applied sciences and technology).
The cultural and pedagogic tradition of antiquity and of the early Middle
Ages bequeathed to the universities, along with this rigid classification of the
disciplines, the idea that there was a hierarchy among the disciplines themselves. This hierarchy was governed by positive criteria such as the more or
less directly religious character of each discipline, its social usefulness, and its
intellectual dignity; conversely, a discipline would be downgraded, or even
excluded outright, if it in any way seemed 'profane', 'lucrative' (i.e. yielding
profits to an individual), or 'mechanical' (i.e. concerned with matter). Any
hierarchy constituted in this manner and expressing itself more concretely in
university life, in terms of the according of precedence, powers, and prestige,
was obviously bound to place the faculty of theology at the summit, with the
faculties of law and medicine coming just below it and the faculty of arts
being ranked last. One should not conclude from this, as we shall see, that
this latter was, as has sometimes been suggested, merely a 'preparatory
faculty' for the other so-called 'superior' faculties, or that arts students and
teachers were necessarily excluded from every form of 'university power'. But
the fact remains that no recognized medieval university was ever restricted to
arts schools. Although the latter were, in various forms, fairly plentiful in the
medieval West (above all, from the fourteenth century on), they were only
granted university status when they were associated with, at the very least, a
faculty of theology, law, or medicine.
It was, however, rare in the Middle Ages to find a university with all of the
various faculties. Prior to the 1360s, when the new faculties of theology proliferated, such universities were only to be found at Paris (although civil law
had not been taught there since 1219), Oxford, and Cambridge. The other
universities tended to have only two or three faculties or, indeed, just one
(law in the case of the University of Orleans, for example). Those universities
which had been founded from the 1380s onwards, were usually granted, on
paper at least, the right to have 'all the authorized faculties' but, in practice,
certain of these faculties, especially those of theology and medicine, had very
low numbers or even a very intermittent existence.
But the crucial point to grasp here is that, for the men of the Middle Ages,
there could only be a university or studium generale where a discipline was
taught that was 'higher', that is, perfect and completed, as much in terms of
the 'authenticity' of the knowledge that it contained as in terms of its social
purpose. In spite of the tireless attempts of medieval philosophers and
scientists to affirm the independence and the lofty nature of their discipline,
the arts never ceased to labour under the suspicion of being irredeemably
marked by their profane origins in antiquity. As a consequence, they were
never accorded anything other than a propaedeutic value, since incomplete
disciplines in a Christian culture could claim no legitimate role other than
that of helping one to gain access to the truly higher and self-sufficient forms
of knowledge.
In theory, as I have already said, all universities with the same faculties
were supposed to guarantee the same level of teaching and to confer degrees
that were equally valid throughout Christendom. In practice, as we shall see
below, there were considerable disparities and the most important universities, especially Paris as regards theology and Bologna as regards law-which
claimed, in their own favoured domain, a founding role, a genuine superiority, and a kind of mastery over the whole of Christendom - refused to admit
that the degrees obtained in the other studia generalia were of equal value to
their own.
Finally, the methods of teaching adopted tended to be much the same in all
the medieval universities. Admittedly, there were significant differences, in
matters of detail, from one faculty, university, or period to another.
However, considered overall, there was a kind of common spirit which could
fairly be described, if one so wished, as scholastic. This was still, for the most
part, an inheritance derived from the main centres of scholarship of the
twelfth century, namely, the schools of logic and theology in Paris, the law
schools in Bologna, and the schools of medicine in Salerno.
What were the main features of this tradition? Apart from the general and
exclusive use of Latin as the language of scholarly debate, one should note the
primacy of two basic types of exercise, in all faculties, namely, the 'lecture'
and the 'dispute'. The former consisted of a reading, with commentary, of the
texts contained in the official syllabuses, thereby giving the student mastery of
the 'authorities' who served as the basis of each discipline; the latter, an oral
debate conducted according to the rules of Aristotelian syllogistics, depending upon constant references to the 'authorities' and serving to establish,
defend, or refute a particular thesis or 'case', allowed one to resolve and to
develop into a body of consistent doctrine problems of every kind (philosophical, juridical, theological, etc.) which arose out of the study and comparison of texts.
The prevalence of this type of pedagogy, which was all the more pervasive
for being defined as compulsory by the university statutes, had a whole range
Jacques Verger
of different consequences. Firstly, it gave a crucial, propaedeutic role to
grammar and dialectic, disciplines which were indispensable for anyone
wishing to arrive at a good understanding of texts and at logically impeccable
reasoning which was itself regarded as the primordial means of access to the
truth. Secondly, it established the respective importance, within this form of
teaching, of writing, which was a necessary support of the authorities and of
the 'authorized' gloss, and of the spoken word, the normal medium for
lectures and still more for disputes. Thirdly, and as a consequence of the
above, it gave considerable importance to the personal relation between
master and pupil. Fourthly, it also required constant recourse to memorizing
and therefore to repetition, which generally demanded very long durations of
study. These durations, which increased throughout the thirteenth century
and only began to shorten to any extent in the fifteenth, varied from university to university and from faculty to faculty, ranging from four or five years
in the arts faculties (and even seven or eight at Oxford) to twelve or thirteen
at certain law faculties (Toulouse) and as many as fifteen or sixteen at the
faculty of theology in Paris.
So committed were the medieval universities to this form of pedagogy that
they took it to excesses which many deemed paralysing. Indeed, they were
virtually cut off from every other form of intellectual procedure, whether
traditional (mystical exegesis, beloved of monastic culture) or innovatory
(experimentation and measurement, philological and historical analysis);
these latter, championed by the humanists, only began, with great difficulty,
to make inroads into university teaching around the late fifteenth and early
sixteenth century. Up until then, only the liveliest forms of doctrinal opposition had managed to achieve some sort of expression within this stiflingly
uniform framework.
The universities did not have a monopoly over 'scholastic' pedagogy. It
also prevailed, albeit in an often simplified form, in the thirteenth and fourteenth century, in many urban schools and mendicant studia. Yet it was the
universities that were responsible for perfecting scholasticism. More particularly, they were the only institutions - and this was one of the great
innovations of the medieval university system - to link teaching and examinations closely together. Even if in fact, for various different reasons, many
medieval students defaulted, as we shall see, before actually taking their
exams, the examination was conceived as the normal culmination of a course
of study, which entitled one to an official degree. The examinations were
mainly oral and were subject to the most meticulous specifications (although
this concern with minutiae obviously did not rule out deception and cheating); they served to confirm that a student had mastered the knowledge and
techniques which had been inculcated in him, and that he was capable of
reproducing the exercises where he had up until then been a merely passive
listener. The baccalariatus, where it existed, generally involved carrying out a
simplified 'reading', whereas the granting of the licentia depended upon the
winning of a dispute, and a doctorate was nothing other than the solemn
inauguration of an 'ordinary' teaching post.
The above is obviously no more than a general, fairly abstract framework,
whose concrete application, local peculiarities, and long-term transformations will be illustrated in subsequent chapters.
To summarize the argument so far: a medieval university was not only a
papal foundation guaranteeing its members a range of different privileges; it
was also an independent community, with an often complex internal structure, committed to a specific type of teaching, and recruiting its members
from the whole of the geographical area over which it wielded influence (an
influence which could, ideally speaking, be extended across the whole of
Christendom).
THE DIVERSITY OF MEDIEVAL UNIVERSITIES
Our first task was obviously to attempt a definition of the medieval university. Yet, were we to stop short at this point, the reader would be left with a
far too uniform and static idea of the phenomenon, for the sixty or so universities of the medieval West were in fact extremely various as regards their
numbers, their intellectual orientation, their social role, and the university
institutions themselves.
This diversity was the product of both history and geography. Indeed, the
particular qualities of each medieval university can largely be accounted for
in terms of the date of its establishment, the conditions under which it was
founded, and the social and political situation of the town and region in
which, whether by chance or design, it was installed. It is therefore appropriate now to retrace in broad outline the chronology of the university foundations which occurred in medieval Europe, together with a brief account of
their respective localities.9 Yet this seemingly simple task runs up against a
number of practical difficulties.
Since the first universities arose gradually out of pre-existing schools, the
fixing of an exact date of birth is always awkward. If, for example, one were
to accept the solemn papal confirmations or the first written statutes which
have survived (1215 and 1231 for Paris, 1220 for Montpellier, 1252 for
Bologna), one would invariably end up with dates that are clearly too late. If,
in spite of all the complications involved, one can generally agree, as we shall
see below, that a decisive change in the nature of the institutions involved
occurred within a 'fork' of ten to fifteen years (as was the case at Bologna,
Paris, Montpellier, and Oxford, all four of which would seem to have become
genuine universities between 1200 and 1215, or possibly a little earlier in the
9 Save where contrary information is available, I have followed Rashdall, Universities; L. Jilek
(ed.), Historical Compendium of European Universities .
Jacques Verger
case of Bologna), there are a number of other cases in which such a change
would seem to have dragged on interminably, as was the case at Orleans
(where the word universitas was first used in 1236, with the papal bull being
dated 1306) or at Angers (where we know of schools of law as early as 1230,
but where the first use of the expression studium generate dates from 1337,
and where the papal confirmation only occurred in 1364).10 In the latter
instances, the choice of a date of birth can only be arbitrary.
For the more recent universities, there is usually a clearly dated papal letter
of foundation (sometimes preceded or followed by a princely charter). But
the real launching of such institutions often occurred a few years later and,
most crucially, there were false starts. Thus, the University of Toulouse,
although officially created in 1229, enjoyed a somewhat precarious existence
up until the 1260s. The University of Vienna, founded in 1365, only really
became active in 1383, with the arrival of teachers who had been hounded out
of Paris by the Great Schism. The University of Cracow, which was established in 1364, rapidly disappeared from sight, being revived only in 1400,
upon the initiative of King Ladislaus Jagello, with new papal bulls. In cases
such as these, it obviously makes no sense to hold to one date only.
There were also many projects for the foundation of universities which
were stillborn, even if things sometimes proceeded as far as the granting of a
papal bull. Rashdall's classic manual on the subject cites some fifteen 'paper
universities' of this kind, and his list is almost certainly incomplete.11 Such
failures are invariably of interest to the historian. A number of them, being no
more than projects arising out of a prince's whim or a chance concatenation
of circumstances, are easily explained. Others are more difficult to understand. Why, for instance, did the universities projected for Lucca, Lyon, or
Geneva never see the light of day? Each of these cases requires a monograph
by itself. But, for our present purposes, these failed attempts must be set to
Studia generalia which indisputably existed but which were ephemeral,
intermittent, or in decline pose a much more serious problem for the historian. This category would include, for example, various studia of northern
Italy (Vicenza in 1204-10, Arezzo in 1215-55 a nd t n e n again around 1338,
Vercelli from 1228 to the end of the thirteenth century) which arose as a
consequence of the migration of teachers and students from the two main
universities, Bologna and Padua, and which, for the most part, fell into
decline and disappeared fairly quickly, after a few years of activity, when the
majority of their members returned to their universities of origin, once the
conflict which had led to their departure had been settled. A number of other
universities, mostly fourteenth-century foundations, failed to develop sufficiently, either because of the general 'troubles' of the period, or because a
10 Universite's en France, 41-2.
n Rashdall, Universities, vol. II, 325-31.
favourable social or political milieu was lacking. A few continued nevertheless to lead a humdrum, even vegetative, existence right up until modern
times, as for example the Universities of Cahors and of Orange in France, the
University of Huesca in Aragon, and that of Ferrara in Italy. Others were
obliged to shut their doors fairly rapidly, as, for example, the University of
Palencia in Castile, the University of Grenoble in Dauphine, and the Universities of Treviso, Florence, and Piacenza in Italy. Such matters are all the
more difficult to assess, as one can well imagine, given the fact that the
decline and disappearance of these institutions generally left no other trace
than that of increasing gaps and silences in the documentation. But one
should not therefore disregard these universities, whose character as studia
generalia is usually well established.
While, in spite of everything, it is relatively easy to draw up a list of the
universities founded during the Middle Ages, the real difficulty is to establish
which, at any given date, were the truly active studia generalia. The maps
assembled at the end of this chapter are intended to give some idea of this,
but they have the drawback of making no distinction between big and little
universities, between complete universities and universities with one or two
faculties, and between universities which wielded some influence over a large
area and universities which were merely local. It would seem difficult, not
least because of the present state of research, to imagine any system of representation that would be sufficiently fine to bring out the interplay of these
various parameters (which themselves vary over time). But one should at least
bear this problem in mind when one seeks to understand the place and the
role of universities in medieval society and civilization.
THE BIRTH OF THE UNIVERSITIES
Broadly speaking, one can distinguish three different phases in the development of the medieval universities.
The first phase, obviously, is that of the birth of the universities. The
crucial event here was the emergence of the Universities of Paris and Bologna,
which, although very different from each other, would continue to be the
most famous ones up until the end of the Middle Ages. One should not, of
course, exaggerate the differences between these two universities or, above
all, overemphasize the extent to which they served as models for all subsequent foundations. Nevertheless, the crucial role that they played in the
first elaboration of the university as an institution justifies our pausing a
moment to consider the conditions surrounding their birth.
Let us begin with Bologna, which clearly deserves, because it was a handful
of years ahead of any other, the somewhat vain title of oldest European university. We cannot, however, assign an exact date to this birth. It seems more
important to stress that the University of Bologna inherited a long tradition of
Jacques Verger
law teaching.12 Private law schools had existed in Bologna since the second
half of the eleventh century. Although their origin is obscure, the context in
which they arose is quite clear, namely the particularly precocious renewal of
urban life in northern Italy and the revival of written law in places that were,
from 1075 onwards, the main theatre for the great political confrontation
between the papacy and the empire. The first professors at Bologna of whom
we know were Pepo, who taught around 1070-1100, and, more especially,
Irnerius, whose presence there is attested for the years between 1112 and 1125
and to whom we owe the restructuring of the whole of the Corpus iuris civilis
(that is to say, the whole of Roman law as codified in the sixth century by the
Emperor Justinian) and the beginnings of the 'Gloss' (that is to say, the commentary upon the text of the Corpus in accordance with the rules of dialectic). Towards the year 1140, the monk Gratian, who was also at Bologna,
performed a similar service in relation to canon law.
The progress of the Bolognese schools was such that, in 1155, the Emperor
Frederick I Barbarossa placed their students under his direct protection and
declared them subject only to the jurisdiction of their masters or of the bishop
of Bologna (and not to that of the local civil authorities).13 There is no indication, however, that, up until around 1180, the Bolognese law schools were
anything other than private schools opened and run by each master after his
own fashion, gathering together the students who had entered into an agreement with him and paid him fees {collectae) in return for his teaching. The
crucial change would seem to have taken place around the years 1180-90.14
The number of students, often from very distant countries (Germany, France,
England), was growing even faster. Rival schools were developing in neighbouring towns (Modena). At Bologna itself, the commune, whose independence was growing even greater, sought to win more control over the masters
and students, while at the same time preventing them from fleeing to rival
towns. The masters, who were themselves mainly Bolognese in origin, agreed
from 1189 to swear an oath to the commune not to seek to transfer the
studium elsewhere. The students, on the other hand, began to group themselves in 'nations', according to their places of origin (we hear of the
Lombard nation as early as 1191), and these were soon federated into 'universities' with elected rectors at their head. These associations were meant to
guarantee the mutual aid and protection of the students against the exactions
of the local people and local authorities. After a few false starts, the classical
12 With regard to the beginnings of the university of Bologna, see, in addition to Rashdall,
Universities, and Cobban, Medieval Universities, M. Bellomo, Saggio sull'universitd nell'etd
del diritto comune .
13 On the Bologna schools of the twelfth century see G. Cencetti, ' "Studium fuit Bononie" ',
Studi Medievali, series III, 7 , 781-833 (republished in G. Arnaldi (ed.), Le origini
deirUniversitd , 101-51).
14 J. K. Hyde, 'Commune, University, and Society in Early Medieval Bologna', in Universities in
Politics, 17-46.
system of the two cismontane and ultramontane universities would seem,
around 1230-40, to have assumed its definitive shape. The rectors, unlike the
doctors, refused to swear an oath to stay in the one place, whereas the
commune, with the agreement of the teachers, sought by means of various
statutes (1211,1216-17) to check the further development of student universities which were already well and truly constituted and, in addition, enjoyed
the support of the pope. The latter, by presenting himself as the defender of
the 'liberty of the students', managed to extend his authority over institutions
that had up until then been mainly secular. Thus, in 1219, he decided that
from then on it would be the archdeacon of Bologna who would confer a
licentia, after a rigorous examination; up until then, the awarding of titles
would seem to have been left to the masters' discretion.
The struggle was a protracted one, but the energy of the students, the
growing threat to the very existence of the studium of Bologna posed by the
emergence of those of Arezzo (1215), Padua (1222), and Naples (1224), and,
finally, the development of Bologna's communal government, in which the
'popular' party, more favourably disposed towards the schools, had gained
the upper hand, allowed a compromise to be reached. The town recognized
the independence of the universities, which were therefore under the jurisdiction of their rectors, whilst at the same time giving the students, as far as
lodgings, provisions, and access to credit and justice were concerned, the
same guarantees as were enjoyed by the citizens of Bologna. These concessions, which had already been implied in the communal statutes of 1245,
were solemnly ratified only in 1274-90. To understand the nature of this
development, one should bear in mind that the law students in Bologna were
generally adults, often recruited from fairly high up in the social scale, and
sometimes the holders of offices or benefices, which naturally conferred
independence and maturity upon them.
In the meantime, these same student universities had also succeeded in
assuming virtually total control of the organization of studies. Thus, it was
they who hired the teachers, by means of a yearly contract which fixed their
fees and committed them to a strict schedule for the reading of the specified
books of the Corpus iuris civilis or of the Corpus iuris canonici. This system
is known to us through the university statutes of 1252, which are the oldest
surviving ones and whose drafting may be taken to symbolize the moment at
which the university became definitively stabilized as an institution.15
So it was that the university which was to serve as a model for the whole of
southern Europe was born. Since the model was for a 'students' university',
the doctors, although they did not lose their undeniable social prestige, and
15 D. Maffei, 'Un trattato di Bonaccorso degli Elisei e i piu antichi statuti dello Studio di Bologna
nel manoscritto 22 della Robbins Collection', Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law, new series, 5
Jacques Verger
although they did in the end establish colleges of their own,16 found themselves marginalized in institutional terms. In addition, the fact that it was a
model for a university which was, above all, juridical played a large part in
consolidating the role of jurists in every aspect of life in the societies and
states of western Europe.
In the course of the thirteenth century, other forms of instruction were also
established, in the wake of the juridical universities, at Bologna. 'Arts' schools
undoubtedly existed there from before 1220. The training of students
attending such schools, many of whom were subsequently to become jurists,
involved the teaching, above all, of grammar and of rhetoric (in the educational form of the ars dictaminis, that is, the epistolary art), together with a
fair amount of logic, but with almost no natural philosophy. The schools of
medicine made their appearance around 1260. Gradually, a university of arts
and of medicine was established, with institutions directly inspired by those
of the juridical universities; it was only in 1316, however, that its full independence, under an elected rector, was recognized by the universities of law and
by the commune.
The University of Paris, which came into being at almost the same time as
that of Bologna, had very different qualities.17 It owed its origin to the schools
which appeared in Paris from the end of the eleventh century. However, one
should distinguish between the traditional ecclesiastical schools, the principal
one being that of the chapter of the cathedral of Notre-Dame, and the private
schools opened by independent masters (although obliged, at any rate after
1150, to request a licence to teach' from the chancellor of Notre-Dame). The
school of Notre-Dame was, above all, a school of theology and it was run, in
the second half of the twelfth century, by a series of famous masters, such as
Peter Lombard, Peter Comestor, and Peter the Chanter, who composed the
manuals upon which the teaching of theology, until the end of the Middle
Ages, depended. The content of the courses taught in the private schools was
more varied for, although their speciality was dialectic, grammar, law, and
medicine were also taught there.
In the closing decades of the twelfth century, such schools undoubtedly
proliferated. More and more students, often from distant parts (England,
Germany, Italy), flocked to them. This rapid, almost uncontrolled growth
gave rise to many problems, both material , 421-43, reckons that their final organizational form was not achieved until
17 J. Verger, 'Des ecoles a Puniversite: la mutation institutionnelle', in R.-H. Bautier (ed.), La
France de Philippe Auguste. Le temps des mutations , 817-46; J. Verger, 'A
propos de la naissance de l'universite de Paris: contexte social, enjeu politique, portee intellectuelle', in Schulen und Studium,
order) and institutional and intellectual. The new masters chafed at the
power over them, limited though it was, that the bishop and the chancellor
claimed to wield; the latter were themselves troubled, as were many of the
masters, by the proliferation of the schools and by the resulting 'confusion' in
instruction, the major dangers in their eyes being obviously the advance of the
'lucrative disciplines' (law) and the success of Aristotle's philosophical texts,
the translations of which were then becoming current in Paris.18
Given these conditions, the birth of the University of Paris can be interpreted as a kind of compromise between the parties involved. It allowed the
masters, and the masters of arts in particular, certainly as early as 1208-10, to
form themselves into an autonomous guild, to endow themselves with statutes, to co-opt their new colleagues, and to elude the direct control and
exactions of the chancellor of Notre-Dame - in short, to form a university in
the sense defined above. On the other hand, the ecclesiastical authorities,
together with the already established masters, the masters in theology in
particular, benefited from the institution of obligatory syllabuses, detailed
curricula, rigorous examinations, and valuable guarantees against the proliferation of new schools and the anarchic 'confusion' of disciplines; it
imposed, through the bias of the university institutions themselves and, more
especially, through the distinctions between the various faculties, a respect
for the classifications and hierarchies upon which Christian knowledge had
traditionally been based.
This compromise was not achieved without struggles, which lasted up
until 1231. Indeed, they would have continued longer, had the king of France
and the pope not intervened and acted as arbiters, very much in the schools'
favour. The king allowed the students the personal privileges of clerics as
early as 1200, and the pope solemnly granted the university its first official
statutes, in 1215 and in 1231. Yet this support was counterbalanced by other
factors. The popes, in particular, set out to supervise the organization of
teaching and to have the new institution serve their own ends, namely the
defence and exposition of orthodox doctrine against the threat of heresies,
and the training of effective theologians and preachers. Having prohibited the
teaching of civil law in Paris in 1219, on the grounds that it was too profane,
they lost no time in compelling the university to incorporate the theology
schools of the new mendicant orders (1220) and, in spite of the very violent
dispute between mendicant friars and secular masters (1250-6) which finally
erupted in relation to this issue, they remained unyielding.19 It was during this
same dispute, and in the years that followed, that the University of Paris
finally settled upon the institutions that it was to keep until the end of the
18 S. C. Ferruolo, The Origins of the University. The Schools of Paris and their Critics. 1100-
1215 .
19 M.-M. Dufeil, Guillaume de Saint-Amour et la polemique universitaire parisienne. 1250—1259
 .
Jacques Verger
Middle Ages, with the constitution of the 'four' nations (from 1220 on), the
creation of the office of rector, who was elected from the company of the
masters of arts (around 1240), and the emergence of the 'higher' faculties,
with their own statutes and dean (around 1260).
Throughout this long history of conflict, the university essentially consisted
of the masters. The University of Paris was in fact a 'university of masters', a
federation of schools in which, while maintaining their personal authority
over their own pupils within their particular school, the masters, by means of
their councils and their elected officers, collectively administered the whole
of the studium and abided by a common agreement as regards all matters
concerning teaching and examinations. As explained above, the majority of
these masters, who therefore dominated the nations and elected the rector,
were the young masters of arts, often themselves students or about to be
students of theology, law, or medicine. This fact had an indisputably 'democratic' impact upon the operation of the University of Paris as an institution,
even if it was bound to lead to repeated clashes with the masters of the
'superior' faculties.
If so much space has been devoted to the two oldest European universities,
it is not only because, up until the end of the Middle Ages, they continued to
be the most famous, with the largest teaching staff and the widest geographical influence, but also because they generally served as models for the
majority of the more recent foundations. A more rapid listing seems appropriate for the latter, however.
Some of them are, in fact, almost as old as Bologna or Paris. As we have
already seen, the schools of medicine at Salerno did not really undergo much
development in the course of the thirteenth century; the statutes granted them
in 1231 by the Emperor Frederick II established a degree system but denied
them all independence. On the other hand, the schools of medicine at Montpellier, whose existence is attested at least as early as the 1130s but whose
origin remains obscure, became a genuine 'university of medicine' in the
course of the thirteenth century. The statutes this university received in 1220
from a papal legate placed it under the authority of the church but also
confirmed the doctors' authority over the studium.
In these same years, the University of Oxford was born. The siting of the
first English university in this small market-town, which was not even the seat
of a bishop, is somewhat surprising, and chance must have played a part in it.
One should bear in mind, however, that Oxford had long had several ecclesiastical establishments, which may have provided a point of departure. At
any rate, even if it is certain both that a series of contributions from the
University of Paris played a part in developing it further and that its institutions took their inspiration from the Parisian ones, it was indisputably an
autochthonous and original university. There were schools in operation in
Oxford from at least as early as the middle of the twelfth century; an embryo-
nic university organization was in existence from 1200, even before the first
papal statutes (1214), which were complemented by royal charters, had established its first institutions (the chancellor, the proctors of the nations, and the
'congregations' of the masters), while at the same time guaranteeing its
independence from both the bishop of Lincoln and the local population and
civil authorities.20
The two principal ways in which, up until the end of the Middle Ages, a
university came to be founded, the 'swarm' or the establishment of such an
institution by prior decision of the civil or ecclesiastical authorities, were
already familiar in the first decades of the thirteenth century.
A swarm involved a group of masters and students leaving their university
of origin, generally after a dispute with the local authorities, establishing
themselves in a new town, and recreating a university there. Migrations of
this sort were generally provisional, with settlement of the dispute resulting in
a return to the original university. Yet, where conditions were favourable, a
new university might be founded.
This is precisely what happened in Cambridge, with masters and students
fleeing Oxford between 1209 and 1214 (following the arrest and execution of
a few students, upon the orders of the mayor and the king). In France, the
ancient schools of Orleans and Angers undoubtedly benefited from the flight
of masters and students from Paris in 1229-31 (they were seeking reparation
for the death of a number of students at the hands of the royal serj eants), even
if, as we have seen, it was only much later that they won official recognition
of their university status.
Yet it was northern Italy that was the heartland of university migrations,
very probably because of its economically developed condition, its division
into rival city states, and, as noted above, its system of student universities,
which were especially suited to geographical mobility. In addition, the
various disputes which, in the first half of the thirteenth century, marred
relations between the University of Bologna on the one hand, and the
commune and the emperor on the other, gave rise to a series of secessions.
However, only one of these gave birth to an important university, that of
Padua (1222). Yet this university, whose institutions and intellectual orientation clearly reflected its descent from the University of Bologna, did not really
make any noteworthy advances until after 1260.21 There may have been a
university at Reggio Emilia from around 1188, and there were undoubtedly
universities at Vicenza between 1204 and 1209, at Arezzo in 1215 and up until
around 1255, at Vercelli (the result of a migration from Padua between 1228
and 1244), and at Siena from 1246 to 1252, but all of these institutions shone
brightly for a brief period, only to disappear after a few years, leaving behind
20 History of Oxford,
vol. I, 1-95.
21 G. Arnaldi, 'Le origini dello studio di Padova dalla migrazione universitaria del 1222 alia fine
del periodo ezzeliniano', La Cultura, 15 , 388-431.
Jacques Verger
them a local memory which would serve to justify, in the fourteenth century,
a number of generally vain attempts to revive them.
It was also in the thirteenth century that the civil or ecclesiastical authorities first, of their own accord, took the decision to create or, as the saying
went, to 'plant' universities. Even where there were founding acts of this
nature, earlier schools often existed and, indeed, provided the basis for the
new university. Yet such acts generally implied recourse, with varying degrees
of completeness, to an established institutional model. In addition, one can
interpret them as signs that clearly conceived social and political aims were
invested in the new foundations from the very beginning, even if they were
not always fully realized subsequently.
The University of Naples, which was founded in 1224 by the Emperor
Frederick II to compete with that of Bologna and to train the jurists whom he
required, was one of the first of this type. Although closely supervised by
royal officers, it was granted the minimum of corporate organization that
would enable one to speak of a university. Furthermore, very probably
because of southern Italy's troubled development in the thirteenth century, it
did not manage to develop much further, in spite of a series of 'general
reforms', effected as much by Frederick II and his immediate successors as
under the Angevin dynasty.22
The first foundation of this type in France was that of the University of
Toulouse, which was established through the Treaty of Paris, after the
crusade against the Cathars and the count of Toulouse (1229). This foundation, which was obviously fairly unpopular locally, took a long time to gain
ground, and only did so, during the 1260s, at the price of a fairly profound
alteration in its nature. Instead of the religious, proselytizing university that
had first been planned, there developed a predominantly juridical university,
which was more in harmony with the southerners' expectations.23
Our list of 'created' universities ought also to include the one that Pope
Innocent IV chose to establish in the curia itself (studium curiae, 1245).
Yet it was undoubtedly in the Iberian peninsula that, from the thirteenth
century, the political authorities interfered most directly in the development
of the universities, a fact which can very probably be explained by the tendency of the Spanish sovereigns to take the whole of the organization of their
kingdoms into their own hands, as they were constituted through the gradual
advance of the Reconquista. As early as 1208, Alfonso VIII, king of Castile,
introduced salaries for the teachers at the cathedral school of Palencia. It is
hard to decide if these privileges, confirmed in 1220 by a papal bull, served to
create a genuine university. Be this as it may, the studium of Palencia, which
remained in operation for a number of years, above all for the liberal arts and
22 G. Arnaldi, 'Fondazione e rifondazioni dello studio di Napoli in eta sveva', in Universita
23 Les Universites
de Languedoc
au XHIe siecle, Gahiers de Fanjeaux, 5 .
theology, would seem to have disappeared around 1250. In the meantime,
royal favour had shifted to Salamanca. Indeed, a chronicler records that, in
the winter of 1218-19, Alfonso IX of Leon had founded a university at Salamanca. Royal privileges of 1254, ratified by a papal bull of 1255 and reiterated
in the famous juridical compilation known as the Siete partidas (around
1260), culminated in the definitive recognition of a genuine studium generale
at Salamanca, which was under the strict control of the local ecclesiastical
dignitaries but clearly endowed with all the traditional privileges. Its organization, which we only know of through a series of very late statutes (1411,
1422), was undoubtedly of a mixed type, borrowing more elements from
Bologna than from Paris. Another studium generale of the same type was
founded at Valladolid before the end of the century, endowed by the king of
Castile and enjoying his full protection, although the papacy did not fully
recognize its status as a university until 1346.
The University of Lisbon was of much the same kind, and was founded
and endowed by Denis, king of Portugal, and by a number of the kingdom's
ecclesiastical dignitaries (the Cistercian abbot of Alcobaca, in particular)
around 1288, a foundation which was confirmed by the pope in 1290.
So it was that, by the end of the thirteenth century, the universities,
although still few in number, had become institutions of central importance
in European cultural life, places dedicated to the production and diffusion of
ideas, indeed, even sites of genuine 'intellectual power',24 as well as for the
training of ecclesiastical or civil elites. Eighteen studia generalia emerged
prior to 1300,25 of which fifteen (or sixteen, if one includes Salerno) were very
probably quite active at this date. A number of them had certainly already
attracted several thousand students, of very varied origin; these would continue to be the main European universities up until the end of the Middle
Ages (Bologna, Paris, Montpellier, Oxford, Padua, Salamanca, Cambridge).
Other universities had a strong influence locally.
UNIVERSITIES AT THE END OF THE MIDDLE AGES
Given that new universities were still being founded, possibly in even greater
numbers, in the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, there is cause
to question the traditional diagnosis which has it that the universities
'declined' at the end of the Middle Ages.
The first phase may be said to end in 1378, when the Great Schism began.
This phase, as well as involving the definitive recognition of the university
status of centres founded prior to 1300, such as Orleans, Angers, and Valla-
24 H. Grundmann,' "Sacerdotium - Regnum - Studium": zur Wertung der Wissenschaft im 13.
Jh.', Archiv fur Kulturgeschichte,
34 , 5-21.
25 The number would be twenty-three if one were to include the disputed cases of Salerno,
Reggio, Piacenza (papal bull of 1248, but very probably without effect), Palencia, and Seville.
Jacques Verger
dolid, saw the creation of nineteen new universities, namely Lerida (1300),
Avignon (1303), Rome (1303), Perugia (1308), Treviso (1318), Cahors (1332),
Grenoble (1339), Pisa (1343), Prague (1347), Florence (1349), Perpignan
(1350), Huesca (1354), Arezzo (1355), Siena (1357), Pavia (1361), Cracow
(1364), Orange (1365), Vienna (1365), and Pecs (1367).26 A total number of
twenty-eight (or thirty-one if one includes Salerno, Verona and Lucca), would
seem to have been genuinely in operation in 1378.
Without going into details regarding these later foundation, their general
characteristics should none the less be reviewed. First of all, the initiative of
the authorities, whether ecclesiastical or, as was more and more the case,
civil, was from now on the crucial factor - even if the presence of earlier
schools and, more broadly, the existence of a favourable social and cultural
milieu were common and, indeed, virtually necessary elements in the successful development of a new foundation. In Avignon, Perugia, and Prague, for
example, such new foundations began by confirming the elevation to university status of important pre-existing schools. On the other hand, in places
such as Treviso, Grenoble, and Huesca, where virtually nothing existed, the
universities seem to have been fairly arbitrarily implanted and quite often
languished or even disappeared at the end of a few years. Adopting an overall
view, prior to 1378, only universities with relatively low numbers and slight
influence - Prague excepted - arose in the course of the fourteenth century.
The majority of these universities (fifteen out of nineteen) were located in
southern Europe, and the dominant faculty was generally that of law, the
others being non-existent or, at best, having low numbers and a mediocre
level of achievement. Consequently, these universities generally adopted statutes modelled on those of Bologna, but they usually adapted them to the
local social and political situation and tried to avoid the complete separation
of student universities and doctors' colleges that characterized the system at
Bologna itself.
If one excepts Paris and Oxford, southern Europe had been the favoured
terrain for universities, because of its higher levels of urbanization, because of
its traditions of written law, and, possibly, because of the earlier progress
made by lay elements in society there. However, a movement for the creation
of new universities outside this area arose in the middle of the fourteenth
century, the turning-point being the founding of the University of Prague in
1347. Up until then, the Holy Roman Empire and central Europe had
remained a little outside this movement, very probably because of the preponderance of the nobles. As the latter were able, when they so desired, to
send their sons to study in Paris or in Bologna, they had little desire to see the
26 Or twenty-one if one were to regard the studia of Verona (it was granted a papal bull by Pope
Benedict XII in 1339) and Lucca (imperial bull in 1369) as enjoying university status. One
should also bear in mind that Arezzo and Siena had already fostered studia generalia, for a
period of some years, in the thirteenth century.
emergence of autochthonous universities, which would be easier to enter,
thereby providing the children of the bourgeoisie and the peasantry with
opportunities for social climbing and by the same token reinforcing the political weight of the church and of the towns. Yet economic development and
the awakening of national sentiments made the movement for the creation of
new universities ever more powerful. In 1347, it prevailed, with the help of
the pope and, above all, that of the new emperor, Charles IV - a prince of
French culture and a man very much in favour of the university as an institution.27 After some years, the University of Prague met with considerable
success, attracting hundreds of German, Czech, and Polish students.28 This
success spawned a number of imitations, whose early stages were, however,
far more laborious: in Austria the University of Vienna, which was created in
1365 but languished up until 13 8 3; in Poland the University of Cracow, which
was founded in 1364 but was very soon in trouble and had to be reestablished in 1397-1400; and in Hungary the University of Pecs, founded in
1367, but which only lasted ten years.
As in so many other areas of European history, the Great Schism, which
began in 1378, represents a genuine rupture in the history of the universities,
which was all the more dramatic for unfolding against a background of crisis
(plagues, wars, and economic depression). The unit of medieval Christendom
was irremediably shattered, and universalist pretensions, such as were cultivated at the University of Paris, were no longer in fashion. Here one is
witness to the birth of the modern state and to the awakening of national
sentiments.
Given this context, it is not hard to understand why universities should
have proliferated. Indeed, seven were founded or reopened between 1378 and
1400, eighteen between 1400 and 1450 (indeed, twenty, if one is prepared to
count Parma and Gerona), and twenty-two between 1451 and 1500. The
twenty-eight (or thirty-one) universities operative in 1378 became thirty-one
(or thirty-four) in 1400 and sixty-three (or sixty-six) in 1500. New foundations sprang up throughout Europe, with seven in the Iberian peninsula (or
eight with Gerona), eight in France, fifteen in Germany (to which one can add
the University of Louvain, founded in 1425 by the duke of Brabant), nine in
the kingdoms situated on the western and eastern fringes of old Europe (Scotland, Scandinavia, Poland, and Hungary), and, finally, eight in Italy. There it
was admittedly not so much a question of genuinely new foundations, save at
Ferrara (1391), Turin (1404), and Catania (1444), as of the reopening of
27 In addition to Prague, the Emperor Charles IV granted diplomas either founding or ratifying
the foundation oistudia
generalia in Cividale in Friuli (1353, but it remained a dead-letter),
Arezzo (1355), Perugia (1355), Siena (1357), Pavia, (1361), Florence (1364), Orange (1365), and
Lucca (1369).
28 P. Moraw, 'Die Universitat Prag im Mittelalter. Grundziige ihrer Geschichte im europaischen
Zusammenhang', in Die Universitat zu Frag, Schriften der sudetendeutschen Akademie der
Wissenschaften und Kiinste, 7 , 9-134.
Jacques Verger
universities in towns which had already given shelter to studia generalia in the
thirteenth or fourteenth century. England alone was untouched, with no new
foundation emerging to challenge the age-old monopoly of Oxford and Cambridge.
Far more than had been the case in the past, these new universities were
mainly founded upon the initiative of princes or of towns, which would grant
them, along with their first privileges, their initial material and financial
endowments. Being simultaneously the founders and protectors of these
institutions, they derived both prestige and a crucial nursery of clerics,
preachers, and jurists from them. However, a confirmatory papal bull was
generally required and, needless to say, many of these new foundations in fact
depended upon pre-existing schools.
This does not mean that, by the end of the fifteenth century, the European
university network was virtually complete. After all, new universities were
still being founded in the sixteenth century. However, a number of people
began to grow anxious, in the course of the fifteenth century, about the proliferation of new foundations. The ancient universities tried, with varying
degrees of success, to preserve their local monopoly. Thus, the University of
Paris, believing that the towns of Caen and Bourges were too close, sought to
check the creation of new universities there. In the kingdom of Aragon, the
University of Lerida never ceased reminding the world at large of the monopoly granted it in 1300 by its founder, King Diego II, in order to impede plans
for the founding of universities in other cities, in Barcelona in particular.29
Likewise, in Italy, Pavia managed to establish its right to remain the one and
only university within the duchy of Milan, and thus to restrict the claims of
existing or projected schools in Piacenza, Parma, and Milan itself.
On the other hand, it should be appreciated that very few of the universities founded after 1378 foundered altogether, since many managed to
survive at a fairly mediocre level, both as regards numbers and as regards the
influence of their teaching. The most dynamic foundations of the fifteenth
century were undoubtedly in the northern half of the kingdom of France
(Poitiers, Bourges, Caen), in Louvain, in Cracow, and in Germany. These
universities were large institutions, often with several hundred students of
varied origin, and their numbers rose steadily in the course of the century.30
Further, these universities were favourably regarded by the local people and
by the local civil and ecclesiastical authorities, and were therefore the
recipients of generous donations, benefiting the university itself, the colleges,
and the university teachers. The Hanseatic Universities of Rostock and
Greifswald are outstanding instances of this type of university. Finally, they
29 C. Carrere, 'Refus d'une creation universitaire et niveaux de culture a Barcelone: hypotheses
d'explication', he Moyen Age, 85 , 245-73.
30 The increasing size of the student body in German universities of the fifteenth century has
been established by R. C. Schwinges, in his
Vniversitdtsbesucher.
were intellectually ambitious universities, capable of retaining the services of
masters of some renown. These institutions thereby succeeded in promoting
new currents of thought and original teaching (the new astronomy at
Cracow, humanism at Vienna, 'nominalism' at Tubingen), in short, in reviving, for their own benefit, the creative vocation which had seemed up until
then to be the prerogative of the oldest centres of learning, such as Paris or
These new universities in the northern half of Europe generally took the
main features of their organization from the Parisian model. They therefore
tended to have the four 'classical' faculties (arts, theology, law, and medicine), the most important being the arts faculty, which had the largest
numbers and the theology faculty, in which secular masters and mendicants
shared out the teaching between them. These were 'masters' universities',
although at Prague, for example, or at Vienna or St Andrews, the students
were sometimes able, at least in the early years, to play a part in certain
elections and decision-making processes. At Prague, Vienna, Louvain, St
Andrews and Glasgow, there were, as in Paris, four 'nations', but the masters
of arts never achieved the kind of dominance they enjoyed at Paris or at
Oxford. Each faculty had its own dean, and authority over the whole university was wielded by a council of masters, from all the faculties, which
generally elected the rector.
The universities which had been founded in the fifteenth century were
usually equipped, at any rate officially, with 'all the authorized faculties',
either right from the start or else after a few years (at Rostock, the theology
faculty was only inaugurated in 1431, a full twelve years after the founding of
the university). Conversely, the majority of those born before the middle of
the fourteenth century were incomplete, and could only boast one, two, or
three faculties. To be more specific, the popes, concerned to exercise strict
control over the teaching of theology and the proliferation of the prestigious
degree of master of theology, had only sanctioned its teaching at a university
level in Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge and at the studium of the curia.31 This
policy was abandoned from the 1360s, undoubtedly upon the initiative of
Pope Urban V.32
The call for a degree of decentralization of theological instruction was now
being heard on all sides, for the teaching in Paris, torn apart by the quarrels
between 'nominalists', Scotists, Thomists, and so on, could no longer provide
such guarantees of orthodoxy as would justify the virtual monopoly which it
31 Which obviously did not stop numerous theology studia, often of a very high level, from
functioning within the mendicant orders' own educational networks; he scuole degli ordini
mendicanti
(secoli XIII—XIV) ; F.-B. Lickteig, The German Carmelites
Universities
 .
32 E. Delaruelle, 'La politique universitaire des papes d'Avignon - specialement d'Urbain V - et
la fondation du College Espagnol de Bologne', in El Cardenal
y el Colegio de
Espana, vol. II , 8-39.
Jacques Verger
enjoyed. Furthermore, there was now a more rigorous definition of the
notion of the stadium generate, and there were increasing local and national
pressures for the establishment of autochthonous theology faculties. The end
of the Middle Ages therefore saw the constitution of numerous such faculties
by papal bull, namely Toulouse and Bologna in 1360, Padua in 1363, Pavia in
1389, Salamanca in 1396, Lisbon in 1400, Avignon in 1413, Montpellier in
1421, Lerida in 1430, Valladolid in 1436, and Perpignan in 1447, amongst
others. Around the end of the fourteenth century, Vienna and Cracow
received the right to have theology faculties, although they had been explicitly
refused that right twenty or thirty years earlier, at the time of their original
foundation (at Prague, admittedly, the theology faculty had existed from the
start). In general, however, this proliferation of theology faculties mainly
affected the southern universities and, in practice, it often led to already existing mendicant studia being granted university status (which gave then the
right to confer degrees), through their integration into the local university.
UNIVERSITY COLLEGES
No typology of medieval universities, even if a cursory one, would be complete without a mention of university colleges.
The first university colleges appeared in Paris, at the end of the twelfth
century. These were nothing more than modest pious foundations, serving to
provide shelter for a handful of students, often in the midst of other 'poor
clerics'. The first genuine colleges were established in Paris, and then in
England, in the second half of the thirteenth century, at a time when the rate
of expansion of the universities was beginning to pose serious practical problems. In Paris, mention should be made of the colleges of the Sorbonne (1257)
and of Harcourt (1280); in Oxford, there were Merton (1263-4), Balliol
(1261-6), and University College (around 1280), and, at Cambridge, Peterhouse (1284). Their mode of organization took its inspiration in the main
from that of the mendicant monasteries, which had been established as early
as the 1220s within these universities, for the use of students belonging to
these orders. Endowed with land, properties, and rents, these colleges considered it their mission to take in a given number of students for a specified
period of time. The first colleges included establishments reserved for the use
of the monks of a particular abbey or order and which were more or less
assimilated to priories, such as the colleges of Saint-Bernard (Cistercian -
1248), of Cluny (around 1260), and of Saint-Denis (around 1263), all at Paris,
and the colleges of Gloucester (1283) and of Durham (1289), at Oxford.
However, the majority of colleges were meant for secular students (with the
family or compatriots of the founder often enjoying priority). In the years
before 1300, a total of nineteen colleges were founded at Paris, six at Oxford,
and one at Cambridge.
Although there were more colleges at Paris than elsewhere, they were often
small establishments, meant for young students of arts; they had very little
independence and were strictly supervised by the external authorities,
whether ecclesiastical or university. The English colleges were more independent and more democratic, their fellows being predominantly bachelors of
arts and theology students.
As an institution, the university college was most successful in the fourteenth century: between 1300 and 1400, thirty-seven were founded in Paris,
five in Oxford, and seven at Cambridge. The Parisian colleges continued in
general to be more modest than the English ones, yet the most important for
a long time was the College of Navarre, founded at Paris in 1304, for seventy
students; it was to be rivalled only by New College, Oxford, founded in 1379,
also for seventy students. Colleges spread in the fourteenth century in the
southern universities, where they had been unknown up until then, but they
were never to be as important there as at Paris or Oxford. Fifteen colleges
were founded in the south of France (eight of which were at Toulouse), eleven
in Italy (the only important one being the Spanish College founded in Bologna
in 1367), and two in Spain. The new universities of the Holy Roman Empire
and of central Europe adopted this institution (eight foundations, in all) but a
fairly particular type of college (often called collegium maius) was involved
here, in which masters enjoyed precedence. Such colleges were then supposed
to supervise the running of the faculties, whose teaching body they, for the
most part, assembled.
Colleges were still being founded in the fifteenth century, at a slower
rhythm in the oldest universities (thirty-six in France, twelve of which were in
Paris; nine in England; eight in Italy), but enjoying considerable support elsewhere (twenty-seven in the Empire; three in central Europe; three in Scotland;
six in the Iberian peninsula, destined to have a glorious future). It was rare
indeed for a medieval university to have no college, as was the case with
Whoever their founders were, whether princes, important officers, ecclesiastical dignitaries, or former regents, the colleges of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries were regarded less as simple lodging-houses for 'poor
scholars' and more as privileged institutions serving to guarantee their
members, at the price of a degree of discipline, the best conditions for work
and study, in other words, to constitute a student elite.33 Wealthier students,
especially students of law, were therefore admitted. The ever larger donations
benefiting the colleges, or, at any rate, those which had not been ruined by the
wars, enabled them to extend their libraries and, crucially, to constitute
33 A. L. Gabriel, 'The College System in the Fourteenth-Century Universities', in F.L. Utley (ed.)»
The Forward Movement of the Fourteenth Century , 79—124; A. L. Gabriel,
'Motivations of the Founders of Mediaeval Colleges', Beitrage zum Berufsbewusstsein des mittelalterlichen Menschen, Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 3 , 61-72.
Jacques Verger
themselves as genuine teaching institutions, with a proper body of regents
and with new and more progressive pedagogic methods. Such colleges were
therefore increasingly in a position to compete with the faculties, whose role
tended to be reduced to the conferment of degrees.
Only the main colleges became 'colleges de plein exercice" (colleges providing a full course) but, from the end of the fourteenth century, some gave the
impression of being genuine centres of intellectual life, indeed, far more
dynamic than the rest of the university. The role played by the College of
Navarre and by Magdalen College in the first spread of humanism at Paris
and at Oxford is well known.34 This process was very probably less pronounced in the countries of the Holy Roman Empire, where the poor
students continued to constitute an important part of the enrolment of the
colleges. At any rate, the colleges still only received a minority of students
(between 10 per cent and 20 per cent at Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge and
even less at other places) but, in France, England, and Germany, they were
henceforth the place where the pedagogic model which was to exert the
greatest influence upon the evolution of practices of secondary and higher
education in modern Europe was elaborated.
LIST OF EUROPEAN UNIVERSITIES IN THE MIDDLE AGES
Those studia whose status as universities is open to dispute have been placed
in brackets.
(Salerno) (twelfth century) - statutes granted by the Emperor Frederick II
Bologna (end of the twelfth century)
(Reggio) (1188) (schools continued to be active up until the end of the
thirteenth century)
Vicenza (1204) (disappeared after 1209)
(Palencia) (1208) (disappeared around 1250)
Paris (beginning of the thirteenth century)
Oxford (beginning of the thirteenth century)
Montpellier (beginning of the thirteenth century)
Cambridge (1209-25)
Arezzo (1215) (disappeared around 1260 - a new foundation in 1355, disappeared around 1373)
Salamanca (before 1218-19)
Padua (1222)
Naples (1224)
34 G. Ouy, 'Le college de Navarre, berceau de l'humanisme francais', in Enseignement et vie
intellectuelle (IXe~XVIe siecle). Actes du 9$e Congres national des societes savantes, vol. I
 , 2.75-99-
Vercelli (1228) (disappeared in the fourteenth century)
Toulouse (1229)
Orleans (around 1235) (officially recognized as a studium generale in
Studium of the Roman curia (1245)
Siena (1246) (disappeared around 1252 - new foundation in 1357)
(Piacenza) (1248) (there is some doubt as to how effective its opening in
1248 really was; it was active once more from 1398 to 1402, when the
University of Pavia transferred to Piacenza)
Angers (around 1250) (officially recognized as studium generale in
(Seville) (1254-60) (founded by the king and the pope, this studium may
not have been a genuine university - disappeared around 1270)
Valladolid (end of the thirteenth century) (officially recognized as studium
generale by the pope in 1346)
Lisbon (1290) (transferred to Coimbra from 1308 to 1338 and from 1354 to
Lerida (1300)
Avignon (1303)
Rome (1303) (disappeared at the end of the fourteenth century - reestablished in 1431)
Perugia (1308)
Coimbra (see Lisbon)
Treviso (1318) (very probably disappeared in the fourteenth century or, at
the latest, in 1407)
Cahors (1332)
Grenoble (1339) (disappeared in the middle of the fourteenth century)
(Verona) (1339) (this studium^ whose status as university is doubtful, disappeared in the fifteenth century)
Pisa (1343) (disappeared around 1360 - re-established at the beginning of
the fifteenth century)
Prague (1347)
Florence (1349) (transferred to Pisa, and thereby closed, in 1472)
Perpignan (1350)
Huesca (1354) (disappeared in the first half of the fifteenth century - reestablished in 1464)
Pavia (1361) (transferred to Piacenza in 1398, and thereby suppressed re-established in 1412)
Cracow (1364) (disappeared prior to 1370 - re-established in 1397)
Orange (1365)
Vienna (1365)
Pecs (1367) (disappeared at some point after 1376)
(Lucca) (1369)
Jacques Verger
Erfurt (1379)
Heidelberg (1385)
Cologne (1388)
Buda (1389) (disappeared around 1400 - re-established in 1410, disappeared around 1460)
Ferrara (1391) (disappeared in 1394 - re-established in 1430)
Wiirzburg (1402) (disappeared after 1413)
Turin (1404)
Leipzig (1409)
Aix-en-Provence (1409)
St Andrews (1411)
(Parma) (1412) (this studium claimed to be generate between 1412 and
Rostock (1419)
Dole (1422)
Louvain (1425)
Poitiers (1431)
Caen (1432)
Bordeaux (1441)
Catania (1444)
(Gerona) (1446) (royal charter in 1446, but only became a real university in
the sixteenth century)
Barcelona (1450)
Glasgow (1451)
Valence (France) (1452)
Trier (1454)
Greifswald (1456)
Freiburg im Breisgau (1457)
Basle (1459)
Ingolstadt (1459)
Nantes (1460)
Bourges (1464)
Pozsony (1465) (disappeared at the end of the fifteenth century)
Venice (1470) (college of physicians authorized to grant doctoral degrees)
(Genoa) (1471) (only opened in 1513)
Saragossa (1474)
Copenhagen (1475)
Mainz (1476)
Tubingen (1476)
Uppsala (1477)
Palma, Majorca (1483)
Sigiienza (1489)
Aberdeen (1495)
Frankfurt-on-Oder (1498) (only opened in 1506)
Alcala (1499)
Valencia (1500)
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliographies
Bibliographie internationale de l'histoire des universites, vol. I, Espagne - Louvain -
Copenhague—Prague, by R. Gilbert, J. Paquet, S. Ellehoj, F. Kavka, and J. Havranek,
Geneva, 1973; vol. II, Portugal — Leiden — Pecs — Franeker- Basel, by A. Moreira de
Sa, R. Ekkart, M. Fenyes, A. de Kalbermatten, and L. Haeberli, Geneva, 1976.
Coing, H. (ed.) Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren europaischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, vol. I, Munich, 1973, 39-128.
Craigie, J. A Bibliography of Scottish Education before 1872, London, 1970.
Ermann, W. and Horn, E. Bibliographie der deutschen Universitdten, 3 vols., Leipzig/
Berlin, 1904-5; reprint, 1965.
Fletcher, J. M. (ed.) The History of European Universities. Work in Progress and
Publications, 5 vols., Birmingham, 1977-81.
Fletcher, J. M. and Deahl, J. 'European Universities 1300-1700: the Development of
Research 1969—81, and a Summary Bibliography', in J. M. Kittelson and P. J.
Transue (eds.), Rebirth, Reform and Resilience: Universities in Transition 1300-
1700, Columbus, Ohio, 1984, 324-57.
Fletcher, J. M. and Upton, C. A. 'Publications on University History since 1977: a
Continuing Bibliography', History of Universities, 7 , 371-468. This is a
current bibliography which is published every year.
Gabriel, A. L. Summary Bibliography of the History of the Universities of Great
Britain and Ireland up to 1800, Covering Publications between 1900 and 1968,
Notre Dame, Ind., 1974.
Garcia y Garcia, A. 'Bibliografia de historia de las universidades espanolas', Repertorio de historia de la ciencias eclesidsticas en Espana, 7 , 599-627.
Guenee, S. Bibliographie de Vhistoire des universites francaises des origines a la Revolution, 2 vols., Paris, 1978-81.
Hammerstein, N.' Jubilaumsschrift und Alltagsarbeit. Tendenzen bildungsgeschichtlicher Literatur', Historische Zeitschrift, 236 , 601-33.
Hammerstein, N. 'Neue Wege der Universitatsgeschichtsschreibung', Zeitschrift fur
Historische Forschung, 5 , 449—63.
Hammerstein, N. 'Nochmals Universitatsgeschichtsschreibung', Zeitschrift fur Historische Forschung, 7 , 231-36.
Petry, L. 'Deutsche Forschungen nach dem zweiten Weltkrieg zur Geschichte der Universitaten', Vierteljahresschrift fur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, 46 ,
de Ridder-Symoens, H. 'Universiteitsgeschiedenis als bron voor sociale geschiedenis',
Tijdschrift voor Sociale Geschiedenis, 10 , 87-115.
de Ridder-Symoens, H. and Paquet, J. 'Bibliografisch Overzicht Universiteitsgeschiedenis der Nederlanden', Batavia Academica, 2 , 18-21. This is a current
bibliography which is published every year.
Jacques Verger
Scheurkogel, J. 'Nieuwe universiteitsgeschiedenis in de late middeleeuwen', Tijdschrift voor Geschiedenis, 94 , 194-204.
Stark, E. Bibliographie zur Universitd'tsgeschichte. Verzeichnis der im Gebiet der Bundesrepublik Deutschland 1945-1971 veroffentlichen Literatur, ed. E. Hassinger,
Munich, 1974.
Steiger, G. and Straube, M. 'Forschungen und Publikationen seit 1945 zur Geschichte
der deutschen Universitaten und Hochschulen auf dem Territorium der DDR',
Zeitschrift fur Geschichtswissenschaft, 7 (special issue), (i960), 563-99.
Stelling-Michaud, S. 'L'histoire des universites au Moyen Age et a la Renaissance au
cours des vingt-cinq dernieres annees', in Rapports du Xle Congres international
des Sciences historiques, vol. I, Stockholm, i960,97-143; revised Italian translation:
'La storia delle universita nel medioevo e nel Rinascimento: stato degli studi e
prospettive di ricerca', in G. Arnaldi (ed.) Le origini delVUniversitd, Bologna, 1974,
Straube, M. and Flaschendrager, W. 'Forschungen zur Geschichte der Universitaten,
Hochschulen und Akademien der DDR ', Zeitschrift fur Geschichtswissenschaft, 18 (special issue) , 187-209.
Verger, J. 'Tendances actuelles de la recherche sur l'histoire de Peducation en France
au moyen age (Xlle-XVe siecles)', Histoire de VEducation, 6 , 9-34.
Vico Monteoliva, M. 'Bibliografia sobre historia de las universidades espanolas',
Historia de la Educacion, 3 , 281-90.
Zanella, G. 'Bibliografia per la storia dell'universita di Bologna dalle origini al 1945,
aggiornata al 1983', Studi e memorie per la storia delVUniversitd di Bologna, new
series, 5, .
General works
Cobban, A. B. The Medieval Universities: Their Development and Organization,
London, 1975.
Denifle, H. Die Entstehung der Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400, Berlin, 1885;
reprint, Graz, 1956.
Fried, J. (ed.) Schulen und Studium im sozialen Wandel des hohen und spa'ten Mittelalters, Sigmaringen, 1986.
d'Irsay, S. Histoire des universites francaises et etrangeres des origines a nos jours, 2
vols., Paris, 1933-5.
IJsewijn, J. and Paquet, J. (eds.) Universities in the Late Middle Ages, Mediaevalia
Lovaniensia, series 1, studia 6, Louvain, 1978. This volume is also published as
Paquet, J. and IJsewijn, J. (eds.) Les Universites a la fin du moyen age, Publications
de l'lnstitut d'Etudes Medievales, 2nd series, 2, Louvain, 1978.
Jilek, L. (ed.) Historical Compendium of European Universities — Repertoire historique des universites europeennes, Geneva, 1984.
Kaufmann, G. Geschichte der deutschen Universitaten, 2 vols., Stuttgart, 1888-96;
reprint, Graz, 1958. Volume I deals with European universities.
Kibre, P. Scholarly Privileges in the Middle Ages. The Rights, Privileges and Immunities of Scholars and Universities at Bologna - Padua - Paris - Oxford, Cambridge,
Mass., 1961.
Le Goff, J. Les Intellectuels au Moyen Age, 2nd edn, Paris, 1985.
Pedersen, O. Studium generale. De europceiske universiteters tilblwelse, Copenhagen,
Rashdall, H. The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, 3 vols., ed. F. M.
Powicke and A. B. Emden, Oxford, 1936; reprint, Oxford, 1988.
Universitd e societd nei secoli XII—XVI. Atti del nono convegno internazionale di
studio tenuto a Pistoia nei giorni 20-25 settembre 1979, Pistoia, 1982.
Les Universites europeennes du XIVe au XVIIIe siecles: Aspects et problemes. Actes
du colloque international a Voccasion du Vie centenaire de I'universite Jagellone de
Cracovie, Geneva, 1967.
Verger, J. Les Universites au Moyen Age, Paris, 1973.
Verger, J. 'Universites et ecoles medievales de la fin du Xle a la fin du XVe siecle', in
G. Mialaret and J. Vial (eds.), Histoire mondiale de Veducation, vol. I, Paris, 1981,
Wieruszowski, H. The Medieval University: Masters, Students, Learning, Princeton,
N.J., 1966.
Individual countries
Ajo Gonzalez de Rapariegos y Sainz de Zufiiga, C. M. Historia de las universidades
hispdnicas. Ortgenes y desarrollo desde su aparicion a nuestros dias, 11 vols.,
Madrid, 1957-77.
Barcala Mufioz, A. 'Las universidades espanolas durante la Edad media', Anuario de
Estudios medievales, 15 , 83-126.
Bellomo, M. Saggio sulVuniversitd nelVetd del diritto comune, Catania, 1979.
Boehm, L. and Miiller, R. A. (eds.) Universitd'ten und Hochschulen in Deutschland,
Oesterreich und der Schweiz. Eine Universitd'tsgeschichte in Einzeldarstellungen,
Diisseldorf, 1983.
Cadini, F. and others (eds.) La crisi del sistema comunale, Storia della societa italiana,
7, Milan, 1982.
Cobban, A. B. The Medieval English Universities: Oxford and Cambridge to c. 1500,
Cambridge, 1988.
Coissac, J. B. Les Universites d'Ecosse depuis la fondation de I'universite dyAberdeen
jusqu'au triomphe de la Reforme (1410-1560), Paris, 1914.
Engelbrecht, H. Geschichte des osterreichischen Bildungswesens, vol. I, Vienna, 1982.
Guenee, S. Les Universites francaises des origines d la Revolution. Notices historiques
sur les universites, studia et academies protestantes, Paris, 1982.
Kaufmann, G. Geschichte der deutschen Universitd'ten, 2 vols., Stuttgart, 1888-96;
reprint, Graz, 1958. Volume II deals with German universities.
Paulsen, F. Die deutschen Universitd'ten und das Universitd'tsstudium, Berlin, 1902.
Paulsen, F. Geschichte des gelehrten Unterrichts auf den deutschen Schulen und Universitd'ten vom Ausgang des Mittelalters bis zur Gegenwart, vol. I, 3rd edn, Leipzig/
Berlin, 1919.
Roslanowski, T. 'Universitaten und Hochschulen in Polen', in E. Maschke and J.
Sydow (eds.), Stadt und Universitdt im Mittelalter und in der fruhen Neuzeit, Sigmaringen, 1977, 166-9.
Verger, J. (ed.) Histoire des universites en France, Toulouse, 1986.
Jacques Verger
\ CONFED. ,-•• **R«Mo 
/:Verona -...
• Bordeaux 1441
"':.'"•..)-
/ j /_ yicenza 1204 \
Grenoble 1339^ VeVcelli 1228" *
T r e v i $ 0 1 3 1 8 \
©Pecs 1367
• ^Ve^cTu^CT--".
, V S •Florence 1349
NSienaV • Perugia 1!
Medieval university towns. The political divisions are those
of c. 1490. Dates in brackets are uncertain. See the list at the end
of chapter 2 for further details. Adapted, with permission, from
H. Rashdall, The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, ed.
M. M. Powicke and A. B. Emden, Oxford, 1936; reprint,
Oxford, 1988
Status as universities:
• definite
O debatable
2 Foundations prior to 1300.
Status as universities:
• definite
O debatable
3 Universities active in 1300.
Status as universities
O debatable
2nd second
foundation
4 Foundations 1300-78.
Status as universities:
• definite
O debatable
Universities active in 1378.
Status as universities:
• definite
O debatable
2nd second
foundation
T r i e r #
.Heidelberg
i.B. /•vTubingen
Genoas. Parma F
Huesca(2nd)
• Saragossa
6 Foundations 1378-1500.
Status as universities:
O debatable
St Andrews
Prague r-> * Cracow
M a i n z J # Heidelberg
7 Universities active in 1500.
STRUCTURES
RELATIONS WITH AUTHORITY
by PAOLO NARDI
PAPACY, EMPIRE, AND SCHOOLS IN THE TWELFTH CENTURY
Recent historical studies clearly show that the theory that the imperial
authorities intervened directly in higher education from the early twelfth
century onwards must be rejected. There is nothing, for example, to show
that the University of Bologna was founded at the instance of Countess
Matilda of Canossa after her appointment as Vicar of the Holy Roman
Empire in May m i . 1 In the first few decades of the twelfth century not even
the church found it necessary to institutionalize the new schools arising in
Europe, in spite of the close ties that, from the Gregorian reform onwards,
firmly linked ecclesiastical circles with the study of theology and law. The
way the schools were organized did not make for closer official relations, for
they flourished at a time when the institutional location of education was less
important than the personality of a teacher able to attract a group of pupils
willing to follow him anywhere.2 Also, it was widely believed that hankering
after riches led directly to the propagation of false doctrine; accordingly, the
Councils of Clermont (1130) and Reims (1131) and the second Lateran
Council of 1139 solemnly forbade monks and regular canons to study medicine and civil law after taking holy orders and pronouncing religious vows.3
On the other hand the papal curia did not neglect contacts with the principal
schools - the Bologna school of law , i6ff.
Paolo Nardi
glossator Bulgarus)4 and the school of theology in Paris (in 1144 Cardinal
Robert Pullen,5 an English theologian who had taught in Paris, was appointed
Chancellor of the Holy Roman Church).
The first important manifestation of imperial interest in the demands and
activities of teachers and scholars was undoubtedly the Authentica Habita, a
constitution issued by the Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa in 1155 when he
first came to Italy to receive the crown.6 In May 1155, near Bologna, he met
the masters and students of the school of law. According to the anonymous
author of the Carmen de gestis Frederici I, they begged him to forbid the
exercise of the right of reprisal against foreign scholars (seizure of person or
property to satisfy debts incurred by their compatriots) and to grant all of
them freedom of movement 'so that all men minded to study be free to come
and go and dwell in security' (ut nemo studium exercere volenteslimpediat
stantes nee euntes nee redeuntes).7 Frederick I Barbarossa immediately issued
the celebrated constitution, in which he affirmed the pre-eminent value of
scientific knowledge, and recognized as praiseworthy and deserving of protection all persons who in pursuit of it were obliged to live far from their own
country. He granted professors of civil law and students the privilege of
freedom of movement and safe residence in all seats of learning. Secondly,
expressing compassion for persons who spent all their substance and braved
all sorts of dangers in order to survive in a foreign country, he decreed that no
one should dare to harm or wrong scholars or, above all, to recover from
them debts contracted by their countrymen, on penalty of having to reimburse four times the amount (the quadruplum). This sanction was enforceable against all transgressors, and magistrates neglecting to enforce the law
were disgraced and barred in perpetuity from their office. Thirdly, Frederick I
ordered that any scholar summoned to appear in court could choose whether
to be tried by his own masters or by the bishops' courts. A plaintiff applying
to another judge was punished by losing his case even if it was good in law.
The effect of this order was to extend the benefit of clergy (privilegium fori)
already enjoyed by clerics to lay students, and to confirm an old imperial rule
(which since it came from Justinian's Omnem constitution was well known
to the masters of Bologna) empowering the bishop and professors of Berito to
judge students of that city. Frederick I caused the Habita to be inserted in
Justinian's Codex; this clearly showed his wish to revive Roman law and
incorporate it in the legal system of the Holy Roman Empire (the Saerum
Imperium). His plan exactly suited the masters in Bologna, who as the inter-
4 H. Kantorowicz, Studies in the Glossators of the Roman Law , 68, 71.
5 P. Classen, Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed. J. Fried, Schriften der MGH, 29
 , 9-10.
6 W. Stelzer, 'Zum Scholarenprivileg Friedrich Barbarossas ("Authentica Habita")', Deutsches
Archiv fiir Erforschung des Mittelalters, 34 , 123-65.
7 I. Schmale-Ott (ed.), Carmen de gestis Frederici 1. imperatoris in Lombardia, MGH Scriptores
 , 17-18, 496-7.
Relations with authority
preters and teachers of Justinian's laws, had every interest in getting them
generally recognized and applied.8
Frederick I was not, however, in a position to put the Habita into effect;
the political aims that appeared feasible when he first visited Italy proved to
be beyond his reach. The war of 1159-62 with the communes of the Lombard
League, culminating in the sieges of Crema and Milan, affected his relations
with the scholars studying in Bologna, if we are to treat as genuine a letter
said to have been sent to him at the time by four masters in Bologna, begging
him to revoke the order expelling from Bologna students from Milan,
Brescia, and Crema.9 On that occasion Frederick I ignored the Habita constitution, and addressed himself only to the political situation of the moment.
Later on, when the city joined the Lombard League, the emperor showed no
further interest in Bologna's professors and scholars.10
In September 1159 Cardinal Rolando Bandinelli became pope. He was an
expert theologian and consummate politician. As Chancellor of the Holy
Roman Church from 1153 onwards he had favoured closer contact between
the papal curia and the principal schools, fully realizing because of his education
and political acumen the growing importance of teaching theology and law.
Immediately after his bitterly contested election (which led to a schism) Pope
Alexander III sent letter after letter to prominent persons and institutions,
explaining the facts and presenting himself as legitimate pope. Among the
recipients were the teachers of civil law, and all other masters, in Bologna.
This was probably the first official solemn recognition of their importance by
the ecclesiastical authorities.11 When Alexander, as a fugitive from the enmity
of the Emperor Frederick I, stayed in France from April 1162 to September
1165, he gained a profound knowledge of conditions in the numerous and
flourishing episcopal schools of the kingdom of the Franks {regnum Francorum), On his return to Italy the pope decided to order the abolition of the evil
custom (prava consuetudo) of masters in the diocesan schools of exacting a
money payment for the award of the licence to teach {licentia docendi). He
accordingly issued a decretal, addressed principally to the French bishops,
ordering that persons considered capable of teaching in schools {regere
scholas) should be able to do so without making payment and without let or
hindrance, as it was not lawful for knowledge to be bought or sold. He later
8 G. Cencetti, 'II forodegli scolari negli Studi medievali italiani', Attie memoriedella R. Deputazione di storia patria per I'Emilia e la Romagna, 5 , 165; J. K. Hyde, 'Commune, University and Society in Early Medieval Bologna', in Universities in Politics, ^zii.; R. L. Benson,
'Political Renovatio: Two Models from Roman Antiquity', in Renaissance and Renewal,
9 J. Fried, Die Entstehung des Juristenstandes im 12. Jahrhundert, Forschungen zur neueren
Privatrechtsgeschichte, 21 , 54-5.
10 G. De Vergottini, 'Lo Studio di Bologna, l'Impero, il Papato, in Scritti di storia del diritto
italiano, vol. II, Seminario giuridico della Universita di Bologna, 74 , 744ff.
11 K. W. Norr, 'Institutional Foundations of the New Jurisprudence', in Renaissance and
Renewal, 325. For Rolando Bandinelli see Classen, Studium (note 5), i3off.
Paolo Nardi
confirmed this principle and fixed the procedure for recognition of the candidate's ability to teach, laying down that the candidate must be recognized as
able to teach only after examination by the 'greater and wiser part' {maior et
sanior pars) of the chapter of canons of the cathedral (1173).12 He ordered
that, if the dignitary authorized to confer the licentia docendi infringed the
order not to require payment, the bishop should appoint someone else in his
place. Finally, at the third Lateran Council of 1179 t n e P°Pe confirmed that
both the licentia docendi and teaching should be free of charge, and provided
that masters should be paid by benefices. Thus to repress simony and corruption Alexander reformed the educational practices of the church, encouraged
an influx of poor students admitted not for their fortune but for their merit,
and saw to it that teachers were adequately paid; moreover, he laid the foundations of the studia of western Europe and especially of the Paris studium.13
During the pontificate of Alexander III (1159-81) the teaching of law was
vigorously encouraged, to the particular advantage of the school in Bologna,
which consolidated its position as the most important centre in Europe for
the study of Roman and canon law, although other schools appeared, mainly
outside Italy.14 It has been roundly denied that the Bologna school was an
ecclesiastical foundation;15 but the bishop of Bologna was unquestionably the
only authority to be given jurisdiction over scholars by the emperor himself.
Later the conflict between the emperor and the commune of Bologna
strengthened Bologna's links with the papacy. The Holy See had its own
lively interest in promoting the teaching of law, as may be inferred from the
great output of canon law rules at the time, and from the appointment to high
office of many prelates trained in law. The first mention of an order by a
papal legate regarding the scholars and teachers of Bologna dates from
1176-7: the bishop of Porto-Ostia Guglielmus forbade them on penalty of
excommunication to compete for lodging in the hospitia (halls of residence)
by promising to pay landlords a higher rent, either in consideration of the
advantages of the lodging or for the vainglory of seeming richer than their
colleagues, and protected the tenants of the hospitia by forbidding masters
and scholars to apply to the landlord for an already occupied lodging before
the expiry of the current lease or without the tenants' consent. Some years
later, and certainly before August 1182, the Legate Pietro, bishop of Tusculum, confirmed the prohibition, threatening transgressors with anathema -
12 Classen, Studium (note 5), 245 n. 14a (note added by J. Fried); A. E. Bernstein, 'Magisterium
and License: Corporate Autonomy against Papal Authority in the Medieval University of
Paris', Viator, Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 9 , 292ff., appears to be unaware of
the document mentioned by Fried.
13 P. Delhaye, 'L'organisation scolaire au Xlle siecle', Traditio, 5 , 258ff.; G. Post, K.
Giocarinis, and R. Kay, 'The Medieval Heritage of a Humanistic Ideal: "scientia donum Dei
est, unde vendi non potest" ', Traditio, 11 , 195-234.
14 S. Kuttner, 'Revival' (note 2), 319. See also chapter 12, 'The faculties of law'.
15 G. Cencetti, 'Studium fuit Bononie. Note sulla storia dell'universita di Bologna nel primo
mezzo secolo della sua esistenza', Studi medievali, 3: 7 , 781-833, especially 815.
Relations with authority
banishment from the Christian community. Lastly, between July 1184 and
November 1185, Pope Lucius III repeated the prohibition and furthermore
charged the bishop of Bologna to read out the decretal Ex rescripto constitution every year to the assembled masters and scholars (in communi audientia
magistrorum et scholariorum).16 The pope thereby specifically reaffirmed the
bishop's jurisdiction on a very sensitive issue, since it concerned the relationship of the citizens of Bologna with all members of the Bologna studium.
At about this time the commune of Bologna became actively interested in
the schools (scholae) in its territory, which brought the city prestige and its
inhabitants riches. It began to devise ways of preventing the masters from
emigrating to other cities with their pupils in their train. The case of the jurist
Pillius, who in 1182 or thereabouts entered into secret negotiations with the
people of Modena to transfer his school there, led the commune to require all
masters to swear on oath not to transfer their residence out of Bologna for at
least two years. Other teachers were subsequently required to swear similar
oaths and in this way the Habita constitution, granting teachers the beneficium of freedom of movement to carry out their teaching, was repeatedly
violated. These serious acts of interference with the academic life of Bologna
probably encouraged the students to form a universitas, that is, a corporation
similar to the contemporary trade guilds, or associations of members of
certain professions within a city, formed to defend members' interests by
appointing their own representatives and by special jurisdictions reserved to
themselves.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE CHURCH IN THE TWELFTH AND
THIRTEENTH CENTURIES
At the end of the twelfth century and in the first twenty years of the thirteenth
century the hegemony in European politics assumed by the papacy and the
ecclesiastical hierarchy undoubtedly led to an increase in the number of
'ecclesiastical clerks'17 attending the principal studia. At that time, even in a
kingdom with as many schools as France, there were not many masters even
in cathedral chapters; but between the second and third decades of the thirteenth century Boncompagno da Signa had no hesitation in affirming that
teachers and scholars (ordo scholasticus) were the mirror of the church
(speculum Ecclesiae) because many of the highest ecclesiastical dignitaries
were drawn from academic circles (ab ipso [ordine] quidem trahuntur omnia
principalia et secundaria Ecclesiae membra), to such an extent that the world
16 P. Landau, 'Papst Lucius III und das Mietrecht in Bologna', in S. Kuttner (ed.), Proceedings of
the Fourth International Congress of Medieval Canon Law. Toronto, 21-25 August 1972
 , 511-22.
17 For the distinction between ecclesiastical and scholar (or lay) clerks, see J. W. Baldwin,
Masters, Princes and Merchants. The Social Views of Peter the Chanter and his Circle , vol. I, 73; vol. II, 51 n. 57.
Paolo Nardi
of study appeared to be identical with the church itself {cum ex ipsis [sc. viris
scholasticis] et in ipsis consistere videatur [Ecclesia]),18
The Holy See's interest in promoting and organizing higher education
therefore revived, and greatly increased under Pope Innocent III (1198-1216),
a theologian, jurist, and politician of great acumen and indisputable authority. His laws aimed at amplifying the rules laid down by Pope Alexander III
for the episcopal schools, and, especially in Paris and Bologna, establishing
the status of teachers and students. Such was the purpose of the decretal Tuae
fraternitatis, issued in 1207, authorizing clerics going to study at an important
centre of learning to go on drawing the income from their benefices in
absence from them. Such was also the purpose of the rules promulgated at
the fourth Lateran Council of 1215, repeating the order to cathedral churches
to open schools, run by masters of recognized ability paid by benefices, for
priests and poor laymen, and requiring schools of theology, also with paid
teachers, to be set up in metropolitan dioceses.19 Nor was Innocent III
indifferent to the demands of the universitates then coming into being; his
decretal Quia in causis confirmed to the scholars of Paris assembled in a
universitas their right under the ius commune (the two universal codes of
Roman law and canon law) to appoint their own representatives in a legal
action; and by his decretal Ex literis he acted as interpreter and supreme
guarantor of the rules which the societas of teachers of theology, canon law,
and arts in Paris had sworn to obey; he laid down the principle that any
person excluded from the universitas for disobedience {propter contumaciam) could be readmitted if he made adequate amends. All these rules
figured in two decretal collections: Compilatio 111, promulgated by Innocent
III in 1210 and sent to all masters and students dwelling in Bologna for faithful observance in and out of school, and Compilatio /V, drawn up in 1215-16
by a prominent jurist of Bologna in close touch with the curia.20
The efforts of Innocent III to regulate higher education would have fallen
short of their goal had they not been completed by the special regulations
issued by his cardinal legates and by the jurisprudence of the prelates
appointed to adjudicate controversies. Thus in Paris the Cardinal Legate
Guala Bicchieri's shrewd legal mind laid down the methods to be followed by
the masters and ecclesiastical authorities in the exercise of their jurisdiction
over the scholars. Teachers were first to admonish the students in general
18 De Vergottini, 'Studio di Bologna', (note 10), 790 n. 120.
19 G. Post, 'Masters' Salaries and Student-fees in the Mediaeval Universities', Speculum, 7 ,
20 K. Pennington, 'The Making of a Decretal Collection: the Genesis of Compilatio Tertia', in S.
Kuttner and K. Pennington (eds.), Proceedings
of the Fifth International
Congress of
Canon Law. Salamanca,
2.1-Z5 September
1976 , 67—92; S. Kuttner,
'Johannes Teutonicus, das vierte Laterankonzil und die Compilatio quarta', in S. Kuttner,
Medieval Councils, Decretals and Collections of Canon Law. Selected Essays ,
essay no. X, 608-34.
Relations with authority
(generaliter) and threaten transgressors with excommunication. Then, after
granting the students time to submit their defence, they were to repeat their
admonishments and threats in school, naming the rebels and all persons
evading trial. Finally, if the guilty persons failed to mend their ways, the
chancellor of the cathedral chapter was to pronounce on them a sentence of
excommunication from which only the bishop or abbot of Saint Victor could
absolve them (1208). Later the universitas of masters and scholars entered
into a long dispute with the chancellor of the chapter over the award of the
licentia docendi and the exercise of jurisdiction. Innocent III appointed the
bishop of Troyes to settle the dispute, and the bishop of Paris to act as depositee of, and to approve, the agreement reached by the parties. This stipulated
that candidates for the licentia docendi should not be required to pay for it or
to swear fidelity, and that if the chancellor refused to grant it the bishop
should award the licentia to all candidates recognized by a majority of the
teachers in the disciplines concerned as suitable to hold it. The masters in
Paris were thus officially recognized as possessing the same prerogatives as
those held by cathedral chapters at least since the time of Alexander III.21
Lastly, in 1215 the Cardinal Legate Robert of Courson (Robert of Kedleston),
a former master in Paris, drew up a comprehensive set of rules for the Paris
studium. These laid down teaching programmes and procedure, regulated
academic custom at official gatherings and clothing and occasions for mourning, confirmed the rules for examinations for the licentia docendi fixed two
years before by agreement between the universitas and the chancellor, and
repeated that masters should exercise jurisdiction over scholars. Without
explicitly referring to the decretal of Lucius III on tenancies in the hospitia, he
drew attention to its contents; and he indicated the matters which the universitas was competent to decide by requiring masters and scholars to swear an
oath to observe certain rights and duties - preparation of the defence of
scholars who had been seriously wronged, where justice had not been done;
the fixing of rents for rooms in the hospitia^ and settling times and procedures
for lessons and disputations. This was the fullest and most detailed definition
of studium organization ever formulated by the ecclesiastical authorities.22
Ecclesiastical authority also tried to influence the Oxford
However, although Oxford scholars were formally subject to the supervision
and jurisdiction of the bishop of Lincoln, to whose diocese Oxford belonged,
Lincoln was far away and his practical influence small. The excommunication of King John by Innocent III in March 1208 caused the first diaspora of
the 'clerks' of Oxford, who feared reprisals by the king. In the following year
a murder committed by a scholar led the authorities to arrest some of his
21 G. Post, 'Parisian masters as a corporation, 1200-1246', in G. Post, Studies in Medieval Legal
Public Law and the State, 1100—1322 , 34ft., 44—6.
22 S. C. Ferruolo, 'The Paris statutes of 1215 reconsidered', History of Universities,
Paolo Nardi
colleagues. Two or perhaps three students were condemned to death with
royal approval. The result was an exodus of masters, followed by their
pupils, in protest against the violation of the benefit of clergy (privilegium
/on). Only five years later, in 1214, the rules made by the Cardinal Legate
Nicolaus de Romanis restored the studium to life; he ordered that scholars
arrested by the secular authorities should be handed over to the bishop of
Lincoln, or to the archdeacon or the chancellor of the chapter; and he made
these authorities responsible for administering the compulsory payment
extracted from the citizens of Oxford in aid of poor students. The legate also
confirmed the system then current of fixing rents in the hospitia, to ensure
compliance with the regulations made by Lucius III to prohibit competition,
basing their amount on the valuations agreed by scholars and citizens jointly
prior to 1209; a committee of four masters and four citizens was appointed to
settle cases in which the necessary valuations had not been made.23
The troubles in Oxford in the early thirteenth century are a clear example
of the difficulties and bitter disputes between a university and secular authorities - especially locally - at a time of crucial importance to the formation and
growth of the studia. Similar events elsewhere were settled by closer control
of the ecclesiastical authorities. In Paris, for instance, following the murder of
several students by a band of Serjeants guided by the prevot, Philip II
Augustus was obliged in 1200 to grant the scholars a privilege assuring them
that he would prosecute with special rigour any persons doing them harm,
and undertaking to allow scholars accused of criminal offences to be tried by
the ecclesiastical authorities.24 Meanwhile in Bologna the universitas of
scholars was gathering strength and becoming more firmly established, to the
alarm of the commune, which feared the growth in its midst of a cosmopolitan body and a jurisdiction parallel to that of its own podestd. In 1211 the city
was governed by the podestd Guglielmo da Pusterla, who supported the
Emperor Otto IV recently excommunicated by Innocent III. One of the laws
enacted by Guglielmo as podestd prohibited the formation of groups whose
members swore to lend each other mutual aid and support, other than associations of men of war and artists taking such oaths ad honorem et utilitatem
of the commune. The intention was obviously to prevent the formation of
scholars' universitates. But in the same year the pope came down firmly on
the side of the students, exhorted the people of Bologna to leave the party
supporting the emperor, and threatened to excommunicate the city and transfer the studium elsewhere. By this means he succeeded in bringing about a
new balance of power in Bologna favouring the party supporting the papa-
23 R. W. Southern, 'From Schools to University', in History of Oxford,
26, 29-32; C. H. Lawrence, 'The University in State and Church', in History of Oxford,
97-100, 133, 136, 140.
24 J. Verger, 'Des ecoles a l'universite: la mutation institutionnelle', in R.-H. Bautier (ed.), La
France de Philippe Auguste. Le temps des mutations.
Actes du Colloque
international
par le CNRS , 82iff.
Relations with authority
cy.25 Subsequently, in 1215 or thereabouts, the teachers renounced jurisdiction over lay scholars in criminal cases, and it passed almost entirely to the
commune (cases involving clerics remaining under the jurisdiction of the
bishop). Although recognizing the existence of the universitas, the commune
forbade scholars to associate themselves in sectam vel conspirationem to
leave Bologna, and demanded that the rectors, as representatives of the association, should swear never to promote "the transfer of the studium. The
scholars reacted strongly, and found that the most effective defence of their
libertas was the protection of the church: in the spring of 1217 the new pope
Honorius III exhorted the podestd to revoke his order, or not to apply the
regulations restricting scholars' freedom of movement, and advised the scholars to resist the demands of the city authorities without using violence, and to
leave Bologna rather than give way. Later, in 1220, addressing the people of
Bologna, he condemned the laws restricting academic libertas, calling them
harmful to the interests of the city; he ordered their repeal and declared the
podestd to be released from the oath he had taken on them. The year before,
the Holy See had reaffirmed that it was for the ecclesiastical authorities to
award the licentia docendi, and had ruled that, in Bologna, only the archdeacon could confer it - after diligent examination so as to prevent unqualified
persons from occupying the professorial chair, as, it was complained, they
often did, to the detriment of the entire teaching profession.26
Honorius III showed similar solicitude for the Paris studium. On learning
that the bishop of Paris had excommunicated the universitas on the grounds
that it had framed its own statutes without the explicit consent of the local
ecclesiastical authorities, the pope took the scholars under his protection as
his dearly beloved sons {tamquam filios speciales) and ordered the excommunication to be cancelled; but meanwhile he took over direct control of the
universitas, and until the dispute was settled issued instructions on the use of
the seal, the exercise of jurisdiction by the masters, the appointment of
officials to punish misconduct, and participation in funeral rites. He also
settled the function and role of the Paris studium in his decretal Super speculam of 22 November 1219, forbidding civil law to be taught in Paris and
neighbouring cities and localities, on the grounds that in France laymen did
not use the laws of the Roman emperors, and that in few ecclesiastical suits
was resort to Roman law essential. The decretal also attempted to control the
teaching of theology by extending the provisions of the Council of Tours of
1163 forbidding regular and secular clergy to study civil law and medicine,
25 G. Rossi,' "Universitas scholarium" e Comune (sec. XII-XIV)', Studi e memorie per la storia
dell'Universitd
di Bologna,
new series, I , 197-227; A. Hessel, Storia
della citta di
Bologna dal 1116 al 1280, ed. G. Fasoli , 92.
26 M. Bellomo, Saggio sull'universita nell'eta del diritto comune , 87-9; P.
Weimar, 'Zur Doktorwiirde der Bologneser Legisten', in C. Bergfeld (ed.), Aspekte europaischer Kechtsgeschichte. Festgabe fur Helmut Going zum yo. Geburtstag , 427-9.
Paolo Nardi
and by granting to teachers of theology, for so long as they continued to
teach, and to students, for a period of five years, the privilege of drawing the
income of their benefices even when absent from them, notwithstanding any
provisions to the contrary, whether written or customary.27
At the same time the Holy See also intervened in minor studia such as that
of Montpellier. In 1220 the Cardinal Legate Conrad of Urach, in agreement
with certain bishops of the region and the teachers and scholars of the
medical universitas, issued comprehensive regulations 'in the general interest', ordering that no person should teach in public unless approved by the
bishop of Maguelone and the college of teachers, or style himself a scholar
unless subject to a master. In the matter of jurisdiction the legate ordered that
civil cases should in the first instance be heard before a master chosen by the
bishop and a college of three teachers. The bishop himself was to act as judge
of appeal in civil cases and as sole judge in criminal cases. Other regulations
were issued on relations between masters and scholars, the duration of
lessons and disputations, funeral honours, and the obligation to receive the
tonsure incumbent on any person who had received an ecclesiastical benefice
or taken holy orders. Lastly, each master was required, when entering upon
his career as a teacher, to swear to observe the legate's statutes. These were to
be read out publicly at every inceptio - the master's official inception of his
duties as a licensed teacher - in audientia communi, before the assembled
masters and scholars.28
It may be concluded that in the papacies of Innocent III and Honorius III
the church, realizing that new organizations such as the universitates were
growing up in the most important centres of study in Europe, issued increasingly detailed regulations on higher education with the intention of effecting
reform and improvement (reformatio in melius) in the most authoritative
schools - a reform that would not merely regulate relations with the nascent
corporations of teachers and scholars, but would cover every detail of the
organization of the studia. One reason, incidentally, for the violent disputes
between the universities and the lay authorities was that, judging by the small
numbers of royal officials with academic qualifications, particularly in the
French court, the lay authorities were not interested in encouraging the formation of an educated ruling class.
THE POLICY OF EMPEROR FREDERICK II AND THE POPES
On the day of his coronation, 22 November 1220, the Emperor Frederick II
27 CUP, vol. I, 88—90, nos. 30-1; 102—4, no> 45» 9°~3> n o« 32» Post, 'Parisian masters' (note 21),
37,39,47—9. For the problems concerning the Super speculam, see S. Kuttner, 'Papst Honorius
III und das Studium des Zivilrechts', in S. Kuttner, Gratian and the Schools of Law
 , essay no. X, 79-101 (for retractationes:
28 Cartulaire del'Universite
de Montpellier,
vol. 1,1181-1400 (Montpellier, 1890), 180-3, no- 25
Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. II, 4-6, no. 882.
Relations with authority
promulgated the constitution entitled De statutis et consuetudinibus contra
libertatem Ecclesiae editis safeguarding the immunities and privileges of the
clergy, and ordered the jurists of Bologna to insert it in the great Corpus of
Roman law.29 He thereby showed that imperial policy was still interested in
the law schools, following a tradition going back to the Habita constitution
but soon interrupted by war and the dynastic crisis preceding his ascension of
the throne. Nevertheless, the Emperor Frederick II had no intention of competing with the pope as protector of the Bologna studium, but he had other
and more ambitious plans, as the years of his vigorous rules in Italy were to
show. His first important act of scholastic policy was to found the Naples
studium to train the ruling class of the kingdom of Sicily, a territory no less
dear to Frederick II than the Holy Roman Empire. In 1224 a letter to all
dignitaries in the kingdom, stating the reasons for his decision and the way in
which it was to be carried out,30 echoed parts of the Habita constitution and
followed some of its directives. But it was for quite other reasons; for, whilst
both documents showed the intention of preserving scholars and teachers
from the discomforts of the status of foreigners (peregrini), the Habita constitution offered protection to all possible seats of learning and forbade reprisals
of any kind, whereas the 'circular' of 1224 restricted protection to persons
frequenting the Naples studium. It forbade any person to leave the kingdom
to teach or study, and threatened to punish the parents of any subjects of the
king of Sicily who did not return to their home country by Michaelmas (29
September). The privileges it granted to scholars were naturally similar to
those enjoyed by their colleagues in the principal studia of the time; as in the
Habita constitution, the safety of their person and property was guaranteed
and they were made subject to the jurisdiction of their teachers, but only in
civil cases (this was analogous to the papal legate's provisions for the Montpellier studium). To prevent competition for tenancies of the hospicia, rents
there were to be fixed by a joint committee of scholars and citizens and might
in no case exceed a stated amount. This last provision was not very different
from that made by the papal legate a decade before for the Oxford studium.
The main differences between Frederick II's studium and the most important
seats of learning in Europe was that in Naples the ecclesiastical authorities
had no authority to recruit teachers, award the licentia docendi, or exercise
jurisdictional powers.
Thereafter, between 1226 and 1240, the emperor pursued his scholastic
policy of depriving Bologna of its primacy and sought to make Naples the
most prestigious centre for the teaching of law in the kingdom of Sicily and in
29 Weimar, 'Zur Doktorwiirde' (note 26), 431; S. Kuttner, 'A New Eyewitness Account of the
Fourth Lateran Council', in Kuttner, Medieval
(note 20), essay no. IX, 167-71.
30 F. Torraca, 'Le origini. L'eta sveva', in Storia della Universitd di Napoli , 3-15;
G. Arnaldi, 'Fondazione e rifondazioni dello studio di Napoli in eta sveva', in Universita e
societd, 81-105.
Paolo Nardi
the whole empire. On several occasions, in 1226,1234, and 1239, Frederick II
sent pressing invitations to teachers and scholars in Bologna and to his other
subjects, Italian or ultramontane, to attend the Naples studium. He forbade
them to go to Bologna to teach or study, and formed in Naples a teaching
staff of great eminence, whose jurists were especially remarkable. His intention was no longer merely to train the ruling class of his kingdom of Sicily; he
aspired to nothing less than creating a great intellectual elite to sustain the
imperial throne with the instruments of law and the prestige of culture. In
this belief, and paraphrasing Justinian's summons to the aspiring law
students (cupida legum iuventus) of his time when he promulgated his
Institutes, Frederick II affirmed that the imperial throne should be mighty by
force of law as well as by force of arms.31 With that lofty aim in view, in 1238
he sent a jurist devoted to him, a former professor in Naples, to teach civil
law in the Vercelli studium founded shortly before by a migration of students
from Padua. At that time the emperor's policy of centralization to benefit
Naples caused a crisis in other centres of learning such as Modena, Arezzo,
and Padua, which had come into being spontaneously, at the end of the
twelfth century and in the first decades of the thirteenth, through migrations
of teachers and scholars from Bologna, and had then flourished for some
The emperor's tactics, vigorous and tenacious though they were, did not
deter the popes from their policy of assiduous guardianship and tight control
of the studia traditionally linked with the ecclesiastical authorities. At the
same time they granted concessions and privileges to schools of more recent
formation, and promoted the foundation of new centres of learning. Above
all, they continued to show the highest consideration for the Bologna
studium; in 1226, at the very time when the emperor was sending out the first
of his invitations to desert Bologna, Pope Honorius III appointed the jurist
Tancred, archdeacon of the diocese of Bologna, to draft the Quinta compilatio of decretals, and instructed him to see that it was adopted in all law courts
and schools (tarn in iudiciis quam in scholis).33 In 1234 Pope Gregory IX
repeated this significant gesture by publishing his great collection of decretals,
the Liber extra, addressing it to the academics of Bologna (and Paris) in the
very words of Innocent III promulgating the Tertia compilatio. Especially
under the heading De magistris, the new Compilatio included all the principal
regulations for higher education from the time of Pope Alexander III, and so
31 E. M . Meijers, 'L'Universita di Napoli nel secolo XIII', in E. M . Meijers, Etudes d'histoire
droit, vol. Ill , 149—60; P. Nardi, 'Comune, Impero e Papato alle origini dell'insegnamento universitario in Siena', Bullettino
senese di storia patria, 90 , 55ff.
32 E. Cortese, 'Scienza di giudici e scienza di professori tra XII e XIII secolo', in Legge
 , 117, 122.
33 L. E. Boyle, 'The Compilatio Quinta and the registers of Honorius III', Bulletin of Medieval
Canon Law, 8 , 9—19.
Relations with authority
sanctioned the discipline elaborated by the Church of Rome over nearly
three-quarters of a century.34
Meanwhile in 1231 Gregory IX successfully concluded his mediation in the
controversy between the university community of Paris and King Louis IX of
France. His bull Parens scientiarum recalled teachers and scholars to Paris,
confirmed and clearly recapitulated the regulations made by Cardinal Robert
of Courson, and introduced further measures to protect scholars and teachers, authorizing them to suspend lessons whenever their privileges were seriously infringed. At the same time the pope exhorted the king to renew the
privileges granted to scholars by his predecessor Philip II Augustus, and in
particular asked him to agree that rents in the hospitia should be fixed by a
joint committee of two masters and two citizens.35
The most significant order made by Gregory IX in scholastic affairs is
contained in his bull of 1233 to the Toulouse universitas of masters and scholars,36 and to the bishop and Count Raymond. This granted the students of
Toulouse equal privileges with their colleagues in Paris, and made the signal
concession that anyone examined and awarded the licentia docendi in Toulouse could freely regere ubique, that is, teach anywhere without undergoing
further examination. This important concession aroused so much apprehension that hardly a year later the pope had to send the bishop of Paris
assurances that the privilege granted to the Toulouse studium would not
prejudice the privilege of the Paris studium relating to the award of the licentia. A few years before, Gregory IX had exempted several masters of arts and
medicine who had taught in Angers and Orleans from further examination
before they were allowed to teach in Paris. By the will of the pope, therefore,
a rift was opening in the system of recruiting teachers, a system founded on
the privileged position rightly enjoyed by the oldest and most authoritative
studia as teacher-training centres for the whole of western Europe. Henceforth the Holy See's scholastic policy was strongly to encourage the formation of new schools, especially outside Italy and in territories not de facto
subject to imperial jurisdiction and therefore not directly controlled by the
Emperor Frederick II. Thus in 1233 Pope Gregory IX conferred important
privileges on the Cambridge studium, founded in 1209 by a migration from
Oxford; he recognized the existence of the scholars' universitas, and granted
its members the right of trial only within the diocese of Ely, to which Cambridge belonged (ius non trahi extra).37 A few years later the same pope sent a
brief to the bishop of Orleans authorizing the teaching of Roman law in
34 A. Friedberg (ed.), Corpus
iuris canonici,
vol. II (Leipzig, 1879), 1-4, coll. 768-71 (X.5.5); coll.
14-15 (X.i.2.11); coll. 215-16 (X.1.38.7); coll. 520-1 (X.3.18.1); coll. 463 (X.3.4.12).
35 CUP, vol. I, 136-9, no. 79; 140, no. 82.
36 C. E. Smith, The University of Toulouse in the Middle Ages. Its Origins and Growth to 1500
AD , 57ft.
37 M. B. Hackett, The Original Statutes of Cambridge University. The Text and its History
 , 51, 53ff.
Paolo Nardi
Orleans, Honorius III having forbidden it in Paris. In doing so Gregory
bowed to the wishes of many doctors of law and scholars, on condition that
the scholars were not members of the clergy with cure of souls, who were
again forbidden to study civil law.38
The higher education policy of Gregory IX was continued by Innocent IV
(Sinibaldo Fieschi of Genoa), who ascended the papal throne in the summer
of 1243, when Frederick II was consolidating his hegemony over the ecclesiastical hierarchy, especially in Italy. In the autumn of 1244, fearing complete
subjection to the will of the emperor, the new pope fled to France, where he
turned his attention mainly to the transalpine studia and schools. In the university community in Paris he found little to add to the firmly based system of
privileges and guarantees set up by his predecessors; it remained for him only
to confirm previous provisions and agreements, and to grant the ius non trahi
extra in 1245. At the same time Innocent IV extended to the Toulouse
studium the rules made for Paris in the bull Parens scientiarum of Gregory
IX, and granted secular students of theology at the Dominican studium in
Dijon rights equal to those of their colleagues in Paris, and especially the
privilege allowed by Honorius III of continuing to draw the income of their
benefices even in their absence. But the most significant results of Sinibaldo
Fieschi's university policy during his stay in Lyon were the foundation of the
papal studium {studium curiae) in 1244-5 a n^ t n e Piacenza studium in 1248,
and his concessions to the teachers and scholars of Narbonne in 1247. In
every case the pope provided that teachers and students should enjoy the
same privileges, indulgences, freedoms, and immunities as their colleagues in
the studia generalia. Turning in particular to the bishop, clergy, and people of
Piacenza he quoted as an example of a studium generale the one in Paris.39
These were important innovations in official language; never before had the
public authorities used the term 'studium generale* or indicated the Paris
studium as a prototype. When the Emperor Frederick II proclaimed in 1226
that he had founded the Naples studium 'in the general interest' (ad generale
commodum) of all persons wishing to study and be trained in the disciplines
of scholars, the expression was probably not used in a technical sense to
mean a studium generale. In the late 1230s and early 1240s, however, the term
studium generale was used with an exact meaning in the works of authoritative masters of canon law such as Goffredo of Trani and Bernard of Botone.
For them it was an institution in a city of royal foundation (as opposed to
villae and castella) which could be frequented by students 'from almost any
part of the world' (quasi de omnibus partibus mundi), who if they were
38 E. M . Meijers, 'L'Universite d'Orleans au XIHe siecle', in Meijers, Etudes (note 31), 28.
39 E. Falconi and R. Peveri (eds.), // Registrum
del Comune
di Piacenza,
vol. I , 303-4, no. 146; R. Creytens, 'Le "Studium Romanae Curiae" et le Maitre du Sacre
Palais', Archivum fratrum praedicatorum, 12 , 23ff.; M. Bellomo, 'Intorno a Roffredo
Beneventano: professore a Roma?', in M. Bellomo (ed.), Scuole diritto e societd nel Mezzogiorno medievale d'ltalia, vol. I , 172.
Relations with authority
theologians could continue to draw their prebends during their absence.
Understandably, as a trained jurist Pope Innocent IV was disposed to accept
officially a term formerly generic but fast acquiring a precise technical
meaning.40 His concessions of 1244-8 did not put the new studia on a completely equal footing with the studium generate of Paris, particularly as they
made no mention of the award of the licentia docendi and so conveyed that
the function of the studia was merely to teach.
On the death of the Emperor Frederick II in 1250 his plans for higher
education collapsed. Innocent IV returned to Italy and followed the traditional papal policy of support to university communities. He was perfectly
familiar with their theoretical as well as practical problems, having dealt fully
in his legal works with the nature and character of a universitas. In 1253 he
approved the statutes of the community of scholars {universitas scholarium) in Bologna. These, as far as is known, regulated inter alia the time
allowed scholars to pay the masters' fees, feast-days, the obligation to hold
disputations at the beginning of the academic year, and (perhaps later) the
puncta - the time in which teachers were required to 'read' (expound) the
books of law - and penalties for non-compliance.41 The texts as we know
them are probably not complete, so that it is impossible to say to what extent
the Bologna universitas had become independent of the commune and the
church; but for a long time past the rectors' powers must have included
jurisdiction in civil lawsuits and minor criminal cases. In 1252 Innocent IV
had granted special privileges to the universitas of masters and scholars in
Siena, whom he declared to be completely immune from taxes and forced
labour (servitia, tallia, collecta, and angariae) levied on their person or property by the city of Siena. Finally he confirmed the universitas of scholars and
masters in Oxford in the full enjoyment of the immunities, freedoms,
customs, and statutes already being observed by them.
The same policy of ubiquitous intervention in the universities' internal
affairs was followed by Pope Alexander IV, especially towards the Paris
studium, of whose superiority to the studia generalia of more recent foundation he was very well aware. In a striking phrase he compared its role in the
church to 'the tree of life in God's paradise' (lignum vitae in Paradiso Dei),
and accordingly issued orders in April 1255 abolishing, modifying, or making
innovations in some of the statutes of the University of Paris, including those
on the suspension of courses as a sign of protest, the procedure for co-opting
new teachers, and the powers of the chancellor. The ecclesiastical authorities'
extreme zeal and interest in the discipline and activities of the Paris studium
40 On the studium generate concept, see E. Cortese, 'Sulla scienza giuridica a Napoli tra Quattro
e Cinquecento', in Bellomo (ed.), Scuole diritto (note 39), 44—6; Nardi, 'Comune, Impero e
Papato' (note 31), 62-5.
41 D. Maffei, 'Un trattato di Bonaccorso degli Elisei e i piu antichi statuti dello Studio di Bologna
nel manoscritto 22 della Robbins Collection', Bulletin of Medieval
Canon Law, 5 ,
Paolo Nardi
led them after a few years to condemn severely philosophical doctrines
judged heterodox, such as those professed by Siger of Brabant, Boethius of
Dacia, and other exponents of Latin Averroism. These were definitively condemned in 1277 by Stephen Tempier, bishop of Paris.42
RELATIONS BETWEEN SECULAR AUTHORITIES AND UNIVERSITIES
IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY
The privileges granted by the thirteenth-century popes would never have been
put into effect but for the constant collaboration of the secular authorities,
whether royal or local. A striking example is Piacenza, where in spite of the
foundation of the studium generate by Innocent IV the ruling class of citizens
failed to provide conditions in which a studium could be formed or grow
up.43 In contrast, the kings of England strongly supported the studium at
Oxford and Cambridge. From 1231 onwards Henry III issued orders confirming and consolidating the privileged position already enjoyed by masters and
scholars as a result of ecclesiastical concessions. The privilege granted to the
Oxford universitas by the papal legate in 1214, of directly controlling rents of
scholars' lodgings through committees appointed for the purpose, could
never have been put into practice without the cooperation of the secular
authorities. It was they too who enforced the rule (also applied in Paris and
Montpellier) that students must be entered on a teacher's list; the sheriff was
ordered to imprison students who did not register as scholars within a fortnight of their arrival. These and other royal orders became part of the statutes of the universitas of Cambridge issued around 1250. In 1244 King Henry
III granted the chancellor of the universitas at Oxford wide powers of jurisdiction, making him competent to try cases of debt, the fixing of rents for
lodgings, the hire of horses, breaches of contract, and purchase of victuals
where one of the parties to the lawsuit was a member of the universitas. In
1248 the king granted the universitas further privileges, conferring upon it
authority to superintend trade in victuals within the city.
No less decisive was the action taken by the kings of Castile and Leon in
Spain; Alfonso VIII of Castile (1158-1214) founded a studium in Palencia,
engaging Italian and French teachers of theology, canon law, and arts, and
Alfonso IX of Leon (1188-1229) founded the studium of Salamanca. The
latter foundation was confirmed and reorganized by Alfonso X the Wise
(1252-84), who regulated the stipends of professors and the jurisdiction of the
42 CUP, vol. I, 279-85, no. 247; 543ff., no. 473; M. Grabmann, Mittelalterliches
Geistesleben.
Abhandlungen
zur Geschichte der Scholastik
und Mystik,
vol. Ill , 159-96; J.
Chatillon, 'L'exercice du pouvoir doctrinal dans la chretiente du XIII siecle: le cas d'Etienne
Tempier', in J. Chatillon, D'lsidore de Seville a Saint Thomas
Etudes d'histoire et de
 , essay no. XV, 13-45.
43 E. Nasalli Rocca, 'Lo "studium generale" di Piacenza nel sec. XIII. Contributo alia storia delle
Universita', Bollettino
storico piacentino,
51 , 129—41.
Relations with authority
bishop and alcalde of the city.44 The secular authorities, however, had first to
enlist the cooperation of the local ecclesiastical authorities (the bishop of
Palencia, and the bishop and chapter of Salamanca) and then to apply to the
Holy See to obtain for both foundations the dignity and privileges of studia
generalia, albeit with certain restrictions. Thus in 1255 Pope Alexander IV
solemnly confirmed the foundation of Salamanca and granted it the prerogatives of a studium generate, including recognition of the licentia ubique
docendi, except in Paris and Bologna.45 And in 1263 Pope Urban IV granted
the masters and students of Palencia the usual immunities, freedoms, and
indulgences enjoyed by their colleagues in Paris and other studia generalia, in
the same terms as for Piacenza but (as for that city) without mentioning the
licentia ubique docendi.
In the thirteenth century kings and princes became more anxious to have
the services of university-trained administrators. Already at the end of the
twelfth century officials known as magistri were working in the English royal
chancery, but only in the reign of Louis IX did university-trained officials
become numerous and influential in the French bureaucracy and court. From
the latter half of the thirteenth century onwards, and especially after Philip
the Fair became king in 1285, many jurists entered the Parlement and the
royal curia, most of them from the Orleans studium or trained in Roman
Law at that school, and some of them vigorously upheld the French monarchy's ambitions to take the place of the Holy Roman Empire and assume its
prerogatives and rights of dominion. When an Angevin ascended the throne
of the kingdom of Sicily after the Hohenstaufen dynasty became extinct, the
relations of the Orleans Law school with the house of Anjou were just as
close. Thus in 1266 Charles I re-established the Naples studium, attracting to
it teachers from Orleans, and employing some of them in high offices of state
rather than in teaching.46
Although the transformation of law into 'a culture of officials' was 'typical
of monarchies', even then and even in the studia in the Italian communes it
was becoming common for doctores to produce works intended mainly for
the legal profession and the town magistrates, and among the latter appeared
the first important authors of legal works of great technical value.47 The time
had long gone by when the professors of Bologna had deplored the ignorance
of judges; city governments were now increasingly interested in subsidizing
44 A. Perez Martin, 'Importancia de las universidades en la recepcion del derecho romano en la
Peninsula iberica', Studi sassaresi, 8 , 285-8.
45 V. Beltran deHeredia, Bulario dela Universidad
de Salamanca
(1219-1549),
vol. I , 322-3, no. 15; see also 32off., nos. 11-14 and 16.
46 Meijers, 'Universite d'Orleans' (note 38), 5-24; Meijers, 'Universita di Napoli' (note 31),
149—66; D. Maffei, 'II giudice testimone e una "quaestio" di Jacques de Revigny' (Ms. Bon.
Coll. Hisp. 82)', Tijdschrift
voor Rechtsgeschiedenis,
35 , 71-3; J. R. Strayer, Les Gens
de justice du Languedoc
sous Philippe le Bel .
47 Cortese, 'Legisti, canonisti e feudisti' (note 1), 272; Cortese, 'Scienza di giudici' (note 32),
Paolo Nardi
and regulating their own schools. Thus in Padua, after 1260, the commune
decreed that new professorial chairs should be set up at the university and
undertook to pay the stipends of foreign teachers, drawing up rules for
students' mutual benefit societies, the production of manuscripts, and the
availability and rent of lodgings, and so set in motion a fruitful process of
'refoundation' which was to have important results, especially at the turn of
the thirteenth century. Similarly, the communes of Perugia, Siena, and
Modena in the latter half of the thirteenth century took it upon themselves to
engage masters and recall scholars, offering them excellent living conditions
in accordance with the provisions of ordinary law relating to their safety and
privileges.48 The commune of Bologna, in particular, steadily extended its
influence and control over the studium^ granting the students the right to
compensation for damage suffered in riots or fires and concessions regarding
rents, food purchase, and the validity of contracts and wills made in a form
other than that required by the laws of the city. It also granted them a status
similar to that of the citizens of Bologna as regards liability to 'reprisals' in
conformity with all the provisions of the Habita constitution of more than a
century before. As a corollary, however, the jurisdiction of the town magistrates was extended and that of the rectors restricted, and the commune
gradually took over the recruitment of teachers and the burden of paying
masters' salaries, previously paid by the scholars' contributions (collectae), so
that the scholars lost an ancient and important prerogative. In this way municipalization of the Bologna studium was greatly stimulated. It could no longer
be checked at the end of the thirteenth or the beginning of the fourteenth
century, when the commune intervened more rigorously in the life of the
universitas, interfering in the election of rectors and making secular scholars
completely subject to municipal jurisdiction in criminal cases. The latter provision, whilst admittedly confirming a long-standing practice, finally deprived
the scholars of an ancient privilege dating back to the Habita constitution,
but left clerics under the bishop's jurisdiction.
Despite the universally recognized primacy of the studia of Paris, Bologna,
Montpellier, Oxford, and Cambridge, they lacked any official declaration of
the right to confer the licentia ubique docendi. Only a universal power (potestas generalis) could grant this right, as it had done in Toulouse and Salamanca, which had received this important privilege from Pope Gregory IX
and Pope Alexander IV, respectively. The special status of the Paris and
Bologna studia was implicitly recognized by the refusal of Pope Alexander IV
to permit teaching there by licentiati from the studium generale of Sala-
48 G. Arnaldi, '11 primo secolo dello Studio di Padova', in Storia della cultura veneta, vol. II, //
Trecento , 14—17; M. Bellomo, 'Studenti e "Populus" nelle citta universitarie
italiane dal sec. XII al XV, in Universid e societd, 6yii.\ G. Ermini, Storia della Universitd di
Perugia, vol. I , 15ft.; C.G. Mor and P. Di Pietro, Storia dell'Universitd di
Modena, vol. I , 12.-19; Nardi, 'Comune, Impero e Papato' (note 31), Sy(i.
Relations with authority
manca. Pope Nicholas IV granted official recognition of the licentia ubique
docendi to Montpellier in 1289, to Bologna in 1291, and to Paris in 1292.
Oxford failed to obtain it, in spite of the efforts of King Edward I and King
Edward II between 1303 and 1317, but in 1318 Pope John XXII issued a papal
bull appointing Cambridge a studium generale^ which henceforth also
implied the grant of the licentia. At the end of the thirteenth century and in
the first two decades of the fourteenth, the papacy was in fact pursuing its
higher education policy with renewed vigour, as is shown by the decisions of
Nicholas IV and his successors Boniface VIII and Clement V. Thus in 1290
Nicholas IV granted studium generale status to the school founded in Lisbon
by King Denis the Just of Portugal in 1288-9 and in 1291 to the school
founded at Gray by Count Otto IV of Burgundy in 1287. Boniface VIII instituted the studium generale of Rome in 1303 and that of Pamiers in 1295. He
raised Avignon to university status in 1303, as did Clement V the already
famous schools of Orleans (in 1306) and those of Perugia (in 1308).49 Clement
V issued orders for the foundation of chairs of Hebrew, Arabic, and Chaldean in the studia of Paris, Bologna, Oxford, and Salamanca, not all of
which complied, and forbade newly graduated doctors to spend more than
three thousand silver turonenses to celebrate the award of their degree.
These orders completed the regulations made by the church on higher education, and were incorporated into the collection of Clementinae decretals
issued by his successor John XXII on 1 November 1317 and sent to many
universitates.50
Among the documents of that period the decree for the foundation of the
studium generale in Rome is of special interest. It was promulgated by Pope
Boniface VIII (Benedict Caetani) at Anagni on 6 June 1303, towards the end
of his conflict with King Philip the Fair of France and the clergy supporting
him, and a few months before the pope's humiliation and death. As well as
making the customary provisions for the institution of the studium generale
and the grant to masters and scholars of all the privileges, freedoms, and
immunities conferred upon their colleagues in other studia generalia, the
decree regulated in detail the status to be enjoyed by professors and students,
so recapitulating in essentials the entire discipline for studia generalia gradually built up and consolidated over more than a century on the model of
Paris and Bologna. This is a highly significant event, taking into account that
49 M. Meyhofer, 'Die kaiserlichen Stiftungsprivilegien fur Universitaten', Archiv fur
Urkundenforschung,
4 , 396H.; G. L. Haskins, 'The University of Oxford and the "Ius ubique
docendi" ', English Historical Review, $6 , 281—92; A. Garcia y Garcia, 'Aspectos de la
Universidad Portuguesa Medieval', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, i34ff., 139.
50 Clementinae
5.1.1 and 5.1.2, in A. Friedberg (ed.), Corpus iuris canonici,
vol. II (Leipzig,
1879), coll. 1179—80. On the application of Clementinae
5.1.1 see D. Maffei, 'Alberico di Metz
e il suo apparato sulle Clementine', Bulletin of Medieval
Canon Law, 1 , 44 n. 4; F.
Soetermeer, 'The Origin of Ms. D'Ablaing 14 and the Transmissio
of the Clementines to the
Universities', Tijdschrift voor Rechtsgeschiedenis,
54 , 108-12.
Paolo Nardi
the pontificate of Boniface VIII and with it the political apogee of the papacy
were drawing to an end, and that the Avignon 'captivity' of the Church of
Rome was about to begin.
THE GROWING SUPPORT OF SECULAR AUTHORITIES IN THE
FOURTEENTH CENTURY
In the first half of the fourteenth century the secular authorities became much
more active in higher education. In many parts of Europe princes and communities of citizens joined the ecclesiastical authorities in promoting and
organizing new and old centres of learning. At the beginning of the century
the Angevins showed particular solicitude for the Naples studium, giving it
special protection,51 and for the studium of Avignon in Provence, which
Charles II sedulously protected, granting the masters and scholars many
privileges and trying to ease their poverty by giving them leave to appoint a
banker to lend them money.52 He attempted, however, to encroach upon the
independence of the universitas of doctors and students there by ordering that
an official from his curia should be appointed to the committee fixing rents
for accommodation in the hospitia, to act as referee in case of disputes
between the universitas and the town. Meanwhile, as part of his conflict with
Boniface VIII, King Philip the Fair of France repeatedly interfered in the internal affairs of the Paris studium, in pursuance of the plans for his hegemony
elaborated by his court and the Orleans school of law. King Diego II of
Aragon gave Lerida a studium adequately protected and furnished with professorial chairs paid for by the town, and obtained for it from Boniface VIII
privileges equal to those of Toulouse. Some years later, in 1318, Frederick of
Habsburg, king of the Germans and pretender to the imperial throne, granted
the town of Treviso permission to found a school for the teaching of law and
any other discipline solemniter et generaliter, that is, to standards as high as
in a studium generate.
In the northern part of central Italy communes boasting a respectable cultural tradition, and which for many decades, although not continuously, had
financed professorial chairs and schools of higher education, spent great sums
of money in an effort to deprive Bologna of the supremacy it had enjoyed
since the twelfth century. In the first decades of the fourteenth century Padua,
Perugia, Siena, and Florence, taking advantage of the crisis opposing the town
of Bologna and the scholars of its studium, spared no pains to attract teachers
and students, promising them ideal living conditions and continuance of their
existing privileges. Some communes made extraordinary efforts of organization to put their studium on a sound financial basis and consolidate their
51 F. Sabatini, Napoli Angioina:
cultura e societd , i8ff., 223ff.
52 G. M. Monti, 'Da Carlo I a Roberto d'Angio. Ricerche e documenti', Archivio storico per le
napoletane,
57 , izjti.,
Relations with authority
administration, appointing 'wise men' or 'officers' to look after the requirements of the studium and approach illustrious teachers, to whom they offered
lavish rewards and good lodgings to attract their services. Relations between
the university and the local authorities accordingly became closer and the
authorities exercised stricter control over their studia; but any attempt to
improve organization would have failed had not the competent authorities
granted the title and privileges of a studium generate, without which no
academic institution could now survive. Municipal governments, especially
those of Perugia, Siena, and Florence, therefore had to make protracted
efforts to get the popes to bestow the prestigious title and its corollary, authority to grant the degree of doctor; only Perugia managed to obtain this in
time to take full advantage of the crisis of 1321 in the Bologna studium,
especially in the teaching of law.53
One after the other, princes outside Italy promoted the foundation of new
studia - the Dauphin Humbert II at Grenoble in 1339 and, more importantly,
Charles IV of Luxemburg at Prague in 1347.54 The secular authorities were
eager to found a university because they wanted a steady supply of better
trained and more cultivated officials, and even more because they aspired to
possess and control a centre of education that would rival the most ancient
and famous seats of learning, and spare their subjects the discomforts of
having to study abroad.
For some years after his coronation as emperor in 1355, Charles IV of
Luxemburg successfully opposed the papal monopoly of the award of the title
of studium generale and the privilege of ubique docendi. Breaking with the
policy of his predecessors, who from the time of Frederick II onwards had
taken no interest in higher education, he hastened to grant a studium generale
to the Italian cities of Arezzo, Perugia, and Siena, and later to Pavia, Florence,
Lucca, and Orange. It is, however, significant that the charters of Charles IV
confirmed the regulations established long ago, predominantly by the church,
and repeated the organization of the studia generalia as modelled mainly by
the church. This was particularly so in respect of the privileges of universitates - exemption from taxes, dues, or 'reprisals' (seizure of person or property), and the award of academic degrees. These had to be awarded by the
bishop or his representative from the council of doctors and masters of the
studium (de consilio doctorum et magistrorum studii).55 In this way the studia
generalia, founded by the public authorities and substantially uniform in
organization and purpose although located far apart and living under dissimilar
53 Especially for Siena: G. Prunai, 'Lo Studio senese dalla "migratio" bolognese alia fondazione
della "DomusSapientiae" (1321-1408)', Bullettino
senese distoria
patria, 57 , 3-54. For
Florence: E. Spagnesi, 'I documenti costitutivi dalla provvisione del 1321 allo statuto del 1388',
in Storia dell'Ateneo
fiorentino.
Contributi
di studio,
vol. I , 109-45.
54 A. Vetulani, 'Les origines et le sort des universites de l'Europe centrale et orientale fondees au
cours du XlVe siecle', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, i5off.
55 Meyhofer, 'Kaiserlichen Stiftungsprivilegien' (note 49), 320-30.
Paolo Nardi
political systems, began their functional relationship with the papacy and the
empire, which in the medieval view were authorities complementing each
Ecclesiastical interest in higher education did not slacken in the fourteenth
century, in spite of the growing involvement of secular rulers and the end of
papal hegemony in European politics. During the Avignon 'captivity'
(1309—76), the universities of the south of France and Provence benefited most
from papal grants and from the influx of intellectuals having connections
with the papal court. The Avignon studium in particular had as masters
famous jurists who were also employed on official duties for the papal
curia.56 In 1339 the Montpellier studium received from the Cardinal Legate,
Bertrand de Deaux, new regulations which ensured that the bishop should
control the award of academic degrees and have powers of jurisdiction, and
confided responsibility for day-to-day administration to the students, and for
teaching to the masters. The statutes of the Toulouse studium were reformed,
Pope John XXII, born in Cahors, founded a studium there in 1332, and in
1339 Benedict XII raised the Grenoble studium to the rank of studium generate. Especially in the first part of the fourteenth century, however, the popes
continued to exercise tight control in Paris, still the most important centre for
the teaching of theology, and proved willing to entertain applications from
other sources. Thus Clement VI (1342-52) conferred the title of studium genet ale on Valladolid in 1346 at the request of King Alfonso XI of Castile, on
Prague in 1347 at the request of King Charles IV (the future emperor), and on
the studia of Pisa (1343), Padua (1346), and Florence (1349). Later, perhaps
because of the energetic policy of the Emperor Charles IV, papal policy
towards the universities became more selective. Pope Urban V (1362-70) in
particular did not stop short at granting privileges and titles, but tried to
regulate the establishment of faculties of theology, found more university
colleges, and reaffirm ecclesiastical prerogatives, especially for the award of
academic degrees. The most significant features of his policy were his confirmation of the studium generale and licentia ubique docendi to three European rulers: Casimir III of Poland for the studium generale of Cracow in
1364, Duke Rudolf IV of Austria for the studium generale of Vienna in 1365,
and King Louis I of Hungary for the studium generale of Pecs in 1367; but the
pope did not grant these three studia a faculty of theology, being of the
opinion that, in those parts, conditions were not favourable to the formation
of theological schools. He did, however, found the theological faculty in
Padua, and agreed to improvements in the operation of the theological faculties in Bologna, Toulouse, and Florence, mainly to decentralize theological
56 J. Verger, 'Les rapports entre universites italiennes et universities fran^aises meridionales
(XII-XV siecles)', in Universita e societd, i57rf., 174^-; J- Verger, 'L'Universite d'Avignon au
temps de Clement VII', in Genese et debuts du Grand Schisme d'Occident ,
Relations with authority
studies but probably also to promote criticism of the Ockhamist doctrines
professed by the doctors and scholars of Paris, and to revive the Thomist
doctrines that he himself professed. Urban V strongly asserted that the award
of academic degrees was an ecclesiastical prerogative; he even declared that
Casimir's order to the royal chancellor of Cracow to exercise that function
was invalid, and that only the bishop was entitled to perform it. In Urban's
time and that of his immediate predecessors and successors, many more
colleges for poor students were founded in Italy and elsewhere, either by the
popes or by prelates of high rank.57
Although in the fourteenth century many universities were founded and
others were granted the privileges of a studium generale, only those universities assiduously supported by their founders or administrators proved viable
for long. In central and eastern Europe, in spite of the solemn foundation of
studia in Vienna, Cracow, Pecs, and Prague, a flourishing university grew up
only in Prague, principally because of the support of the Emperor Charles IV,
who endowed each faculty with a building and provided for the subsistence
of the masters in various ways, even founding the Collegium Carolinum for
twelve of them in 1366.
Meanwhile, in Italy universities flourished and took firm root in the great
cities where governments, either directly or through their nominees, issued
strict and detailed regulations for the organization of the stadium, closely
supervised its operation, and did not cut their spending on education to
supply more pressing demands such as those for weapons of war. Prosperity
and crisis alternated in the Universities of Perugia, Padua, Siena, and Florence, as the city authorities alternatively showed them care and neglect, and
the Naples studium became an emblem of decay when in the reign of Queen
Joan I (1343-81) it ceased to receive any support worthy of mention. In fact,
in the kingdom of Naples, from the time of Robert the Wise (1309-43)
onwards, the dearest ambition of many teachers in the university was to leave
it and take up high office in the government and the church, as indeed many
teachers of civil and canon law did.
Many local authorities in the south of France were similarly indifferent to
the needs of universities. In Montpellier, for example, the city consuls did not
trouble to apply the regulations for the control of rents in the hospitia issued
by Cardinal Bertrand de Deaux, who in 1344 threatened to revoke the privileges of the studium and even to transfer it elsewhere.
Troubles infinitely more serious broke out between town and gown in
Oxford, culminating on St Scholastica's Day (10 February 1355) in nothing
57 A. L. Gabriel, 'The College System in the Fourteenth-Century Universities', in F. L. Utley
(ed.)> The Forward Movement of the Fourteenth Century , 79—124 (especially 84ff.); A. L. Gabriel, 'Motivation of the Founders of Mediaeval Colleges', in A. L. Gabriel,
Garlandia. Studies in the History of the Mediaeval University ,
Paolo Nardi
less than a massacre of students by the citizens with the connivance of the
bailiffs. The king took over the protection of the studium and appointed a
panel of judges, which arrested the mayor and aldermen of Oxford and
deprived the sheriff of office. Only when its existing privileges were confirmed, and further privileges granted by the royal charter of 27 June 1355,
did the studium resume its activities: Oxford was sentenced to pay heavy
reparations, and was humiliated by subjection of its civic representatives to
the university.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE GREAT SCHISM
The crisis following the Great Schism profoundly affected the studia generalia
most closely linked to the papacy and church. From 1380 onwards there were
two popes, Urban VI in Rome and Clement VII in Avignon. University communities were at once faced with a dilemma: recent practice required them to
send the pope the rotuli (rolls) of petitions for benefices for the 'clerks';58
which pope should they declare for? At first they attempted to find a legalistic
way round the difficulty by trying to establish which of the two elections was
in accordance with canon law, and famous teachers including Baldus de
Ubaldis and Giovanni da Legano gave their own authoritative opinion. Their
views commanded respectful attention in Italian and foreign universities, but
not unanimous agreement, particularly in the latter. Everywhere, on the contrary, there were conflicting loyalties, uncertainty, and fierce quarrels such as
those between the Urbanist universities of Bologna or Prague and the French
and Provencal universities, which were of course Clementist. The Paris
studium offered the most intense turmoil and the most bitter internal divisions between its nations and the faculties until the supporters of Clement VII
won the day with the decisive backing of the French kings.59 It was in the
Paris studium^ more than in any other European intellectual centre, that the
debate on how to end the Schism was most advanced, and that the foundations were laid on the conciliarist theories so profoundly influential in the
ensuing decades. But, meanwhile, the firmly Clementist attitude of the French
crown caused irremediable divisions among the teachers of the Paris studium^
preventing freedom of discussion and driving opponents into exile (1383).
Nor did Urbanist ardour abate; in 1384 Pope Urban VI launched an active
university policy, granting Vienna a faculty of theology and in 1385 founding
the Heidelberg studium^ whose masters at once refused to recognize
academic degrees awarded in Paris by the Clementist chancellor. Between
1386 and 1389 Urban VI, pursuing the same policy, granted the privileges of
studium generale to Cologne, Lucca, Kulm, and Erfurt in an attempt to extend
58 D. E. R. Watt, 'University Clerks and Rolls of Petitions for Benefices', Speculum,
34 ,
59 R. N . Swanson, Universities,
and the Great Schism
 , 2.2-44, 58.
Relations with authority
his influence, but was disappointed in his expectations. The net result was
that more university institutions were founded in central and eastern Europe,
and that studia such as those of Prague and Vienna flourished, benefiting by
the exodus from Paris of the masters of the German nation. The universities
in the south of France, however, suffered defections, even by Clementist
masters, and entered upon a decline that spared only Avignon, obviously
because of the curia there, which still strongly attracted masters and students
whose ambitions lay in an ecclesiastical career.
The Schism continued under the successors of Urban and Clement, keeping
alive the debate in and between the universities on how to escape from a
situation of growing confusion and danger to the church. The Paris studium
was, as before, one of the most active parties; it pressed for an agreement,
preferably that both popes should abdicate (1395), but both European
academic circles and the most active architects of the Schism had grave
doubts as to the wisdom of this course. In May 1398 the French universities
were admitted to the Council of the French Church assembled to consider the
question of obedience to the pope in Avignon (the Spaniard Pedro de Luna),
but only the University of Paris exercised much influence, particularly
towards the end of the Council, when it managed to push through the decision to withdraw obedience (subtractio oboedientiae) from Benedict XIII so
as to end the feud between Avignon and Rome. That decision proved
ineffective and doomed to failure when the University of Paris had again to
swear obedience to Benedict XIII, under pressure from the French crown and
from the minor studia of Angers, Montpellier, Orleans, and Toulouse (1403).
In the first years of the fifteenth century conciliarist views came to be
regarded as those most likely to end the Schism, and so gained ground in the
principal studia of Europe; but the authority of the university doctors was on
the wane, and they now supplied only a gloss of theory to each move by the
ecclesiastical and temporal powers. The universities had in fact never
regarded themselves as institutions responsible for reuniting the church, but
only as counsellors of the religious and temporal authorities, leaving them the
onus of policy and action. Consequently, the universities were not allowed to
take part in decision-making, either during the attempts to end the Schism or
in the General Councils that took place in Europe from 1409 until the midfifteenth century, although many academics took part in the discussions,
stating their views and exercising great personal influence.
The bitter quarrels that had marked the Schism and continued to divide the
church in the conciliar period encouraged popes and anti-popes alike to interest themselves in the universities. At the end of the fourteenth century and in
the first decades of the fifteenth, both Rome and Avignon were prodigal in
granting privileges to religious and secular authorities wishing to set up studia
in the territories under their jurisdiction. Evidently the rival popes realized
that they needed the intellectual support of part of the academic world. They
Paolo Nardi
therefore encouraged the foundation of universities in areas on whose fidelity
they could count.60
FROM STUDIUM GENERALE TO PRINCELY INSTITUTION
Meanwhile the bitter controversies between the religious authorities, in
which sovereigns too were involved, weakened what had been the function of
the studia generalia from their very beginnings: that of supranational centres
propagating an international culture. Instead, the universities were more
closely associated with sovereigns and secular authorities and became, in
effect, schools for the intellectual elite and ruling classes of the states in which
they were situated. A striking example of this is the Prague studium generale.
Still as an offshoot of the original idea of the university as a universallyminded pan-European institution, the Prague studium was founded in 1348
on the model of both Paris and Bologna. Its foundation was due to royal
interest and a royal decision. Situated well away from a traditional older
Europe racked by the notorious crises caused by the Schism, Prague University, elaborating on an existing studium generale of the religious orders, owed
its existence and the favourable political terms that guaranteed its privileges
and success to the patronage of a great sovereign, Charles IV. Before long - in
1372 - it was divided into a university of law and faculties of arts, medicine,
and theology. It could draw on a wide supraregional recruitment area for its
students and teachers, and consequently soon enjoyed an importance comparable to that of the older universities.
The intention of Charles IV was not to give what might be called a
'modern national Bohemian' education, however modern he might have
appeared at the time, but to glorify the abstract principles of dynastic prestige
and the universal preservation of sovereignty. At Charles's death his university was still not strong enough to ride out the political and religious troubles
which cast a shadow over King Wenceslas's reign, and consequently declined.
The narrow pro-Czech policy applied by the university at the time of the
struggle between the archbishop and the supporters of Wyclif, especially
later on, when John Huss became active, and between the king and the
princes of the Holy Roman Empire, plunged the university into meaningless
mediocrity at the beginning of the fifteenth century. The non-Czech professors and students left Prague in a body, to the great benefit of Vienna,
60 H. Millet, 'Les Peres du Concile de Pise (1409): edition d'une nouvelle liste', Melanges de
I'Ecole franqaise de Rome. Moyen Age. Temps modernes, 93 , 713—90; M. C. Miller,
'Participation at the Council of Pavia-Siena, 1423-1424', Archivum historiae pontificiae, 22
 , 389—406; P. Uiblein, 'Zu den Beziehungen der Wiener Universitat zu anderen Universitaten im Mittelalter', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, 188; A. Black, 'The Universities
and the Council of Basle: collegium and concilium', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages,
Relations with authority
Heidelberg, and most of all Leipzig, which most nearly became the successor
of Prague University.61
Prague University of course set the princes and authorities of the empire
and of eastern central Europe an example worth imitating of a really successful national studium generate, a studium in the guise of an old universal
European institution, but with a new look. It was this that inspired many of
them in the fifteenth century to set up similar institutions of their own. But
neither the Schism nor the new conciliar outlook could alter the fact that
these studia needed papal privileges. It was consequently easier than ever to
get these, but they no longer meant universal recognition; their importance
was merely formal. Even so, adopting and adapting the statutes of older
European universities did suggest an apparently universal equilibration and a
uniformity not confined by frontiers.
In reality the authorities founded the new universities for their own political and religious ends; the foundation of universities at Leipzig (1409) and
Rostock (1419) was quickly followed by that of seven others in the territory
of the Holy Roman Empire, mainly at the expense of the secular authorities.
But although these universities seemed to follow the traditional model and
ideals, they had a distinctly regional slant. They were no longer founded for
genuinely European reasons; it was rather the steady development of the
Holy Roman Empire in the late Middle Ages as a group of independent territories that led princes and cities to found these universities, which enjoyed
papal privileges granted by the popes to ensure papal supremacy. The universities were founded for a variety of reasons - a sovereign's ambition, the
growing usefulness of scholars in public business, a prince's desire for prestige, and even piety or to bring economic relief to depressed areas, as in
Louvain, Mainz, and Trier. All those universities, although superficially
resembling their older universally-minded sisters, slowly changed in character. Their connections with the burghers and court circles were much
stronger. Certainly, in spite of their outward conformity with the intentions
of their founders, the universities enjoyed great freedom in their internal
affairs, no less than their older sisters. They were not yet subject to the religious stranglehold of the state, as they were in the Reformation period. Spiritual and temporal interests could co-exist peaceably to a great extent and
could even work together for a common purpose without disagreement.62
No less significant was the turn taken in the first half of the fifteenth
century in the relationship between the Paris studium and the secular authorities, especially towards the end of the Hundred Years War. The university's
61 P. Moraw, 'Die Universitat Prag im Mittelalter. Grundziige ihrer Geschichte im europaischen
Zusammenhang', in Die Universitat
zu Prag, Schriften der sudetendeutschen Akademie der
Wissenschaften und Kiinste, 7 , yli.
62 E. Schubert, 'Motive and Probleme deutscher Universitatsgriindungen des 15. Jahrhunderts',
in P. Baumgart and N. Hammerstein (eds.), Beitrage zu Problemen deutscher
Universitatsgrundungen der fruhen Neuzeit,
Wolfenbiitteler Forschungen, 4 , i}tf.
Paolo Nardi
prospensity to intervene in political and religious affairs (so evident at the
time of the Schism) continued during the spread of English domination in
France and the foundation there of the dual monarchy. At the crucial points
of this long crisis the University of Paris never failed to play a part of the first
importance. Its apparently inconsistent behaviour towards the rival parties
was in line with the openly pacifist views of its academics, who had no hesitation in proclaiming fidelity to the king of France, even if that king were an
Englishman; but they did so to obtain the favour and protection of the crown,
as they looked upon the studium qua studium as an institution governed by
privileges granted by the popes as universal rulers. The representatives of the
royal power, however, declared that the king of France was emperor in his
kingdom and was not subject to any other authority there; but it was for the
king only, and not for the pope or any other person, to create bodies such as
the university and endow them with privileges; and that the University of
Paris could therefore enjoy its privileges only by submitting to royal control
and jurisdiction. The controversy - never a bitter one - ended in 1446 when
Charles VII ordered all cases, including civil cases, relating to the University
of Paris to be dealt with by the Parlement.63 In 1452 the Cardinal Legate
Guillaume d'Estouteville promulgated a general reform of the statutes of the
University of Paris, mainly at the instigation of high officials of the crown,
including the president of the Parlement, in obedience to the orders of the
king himself.
Henceforth France tended to restrict drastically the immunities and privileges which the academics of the twelfth to fourteenth centuries had enjoyed
before the complete consolidation of the French monarchy. Toulouse University, for example, recognized the Parlement of Toulouse as a referee in university controversies, and in the second half of the fifteenth century relied
more and more on it to settle administrative difficulties in the university.64
At the end of the Middle Ages nearly all the principal states of Europe had
universities of their own, founded on the authority of pope or emperor, but
the supreme authorities of the Respublica christianorum did no more than
grant certain initial privileges. Therefore the institutions they founded were
completely dependent on their local authorities, especially the secular ones,
for their administration and operation. Let us take as an example the Louvain
studium, founded by Martin V in 1425 at the request of John IV, duke of
Brabant, the inhabitants of the city, and the chapter of St Peter: the ecclesiastical authority reserved the right to award the licentia ubique docendi, and
the provost of the chapter of St Peter was appointed chancellor with the
power to award academic degrees, but the studium began to function only
because of the financial support of the duke and citizens, who sincerely
63 J. Verger, 'The University of Paris at the end of the Hundred Years' War', in Universities
Politics, 47-78.
64 Smith, University of Toulouse
(note 36), i83ff.
Relations with authority
wanted to have efficient university schools.65 Rulers were convinced of the
social importance of universities, not least as training centres for their own
civil servants. At the petition of Louis II, king of Sicily and count of Provence,
Alexander V created by bull in 1409 a studium generale in Aix-en-Provence
with the privileges of Paris and Toulouse. To be sure of the viability of the
new institution, Louis II compelled his Provencal students to study at Aix
In fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Italy, as the free communes and citizen
Signorie were replaced by larger territorial states, the organization and distribution of the studia were correspondingly affected. Most of them had come
into being spontaneously in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and had
been consolidated by the zeal of the local government. Like rulers elsewhere,
the fifteenth-century Italian princes and republican oligarchies were ambitious to possess studia renowned for the quality of their teaching and able to
train a ruling class and a professional elite. Thus both the Visconti and the
Sforza dynasties of the dukes of Milan, tried to make the Pavia studium
generale the principal university in the dukedom, to the especial detriment of
Parma. They restricted as much as they could the rector's jurisdiction and the
powers of the universitas to make its own regulations, and tried to transfer
them to the ducal government; and, by taking over the financial administration of the studium^ they assumed control over the selection and payment of
teachers and regulation of its teaching.67
The Aragonese sovereigns of Naples adopted similar methods when they
refounded the old Hohenstaufen studium generale^ which had suffered a
serious decline towards the end of Angevin rule. They renewed 'public participation in the organization of the school and in the formation of a body of
teachers paid from the public purse'. The Aragonese princes had previously
founded a studium in Sicily: in 1434 Alfonso V the Magnanimous approved
the opening of a university in Catania, probably at the suggestion of dignitaries of the royal council having connections with that city, and perhaps to
compensate Catania for the transfer of the royal court to Palermo. The new
studium generale was granted privileges by Pope Eugenius IV, and from the
very beginning was controlled and administered by the central authority and
the citizen commune, in conflict with the bishop-chancellor (who was
empowered to award doctorates) over the collection of income for the benefit
65 E. J. M . van Eijl, 'The Foundation of the University of Louvain', in Universities
in the Late
Middle Ages, 29-41.
66 For the Aix studium:
D. Maffei, Giuristi medievali
e falsificazioni
editoriali del primo
Cinquecento , 7-9, 13-15, 40-2, 68.
67 M . C. Zorzoli, 'Interventi dei duchi e del Senato di Milano per l'Universita di Pavia (secoli
XV—XVI)', in Universitdesocietd,
553-73; M. G. Di Renzo Villata, 'Scienza giuridica e legislazione nell'eta sforzesca', in Gli Sforza a Milano e in Lombardia
e i loro rapporti con gli Stati
italiani ed europei
(1450-1535)
 , 65—145. For the Parma studium:
'L'Universita di Parma nel Quattrocento', in Parma e VUmanesimo
italiano , 108.
Paolo Nardi
of the university. The college of teachers and the universitas scholarium
never had any influence to speak of.68 The popes lavished special care on the
Rome stadium, behaving towards it like secular princes, and the citizens of
Florence did much to help their studium, spending large sums to pay its
teachers.69 The Venetian republic tightened its grip on the Padua studium,
and the counts (later dukes) of Savoy and the Turin commune established and
organized a prestigious centre of learning.70 Even minor Italian states like the
marquisate of Este and the republic of Siena worked zealously to provide
themselves with schools and teachers of a high standard, competing with
richer cities able to offer greater inducements.71
As has recently been pointed out,72 all the studia that flourished in Italy in
the late Middle Ages vied with each other in recruiting masters at high salaries and offering students better living conditions. This explains why governments had to enact protectionist laws, why they carefully administered the
finances of the studium, and why it was general practice to restrict the powers
of rectors of universitates to civil law cases, and sometimes as well to minor
criminal cases. All in all, Italian centres of learning gradually became provincialized, although some of the best teachers remained continually on the
move from one studium to another73 and there was an influx of students of
various nationalities. Academics in Italy thus became more and more closely
associated with the ruling oligarchy, composed of the richest families, who
filled the principal public offices and the most sensitive diplomatic posts, and
who acted as subtle mediators between the universities and the shifting
kaleidoscope of politics and society.
68 A. Romano, iLegum
e cultura giuridica
nella Sicilia aragonese.
Tenderize,
ruoli , 183-92. For Naples: Cortese, 'Sulla scienza giuridica' (note 40), 43 n. 24.
69 D. S. Chambers, 'Studium Urbis and Gabella Studii: the University of Rome in the Fifteenth
Century', in C. H. Clough (ed.), Cultural
Aspects of the Italian Renaissance.
Essays in Honor
of Paul Oskar Kristeller
 , 68-110; K. Park, 'The Readers at the Florentine
Studio According to the Communal Fiscal Records (1357-1380,1413-1446)', Rinascimento,
 , 249-310.
70 For the Padua studium
and Venice: F. Dupuigrenet Desroussilles, 'L'Universita di Padova dal
1405 al Concilio di Trento', in Storia della cultura veneta, vol. Ill: 2 , 6i6ff. For
Turin: E. Bellone, // primo secolo di vita della Universita di Torino (sec. XV-XVI).
ed ipotesi sulla cultura nel Piemonte
quattrocentesco
 .
71 Piana, 'Universita di Parma' (note 67), 104. For Siena: L. Zdekauer, Lo Studio di Siena nel
Rinascimento
(Milan, 1894).
72 P. Denley, 'Recent Studies on Italian Universities of the Middle Ages and Renaissance',
History of Universities,
I , 200-1.
73 P. Nardi, 'Umanesimo e cultura giuridica nella Siena del Quattrocento', Bullettino senese di
storia patria, 88 , 244-53.
Relations with authority
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baldwin, J. W. and Goldthwaite, R. A. (eds.) Universities in Politics. Case Studies
from the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern Period, Baltimore/London, 1972.
Benson, R. L. and Constable, G. (eds) Renaissance and Renewal in the Twelfth
Century, Cambridge, Mass., 1982; reprint, Oxford, 1985.
Classen, P. Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed. J. Fried, Schriften der
M.G.H., 29, Stuttgart, 1983.
Kuttner, S. 'Papst Honorius HI und das Studium des Zivilrechts', Gratian and the
Schools of Law 1140-1234, London, 1983, 79—101.
Lawrence, C. H. 'The University in State and Church', in J. I. Catto (ed.), The History
of the University of Oxford, vol. I, Oxford, 1984, 97-150.
Meyhofer, M. 'Die kaiserlichen Stiftungsprivilegien fiir Universitaten', Archiv fur
Urkundenforschung, 4 , 294-314, 395-413.
Post, G. 'Parisian Masters as a Corporation, 1200-1246', Speculum, 9 , 421-45
 .
Rossi, G.' "Universitas scholarium" e Comune (sec. XII-XIV)', Studi e memorie per la
storia delV Universitd di Bologna, new series, I , 197-227.
Swanson, R. N. Universities, Academics and the Great Schism, Cambridge, 1979.
Universitd e societd nei secoli XH-XVL Atti del nono convegno internazionale di
studio tenuto a Pistoia nei giorni 20-25 settembre 1979, Pistoia, 1982.
MANAGEMENT AND
ALEKSANDER GIEYSZTOR
GENERAL UNIVERSITY STRUCTURE
The history of the European university is the history of many universities, of
which some eighty existed in the Middle Ages. They varied greatly in antiquity, permanence, and the quality of their teaching and research. Nevertheless, it is possible to detect some regularities, notably in the shaping influence
of two archetypes, those of Bologna and Paris (see chapter 2), and in the use
of the two main Latin terms which designated the medieval university:
studium generale (or more simply studium) and universitas scholarium (or
universitas magistrorum et scholarium). These reflect two features of its
organization. A studium generale arose spontaneously or was founded by
papal or imperial charter, and had the right to grant its alumni permission to
teach at any university {licentia ubique docendi). The term universitas was of
much wider scope. In law, it meant any type of corporation or community.1
Like every corporate body in the Middle Ages the universities were, to
some extent, distinguished by their privileges or, as they were then called,
theii 'liberties and immunities'. The first and most important of these privileges was autonomy, that is, the university's recognized right to act as a
corporate bDdy in dealing with the outside world, to supervise the recruitment of its members, whether teachers or students, and to make its own
regulations and enforce them by exercising some degree of internal jurisdiction. Other privileges, though, were enjoyed by individuals as members of the
corporate body. Teachers and students alike enjoyed a personal status. This
appeared in the twelfth century and took firm shape in the thirteenth. It owed
much to canon law, supplemented by the Authentica Habita (n55), the
scholar's statute. This was both the cause and outcome of a growing ecclesiastical authority over universities, including the Mediterranean universities of
1 O. Weijers, Terminologie des universites au XIHe siecle , 14-26, 34-51.
Management and resources
law or medicine (see chapter 2). The students (often themselves called 'clerks'
and distinguished by their tonsure), like clerics already in minor orders or
monks or priests, were subject to certain restrictions, being forbidden to bear
arms or wear 'secular' clothes, and usually to marry. But they also claimed to
be answerable only to ecclesiastical courts and to enjoy the exemptions from
taxation and military service allowed to the clergy. In comparison with ordinary clerics, indeed, members of universities enjoyed exceptional advantages.
Their person and property were theoretically exempt from seizure or arbitrary summons {ius non trahi). To a great extent they were not subject to the
jurisdiction of the local ecclesiastical authorities and could appeal directly to
the pope or his representative. They were entitled to enjoy the income of
ecclesiastical benefices without being resident in them.
By the end of the Middle Ages, university privileges, although not directly
challenged, were less absolute. Civic authorities had begun to take the place
of the church in guaranteeing university franchises, but also in restricting
them. The personal privileges of students and masters, although not abolished, were subject to growing supervision. Their affairs were increasingly
dealt with by lay officers and courts, which made it their business to hunt
down persons posing as students.2
Such influences, together with factors such as the number of students, the
founder's intention, or local pragmatic arrangements, contributed to the
shaping of the organization and structure of the studium generale. University
communities had subdivisions such as faculties, nations, and colleges, with
similar corporative rights and organizations. The nature of these internal
corporations determined the character of the whole university and requires
some consideration at this point.3
Besides its old meaning of a discipline or field study, from the mid-thirteenth
century onwards facultas meant a body teaching a discipline, i.e. arts, law,
medicine, or theology. Teachers and students were members of these faculties, and consequently also of the studium generale. Faculties were the most
important divisions in the University of Paris, and in other institutions following the Parisian pattern.
The Bologna tradition was different. The studium generale of Bologna
was, like its daughters, a cluster of universities, each for students of only one
2 Kibre, Privileges; P. Classen, 'Libertas scolastica -Scholarenprivilegien - Akademische Freiheit
im Mittelalter', in P. Classen, Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed. J. Fried, Schriften
der MGH, 29 , 238-84.
3 Most of the data can be found in Rashdall, Universities; Cobban, Medieval Universities; Kibre,
Nations; Kibre, Privileges; Weijers, Terminologie (note 1); Denifle, Entstehung; Kaufmann,
Deutsche Universitdten. With a few exceptions, no further reference will be made to these
publications.
Aleksander Gieysztor
discipline, and it was divided into two universities or 'nations' {nationes),
each for students of a particular geographical origin. The teachers and the
students born in Bologna did not belong to these universitates, because it was
supposed that, as will be seen, students of Bolognese origin did not need a
nation to protect them. Professors had their own corporation, the collegium
doctorum, which was completely distinct from the students' corporation (see
chapter 5).
Not all the Italian universities moulded on the Bologna archetype
embodied this structure in its entirety. In the most elaborate form of the
student university, which was limited to Bologna and Padua, the studium
generale consisted of two universities, the universitas legistarum, which can
be called the law faculty, and the universitas artistarum et medicorum
(faculty of arts and medicine), universitas meaning the community of
students. The faculty of theology was in the hands of the mendicant orders
and existed on the fringe of the studium generale. Each faculty was divided
into two 'universities', the universitas citramontanorum of students from the
Italian peninsula, and the universitas ultramontanorum of students from
beyond the Alps.
Each of these was further divided into nations for smaller geographic areas.
The number and names of these nations constantly changed in the course of
time, following and reflecting changes in the geographical recruitment of
students. Both the law university and the arts university had a rector, who
was a student member elected by the consiliarii or presidents of each nation.
Although Padua most closely followed the Bologna pattern, it was only after
two centuries of adaptation and reorganization. Padua was founded in 1222,
but the universitas legistarum did not consist of two law faculties (as was the
case in Bologna) until it was reorganized in 1260. A theological faculty arose
there in 1363 on the fringe of the studium, and (as at Bologna) it was in the
hands of the mendicants. The university of arts and medicine was originally
subordinate to the jurists; it emancipated itself in 1399, although appeals were
still addressed to the rector of the law faculty.
Other Italian studia attracted too few students from a wide area to justify
so complex an organization as that of Bologna and Padua in its full form.
Siena had a law university with ultramontane and cismontane universities,
each with several nations, but its arts faculty did not have nations. In Ferrara
the law university and the arts university were both divided into nations, but
not into ultramontane and cismontane universities. Pisa and Perugia only had
one universitas covering all disciplines, with one rector and only a few
nations. The last group of universities had too few students, and certainly too
few foreigners, to need nations. They are nearer to the northern pattern (e.g.
Fermo, Parma). The Universities of Naples, founded by Frederick II in 1224,4
4 La Fondazione Fridericiana delVUniversitd di Napoli .
Management and resources
and of the Roman court {studium curiae or sacri palatii), created in 1244-5 by
Pope Innocent IV, were authoritarian establishments not fitting into the
general pattern. Both universities started with a law and a theological faculty
only, and were intended solely to educate the ruler's ecclesiastical and civil
servants. After 1323 the studium curiae introduced oriental languages, and in
the fifteenth century philosophy and medicine. About 1500, during the pontificate of Leo X, it merged with the studium urbis, the Roman urban university known as the Sapienza, whose structure was also simple.
In other countries, too, the influence of Bologna can be traced. The Spanish
universities founded during the thirteenth century by the kings of Castile, and
(more particularly) by those of Aragon, were modelled on Bologna although
they also followed patterns of their own. They were student universities, but
less independent than Bologna because more strictly controlled by the crown.
Some other universities (those of Montpellier, Orleans, Angers, and Prague,
for example) can also be related to the Bologna archetype, without having
conformed closely to it. That at Montpellier arose spontaneously from local
schools, in particular from the city's medical schools, well known since the
first half the twelfth century. The papal legate granted it the status of a
medical university in 1220, as a universitas medicorum tarn doctorum quam
discipulorum. An arts university came into existence in 1242, with statutes
imposed by the bishop, and in about 1280 a law university, which after 1339
took the form of a students' university with a separate doctoral college. The
University of Orleans arose from the twelfth-century arts schools and developed after a secession from Paris in 1229; but it taught only one discipline,
law. Its organization combined elements from both archetypes, Bologna and
Paris. Angers, another law university arising from the same secession, added
faculties of theology, medicine, and arts to its law university in the fifteenth
The Prague studium is an interesting example of the flexibility of medieval
institutions. This first university of the Holy Roman Empire was founded in
1346 by the Emperor Charles IV. It then consisted of four faculties, as at
Paris. It was headed by a rector, who was not, however, connected with the
arts faculty as in Paris. For political reasons (see chapter 3), the law faculty
broke away in 1372 and founded an independent law university on Italian
Besides this type of organization, in which university and faculty are more
or less synonymous, there was another, that of the four faculties, the model
which originated in Paris. It consisted of one lower faculty, arts, and three
higher faculties, theology, law, and medicine. (After Pope Honorius III
forbade the teaching of civil law in Paris in 1219, the law faculty taught only
canon law - the University of Orleans can be considered as the civil law
faculty of the Paris studium.) The masters, having quickly become aware of
their own value, called these four faculties 'four rivers of paradise'. Saint
Aleksander Gieysztor
Bonaventure compared the arts to the foundations of a building, law and
medicine to its walls, and theology to its roof and summit.
The Paris model was adopted by the studia of north-western and central
Europe. The German universities, founded in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, were moulded on the Paris archetype and adopted its statutes.
Sometimes, as at Louvain (founded in 1425), statutes were copied from
Cologne, a daughter of Paris founded in 1388.5 An ideal multidisciplinary
university had four faculties, but in the thirteenth century some universities
had only two or three. The Scottish universities offer an interesting example
of difference between norm and reality. The studium generale consisted of
the four traditional faculties, but until the end of the early modern period two
of these (law and medicine), or perhaps three, were merely 'paper faculties'.
Only arts students could follow a whole curriculum at a Scottish university.
One source of diversity of organization arose from the fact that, until the
end of the thirteenth century, the popes protected the Parisian monopoly of
theology and objected to the foundation of faculties of theology elsewhere.
Another source of differentiation was that, although almost every university
had a medical faculty, some of these could hardly survive, especially in the
Holy Roman Empire or Denmark, and did not always have as many as 1 per
cent of the total student population. The arts faculty inevitably had the most
masters and students especially north of the Alps. Although it was regarded
as preparing students for the three higher faculties, most of its alumni never
entered a higher faculty. At the waning of the Middle Ages law faculties
gained importance, and were increasingly attended by students attracted by
the brilliant careers open to talented young graduates in law (see chapters 10
Much of the administration of the university was done by the faculties,
particularly in universities which had no nations, or in which nations were
not important. They provided appropriate channels for active participation in
the organization and management of the studium generale. As a corporation
the faculty had its own head, usually called decanus (dean), a bursar (receptor), beadles, a common seal, and statutes. The dean first appears in the
thirteenth century in Paris and Montpellier, and in the fourteenth century
elsewhere. At first, he was the senior master still engaged in teaching. The
dean was the chairman of the congregation constituted by the masters of the
faculty; he was responsible for administration and teaching, disputations, and
examinations. In Oxford, where the schools first appeared in 1208-9, t n e
faculty of arts held a dominant position as in Paris, and the higher faculties
did not have deans. In the Italian faculty-universities the rector had the same
functions as the deans in the studia north of the Alps. The qualifications
required to become a dean, the methods of election, and his term of office
5 J. Goossens, 'De oudste algemene statuten van de universiteiten van Keulen en Leuven. Een
vergelijkende tekstanalyse', Archives et Bibliotheques de Belgique, 48 , 42-78.
Management and resources
varied from university to university. It is not always clear how a university or
its subdivisions were organized.
One would think that statutes are far and away the best source of our knowledge of the structure and management of the medieval university. This,
however, is not necessarily the case. Very few university statutes, in the strict
sense of the term, have come down to us from the thirteenth century. The
privileges granted by the papacy (as in 1215 and 1231 for Paris, 1214 for
Oxford, 1219 for Bologna and 1220 for Montpellier) merely stated - and gave
papal support in - certain matters of dispute between the university and the
outside authorities, or within the university. Otherwise popes left universities
to make their own regulations for programmes, curricula, examinations, salaries for master and beadles, mutual aid, university offices, student discipline,
dress, and lodging.
These regulations were probably still fairly fluid and in some cases only a
matter of unwritten custom. Even when written down, this was apparently
done too informally for anything more than fragments (often incorporated
into later codes) to have survived. The first university statutes {strictu sensu)
still preserved are undoubtedly those of Cambridge, dating from between
1236 and 1254.6 A text recently discovered in Bologna (a very incomplete one,
for it relates to little else than the puncta taxata of teachers of law) has been
ascribed to the year 1252.7 Elsewhere, we do not find any really orderly sets of
statutes before the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. It is not easy to see how
those were applied and it would be rash to assume, as a few commentators
have done, that such rules were current in previous centuries.
In the older universities statutes sometimes introduced reforms to correct
abuses, and this led to new regulations unknown in the thirteenth century.
This is doubtless true of the Paris statutes of the 1360s and of the general
reform of 1452. In Toulouse between 1309 and 1329, several important statutes stabilized the administration of a university already active for decades
past. The law university at Montpellier received its statutes in 1339. In
Bologna the first complete texts are not earlier than 1317 and 1432; in Salamanca they date from 1411. At Oxford the oldest collection of statutes was
compiled in 1313, and incorporates older provisions.8
6 R. K. Hannay, 'Early University Institutions at St Andrews and Glasgow, a Comparative Study'
Scottish Historical Review, 11 , 266-83; M. B. Hackett, The Original Statutes of Cambridge University. The Text and its History .
7 D. Maffei, 'Un trattato di Bonaccorso degli Elisei e i piu antichi statuti dello studio di Bologna
nel manoscritto 22 della Robins Collection', Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law, new series, 5
 , 73~IQI- Concerning the puncta taxata, see chapter 12, p. 398.
8 Rashdall, Universities, vol. I, 173-5, 443~7; v°l« H> 83-5, 131-3, 168-70; History of Oxford,
Aleksander Gieysztor
Many of the new universities founded at the end of the Middle Ages were
given more or less complete statutes from the beginning (the oldest example
appears to be that of Lerida in 1300).9 These texts were, however, directly
inspired by those of other universities, or even copied from them. We cannot
therefore be sure that they were really suitable to local conditions or, therefore, that they were strictly applied.
In short, although there is always something to be learned from the statutes
that have come down to us, it is wise to compare them with other sources,
such as day-to-day administrative documents, masters' manuscripts, and
reconstituted graduate courses. This often reveals great discrepancies.
The organization of the early medieval university was also shaped by another
corporation, the nation already mentioned above. It first arose spontaneously,
through the efforts of students or students and masters; later it was introduced into the organization of newly founded universities. In many universities the nations was an essential feature; often it was the heads of nations
who elected the rectors and were members of the board of the studium.
In the student universities of Bologna and Padua the universities of law,
arts, and medicine had each been divided into two universitates {citramontana and ultramontana), themselves divided into nations for smaller geographic areas (see p. n o and chapter 9). The recruitment of other Italian universities was too regional to need this complex organization. It reflected their
attraction for certain European countries or regions. For instance, in Perugia
there were only three nations - German, French, and Catalan - for ultramontani. Nations in the Paris type of university were organized rather differently.
To begin with, in Paris only the largest faculty, that of arts, had nations.
These had constituted themselves soon after the university was founded, on
the basis of a loose geographical classification; there were four, namely
France, Picardy, Normandy, and England (the English nation included
students from central and northern Europe). They comprised masters of arts
from the arts faculty, and included professors of higher faculties with a
degree in arts. The congregation of the nation was headed by a proctor
(procurator) chosen for a period of one month by the masters and often
re-elected several times. The nation had its own seal and registers, libri
nationis, revenue, and expenditure, and became an important part of university life.10
Elsewhere in universities north of the Alps nations followed a variety of
patterns. The law university of Orleans, one of the most international medi-
9 Rashdall, Universities, vol. II, 93-4.
10 See also G. C. Boyce, The English—German Nation in the University of Paris during the
Middle Ages .
Management and resources
eval institutions, had ten nations until 1532, being organized like the universitas legistarum of an Italian studium. At Oxford the border between the two
nations, the northerners {boreales, who included the Scots) and southerners
{australes, who included Irish and Welsh), was considered to be the river
Trent, and masters of arts were headed by their respective proctors. As early
as 1274, however, the nations were abolished because they were continually
in conflict with each other. Later, the nation system was revived in the British
Isles in the arts faculties of the three Scottish universities (St Andrews 1411,
Glasgow 1450-1, and Aberdeen 1494), although the recruitment of these
universities was purely Scottish. In this they followed the Iberian system.
Spanish and Portuguese studia generalia were attended mainly by students
from the Iberian peninsula. At Salamanca the four nations corresponded to
the ecclesiastical provinces of Spain. In the Lerida studium only the law
students were divided into nations; but there six of the twelve nations were
foreigners (from Narbonne, Gascony and Provence, France and Burgundy,
Italy, Germany, and the British Isles). In other Spanish universities nations
were of minor importance.
In central Europe, the Paris model was at first followed in the nations
system as in other respects. In Prague four nations (Czechs, Poles, Bavarians,
and Saxons) included all the students. Their consiliarii, students or bachelors,
were members of the university council together with the masters. In Vienna
there were four nations covering all faculties; their student members took
part in electing the proctors. The University of Leipzig also had four nations,
but only professors were entitled to take part in the congregations. In
Cracow, Erfurt and Cologne the division into nations was not authorized.
Four nations were formed in Louvain, but never became important there.
At first nations were independent corporations. Their strength and influence in university matters varied from university to university, but they all
had almost the same structure and organization. Proctors (procuratores) or
consiliarii (in some Italian nations) headed the nations, and had administrative and financial powers, and to some extent jurisdiction; they took part in
the university bodies as counsellors of the rector. The nations had sometimes
their own bursars (receptores), and always their beadles (bedelli) as in
Bologna. In Paris the nations elected every year one principal beadle {bedellus
maior, the proctor's man) and a subbedellus or bedellus minor to assist him.
The beadle's insignia were the verges. In Paris the proctors of the nations
appointed, swore in, and paid the messengers (nuntii volantes minores, or
ordinarii), who bore messages and money between members of the nations
and their families. In the later Middle Ages the proctors also appointed principal messengers, nuntii maiores, functioning as financiers, bankers, and
money-changers in the service of the university.
The books kept by proctors, bursars, librarians, and other officials of the
nation are some of the most important sources of our knowledge of univer-
Aleksander Gieysztor
sity life in the Middle Ages. They give information on the geographical and
social origin and everyday life of members of the nation, and on its finances.
College sources give similar information.
As time passed, another university corporation, the college (collegium - not
to be confused with the collegium doctorum, as is explained in chapter 5),
came to surpass the nations in importance. In some universities of the later
Middle Ages, collegiate establishments determined the structure and management of the university or faculty. The Collegium Artistarum (1390) of Heidelberg housed almost all the salaried masters of the faculty of arts, and the
Louvain arts faculty was divided into four 'pedagogies' (colleges). The
College of Glasgow for undergraduate students was always identified with
the 'university' in the popular mind, since most of its students were arts
undergraduates.
The college, or domus scholarium as it was first called, began as a
boarding-house for poor students, then became an autonomous or semiautonomous academic community of men living and studying together in an
endowed building. These men, teachers and pupils, might come from a particular region or study the same discipline. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries founders and benefactors of colleges especially promoted arts and
theology, and in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries canon and civil law.
Colleges for physicians were always a rarity. (For more information on the
college see chapter 7.)
At the University of Paris there were colleges almost from the beginning.
They began as hospitia, boarding-houses for groups of students or fellows
called socii. A few, including the first college, the College des Dix-huit,
founded for eighteen needy students in 1180, and the College of St Thomas du
Louvre founded in 1186, received endowments; there were even monastic
colleges for students of theology. About 1257 Robert of Sorbon founded the
college known as La Sorbonne, so that there should be a sufficient number of
non-monastic students of theology. It housed first sixteen, then thirty fellowship holders (bursarii) and six young masters of arts working for a doctorate
in theology. Louis IX endowed the college with a plot of land lying near the
ancient Roman thermae. It was managed by a board of church and university
dignitaries, and administered by a principal [provisor), who was appointed, a
prior or lator rotuli elected every year by the fellows to record their duties,
and four proctors. Other colleges such as the College de Navarre (1304),
whose seventy students were divided into three classes - grammar, arts, and
theology - remained basically student colleges. During the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries the founders' motives changed; willingness to aid poor
young men was supplanted by the need to provide comfortable living con-
Management and resources
ditions for an elite of monastic or noble students.11 Bursales who studied with
a grant had a stricter and less luxurious life in college than the commensales
or commoners who paid for their own lodging (see chapter 7). As early as the
fourteenth century lecturers were attracted by the houses, facilities, and libraries owned by the colleges. In the following century lectures began to be held
in the colleges for external students as well as for the fellows {bursarii), the
university retaining the right to control the colleges. By the end of the
fifteenth century Paris had about seventy colleges, including monastic ones.
Some were foundations for foreigners (Danes, Scots, Lombards, and
In Paris, the internal administration of the college was usually carried out
by internal officers. External authorities appointed the head of the college,
saw to it that vacant fellowships or bursae were filled, and so controlled
college life. The managers of college properties often came from outside. In
Oxford and Cambridge, on the contrary, colleges had little adminstrative
connection with the governing bodies of the university; they organized their
own endowment and benefited from the university's teaching and academic
degrees; they elected their heads and co-opted the fellows, who governed
them under their own charters and statutes. Thus colleges in England did not
follow the course taken by Paris. In the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries
undergraduate students of moderate means could get lodging and limited
teaching facilities in halls and hostels. In the course of the thirteenth century
the first colleges were founded to help less well-off bachelors of arts or
masters of arts to continue their studies in the higher faculties. The first
English 'graduate' college was Merton College, founded in 1264; Balliol
College was established in 1261-6 but received its formal charter only in 1282;
University College arose c. 1280. The first college at Cambridge, Peterhouse,
was established in 1284, modelling itself on Merton. King's Hall College,
Cambridge (founded in the early fourteenth century), and New College,
Oxford (founded in 1379), were the first colleges to admit undergraduate
students. Other colleges followed their lead. In 1550 or thereabouts many
more college fellows than students lodged in halls or hostels. Oxford still had
about eighty-nine halls in 1444, but in 1552 only eight, housing about 200
students in all. The thirteen colleges at that time had 450 students.12 Increasingly, tuition at Oxford was given in the colleges rather than in the university,
and consequently undergraduates were encouraged to apply for a college
fellowship. As everywhere else, the regular orders had their own colleges with
full accommodation and teaching facilities. On the continent, Louvain University (founded in 1425) had a flourishing collegiate life. To compare it with
11 A. L. Gabriel, 'Motivation of the Founders of Medieval Colleges', in A. L. Gabriel, Garlandia.
Studies in the History of the Medieval University , 211-23.
12 A. B. Cobban, Medieval English Universities: Oxford and Cambridge to c. 1500 , 158.
Aleksander Gieysztor
Oxford, before 1500 most arts students were housed in the four paedagogia
called after the houses where they were founded: Lily, Pore, Falcon, and
Castle. These provided full accommodation and tuition, mainly for freshmen.
There were also five residential colleges (without teaching) for students of
theology and law. In 1526, 31.8 per cent of the 1,821 registered students lived
in collegiate establishments (17.9 per cent in the four paedagogia, 11.6 per
cent in colleges, and 2.3 per cent in religious houses), 52.2 per cent rented a
room in a private house, and the rest lived at home.13
In central Europe, colleges were primarily or exclusively for masters. In
Prague twelve magistri endowed with a prebend from the college chapel
made up the Collegium Carolinum founded in 1361, and they co-opted their
fellow members. The Collegium was important in that university meetings,
and lectures, were held in the college building. Simultaneously, in Vienna
there was the Collegium Ducale for endowed masters. In Cracow there were
three colleges with living accommodation for professors: the Collegium
Maius or Regium (1400) which had a flourishing library, and was headed by a
provost; the Collegium Minus (1449); and the Collegium Juridicum (1403),
which had a small adjacent student hostel, the Bursa Jerusalem. Cracow also
had other hospices for poor students, such as the Bursa Pauperum (1417). In
Erfurt, the earliest college, Collegium Maius, for masters of arts, probably
dates from the official foundation of the university in 1379, and the Collegium
Amplonianum or Porta Coeli for jurists was founded in 1412. In other
German universities there were professors' colleges, and houses for poor
In southern Europe colleges were never as important as in north-western
Europe - certainly not in the Middle Ages; until the Reformation and
Counter-Reformation they did not acquire any such constitutional or educational significance. Italian students always had close ties with the towns.
They lodged with the townspeople, and shared their living conditions and
political preoccupations. The oldest colleges in Bologna were originally
intended by their founders to supply lodging, board, and financial assistance
only to a few needy students and provided no teaching. They were the
College of Avignon, founded for eight poor students in 1267 by the bishop of
Avignon, and the Collegium Brescianum founded in 1326; in 1436-7 both
merged with the Collegium Gregorianum, a later foundation. The largest was
the Spanish College (1367) with thirty students - eight of theology, eighteen
of canon law, and four of medicine. They lived in the college for seven years,
and theologians and medical students could stay longer after receiving their
doctoral degree. The students came from Spanish dioceses chosen by the
founder of the college, Cardinal Gil Albornoz. Candidates had to pass an
13 E. De Maesschalck, 'De "goede" en de "eeuwige" student. Tucht en huisvesting te Leuven in
de 15c en i6e eeuw', Alumni Leaven, 9 , 11-15.
Management and resources
entrance examination. Poverty and competent grounding 'at least in
grammar', and for theologians and medical students logic, were required.
They were given a room and board, two suits of clothing a year, and a yearly
stipend. The college was run on fairly democratic principles, but internal
discipline was strict. Every year the scholars elected the rector and consiliarii.
Important financial questions were settled by the general assembly. The
patronage of the college was vested in the bishops and chapters of the abovementioned dioceses, plus two members of the Albornoz family.14 In Padua
after 1363, the Collegium Tornacense and seven other colleges housed small
numbers of students.
The Collegio di Spagna in Bologna was taken as a model for the Spanish
colleges which emerged in Salamanca in the late fourteenth century. The
most famous of the Spanish medieval colleges was the Colegio Viejo or
Colegio Mayor de San Bartolome, founded at Salamanca in 1401 for ten
canonists and five theologians. Colleges in provincial France were primarily
boarding-houses for needy students. Toulouse took the lead with the very
early secular College of Vidal Gautier (1243) and the College of Montlezun
(1391). The reason why so few colleges arose in Italy and in France south of
the Loire is clear. Most of the wealthier and more mature students attended
the law and medical faculties. They did not need cheap hostels, but preferred
more comfortable rooms in private houses and freedom from the restraints of
a college or cloister (for college life, see chapter 7). Moreover, the wellorganized student nations offered students all kinds of assistance and financial and juridical help (as is shown by the minutes of the proctors of the
German nations in Bologna, Padua, and Orleans). Theology was dominated
by the mendicant orders, which had their own institutions. There were not
many young grammar and arts students in those southern universities, and
there was therefore no need for special accommodation for the few theologians or arts students of moderate means.
INTERNAL GOVERNMENT
Originally the bishop's representative was head of the universitas, with authority over students and masters. In the course of the thirteenth century different corporations were formed in the studia generalia. Most of the judicial
powers of the bishop's representative passed to an elected head of the new
institutions, the rector.15 Except in England and Spain, as will be explained
later, the role of the bishop's representative became, generally speaking, more
formal. Depending on the constitution of the studium the rector was chosen
from among the students, as in Bologna, or the masters, as in Paris. In
14 B. M. Marti, The Spanish College at Bologna in the Fourteenth Century .
15 For a general review, see O. Eissfeldt, 'Rektor. Geschichte und Bedeutung des Universitatsamtes', Studium Generale, 5 , 384-92.
Aleksander Gieysztor
universities with a mixed type of constitution, the rector was a master but
chosen by masters and students. For instance, in Orleans the rector was a
master chosen by the nations; in Angers, after the reform of 1398, the rector
was elected from among the licentiates by electors nominated by the nations.
A would-be rector had to fulfil certain requirements for election. He had to
be mature (usually aged twenty-five years or over), a clericus (to exercise
judicial authority over clerical students), wealthy (the office entailed much
expenditure), a graduate, and of irreproachable conduct. His term of office
varied from one university to another. The rector was the administrative head
of the university, the executor of resolutions adopted in the assemblies, and
the supervisor of the observance of privileges and statutes; he administered
the university's finances, presided at its meetings, sealed its documents, and
represented it in official affairs. One of his important tasks in the Middle Ages
was to keep discipline and to preside over the university court sitting to judge
and punish offending suppositi (matriculated members of the university).
Indeed, the judicial autonomy of the studium generale was guaranteed by
several privileges starting with the Authentica Habita (1155) of Frederick I
Barbarossa. Theoretically, all suppositi were exempt from civil jurisdiction
and even, to a certain extent, from local ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Suppositi
were regarded as comprising students and teachers, and their wives, families,
and servants; the external officials appointed by the university; and persons
engaged in the production and sale of books (booksellers, copiers, illuminators, preparers of parchment, suppliers of paper, etc).
At first, each of the law universities (civil and canon) in Bologna was
headed by a rector chosen by the students from among themselves. Although
both the town and the professors initially disapproved of the institution of a
student rector, they were forced to comply with it in the course of the first half
of the thirteenth century. The professors had to take an oath of obedience to
the rector. This led to a particular form of student leadership within the
university, except, to some extent, concerning the organization of studies. By
the end of the thirteenth century the two law universities held common
congregations; the two rectors deputized for each other when one was absent;
they may even have had the same seal. Meanwhile the arts and medical
university also elected a rector, but it was not until the early fourteenth
century that he enjoyed the same legal recognition and privileges as his
colleague of the law university. At Padua the rector of the medical university
was subordinate to his counterpart of the law university until the fourteenth
century. In Italian universities the rector generally had no authority over
teaching and examinations; these matters belonged to the collegia doctorum,
either of medicine or of law. In Bologna the rector was elected for a two-year
period. He took precedence over archbishops and even over cardinals and
legates, but not over the bishop of Bologna. His title was dignissimus; the title
magnificus did not appear until the end of the fifteenth century.
Management and resources
The rector's stipend came from half the total income of legal fines;
sometimes he received an additional subvention from the common treasury.
By the end of the Middle Ages he was appointed to a special student professorship, financed by the town. He had to cover the cost of his official
expenses and was obliged to keep two servants. The tightening grip of the
towns or rulers on their universities, and the financial burden of the office,
limited students' willingness to accept this dignity.
Although at Bologna the rector was a student, his jurisdiction in civil
matters inside the university was recognized in the oath taken by all university members. He had to ensure that statutory decisions were enforced and
fines for misdemeanours collected. He could fine keepers of lodgings who
rented rooms to students, and craftsmen working on the production of
books. Whether his sentences against members or servants of the university
were executed depended on the agreement of the public authority (the
comune of Bologna). Both universities demanded that the rector's jurisdiction
should apply whether the student was the plaintiff or the defendant, but the
city authorities repeatedly rejected this demand. The rector had no jurisdiction in criminal affairs until the fifteenth century, when it was conceded
where both parties were scholars. However, canon law forbade any jurisdiction by a layman over a clerk; any student could therefore acquire the immunities of an ecclesiastic, and as the rector of a university of students was
usually a beneficed ecclesiastic he was not subject to municipal law.
Universities modelled on Bologna had similar forms of rectorship, though
its power tended to be more restricted by the influence of the external
authorities. In Coimbra, the two rectors were chosen from among, and by,
the students, but as in the Spanish universities the rector's influence was
limited. Like Bologna, Salamanca was headed by a student rector elected by
the students through their nations. As in Italy, teaching was the preserve of
the faculties' collegia doctorum, not the rector. But unlike Bologna, Salamanca limited the rector's jurisdiction to violation of the statutes; it was the
chancellor who possessed the real powers of jurisdiction and administration.
In studia under strong urban influence, like those of Aragon, Lerida, Valencia, and Barcelona, the chancellor and civil government shared the rector's
The origins of the rector's office in Paris are quite different. The four
nations each had rectores or procurators; in 1249 they decided to elect one
rector - a master - as head of the faculty of arts and virtually of the whole
university. In the beginning his authority was limited to his own faculty, but
because of the great numbers of arts students, and because the rector collected money from all the faculties, and administered it on behalf of the entire
university, often in defence of the rights of the corporation, he gradually
gained authority over the whole institution, probably during the last quarter
of the thirteenth century. The masters of theology opposed his influence and
Aleksander Gieysztor
by the end of the century the chancellor of Notre-Dame retained only the
power to appoint examiners in arts and the prerogative of conferring the
At Paris, the rector had very limited judicial power; the statutes gave him
jurisdiction only over members and servants of the university. The punishments he was allowed to impose were fines, suspension, and expulsion; the
actions he tried were disputes about the rent of hostels, complaints against
craftsmen and merchants supervised by the university, and personal matters
between masters and scholars. The rector was assisted by the proctors in the
permanent court of the arts faculty, but there was a right of appeal to the
whole university, which was decided by special deputies. Where university
members and parties from outside the university were involved, the autonomy of the university was limited by ecclesiastical and lay courts. Such disputes were settled - according to the sphere of competence - by the diocesan
court (bishop's court) or by the Chatelet (the court of the provost of Paris,
acting as conservator of royal prerogatives), or by the court of the apostolic
conservator in Paris.
The Scottish universities closely followed the Paris model. The proctors of
the nations, existing only in the arts faculty, held a conclave to elect the
rector. According to the founding papal bull (1453), the bishop-chancellor
was the chief authority of the University of Glasgow; he delegated his power
to the rector chosen by the proctors of the nations. Many French universities
with large nations, such as Montpellier, Orleans, or Angers, had, however, a
different pattern. Even where the constitution of the University of Toulouse
followed that of Paris, the students' rights were recognized to a greater
extent. The rector had to be a doctor, but was elected by the professors of all
faculties and the students in law. At Montpellier the rector of the law faculty
was chosen from among the students; the faculty, or rather the university, of
medicine was on the contrary presided over by the chancellor, nominated by
the bishop and three masters. His post resembles the chancellorship of the
English universities, where in Oxford and Cambridge, the chancellor, was the
representative of the bishop in the university as elsewhere (see pp. 129-33,on
external government), but his power was never handed over to a rector. He
exercised the full rights and activities of a rector elsewhere. The reasons are
clear: as early as the beginning of the thirteenth century the studia of Oxford
and Cambridge had obtained from their respective bishops, those of Lincoln
and Ely, the right to elect their chancellors. The selected candidate was
chosen from among the doctors in theology or canon law and had to be a
member of the faculty of theology. So the chancellor became an internal
rather than an external officer, always taking the chair at congregations and
acting as rector. In the course of the fifteenth century the chancellor, who as a
prominent personality was usually absent on duties elsewhere, delegated his
powers to a vice-chancellor who by the close of the Middle Ages had become
Management and resources
the de facto head of an English university. He had wide civil and criminal
jurisdiction and power to excommunicate and imprison. Originally his was a
spiritual jurisdiction over scholars, but it was gradually extended to cover
other groups, townsfolk included. By royal charter, the chancellor had criminal and civil jurisdiction in actions in which one party was a clerk. After
quarrels and disputes with the burgesses, the university, victorious since the
mid-fourteenth century, practically governed the town of Oxford; the chancellor's court, and the newly established university steward, with his jury half
of privileged university persons and half of townsmen, controlled legal procedure in the extensive university precinct. The inquisitorial police of the
universities' delegate judges supervised the morals of the inhabitants.16
The central European universities are generally believed to have been
founded on the Paris model, but examination of their statutes shows that this
is not altogether true. Firstly, unlike Paris, the arts faculties in this area never
had a monopoly of the rectorship; the rector could be chosen from any
faculty. The faculty of arts was headed by a dean, as were the three other
faculties. Secondly, the two oldest universities - Prague and Vienna - had a
mixed type of organization. After the secession of 1372 the jurists of Prague
had a separate student university with a student rector, whereas the other
faculties were dominated by the masters. The jurist rector had jurisdiction, in
civil suits and actions for damages, over university members, who had the
right of appeal to the chancellor-archbishop. In 1397 the court of the rector
with the consiliarii of the nations obtained full jurisdiction, civil, criminal,
and spiritual, over lawsuits in which one party was a scholar. But, in Vienna
too, in the early period, masters and students through their nations participated in electing the rector.
The first University of Cracow (1364) was also headed by a student rector,
but the royal chancellor controlled the examinations (although according to
the papal bull this task was to be the bishop's). In the second university (1400)
the bishop was chancellor and confirmed the statutes. His representative, the
vice-chancellor, managed the university finances with the help of the dean of
St Florian's chapter and the rector. The rector was elected by masters and
bachelors for one year, by indirect representational suffrage. He had to be at
least a master of arts or a graduate in law or theology, and usually had a
church prebend. The rector convoked the general congregation of masters,
sometimes with graduates.17 The rector tried civil suits and minor offences,
but from 1410 onwards the university conservators, the deans of three cathedral chapters, defended the university's claim to cite defendants from all dioceses. In other universities in this part of Europe it seems that the rector had a
16 Cobban, Medieval English Universities (note 12), 2.59ft.
17 J. Dabrowski, Z. Kozlowska-Budkowa, and K. Pieradzka, Dzieje Uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego, vol. I , 15-20, 57—71, 127—38.
Aleksander Gieysztor
fairly wide jurisdiction, but no direct spiritual jurisdiction.18 Everywhere
student power waned at the end of the Middle Ages, as did the importance of
the nations. Some German universities, such as Leipzig, continued to elect a
student rector, a young man of noble, perhaps princely, birth, but he was
controlled by a vice-rector or, as in Rostock, by a promotor or superintendens. The latter was a permanent executive officer discharging real rectorial
powers as the representative of the (merely honorary) rector. The election of
a rector gradually passed to a small group; in Tubingen it was dominated by
the regent masters.
The University of Naples is rather an exception. It was a state university,
founded by the emperor (1224) and completely subject to royal authority.
The jurisdiction of the scholars therefore did not belong to the rector but to
the king's officer, the iusticiarius scholarium. In the administration of justice
in criminal cases the iusticiarius was assisted by three assessors chosen by the
students. In civil cases the crown respected the imperial privilege, the Authentica Habita; thus the scholar might be tried by his own master or by the
archbishop.
The real representative, legislative, and administrative authority of the universitas, of the corporation, lay with the general assembly (congregatio generalis, plena congregatio, generate concilium, consilium). Depending on the
basic constitution of the studium, the general assembly was composed of
masters, masters and students, or students alone, and presided over by the
rector (or, in Oxford and Cambridge, the chancellor). Besides the general
congregation there were assemblies (convocatio, conventus, coetus, cetus) on
all levels of the university organization: faculties, nations, and colleges. Only
slight differences in procedure are recorded in the statutes. In the course of
time there was a general tendency to reduce the activities of a general
assembly and to leave current affairs and decisions to a smaller council of
leading officials.
In Paris in the early years of the university, regent masters of all the faculties formed the general congregation which, the rector being subject to it,
managed the university. After the mid-fourteenth century the non-regent
masters were frequently summoned by the rector to attend the congregation
as highly placed persons in church and state. They voted, except at elections;
their presence was probably not legally necessary to the acts of the university
as it was at Oxford and Cambridge. The rector announced the time and place
of the congregation and the agenda. The dean of the theological faculty was
convened by the rector in his house or through a master of arts, the other
18 F. Stein, Die academische Gerichtsbarkeit in Deutschland (Leipzig, 1891); P.Classen, 'Zur
Geschichte der "akademischen Freiheit" vornehmend im Mittelalter', Historische Zeitschrift,
232 , 278; 529-33; Dabrowski, Z. Kozlowska-Budkowa, and Pieradzka, Dzieje (note
17); C. Vandenghoer, De rectorale Rechtbank van de oude Leuvense universiteit 1425-1797,
Verhandelingen Koninklijke Academie, Letteren no. 124 .
Management and resources
deans and proctors by letter. The deans and proctors summoned the master
of faculties and nations by sending a beadle during morning lectures. The
matters to be discussed were suggested by one of the component bodies and
submitted to the assembly by the rector. One matter of importance was the
statutes to be voted. Debates were conducted separately, by each faculty and
nation. In the church of St Julien-le-Pauvre, one of the places in which the
congregation was held, there were proctors' chairs in the four corners of the
nave, and the nations used to retire to these corners. Three smaller bodies,
the superior faculties, had their own places. The opinion or vote of a nation
or faculty was announced by its proctor or dean. The rector then presented
the conclusions of the whole university; where, as often, no conclusions were
reached, he had no casting vote. But from the mid-fourteenth century there
were some declarations of opinion by the majority, and before the end of the
century the right of the majority to bind the minority was accepted in the
nations of the faculty of arts, in the general congregation, and in the assemblies of the faculties. A dissenting body could obstruct the procedure by refusing its key to the chest containing the university seal, and on such occasions
that chest could be broken open; another method was an appeal to the pope.
At Bologna, the rector and the councillors, consiliarii elected by nations,
convoked the general congregation of the two universities. The consent of
one rector and of a majority of the councillors was needed to call this
assembly; at the demand of two councillors votes were taken by ballot with
black and white beans. A majority of the congregation was necessary to pronounce the sentence of deprivation or declare a doctor or scholar perjured.lt
was compulsory for all students to take part; congregations were held in
convents or churches, usually in the convent of St Dominic. Every member
had the right to speak, but the rectors had the power to impose silence on the
loquacious, as the statutes declare. Those statutes could not be altered more
than once every twenty years; eight elected statutarii conducted the revision
and published it without any confirmation. Amending them at any other time
was not possible except by a unanimous resolution of the university upon a
proposal accepted by the rectors and councillors, and then by twenty-four
members of the university named by them; the consent of the doctors was
also necessary.
Three separate congregations arose in Oxford. The first of them was the
Black or Previous Congregation composed of the regent masters in arts. It
was summoned in St Mildred's church (and, after 1437, in St Mary's) for
inceptions in arts and for the preliminary discussion of proposed statutes.
The second congregation, the Lesser Congregation of regents of all faculties,
meeting in a building close to St Mary's church, controlled finances, lectures,
studies, and graduation. The third congregation, the Full or Great Congregation of all the masters, regents and non-regents - later known as the convocation - voted upon the statutes according to a procedure of 1303 providing
Aleksander Gieysztor
for a majority vote by faculties; the non-regents voted separately. This was
the highest court of appeal in the university.
The universities of Spain were nearer to the Bologna model than to the
Paris model. The students' congregation elected the rector; the doctors
formed a college of their own, but were not excluded from votes in congregation as was the case at Bologna. But following the statutes of Salamanca in
1422 the general congregation of students was deprived of its rights, and
management of the university passed to a body ofdiffinitores, a congregation
consisting of a rector, the scholasticus, and twenty persons selected by the
university from student nobles and holders of dignities, not being under
twenty-five years of age, and by ten persons elected by and from the regents
holding salaried chairs. A two-thirds majority was required for any proposal
or matter to be laid before this body. The election of the scholasticus was
entrusted to it, and finally confirmed by the pope.
At Prague the council or congregation of the university was composed of
councillors, as heads of the nations, and of masters. Voting was by count of
heads. Vienna, too, was a university of masters but the students had a vote in
the election of proctors in the nations. In Cracow, the general congregation of
the masters held its meetings, with the rector as chairman, in the Collegium
Maius, but from 1464 the rector and the deans formed the real governing
body of the university. In other universities of central Europe, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, students are still mentioned as taking an indirect part in the election of the rector. But students' rights were curtailed
everywhere. Nations were abolished or were deprived of the right to defend
their interests other than by delegating representatives to the university councils, in which the masters gained a dominant and sometimes exclusive position.19
Besides the high officers of the university and the nations, faculties, and
colleges, other permanent or temporary officials existed who had management duties but who did not belong to the body of masters and students.
Their nature and number varied from university to university, depending on
its size and wealth. At first their role was very limited, but with the growth of
the studia generalia there was more need for sound administration by competent officials from outside the university.
The beadle {bedellus) and messenger (nuntius) were the first external
administrators; their office is almost as old as the universities themselves. In
French universities the office was often bought and sold - at Avignon in 1463
a beadle paid 200 guilders for his office.20 Beadles preceded the rector and
other higher officers during public appearances, in full ceremonial robes,
19 A. Vetulani, 'Les origines et le sort des universites de l'Europe centrale et orientale fondees au
cours du XIVe siecle', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, 148-69.
20 J. Verger, 'Depenses universitaires a Avignon au XVe siecle (1455-1456)', in Avignon
Moyen Age. Textes et Documents
 , 212.
Management and resources
carrying the decorated verge (massa) which was the emblem of their office;
they collected the votes at meetings of the congregation and read lists of
mandatory reading material and of books up for sale; they gave notice of
disputations and kept the list of graduations; they read proclamations and the
text of new statutes; they collected fees and fines, kept the names of those
sentenced to imprisonment, and advertised the times of sittings in the
academic court; as caretakers and porters they were responsible for the
material care of the schools. Every universitas had a bedellus maior or generalis and usually several bedelli minores and/or speciales, who were attached
to professors and to the faculties and nations. The beadles earned the respect
of the academic community. They were citizens of the university town and
they and their wives were granted the rights and privileges of the studium.
They were paid out of special collectae (see p. 133). In many universities, the
office of beadle became venal.
The nuntii or messengers appeared with the nations. They served as gobetweens for the students and their families, carrying money, goods, and
letters. In international university towns nuntii maiores (as opposed to nuntii
minores or volantes, the petty or flying messengers) operated as quasibankers who paid out the scholars' money advanced by their parents or lent
money to scholars. At Padua money-changers (mutuatores et feneratores)
loaned money to suppositi. Financial transactions of students were registered
in the libri memoriales or notarial minute-books of the comune of Bologna.
Students who were short of money often pawned books or even their horses
to buy drink.
In the course of the Middle Ages other officials made their appearance in
most of the universities, under different names. Thus the notarius in Bologna
or Paris, and the dictator in Louvain, acted as secretary. He kept the matricula, recorded the official acts of the university, and wrote documents and
letters. At Oxford a chancellor's scribe or clerk is mentioned for the first time
in 1428. In 1447 the office of registrar was instituted; he was required to be an
MA and public notary. A good knowledge of Latin and calligraphy became a
requirement in the pre-humanistic and humanistic universities. Other salaried
academic personnel were syndici or legal assessors and solicitors of the university or faculty; they looked after the studium's legal affairs and its property. Litigation seems to have been very popular in medieval academic life,
and permanent professional legal aid was therefore not a luxury. Officials
were appointed to collect fees and keep accounts - two massarii (treasurers)
in Bologna, the receiver-general in Paris or Orleans, and the proctors in
Oxford and Cambridge. Of course other university corporations, such as
faculties, nations, and colleges, also had receivers {receptores or quaestores
aerarii), often from an earlier date than their university counterparts. The
chaplain was usually a member of the community, sometimes a student, but
usually somebody from the staff; his duty was to celebrate the statutory
Aleksander Gieysztor
masses in the university calendar and to conduct masses for benefactors, and
the funerals of deceased members. At Oxford University the chaplain also
acquired the salaried function of librarian in 1412. Only with the expansion
of university libraries after the invention of printing did librarians become
important officials of the university, faculty, nation, and college.
Closely linked to the university were people dealing in books.21 The book the manuscript book, and from the last quarter of the fifteenth century the
printed book - was vital to the intellectual life of the university. The
publishers and librarians often belonged to the university, or were at least
controlled and sworn in by it. The stationers (stationarii) and their workrooms and bookshops (stationes) in Bologna were subject to the town authority, but some of them, as stationarii universitatis, owed allegiance to the
rector. The stationarii peciarum were mainly custodians of the original copies
(exemplaria) of teaching texts, corrected and approved by the professors;
those stationers copied them, and loaned them against payment to be copied
by others. The official copies were unbound and delivered in fascicles called
peciae; the pecia stationers were subject to inspection by the committee of
peciarii named by the university. On the other hand, the book stationers
(stationarii, mercatores or venditores librorum) were mainly merchants,
sometimes involved in book production by loaning the pecia and giving it to
professional copyists. At the end of the thirteenth century the university tried
to limit the number of authorized stationers to five. At Paris, the stationers
were the approximate equivalents of the first Bologna group, and the booksellers (librarii) of the second one, but sometimes both activities were practised by the same person. The booksellers sold books, served as brokers, and
commissioned books for copying. Only a few were stationers empowered to
lend out peciae. All this little world of books, and at the end of the fifteenth
century of the printed book as well, was controlled by the university, but only
in so far as its activities concerned the university; for the stationers and booksellers did not work only for the studium.
Besides being responsible for managing the extmplar-pecia system, as in
Bologna or Paris, the stationers in Oxford were authorized university agents
for conducting the book trade within the town, and for valuing books, manuscripts, and other articles offered as pledges. There is clear evidence that the
pecia system was used in at least eleven medieval universities (Bologna,
Padua, Vercelli, Perugia, Treviso, Florence, Naples, Salamanca, Paris, Toulouse, and Oxford).22
21 J. Destrez, La pecia dans les manuscrits
universitaires
du XIHe et du XlVe siecle ;
G. Pollard, 'The "Pecia" System in the Medieval Universities' in M. B. Parkes and A. G.
Watson (eds.), Medieval
Scribes, Manuscripts
and Libraries:
Essays Presented to N. R. Ker
 , 145-61; L. J. Bataillon, B. G. Guyot, and R. H. Rouse (eds.), La Production
livre universitaire
au Moyen Age. Exemplar
et pecia. Actes du Symposium
San Bonaventura
de Grottaferrata
en mai 1983 .
22 Pollard, 'The "Pecia" System' (note 21), 148.
Management and resources
In central Europe, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the prevailing
system was not the pecia but dictation of the texts {pronunciatio) to the
students by the masters and bachelors in the university, as in Prague and
Cracow, or in the schools. Even in Paris, students asked their teachers to
dictate the courses, for financial reasons. Some professional copyists in towns
worked for the universities, among them a specialized group of cathedrales
(from the writing chair, cathedra) in Germany, Bohemia, Austria, and
Poland, now and then approved by the university.23 In addition, many universities mention various kinds of persons specializing in making books exemplatores, scriptores, correctores, miniatores, rasores librorum, ligatores
- all of them more or less subject to the rector or chancellor.
EXTERNAL GOVERNMENT
As explained in chapters 2 and 3, the history of the medieval university is
dominated by its struggle for autonomy. It was a long time before church and
state recognized the studium generate as an autonomous institution, and its
relationship with the town was always precarious.
One of the first demands of the university corporation was the right to
recruit its members. In the earlier medieval schools the right to confer the
licentia docendi (permission to teach) belonged to the scholasticus or
magister scholarum, and in a cathedral school to the chancellor of the
chapter, who was in charge of the bishop's or archbishop's scriptorium or
writing-office. In the course of the thirteenth century it became the practice
for the chancellor also to supervise the university schools, which were under
episcopal jurisdiction.
As early as 1212-13 the masters in Paris obtained the right to hold examinations and recommend candidates for the licentia to the chancellor of Notre-
Dame, who was bound to confer the degree without requiring the candidates
to pay money or swear individual oaths. In Bologna the archdeacon of the
cathedral presided over the examinations committee and granted the teaching licence on the professors' recommendation. The archdeacon was sometimes called cancellarius and in the late Middle Ages it became usual to speak
of the archdeacon of Bologna as chancellor of the university. In the Pisa
studium, on the contrary, the archbishop figured as chancellor. The role of
the chancellor thus tended to become formal rather than real, both in universities that arose e consuetudine and in those founded e privilegio. At Orleans,
for instance, the flourishing cathedral school became a university; the scholasticus remained head of the masters until 1306, when the studium was
officially recognized as a studium generale by papal bull; the masters were
then allowed to elect a rector and the chancellor formally granted the degrees.
23 E. Potkowski, Ksiq^ka rekopismienna w kulturze Polski sredniowiecznej ,
Aleksander Gieysztor
This confronted universities created ex privilegio with a new situation. This
is not to say that the pattern of development was everywhere the same. As
already stated in the passages dealing with the rector, the chancellor retained
more authority in the Spanish studia and in Glasgow. In the English universities the position of the chancellor evolved in a completely different way.
There, the chancellor, being the official representative of the bishop, soon
came to be elected by the masters' guild. From being an external officer set
above the masters, he became one of them. (The rector-chancellor relationship in the English universities is mentioned on p. 122.)
The growth of the chancellor's power in Oxford was due to royal grants of
privilege to the chancellor's court and the spiritual privileges, including even
the power of excommunication, given to him by the archbishops of Canterbury. At the end of the thirteenth century, the chancellor was elected every
two years by the university congregation. His appointment was submitted to
the bishop of Lincoln, and finally to the archbishop of Canterbury for
confirmation. In the fifteenth century, however, chancellors were not only
re-elected, but non-resident. In spite of formal exemptions, the English universities were passing under greater crown control, with chancellors who
were nominated for life and who appointed the vice-chancellor. In 1484 the
bishop of Lincoln was appointed chancellor at Oxford. At Cambridge, from
the early thirteenth century onwards the position of the chancellor was
similar to that of his counterpart in Oxford. There is some parallel between
the chancellor of the English universities and the chancellor of the university
of medicine of Montpellier. The latter was a representative of the bishop and
the head of the corporation; he was appointed by the bishop of Maguelone
and chosen from among the masters. The chancellor's power was, however,
somewhat limited; his jurisdiction was purely civil and the right to award
the licence remained with the bishop. At other European universities there
were still other differences in the method of appointment and the competence of the chancellor as the representative of episcopal authority. In many
universities of central and eastern Europe the chancellor was the local
bishop or archbishop, and delegated his authority to an officially elected
member of the studium. At Tubingen (founded in 1477) the chancellor was a
commissarius perpetuus of the bishop and his conservator. At Pozsony
(Pressburg) in Hungary (founded 1465-7), on the contrary, the archbishopchancellor chose the provost of the chapter of Pressburg as his vice-chancellor.
The bishop of Cracow was chancellor of the university and also its general
conservator. He did not preside over examinations, but awarded the licence
in the higher faculties; he supervised finance and salaries, and intervened in
university life to some considerable effect through his regulations (1422,1433,
24 Dabrowski, Kozlowska-Budkowa, and Pieradzka, Dzieje (note 17), 43-55.
Management and resources
As always, the situation was completely different in Naples; the university
there was subject to the royal chancellor until 1497, when the king's grand
chaplain became governor of the studium.
A second demand of the university corporation was for the right to make
statutes regulating the internal organization of the studium. Consequently the
university needed officers for the management of the studium and for dealings with the outside world. For instance, in almost every university town
citizens and academics jointly appointed a committee of taxatores to fix and
control the prices of rooms, food, and books and ensure an adequate supply
in times of scarcity. At Padua there was more communal supervision: four
citizens (tractatores) cooperated with the student rectors in a wide range of
practical affairs. In Portugal the almocatenes or controllers of weights and
measures were appointed by the students. In Salamanca the rent of lodgings
was fixed by conservatores privilegii, who also exercised other supervisory
functions. This privilege and others recognized by papal or royal authority
were not always observed. Pope and king therefore appointed apostolic and
royal conservators to safeguard the rights and privileges of the studia generalia. Members of the university could appeal to these conservators when
their privileges and other rights were violated inside or outside the university.
At Paris the system worked well: suppositi could appeal to the Chatelet - the
court of the prevot of Paris, who was the conservateur des privileges royaux or to the apostolic conservator in Paris, who was always one of three bishops,
those of Meaux, Senlis, and Beauvais. At Oxford in the thirteenth century the
pope nominated the bishops of London and Salisbury, and in the fourteenth
century also the archbishop of Canterbury, as conservators of the apostolic
privileges, but throughout those centuries the king's intercession was much
more necessary to maintain the rights and privileges of the Oxford students.
There was constant hostility between town and gown, and to avoid further
violence against scholars the king made the sheriff and bailiff responsible for
the preservation of the customary academic liberties and immunities.
Moreover, in the course of the fourteenth century the king greatly reinforced
the chancellor's authority over university members by giving him full jurisdiction over all suppositi, and the necessary power to keep the peace. In this the
chancellor was in fact performing the same functions as the provost-conservateur royal of Paris.
In other universities the apostolic conservators were more powerful, as in
Louvain where they were the archbishop of Trier, the abbot of the abbey of
Tongerlo, and the dean of St Peter's chapter of Louvain. In Prague the pope
designated other conservators: the provost of the chapter of Mainz and the
deans of the chapters of Breslau and Prague, but, as the nation of Saxony
complained that it did not have a conservator for its region, the dean of the
Aleksander Gieysztor
chapter of Liibeck was also appointed (1396).25 At Leipzig and Greifswald the
bishop was recognized as conservator jurium et privilegiorum. Whereas in
the German universities the apostolic conservators exercised spiritual jurisdiction over the university members, in Copenhagen the royal conservator
had apparently unlimited jurisdiction over students. So did the conservatores
studii named by the king from among the burghers in Portugal, where the
royal authority was stronger than in Spain.26 In Italy conservators of privileges played a minor role. The archdeacon of Bologna and a Dominican friar
or another ecclesiastic were appointed to guard the apostolic privileges. In
any event, the students seldom appealed to this papal jurisdiction for assistance in their conflicts and demands. The civic authorities, especially, the
comune, approved this reticence. The Venetian rulers also tried to reduce
ecclesiastical influence in the Padua studium.
The Italian cities were not only concerned to protect the rights of scholars;
they also wanted to keep law and order inside the studium. In the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries more and more Italian communes paid reformatores^
gubernatores^ tractatores, or tutores studii to supervise student activities and
to reduce student autonomy, and, with it, disorder in the comune. In 1391 at
Ferrara a body of reformatores, appointed by the duke and municipality
jointly, was entrusted with the general government of the university, including the appointment of professors. In Turin, in the fifteenth century, the duke
appointed two canonists, four doctors of civil law, one of law and medicine
combined, and one of theology. The government of Venice appointed reformatores to the University of Padua immediately after Padua came under its
authority (1406). From 1517 onwards the Padua studium was governed by a
body of reformatores. The princes of the Holy Roman Empire also tried to
strengthen their influence on 'their' local university by appointing officials to
supervise it or to carry out allegedly necessary reforms there. At Dole the
duke of Burgundy appointed the three distributores (originally appointed to
administer the public funds allocated to the university) as reformatores studii.
At the close of the Middle Ages French kings also tried to reduce academic
autonomy, limit abuses of privileges, and restore order and discipline in the
universities of Paris and the provinces by sending reformatores studii. These
men were members of the Parlement of Paris, well known for their loyalty to
the crown and their belief in a strongly centralized state. For the reforme
generate of the University of Paris in 1452 the king also appealed to the papal
legate, Cardinal d'Estouteville, whose family had long been devoted to the
crown.27 From the beginning papal legates took part in regulating consti-
25 P. Moraw, 'Die Universitat Prag im Mittelalter. Grundziige ihrer Geschichte im europaischen
Zusammenhang', in P. Moraw (ed.), Die Universitat
zu Prag , 45.
26 A. Garcia y Garcia, 'Aspectos de la Universidad Portuguesa medieval', in Universities
Late Middle
Ages, 133-47.
27 J. Verger, 'Les libertes universitaires en France au Moyen Age', in Les Libertes au Moyen Age,
Festival d'histoire de Montbrisson , 426.
Management and resources
tutional matters. In Italy the influence of papal legates in university matters
grew with the expansion of the papal state. When Bologna came under the
direct control of Rome in 1506 the cardinal legate and sixteen reformatores
became the real governors of the studium. Their power increased still more in
the early modern period (see volume II, chapter 4).
The universities also had officials acting temporarily outside the university:
solicitors represented the university in the ecclesiastical and civic courts, and
the studia sent professors on embassy to popes, princes, and councils. How to
pay for all this was a perpetual problem.
Every corporation within the university had its own budget, but medieval
bookkeeping was primitive, and finance was kept to a minimum, as was
material infrastructure. Financial resources and needs of course varied and
became more and more important as time went on. The rather scanty
remaining accounts of universities and nations give some insight into the way
their finances functioned.
University income came from both internal and external sources. The
internal sources were fees for matriculation and graduation, graces (dispensations from the statutory conditions for degrees) and other dispensations,
money collected from the nations, and collectae (see below). External sources
were ecclesiastical benefices, salaries paid by the king, duke, or town, gifts
and legacies, and grants and endowments given for the permanent support of
the university. Expenditure was modest. Much of the budget went to festivities, banquets, and entertainment, or on routine payments for administration
or travel; lawsuits also cost money, and in the later Middle Ages the maintenace of buildings and other properties (e.g. insignia) burdened the academic
budget. Teachers' salaries were not usually paid by the university (see chapter
5). Officials were not paid a salary but were entitled to a part of the collectae',
a proportion of fines, and an allowance for expenses; gifts in kind could also
be substantial.
Collectae were sums levied on the students once or twice a year, to pay
some officials of the university (beadles and proctors) and the teachers, and
some common expenses of the university. By the end of the Middle Ages
collectae cost the students little, but examination and graduation fees, and
gifts in kind to masters and beadles, were a burden to candidates. In the
second half of the fifteenth century university statutes regulated and limited
the fees demanded.28
The university coffers (archa) were fed by fines imposed by the university
court for violation of the university statutes, disciplinary measures, neglect of
28 M. Fletcher and C. A. Upton, 'Expenses at Admission and Determination in Fifteenth Century
Oxford: New Evidence', English Historical Review, 100:395 , 331-7.
Aleksander Gieysztor
duties, and so on. Some statutes exactly stipulate the scale of fines; thus the
statutes of the Collegium Minus at Leipzig (1438) prescribe, for lifting a stone
or similar missile with the intention of throwing it at a master, but not actually throwing it, a fine of 10 new groschen; for throwing but missing the fine
was 8 florins, and still more for a successful throw. The fine for striking
varied according to whether the victim was wounded by the blow and
whether the wound produced mutilation.29 In Vienna the poorest student
offenders were flogged if they could not pay the fine. The statutes of Copenhagen, modelled on those of Cologne, are less explicit; they say only that fines
are at the discretion of the rector and the four deans.30
Collectae and fines were collected by the beadles or receivers (receptores or
collectores). Students could also pay the collectae direct to the masters, as in
Toulouse, Montpellier, and Avignon, or in Bologna after some rather difficult
negotiations between the professor and some of the students.31
At the English universities the proctors served as the principal financial
officers. The earliest extant proctors' account dates from the middle of the
fifteenth century. At Oxford the university's income came, in descending
order, from degree fees, graces, rents of urban property, the payments by
Eynsham and Oseney abbeys for the relief of poor scholars and regents in
arts, fines, money from the keepers of grammar schools in Oxford, and small
miscellaneous amounts. The university's expenditure
embraced a lavish annual entertainment for graduates; an annual distribution
of money to the regent masters; a feast for the auditors of the accounts; sundry
expenses and allowances for the chancellor, proctors and bedels; the payment
of a number of rents; salaries paid to the registrar and to the chaplain-librarian;
payments to the parish clerk of St Mary's church; entertainment for visiting
royalty; expenses in connection with the confirmation of the University's privileges; and payments towards the diverse building ventures.32
Cambridge's budget is similar to that of Oxford and in fact all the medieval
universities' accounts were alike.
An example of central European financial management is Cracow University. After its renewal in about 1400 the funds were secured by the king, the
bishop, and a group of lords. The income from the royal Cracow customs
and salt-mines probably paid for seven to nine professorships. More important were fifteen ecclesiastical benefices for the masters in theology and law,
and forty-six rather modest benefices distributed among the masters in arts
29 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. Ill, 363.
30 J. Pinborg (ed.), Universitas Studii Haffnensis.
Stiftelsesdokumenter
og Statutter
af Kobenhavns
Universitet,
English translation by B.P. McGuire , 117,
31 J. Verger, 'Le cout des grades: droits et frais d'examen dans les universites du Midi de la
France au Moyen Age', in A. L. Gabriel (ed.), The Economic
and Material
Frame of the
University
 , 2.0.
32 Quoted from Cobban, Medieval
English Universities
(note 12), 86.
Management and resources
(they had no more than ten to twelve marcae a. year - bed and board in the
Collegium Maius cost seven marcae); they also had an unknown proportion
of the university funds. The central treasury received fees from students and
graduates, rents from houses belonging to the university, incomes from financial operations with the foundations' estates, and cash payments by donors.
The rector Thomas de Strzempino (1432) observed that 'the purpose of this
institution is not to amass wealth'. Nevertheless, the university provided for
about eighty masters, collected quite a good library, built a stately Collegium
Maius at the end of the fifteenth century and even made loans to the crown
and town.33
The extant accounts of the German nation at the Orleans studium, which
start in 1444, and a variety of other source material, give some idea of the
studium's finances.34 They show that the university derived its income mainly
from part of the matriculation and graduation fees. Most of these fees went
to the nation, for until 1532 matriculations and graduations were registered
by the nation and not by the university. The professors had to pay a fee for
permission to teach at the university, and were also urged to contribute to its
extraordinary expenses. The university's other sources of income were, in
order of importance, fines, legacies, and gifts. Its main items of expenditure,
also in order of importance, were administration, the salaries of its few
officials, the numerous lawsuits in which it was involved, and the growing
cost of academic solemnities and religious feasts and of the maintenance of its
few movable and immovable properties. For extra expenditure, such as a
contribution to sums paid as security by, or for the ransom of, sovereigns (as,
for instance, in 1529 for the French dauphin), the university appealed to its
members' generosity. On other occasions too it might ask for special support.
In 1506 the studium of Louvain contributed to the cost of restoring the city
walls when a French invasion threatened.35 Funds in the Orleans studium
were always minimal, in the fifteenth century and later. Until 1532 they were
managed by a receptor generalise a graduate student chosen by roster among
the receptores of the nations, who was paid a percentage of the income. As
part of the reorganization (reformatio) of 1532, King Francis I ordered the
financial management of the university and the nations to be centralized in
the hands of a general receptor chosen by the burghers of the city. The
33 A. Gieysztor, 'Aspects financiers de l'Universite de Cracovie au XV siecle', in Gabriel (ed.),
Economic Frame (note 31), 51-6; J. Michalewicz, 'Les bases economiques de l'Universite
Jagellonne et leurs aspects sociaux', and M. Michalewiczowa, 'Le benefice en tant qu'element
de la structure d'organisation de l'universite Jagellonne', in L'Histoire des universites. Problemes et methodes , 25-104; J. Michalewicz, Majatek kapita/owy Universytetu
Jagielloriskiego XV-XVIH w. ;]. Michalewicz and M. Michalewiczowa (eds.),
Liber beneficiorum et benefactorum Universitatis Jagellonicae in saec. XV-XVIH (Cracow,
34 H. de Ridder-Symoens, 'La vie et l'organisation materielle de l'ancienne Universite d'Orleans',
in Gabriel (ed.), Economic
Frame (note 31), 37-50.
35 De Universiteit
 , 42.
Aleksander Gieysztor
finances of the University of Avignon are analogous. Its income came mainly
from matriculation and graduation fees, and from letting academic rooms to
bachelors giving 'extraordinary' lectures. Expenditure was principally for
maintenance of the schools (seven classrooms in 1455), the clock, and the
library; ceremonies, correspondence, and lawsuits also absorbed large sums.
Extraordinary costs, such as those for building schools, had to be paid from
external sources.36
In universities erected and strictly controlled by the crown, finance was
somewhat different. A state university such as Naples had no financial
independence. The universities of Castile were also financed by the crown,
with the king appointing the conservadores charged with their administration
and paying their salaries and those of the teachers, a librarian, and a pharmacist. The money was provided from the royal tercias (one-third of the ecclesiastical tithe). Salamanca, Valladolid, and other cities helped their estudio in
times of crisis by levying special taxes on the burghers. The Castilian universities, like all the others, had financial privileges that helped them to survive.
They were exempt from general taxation and from taxes on beer and wine
and import duties on meat.37 (The quantity of tax-free beer and wine to
which universities were entitled was limited, as for instance by the Louvain
city government, and abuse by the universities of their exemption from excise
often led to tension and disputes between town and gown.) But in general,
whatever the pattern of the university might be, the city was constantly aware
of its university, and gave it financial assistance of various kinds. In return the
universities often had to accept the financial control of the city government.
In Prague two official collectores assisted the rector in managing the property
of the university, but most of its possessions in Prague, as in German universities such as Cologne and Leipzig, were assigned to faculties and colleges,
which ensured their own management. The rector had very little money at his
disposal, and for every large item of expenditure he organized a collecta, or
bursa as it was often called in German universities. In the course of the
fifteenth century German princes became more and more involved in the
finance of 'their' university in return for making it more allowances. Universities had no choice. Late medieval universities were not self-supporting.
Their traditional income was completely insufficient to cover the high cost of
acquiring and maintaining academic buildings.
UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS
In the late Middle Ages, as student populations grew and universities ceased
to migrate, universities acquired buildings and movable property. For a long
36 Verger, 'Depenses universitaires' (note 20), 207-18.
37 A. Rucquoi, 'Societes urbaines et universities en Castille au moyen Age', in D. Poirion (ed.),
Milieux universitaires et mentalite urbaine au Moyen Age , 105-6.
Management and resources
time in Paris and Bologna the administration had not needed to take care of
university buildings, because there were none. Lectures were held in houses
rented by the masters, examinations and meetings in churches and convents.
In Paris, however, both the theological faculty and the nations began renting
property as early as the fourteenth century, and acquiring it in the fifteenth
century. With lecture halls in the rue du Fouarre and many other places, with
colleges and lodgings, and with churches (all of them on the left bank of the
river), the Quartier Latin became the university quarter of Paris.38 The young
Bologna studium, too, contented itself with private houses and religious or
public buildings for lectures, meetings, and ceremonies.
Growing numbers of students, some of them very young and needy, made
housing facilities more necessary as time passed. College buildings arose
everywhere, but especially in universities with large faculties of arts, such as
Paris, Oxford, Cambridge, and later on the German universities. Italian
studia also looked for lodgings for their students. The comparatively few
colleges in northern Italy were founded in and after the fourteenth century, at
first in converted private houses. After 1420 a special type of building
appeared, the domus sapientiae (house of wisdom) or sapienza, a teaching
college modelled on the Collegio de Spagna in Bologna, built in 1365-7. The
rooms were grouped around an arcaded courtyard. Gradually the sapienza
ceased to be dwellings and in early modern times became the official university buildings with lecture rooms, discussion rooms, a library, rooms for
accommodation and administration, archives, and a graduation room. The
palazzo della sapienza became the current name for these sumptuous university buildings.39
Besides the marvellous Collegio di Spagna in Bologna (which is still operating), there are outstanding examples of medieval building in Oxford and
Cambridge. The English universities were also precocious in erecting official
academic buildings. The first purpose-built building of this kind, the Congregation House at Oxford, dating from c. 1320, was the gift of Thomas
Cobham, bishop of Worcester. The next important buildings, the Divinity
School and schools of other faculties (all incorporated in the present Bodleian
Library), were erected in the fifteenth century at the cost of individual benefactors and from university funds. Similarly, Cambridge's university building
programme (the Schools Quadrangle) in the late fourteenth and the fifteenth
century made inroads on the university's funds, benefactors' subscriptions
being insufficient.40
The Schools in Salamanca (Las Escuelas), also a fifteenth-century quadran-
38 A. Grabois, La Genese du Quartier
Latin, Studies in History, 23 ; L. E.
Sullivan, 'The Burg of Sainte Genevieve: Development of the University Quarter of Paris in the
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries', Ph.D., Baltimore, 1975.
39 M. Kiene, 'Der Palazzo della Sapienza - Zur italienischen Universitatsarchitektur des 15. und
16. Jahrhunderts', Romisches
Jahrbuch fur Kunstgeschichte,
23/24 , 219-71.
40 Cobban, Medieval
English Universities
(note 12), 86-8 and passim.
Aleksander Gieysztor
gle, conserve one room in its original state. The rude wooden benches and
desks, and the cathedra in the Divinity School, were certainly an improvement for students used to sitting on straw on the floor.41 The rue du Fouarre
or Feurre {vicus straminis or street of straw) in the Quartier Latin of Paris is a
reminder of this custom. The only remaining secular university building of
the Middle Ages in France is the Gothic Salle des Theses at Orleans. This
two-storey building, having a big room for the library and another for meetings, dates from the first half of the fifteenth century. At the end of that
century the university began to build its Grandes Ecoles, and bought a contiguous house for the Petites Ecoles.42
Because of the close ties between the German towns and their universities,
the latter acquired housing facilities and an infrastructure from the date of
their foundation onwards. At first schools were housed in converted private
or religious houses, but as early as the fifteenth century special academic
buildings were erected. Churches continued to be used for official ceremonies
and festivities.43 The local princes also saw to the upkeep of the buildings. At
Heidelberg every year the rector, the dean of the faculty of arts, a master, and
the beadle of the university were bound to inspect all the faculty buildings
together with two workmen. Repairs were paid for from the university
treasury.44
Their strong stone buildings encouraged universities, nations, and colleges
to set up libraries. The Congregation House and Divinity School in Oxford,
several buildings in Cambridge, the Schools in Salamanca, the Collegium
Maius in Cracow,45 and many others, housed book collections constantly
added to from gifts, legacies, and fines, and to a lesser extent by purchase. In
smaller institutions the library dates mainly from the early modern period.
Some statutes laid down very detailed regulations for the upkeep of the
library and the loan of books. In a decree of 1439 the rector of the University
of Heidelberg took special and very strict measures for the collection of
books left to the university by Louis III, count palatine of the Rhine.46 Besides
the libraries, located mainly in the colleges, the most treasured possessions of
the academic institutions were archives kept in chests closed with a triple lock,
as in Orleans, together with seals, maces, verges, and money. Nations and
colleges had chalices, church ornaments, missals, utensils, banners, statutes,
41 J. A. Villar, The University
of Salamanca.
Art and Traditions
 , 49—50.
42 R. Boitel, 'La construction de la Salle des Theses de l'ancienne universite d'Orleans',
de la societe archeologique
et historique
de I'Orleanais,
new series, 1 (i960), 299-309.
43 H. Roller, 'Stadt und Universitat im Spatmittelalter', and A.-D. von den Brincken, 'Die Stadt
Koln und ihre Hohen Schulen', in E. Maschke and J. Sydow (eds.), Stadt und Universitat
Mittelalter
und in der friiheren
 , 17-19, 34~6-
44 L. Thorndike, University
Records and Life in the Middle
Ages, 2nd edn ,
45 K. Riickbrod, Universitat
und Kollegium,
Baugeschichte
und Bautypen
 ;
K. Estreicher, Collegium
maius. Dzieje gmachu
 .
46 Thorndike, University
(note 44), 315-17.
Management and resources
charters, and registers. Students and masters took good care of their valuables. To open the chest of the Anglo-German nation at Paris, eight members
of the nation had to be present; to open the archa exterior, four members (the
procurator, the receptor, and two masters); and to open the archa interior or
scrinium, which contained the nation's money, four masters.47
By 1500 old and new universities alike possessed proper academic buildings
- lecture rooms, assembly rooms, a chapel, one or more libraries, lodgings for
students and teachers - and many articles of value. Throughout Europe,
faculty buildings, and particularly college buildings with libraries combining
functional needs with a show of magnificence, were visible signs that the
masters in the late medieval university were no longer footloose. No longer
could universities threaten to migrate, no longer could public authorities tolerate strikes or secessions; the monumental disposition and architecture of
the late medieval university showed how completely it had become a part of
society. University towns had acquired a character of their own.
ACADEMIC INSIGNIA
From the very beginning, the image and character of a studium generale were
expressed by its costumes, insignia, and festivities. The complex communication of university events required the symbolic ordering of ideas in rites and
ceremonies. Congregations, installations, examinations, inceptions, jurisdictional proceedings, lectures, divine services, and even meals and festivals
observed ritual sequences of words, gestures, objects, music, lights, and furniture, and prescribed forms of dress. University insignia embraced a rather
large group of symbolic objects used in many ways and at different times by
the members of academic bodies: sceptres and verges, chains, rings, seals,
chalices, keys, registers and statute books, gowns and caps. Sceptres were the
visible signs of the autonomous and especially jurisdictional power of rectors:
Cracow University still has four rectorial sceptres dating from the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries. Verges of different length were carried by beadles
before rectors and professors. Newly nominated doctors in Bologna received
gold rings with their licentia docendi (this custom still survives at Uppsala).
Academic costume originated in the dress48 of the secular clergy, to which
masters and scholars at first belonged. The cappa clausa, a loose cape with a
hood and a hole for the head, was introduced in the thirteenth century as
clerical outdoor dress, and in Bologna, Paris, and Oxford was consequently
47 A. L. Gabriel, 'Res Quaedam notatu dignae nationem Anglicanam (Alemanniae) Parisiensem
saeculo XV Spectantes', in A. L. Gabriel and G. Boyce (eds.), Liber Receptorum
Alemanniae
(1425-1494),
vol. VI of Auctariwn
Chartularii
Universitatis
Parisiensis
1964), 43-4.
48 Rashdall, Universities, vol. Ill, 385-93; M. G. Houston, Medieval Costume in England and
France , 153-7; W. N. Hargreaves-Mawdsley, A History of Academic Dress in
Europe until the End of the Eighteenth Century .
Aleksander Gieysztor
regarded as university dress, at least for doctors and masters. By the fourteenth century this costume had acquired a shape and cut of its own. The
significance of colour was not recognized until later. In the fifteenth century
the influence of lay fashion, as in hoods, birettas, bonnets, shoulder pieces,
and scarves, is visible. From this fashion comes the wing-sleeved gown, used
in Germany, the Low Countries, Oxford, and Cambridge. Some colleges
recommended their fellows to wear a certain kind of dress. Occasionally we
read of costume distinguishing between nations, as in Prague at the national
festivals.
By the end of the Middle Ages each faculty wore robes of a distinguishing
shape and colour. At Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge theologians wore black,
and at Salamanca, Coimbra, and Perpignan white. Greenish-yellow or bloodred were the colours of the faculty of medicine. Blue at Perpignan, Coimbra,
and Ingolstadt denoted the faculty of arts. Scarlet was for canonists. At
Bologna, doctors of civil law appear to have taken to wearing scarlet cloth
robes trimmed with ermine at an early date. Fourteenth-century doctors of
canon law wore a blue ankle-length cappa manicata with elbow-length
sleeves, and a cap {pileus) lined with miniver. The rector in 1432 was ordered
to wear a black cloth cappa manicata buttoned up to the neck and a hood
with miniver, and in summer it was to be made of thin cloth. In the fourteenth century the dress of Bologna doctors, except of theology, had come to
consist of a round scarlet pileus, a birretum, and a long supertunica of the
same colour trimmed with miniver or ermine. The costume of students was
regulated; the statutes recommended them to wear the long black tabard
(tabardum) and hood.
At Paris there are references to academic dress in the thirteenth century. In
the fourteenth it became more or less regulated. The faculty of canon law
wore a red cappa with miniver, and a lined scarlet birretum. The regents in
medicine had a cappa rotunda of violet-brown colour. Masters of arts were
to wear a cappa with shoulder piece (epitoge). Bachelors of arts were ordered
to wear brown-black tabards, and after their determinatio a blue cappa
rotunda, and a hood trimmed with miniver. Students had the subtunica, and
for feast-days a supertunica. In the fifteenth century the rector wore a scarlet
supertunica with a close hood.
At Oxford, the vice-chancellor was clad in a scarlet supertunica whose
wide hanging sleeves were lined and edged with grey fur, and as head-dress a
pileus with a small brim. In 1350 masters of theology were ordered to wear a
cappa clausa, and a black pileus rotundus; full dress for doctors of canon law
was the black cappa clausa, for doctors of civil law red, and for doctors of
medicine crimson. Masters of arts wore a black cappa clausa, and later the
sleeveless roba or toga; they were forbidden to wear the pileus, which was
regarded as the preserve of doctors.
In central Europe, a long supertunica or tabard, with a small, low-crowned
Management and resources
hat, seems to be the most common dress in the Middle Ages. Great latitude
as to colour was allowed until the sixteenth century. In the faculty of theology, as in Cracow, the cappa clausa was preserved. Students seem to have
been left to their own devices as long as their dress was decent and not overcostly.
Early universities devoted much thought to the design of their seals, which
bore engraved emblems, figures, and words, since they were used to authenticate legal documents and were therefore a symbol of autonomy.49 In the
first half of the thirteenth century the right to possess a seal was contested, as
at Paris where in 1246 the university regained its seal, which had been broken
in 1225 by the decision of the pontifical legate. The great seal of the University of Paris from the thirteenth century until the Revolution bore the inscription 's. VNIVERSITATIS. MAGISTROR. [et]. SCOLARIV. PARISIVS', and in an
architectural frame the Virgin with Jesus, Saint Nicholas and Saint Catherine, two doctors, and six students with books; and as the counter-seal the
inscription ' +
SECRETUM PHILOSOPHIE', with the figure of Sapientia
(Wisdom). Besides the university seal, faculties and colleges in the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries had seals of their own.50
It was a far cry from the general emblems on a seal, whose principal
feature was its inscription, to heraldic coats of arms on buildings and
movable property as well as seals. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
university heraldry, with its armorial bearings of universities and colleges,
was no less gorgeous than the coats of arms of cities, princes of the church,
and the nobility. The chronicle of Ulrich Richental, written during the
Council of Constance (1414-18), tried to present the European university
community in a set of coats of arms of Paris, Avignon, Orleans, Cologne,
Erfurt, Heildelberg, Vienna, Prague, Cambridge, Oxford, Cracow, Bologna,
and Buda. The illuminator did not everywhere exactly follow the existing heraldic tradition, but added a book, sometimes held in the hand, as a collateral
emblem in every shield. Indeed, the book served as a general symbol of learning, and a book of privileges and registration (matricula) was used, like a
manuscript Bible, in swearing a solemn oath.51 The international and
national import of this heraldic set conveys a sense of the European intellectual community and conscious awareness of the ideal of a local academic
49 Corpus sceptrorum - Die akademischen
Szepter und Sta'be in Europa, vol. I, ed. G. Vorbrodt
and I. Vorbrodt ; vol. II, ed. W. Paatz ; W. Maisel,
Archeologia
prawna Europy [Archeologie juridique Europe] , 264-6.
50 History of Oxford, pi. nos. X, XI, text by J. R. L. Highfield, 225-63. For University of Paris:
R. Gandilhon, Sigillographie
des universite's de France , 83-93.
51 Anton Porg (ed.), Conziliumbuch
geschehener
zu Constanz
(Augsburg, 1583); New York
Public Library, Spencer Collection, MS 32 (about 1450—60): O.Neubecker, J. P. Broeked-
Little, and R. Tobler, Heraldry, Sources, Symbols and Meanings , 240-1; A. L.
Gabriel, 'The Significance of the Book in Medieval Coats of Arms', in Gabriel,
(note 11), 65-96.
Aleksander Gieysztor
body: vivere socialiter et collegialiter, et moraliter, et scholariter (Paris,
The organization and administration of European universities during three
centuries of the Middle Ages were moulded by forces both inside and outside
the corporation itself. Universities therefore had many common features, but
even more which were individual and particular. The legal status of university members and of the university as an institution varied greatly from place
to place until the end of the Middle Ages and, indeed, until the end of the
ancien regime. Although the present survey has aimed mainly at describing
events and institutions, it has also made apparent an essential trend noticeable in other realms of university life; that is, the evolution from legal autonomy and privileged status for masters and scholars to a professorial caste
system and growing dependence upon public authority, coupled with
attempts to uphold corporative and professional prestige in contemporary
52 A. L. Gabriel, 'The Foundation of Johannes Hueven of Arnheim for the College of Sorbonne
(1452)', in Gabriel, Garlandia (note 11), 141.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
See also the select bibliography of chapter 7.
Alvarez, M. F., Robles Carcedo, L., and Rodriguez San Pedro, L. E. (eds.) La Universidad de Salamanca, 3 vols., Salamanca, 1990.
Bannenberg, G. Organisatie en bestuur van de middeleeuwse universiteit, Nijmegen,
Beltran de Heredia, V. (ed.) Bulgario de la Universidad de Salamanca, 3 vols., Salamanca, 1966-7.
Beltran de Heredia, V. (ed.) Cartulario de la Universidad de Salamanca, 6 vols., Salamanca, 1970-3.
Catto, J. I. (ed.) The History of the University of Oxford, vol. I, The Early Schools,
Oxford, 1984.
Chartularium Studii Bononiensis. Documenti per la Storia dell'Universita di Bologna
dalle origini fino al sec. XV, 15 vols., Bologna, 1909-88.
Cobban, A. B. The Medieval English Universities: Oxford and Cambridge, to c.1500,
Cambridge, 1988.
Cobban, A. B. The Medieval Universities: Their Development and Organization,
London, 1975.
Denifle, H. Die Entstehung der Universitd'ten des Mittelalters bis 1400, Berlin, 1885;
reprint, Graz, 1956.
Denifle, H. and Chatelain, E. (eds.) Auctarium Chartularii Universitatis Parisiensis, 6
vols., Paris, 1894-1964.
Denifle, H. and Chatelain, E. (eds.) Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, 4 vols.,
Paris, 1889-97.
Management
and resources
Fournier, M. (ed.) Les Statuts et privileges des universites franchises depuis leur fondation jusqu'en 1789, 4 vols., Paris, 1890-2.
Gibson, S. (ed.) Statuta Antiqua Universitatis Oxoniensis, Oxford, 1931.
Gloria, A. (ed.) Monumentidella UniversitddiPadova, 2 vols., Venice/Padua, 1885-8.
Hargreaves-Mawdsley, W. N. A History of Academic Dress in Europe until the End
of the Eighteenth Century, Oxford, 1963.
d'Irsay, S. Histoire des universites francaises et etrangeres des origines a nos jours, 2
vols., Paris, 1933-5.
Ker, N. R. 'Oxford College Libraries before 1500', in J. IJsewyn and J. Paquet (eds.),
Universities in the Late Middle Ages, Mediaevalia Lovaniensia, series 1, studia 6,
Louvain, 1978, 293-311.
Kibre, P. The Nations in the Medieval Universities, Mediaeval Academy of America,
49, Cambridge, Mass., 1948.
Kibre, P. Scholarly Privileges in the Middle Ages. The Rights, Privileges and Immunities of Scholars and Universities at Bologna - Padua - Paris - Oxford, Mediaeval
Academy of America, 72, Cambridge, Mass., 1961.
Kiene, M. 'Die Grundlagen der europaischen Universitatsbaukunst', Zeitschrift fur
Kunstgeschichte, 46 , 63-114.
Moreira de Sa, A. (ed.) Auctarium Chartularii Universitatis Portugalensis, 3 vols.,
Lisbon, 1973-9.
Moreira de Sa, A. (ed.) Chartularium Universitatis Portugalensis, 8 vols., Lisbon,
Rashdall, H. The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, 3 vols., ed. F. M.
Powicke and A. B. Emden, Oxford, 1936; reprint, London, 1942-58; reprint,
Oxford, 1988.
Verger, J. Les Universites au Moyen Age, Collection SUP, L'Historien 14, Paris, 1973.
Weijers, O. Terminologie des universites au XHIe siecle, Rome, 1987.
JACQUES VERGER
It is self-evident that no university or school can exist without teachers. If a
schooling differs from an apprenticeship, which is essentially practical, or
from tutoring, which is in principle individual, it is because there is a teacher
whose role involves him addressing himself collectively, as it were, to a given
number of pupils. It is likewise the existence of a teacher that allows us to
distinguish a school, even at the higher level, from the other cultural institutions familiar to the Middle Ages, such as the monastic scriptoria, the ecclesiastical or princely chancelleries or courts, academies, and so on, which
tended to depend upon exchange between equals. Yet the fact that the function of teacher plainly existed in all historical periods should not be taken as
an excuse for anachronism. The words describing this function have barely
changed at all over the centuries, but does the teacher in medieval universities
have anything in common with the teacher in present-day universities, as
regards either his professional activity or his social profile - the image he
receives or himself adopts?
THE DOCTORATE
The function of teacher is obviously much older than the medieval universities, as the borrowing of the key terms from classical Latin would suggest:
magister (master), doctor (doctor), and professor (professor).1 Although
these three terms were not employed indiscriminately, they began by having a
similar meaning, with the idea of teaching being associated with that of
excellence in a given domain. It is this second aspect, in fact, which was most
emphasized in the Middle Ages. A master or doctor could teach, but this was
not indispensable. When affixed to a name, even when preceding it, the word
1 Regarding all these questions of vocabulary, see O. Weijers, Terminologie des universites au
Xllle siecle .
simply meant that the holder of it had achieved total mastery of the discipline
which he had studied. He was therefore equipped in his turn to teach it, but
he was also equipped to fulfil all the other functions for which a recognized
intellectual qualification prepared him. In a still broader sense, the general
attitude at the end of the Middle Ages was that the title gave its bearer
genuine social dignity, giving him access to the world of the privileged,
indeed, to that of the nobility. So it was that those masters or doctors who
actually taught were generally described as 'regent' masters or doctors, that
is, regens or actu regens, a participle which soon became a substantive ('a
regent'). This term is still employed at Cambridge.
How did one go about acquiring the title of 'master' or 'doctor'? It was
already current in the twelfth century, if not earlier.2 At that period, it would
seem to have been merely a term in ordinary usage rather than an official title.
Someone would call himself master if he ran a school (whether he was
appointed or had founded it, upon his own initiative or with the authorization, the 'licence', of an authority, generally the representative of the bishop
of the place in question) and, more broadly, the title might be used by anyone
who had studied for a sufficient period of time and who had left a school with
the more or less formal satisfecit of his own master, which seemed to guarantee the level of excellence achieved by his pupil. In the twelfth century, such
magistri began to appear in the cathedral chapters, in the Roman curia, and
in certain princely chancelleries, not to mention all those who founded new
schools at Paris, Bologna, Montpellier, or Oxford.
When the universities first appeared, acquisition of the title of master
ceased to be merely a matter of customary practice and involved instead a
procedure which the universities claimed as their monopoly and which was
meticulously described. Without going into details, it should simply be noted
that the tests enabling one to use this title generally consisted of three
elements.3
The first stage in the process involved the candidate, with the agreement of
his master, who deemed him to have reached a sufficiently high level, presenting himself to the university authorities, the rector, and, above all, the chancellor. The latter, usually attended by a jury of masters, would check that the
candidate had fulfilled the required conditions, that is, as regards both his
morality and his previous studies. Had he studied for the requisite length of
time? Had he, as bachelor, done the prescribed exercises, readings, and dispu-
2 As C. Renardy, among others, has shown in Le Monde des maitres universitaires du diocese de
Liege 1140-1350. Recherchessursa composition et ses activites , especially 79-144.
3 On procedures pertaining to the licence and the doctorate, see Rashdall, Universities, passim;
one can find more detailed information regarding Bologna in M. Bellomo, Saggio sulVuniversitd
nelVetd del dirito comune , especially 239—63; regarding Paris, in P. Glorieux,
'L'enseignement au Moyen Age. Techniques et methodes en usage a la Faculte de Theologie de
Paris, au XHIe siecle', Archives d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du Moyen Age, 35 ,
65-186; regarding Oxford, History of Oxford, passim.
Jacques Verger
tations? There then followed the actual examination, often termed 'private'
or 'rigorous' examination, which was also held in the presence of a jury of
masters presided over by the chancellor. It ordinarily consisted of a disputation upheld by the candidate over a particular question, a 'point', which
was drawn by lot the previous evening or in the morning. If he passed these
first two tests, the candidate was regarded as having 'graduated' (licentiatus)
but, paradoxically, this licentia granted by the chancellor, although it may
have guaranteed his level of intellectual attainment, in no way entitled him to
teach in the university. For this, he had to pass a third test, sometimes called a
'public' examination, which might take place fairly soon after the licentia had
been granted. Inceptio or 'inauguration' was, significantly enough, the term
The public examination which resulted in a person being appointed a
'master' or a 'doctor' did not present any special difficulties, and there was no
possibility of failing. It was in fact, a ceremony, which often took place in a
church, and which involved prayers, solemn orations, and the bestowing
upon the candidate of the emblems proper to a master, namely, biretta,
gloves, and book. He would then perform his first magistral act, usually a
disputation with students, on a theme of his choice. The meaning of the
public examination was perfectly clear. It was simply a display of the competence which the previous examination and granting of the licentia had
guaranteed. It was an act of corporate significance, which showed that the
graduate was suited to teaching and which marked his solemn entrance into
the body of doctors, his recognition and admission by his peers. Even if the
chancellor were present at such ceremonies, he would not wield any authority, in the strict sense, over the awarding of masters' degrees and doctorates, for such awards were acts proper to the university, through which it
declared one of the crucial aspects of its independence, namely its freedom to
recruit whomsoever it wished.4
These, broadly speaking, were the statutory requirements. As far as terminology was concerned, it was customary to talk of a master's degree in the
arts and of a doctorate in law; in theology and in medicine, there was more
variation in the sorts of title bestowed upon graduates.
It is worth adding a few observations regarding the practical side of things.
We should bear in mind, first of all, that only a minority of students ever
actually graduated. This point is not in dispute, although it is hard to arrive at
accurate percentages (save for the universities of the Holy Roman Empire in
the fifteenth century, which kept records of matriculation and of examinations). These percentages varied a great deal from one university, faculty, or
period to another. Why did so many students not last the full course? Apart
4 A. E. Bernstein, 'Magisterium and License: Corporate Autonomy against Papal Authority in
the Medieval University of Paris', Viator, 9 , 291-307.
from the intrinsic difficulty of the studies involved, the time required, and the
high cost, one should note the expense of the degree itself. It is reasonable to
suppose that universities were more selective where the higher faculties were
concerned, although the German arts faculties of the fifteenth century themselves recorded high failure rates, since accounts suggest that only three or
four out of ten students were actually awarded their baccalariatus, and one
out of ten their master's degree. On the other hand, there were instances of
the more adroit or the richer managing, by fraud, corruption, or a special
dispensation, to acquire degrees fairly easily.
Be this as it may, numerous students, whether they wished it or not, were
never in a position to become teachers. But did all the licentiati themselves
become masters or doctors? In some faculties, such as arts or theology, the
two titles almost always went together and were awarded virtually simultaneously. On the other hand, in medicine, and more especially, in law, they
would seem in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries to have been wholly
separate. Many licentiati did not petition for the doctorate, because this title
was far more costly than an ordinary degree and, although it bestowed considerable prestige upon the holder, gave him no further intellectual competence and was only indispensable for those who, since they wished to teach,
had to affiliate to the college of doctors.5
Finally, did all those who were awarded the highest title, whether a
master's degree or a doctorate, teach? Originally, and especially in the great
arts faculties, in Paris or in Oxford, the statutes made this compulsory. Every
new master had to serve for two years, as an 'obligatory' (necessarius) regent.
The advantage of this ruling was that it guaranteed that the teaching staff was
renewed at regular intervals, but it did not necessarily satisfy those involved,
since this obligatory regency could delay their professional advancement, nor
did it please the masters who already held positions, since it was plainly in
their interests to limit the number of schools and of chairs. For these reasons,
the ruling was gradually set aside and, with the reform of 1452, it disappeared
from the statutes of the University of Paris.
If all the masters or doctors did not teach, by whom were the teachers
chosen? There were, generally speaking, two solutions to this problem.
Firstly, co-option by the masters who already held positions, through the
faculty assemblies (as in Paris), the 'general congregations' of the masters of
the university (as in Oxford), or the college of doctors (as at Avignon); and,
secondly, a contract drawn up between the candidate and either the university itself or an external authority (a town or a prince) which served as the
university's protector. Generally annual and renewable, this contract speci-
5 J. Verger, 'Le cout des grades: droits et frais d'examen dans les universities du Midi de la France
a la fin du Moyen Age', in A. L. Gabriel (ed.), The Economic and Material Frame of the
Mediaeval University , 19-36.
Jacques Verger
fied very precisely both the teacher's duties and his remuneration.6 The heartland of the contractual system was, to start with, Italy (Bologna, Padua), but
it was then imitiated by those countries which followed, to a greater or lesser
degree, the 'Bologna model', such as southern France or Spain. In thirteenthcentury Bologna and Padua, it was the student universities which 'elected' the
teachers and sealed a contract with them. From the fourteenth century, the
appearance of teachers' salaries paid by the communes meant that the task of
choosing teachers and negotiations regarding their contracts more and more
became the responsibility of city magistrates, whose speciality, as reformatores or tractatores studii, this would be, although this did not rule out preliminary agreements with the university. At Coimbra, it was the king who
appointed teachers, while at Salamanca, on the other hand, their appointment
continued to be, for the whole of the Middle Ages, the prerogative of the
student rector and his councillors.
TEACHERS CAREERS
The body of teachers in a medieval university was not homogeneous.
If we set aside for a moment the mere baccalarii and licentiati (who were
responsible, in fact, for a very significant part of the teaching), it should first
be noted that, in the theology faculties, many teachers belonged to a religious
order (mendicants, Cistercians). They taught in their monasteries and were
subject to regulations regarding mobility, which were fixed by the general
chapters of their orders, so that they only played a small part in the life and
running of the universities and had quite specific careers. Yet the secular
teachers were very various also. The main phenomenon, observable almost
everywhere in Europe, but with a different term being applied in each case,
was the gradual emergence of a group of genuinely professional regents.7
They were often called 'ordinary', as opposed to 'extraordinary' teachers, the
latter being a vaguer category.
The distinction was, first of all, a pedagogic one. For, in each discipline,
there were the 'ordinary' texts, the most important ones, which were studied
'ordinarily' (ordinarie), i.e. more deeply, and the 'extraordinary' texts, which
were not so fundamental and were often read in an 'extraordinary' or
'cursory' manner. The extraordinary readings were as a whole entrusted to
the bachelors, but doctors could deliver them too. Given these circumstances,
it was common enough to distinguish the ordinary regents, who claimed the
6 At Bologna, these teaching obligations were strictly defined by the taxatio punctorum, that is,
the precise calendar that the teacher had to observe, in order to study one after the other,
without any omissions, all the puncta into which the texts of the Corpus had been divided (see
Bellomo, Saggio (note 3), 205-8).
7 As far as France is concerned, see J. Verger, 'Les professeurs des universites francaises a la fin
du Moyen Age', in J. Le Goff and B. Kopeczi (eds.), Intellectuels franqais, intellectuels hongrois, XIHe-XXe siecles , 2.3-39.
right to give the ordinary readings, at the 'doctoral hour' or 'magistral hour'
(first thing in the morning), from the extraordinary doctors, who were confined to the extraordinary readings, which generally took place in the afternoon, involved texts considered to be less important, and sometimes did not
even feature on the examination syllabus.
But it was not only for pedagogic reasons that the ordinary doctors played
a more important role. Financial and institutional considerations were also
involved. These teachers tended, as we shall see, to earn the most. They
claimed the right to exercise full authority over the students, believing that
they alone were entitled to issue testimonials respecting their academic
achievements and to sit on the board of examiners, since they were, as ordinary regents, the only ones fully in charge of the schools of the university. At
Bologna, this exercise of authority was the main function of the 'colleges of
doctors' of the various faculties. Being subject to a numerus clausus (sixteen
in civil law, twelve in canon law, etc.), these colleges, which were co-opted,
did not include all the regents but merely a select number of them. This elite,
since it supervised the awarding of degrees and a large part of the relevant
revenues, represented a genuine counter-weight to the power of the student
universities.8 This system was especially useful in those cases where the
students participated to a greater or lesser degree in the running of the universities. But the ordinary regents were just as concerned to restrict their own
numbers in the 'masters' universities'. This tendency was virtually as old as
the universities themselves. In 1207, for example, Pope Innocent III had proposed restricting to eight the number of theology schools in Paris. Thus, there
arose the notion of a university chair, in the sense of a secure teaching post,
usually provided with a specific endowment, and sometimes tied to the teaching of a particular subject. However, chairs in the strict sense were rare in the
medieval universities. Five were created in Bologna, alongside the traditional
salaried regencies, in 1317.9 Elsewhere, there were a few examples in the
fifteenth century. On the other hand, one has the impression that almost
everywhere the number of ordinary regents tended to be fixed at a low and
stable number. This fixing of the number of ordinary teachers not only helped
guarantee their incomes and their authority but also made it easier to reject
undesirable candidates, especially the doctors from other universities10 or, as
was the case in Bologna, foreigners to the town, often in favour of the sons or
nephews of the masters already in employment.
Yet the ordinary regents never enjoyed complete control over the university. Setting aside the power of the students in universities like Bologna, there
8 A. Sorbelli (ed.), // 'Liber secretus iuris caesarei' dell'Universita di Bologna^ vol. 1,1378-1420,
con una introduzione suWorigine dei collegi dei dottori , ix-lxxvi.
9 Bellomo, Saggio (note 3), 211-15.
10 The large universities were especially concerned to keep out doctors from other universities,
in spite of the fact that degrees were supposed to be universally valid. Small and new universities, on the other hand, sought to attract the doctors from prestigious universities.
Jacques Verger
remains the fact that those here designated extraordinary doctors, and, more
generally, all the non-regent masters and doctors present in the university or
in the university town (mainly masters of arts studying in a higher faculty)
had generally won, sometimes after intense struggle, the right to participate
more or less fully in the decision-making bodies of the university - and hence
in the profits that might flow from them. This included the various assemblies
and councils, the boards of examiners, and sometimes even the university
offices. This challenge to the dominance of the ordinary regents was certainly
accompanied by a critique, at least an implicit one, of their teaching, which
was often marked by absenteeism and routine.
Developments such as those described above were especially evident in the
faculties of law and medicine in southern Europe. There, teachers in such
faculties were, at an early date, laymen and married; their family responsibilities made continuity in their careers a matter of particular importance. They
often remained teachers all their lives, even if they had to move several times
(depending upon the contracts which they were offered in the various universities). Those priests and monks who taught canon law or theology had more
openings available to them, in that, after a few years as regent, they could opt
for a strictly ecclesiastical career. From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century,
many bishops, and even some cardinals and popes, were former teachers. In
the thirteenth century, over 33 per cent of the recorded Parisian masters of
theology became bishops, abbots, general ministers, or cardinals. In the
fifteenth century, thirty-six of the seventy-nine English bishops (46 per cent)
had taught at Oxford or at Cambridge.11
In the arts faculties, although there were a few 'professional' regents who
taught grammar and logic, a large number of them, especially at Paris and
Oxford, continued to be young masters, who completed their obligatory
regency or, at any rate, only devoted a few years to this teaching, often going
on to take up their studies in a higher faculty.
The late Middle Ages saw the emergence, especially in the arts, of a new
type of regent, with a more stable position but with less dignity than the
ordinary regent of the higher faculties. This was the college regent, who was
most often to be found in universities with numerous colleges, such as Paris,
Oxford, and Cambridge. Although they had first been conceived as lodgings
for poor students, these colleges had gradually come to be entrusted with
more and more teaching. This was also the case with more modest institutions, such as 'pedagogies' or 'halls'. These had begun by being no more than
private lessons but, in the course of time, such forms of teaching were transformed, especially in the larger colleges, into complete exercises, which were
11 R. Avi-Yonah, 'Career Trends of Parisian Masters of Theology, 1200-1320', History of Universities^ 6 , 47-64; J. T. Rosenthal, 'The Training of an Elite Group. English Bishops
in the Fifteenth Century', Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, new series, 60:5
 , 5-54.
open not only to the bursars but also to an external audience, so that they
were in direct competition with the faculties' lectures. The development of
such activities led these colleges to recruit a body of salaried regents of their
own. The colleges of the Sorbonne and Navarre at Paris and Magdalen
College at Oxford (founded in 1448) were the first to develop such forms of
instruction on a large scale.
PAYMENT OF TEACHERS
The form and scale of payment of the teachers was as various as their careers.
In the 'private schools' of the twelfth century, both in Paris and in Bologna,
the teachers lived off fees paid by pupils, which were very probably fixed on
either an individual or a collective basis, by agreement, before the lectures
began. But the church was not too favourably disposed towards this system,
being of the view that 'science was a gift from God, which could not be sold'.
The traditional cathedral schools therefore offered teaching that was, at least
in theory, free, with masters generally being maintained by the granting of a
prebend (canon 18 of the third Lateran Council, 1179).
The problem continued to arise in the universities. The teachers who were
clerics often had ecclesiastical benefices, since the papacy favoured this solution to the problem and therefore granted them very freely and, with them,
dispensations from being resident in these benefices, so that they might have
the income and teach at the same time. Yet such incomes were not always
adequate. In addition, many, especially among the younger masters of arts,
were not granted benefices. This was also the case with lay teachers of law
and medicine in the southern universities. The regents were therefore still
fairly assiduous about collecting the money paid by the students, the collecta.
The students were not always too happy about paying, and the collecta,
which anyway varied from faculty to faculty, never amounted to very much.
From the end of the thirteenth century, students also had to pay higher and
higher fees when taking their examinations.
Teachers fought bitterly over access to the better benefices, and to the
collection of the examination fees and the collectae, which shows just how
crucial these funds were for the regents' livelihood. A theoretical debate
served to justify these practices, with references to Aristotle, the Bible, and
Roman law enabling jurists and theologians to admit both that knowledge,
being a gift from God, could not be valued in terms of money, and that the
labour of a teacher (especially if he had no other resources to call upon)
deserved some recompense, it being understood that such recompense should
not be taken from the poorer students.12
There was a third, and less hazardous, solution, namely the payment of a
12 G. Post, K. Giocarinis, and R. Kay, 'The Medieval Heritage of a Humanistic Ideal: "Scientia
donum Dei est, unde vendi non potest" ', Traditio, 11 , 195-234.
Jacques Verger
salary (which anyway did not rule out the levying of collectae or of examination fees). Recourse was had to this measure from very early on, when new
universities were founded, so as to guarantee a livelihood to those teachers
they wished to attract. This happened at Naples (1224), Vercelli (1228), and
Toulouse (1229). In Italy it became the custom to pay teachers a salary, and
the first instances at Bologna date from 1280 and 1289; by 1381, there were
twenty-three doctors of law whose wages were paid by the commune. Indeed,
the latter managed, by this means, to extend greater control over the recruitment of teachers. The other Italian universities followed suit. A number
(Perugia, Florence, Pavia) offered high salaries at the time of foundation, in
order to try to attract famous teachers from Bologna or Padua. In the Iberian
peninsula, too, salaries became usual; the kings of Castile and Portugal
instituted them for the regents in the universities they founded at Salamanca,
Valladolid, and Coimbra. The church covered the costs of this operation,
since these salaries were based upon parts of the tithes and various other
ecclesiastical revenues which these kings reserved for themselves.13 On the
other hand, in those universities which were founded in Aragon in the
fourteenth century, such as Lerida and Huesca, the towns took responsibility
for salaries.
In France, there were hardly any salaried teachers before the end of the
Middle Ages (1479-93 at Avignon), if one excepts a number of new foundations, which enjoyed varying degrees of success (Orange in 1365, Poitiers in
1431) and which the towns tried to maintain.14 At Oxford, it is worth
mentioning the ephemeral chairs of philosophy, founded in 1437 by the duke
of Gloucester, and, later, a chair of theology (1497). But one should bear in
mind that, both in Paris and in Oxford, the college regents were paid by the
college which employed them as holders of fellowships.
Finally, in the Empire, the founders and benefactors of universities created
in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, whether by princes, towns, or private
persons, provided a livelihood for the regents from the beginning. However,
the solution of paying an annual salary, which was adopted at Louvain, for
example, was something of a burden for the public finances. Universities
therefore usually preferred to have recourse to perpetual foundations, while
reserving for the masters, and for the masters of arts in particular, who were
the most numerous and the most needy, prebends within the local chapters
(from 1443, twenty-nine prebends at Louvain were reserved for the university,
which considerably lightened the burden of wages shouldered by the town)15
13 A. Barcala Munoz, 'Las Universidades espariolas durante la Edad media', Anuario de estudios
medievales, 15 , 83-126.
14 For Orange: F. Gasparri, La Principaute d'Orange au Moyen Age (fin XIHe-XVe siecle)
 , 235-9. F° r Poitiers: R. Favreau, La Ville de Poitiers a la fin du Moyen Age. Une
capitate regionale, vol. II , 380-4.
15 J. Paquet, Salaires et prebendes des professeurs de Vuniversite de Louvain au XVe siecle
 .
or places in the colleges (as was the case in Vienna, Heidelberg, Leipzig,
Rostock, Greifswald, and so on), a system which was also to be adopted in
Scotland (St Andrews, Glasgow).
Whatever the precise mode of payment in each university, there would
seem to have been serious discrepancies. In general, those who taught in
higher faculties seem to have had incomes that were patently larger (benefices,
fees, examination fees, and salaries) than the regents of arts. But many other
factors were involved, including the number of students and the wealth of the
prince or of the town (which obviously varied greatly, as did the personal
reputations of the teachers). At Pavia, for example, between 1387 and 1499,
the number of salaried teachers ranged from nine to about seventy, depending
upon the state of the duke of Milan's finances, whereas there were eventually
huge discrepancies (in the ratio of 1 to 50) between the spectacular sums paid
to a number of famous jurists and the miserable salaries, about as much as
those paid to unskilled workers, paid to masters of grammar or of logic, who
accounted for approximately half of the university's teaching staff.16 Elsewhere, the discrepancies were not so great, but were nevertheless significant
(in the ratio of 1 to 9 at Coimbra, according to a statute of 1323).
An exhaustive description would have to include some account of income
earned by regents which derived from non-university sources. They might,
for instance, have acquired, either through birth, marriage, or work, a personal fortune which guaranteed them an income. They might, on the other
hand, have students lodge in their houses. Finally, they could, alongside their
teaching, give legal or medical consultations, which were usually very costly.
To sum up, there were at least two kinds of teaching career possible in the
medieval universities, with obviously a whole series of intermediate options.
On the one hand, there were those young regents who only taught for a few
years, generally beginning immediately after they had been promoted. They
usually hoped to pursue an ecclesiastical or civil career outside the university.
This does not imply that, after leaving, they ceased to be interested in their
alma mater, for the oaths sworn at the time of their graduation, and when
they took their examinations, bound them irrevocably to it. They would
therefore sit at times on its councils, as non-regent doctors, and they might
return to teach. Nor should their decision to leave after a few years be taken
to mean that they were mediocre teachers. Indeed, being close to their own
students in age, still unconfined by routine, they would seem in fact to have
enjoyed real success. Less concerned with their own personal interests, they
undoubtedly remained more sensitive to the collective aspects of the university as an institution, to the specific religious or political role that it could
Those whom we have called ordinary regents, and who were undoubtedly
16 D. Zanetti, 'A l'universite de Pavie au XVe siecle: les salaires des professeurs', Annales ESC,
17 , 421-33.
Jacques Verger
in the majority by the end of the Middle Ages, especially in the new universities, had quite different careers. Although it was rare for them to abandon
all hope of a promotion outside the university, they tended to pass long years,
or even the whole of their lives, in such places. Thus, of the sixteen professors
of law at Orleans between 1378 and 1429 whose names are known to us,
thirteen at least had taught for between twenty and forty years.17 For such
men, the university was not only a place for exchanges on the intellectual and
the human plane; it also provided a frame for the whole of their lives, guaranteeing both their incomes and their social position. Less prone to engage in
daring collective initiatives or to take radical decisions, they were prepared to
sacrifice neither their personal or familial interests nor the image which they
constructed of themselves, that of men of authority and experience or, if you
like, that of notables. Both the modest regent of a college and the prestigious
'doctor in both the laws' sought to serve the university and to profit from it.
The advent of the ordinary regents obviously reduced teachers' geographical mobility. Admittedly, those who had graduated from the largest
universities always managed to find themselves a good post. Thus, in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, doctors from Bologna and Padua were to
be found in all the new Italian universities, which wrangled long and hard
over such valuable catches. The masters or arts or of theology from the University of Paris were welcomed in southern France or, after 1378, in the Holy
Roman Empire. If one adopts the larger view, however, it is fair to say that
recruitment of teachers at the end of the Middle Ages tended to become more
and more local.
Were such teachers necessarily mediocre and hidebound? A proper answer
to this question demands that one first examines the concrete conditions
governing their teaching.
TEACHING AS A PROFESSION
University statutes gave details of the teacher's teaching obligations. They
varied from university to university, and from faculty to faculty, but were
generally fairly constraining. In the end, they turned teaching into a full-time
activity, a genuine profession. Rather than consider the formal and real
content or teaching methods of the various disciplines (which are examined
in a number of other chapters in this book), it is best to try to gauge just how
onerous a teacher's duties might have been.
A regent's primary obligation was to 'read', that is, to deliver his magistral
lectures on texts specified by the syllabus. These lectures were given in the
morning and lasted one and a half to two hours. The regents had to read on
every day upon which work was permitted {dies legibiles) but, in practice, if
17 Universites en France, 101.
one set aside Sundays and religious festivals, days reserved for solemn disputations and examinations and summer holidays, there were barely more than
between 130 and 150 dies legibiles a year. Some masters gave a second lecture
in the afternoon, but the 'extraordinary', more specialized or optional
lectures, which took place at the end of the morning or in the afternoon, were
usually given by extraordinary regents or by bachelors. The doctors also had
to arrange the disputations, generally in the afternoon, a duty which involved
choosing the themes, presiding over them, and bringing them to a conclusion,
through their own presentation, in the days that followed, of the 'determination' of the questions disputed. There was considerable variety in the
number of disputations that were held. A great theologian such as Thomas
Aquinas gave an average of two a week,18 but in other contexts, especially in
the law faculties, the rule was to have no more than one disputation per
week. This stipulation helped to ensure that the ordinary teaching routine
was not too much disturbed, for all the bachelors had to attend every disputation and therefore postpone their own lectures. Although circumstances
varied with the size of the teaching staff, each master tended not to have
personal responsibility for more than one disputation per month, per term, or
per year (as was the case in Bologna).
To lecture and dispute, a teacher had to have copies of the essential books
in his own library. In addition, he would have to devote a certain amount of
time to preparation, even if he gave the same course year after year, for the
statutes forbade, at any rate in theory, the dictation of a course that had been
wholly written out in advance. The best teachers would also probably after
the event, draft a version of their commentaries and entrust such texts to a
stationer, who would circulate them among the students and the copyists.
University life entailed many obligations other than those that were strictly
pedagogic. There were, for instance, religious ceremonies, both regular and
occasional, examination boards, and the assemblies and councils of the university, the faculties, the doctors' colleges, etc. Teachers might have occasion
to hold one or another of the many elective offices that the administration of
the university required, namely rector, proctor, taxator (of the rents and
prices in the university town), receptor and dean; even in the student universities of the Bologna type, there were the officers of the doctors' colleges (the
priors). The mandates were generally short (a year at the maximum) but
could subsequently be held again from time to time especially by the ordinary
regents. During their period of office the university's officers had to be continuously present: they had to keep accounts and archives, resolve a thousand
and one problems on a daily basis, and represent the university in all circumstances. Such offices, on the other hand, conferred authority and prestige. In
Paris, the rector of the university marched at the head of official processions,
18 Glorieux, 'Enseignement au Moyen Age' (note 3), 127.
Jacques Verger
next to the bishop. Finally, teachers were often summoned, as representatives
of the university, to go on embassies (to the king or the pope) or to participate
in commissions (for the purpose of examining a suspect book or of visiting a
These obligations were not the same for all. For jurists and doctors in
medicine, it was the readings that were fundamental; the masters of arts,
since they were addressing themselves to younger pupils, combined lectures
with repetitions. On the other hand, the masters of theology very probably
tended to accord more importance to disputations than to readings, a good
proportion of which - indeed, virtually all of them - they handed over to the
bachelors, the sententiarii and the biblici, whose task it was to give the
students, regarding the two basic texts, Peter Lombard's Sentences and the
Holy Scriptures, the basic knowledge required to tackle the great scholastic
debates on the 'disputed questions'. As far as administrative duties were concerned, it is probable that particular men, either older or more influential
within the university, were especially responsible for them.
By no means all teachers were equally zealous in the prosecution of their
duties. Seriousness was a matter of personal capacity and temperament, and
it would be quite mistaken to suppose that, even in the eyes of contemporaries, all ordinary regents were serious. The insistence of the university statutes and the penalties stipulated, especially at Bologna, where a number of
students made it their business to watch over and denounce unsatisfactory
teachers,19 go to show, by their very frequency, that teachers almost everywhere 'read' only a part of their programme, dictated their courses, awarded
degrees to unworthy candidates, absented themselves, and drafted in mere
bachelors or licentiati in their place, ploys that the university regulations, it
being impossible to prohibit them strove to limit, for example, to one month
By 1317, Pope John XXII had begun to grow anxious: 'A number of
regents [in law], who should have been devoting themselves to their lectures,
are involving themselves in trials, pleadings, and other external activities.'20
This absenteeism seems to have grown worse at the end of the Middle Ages,
as so many teachers' biographies suggest (being famous, they were perhaps
not representative). Periods spent in the service of a prince or the church, and
extended visits to the Councils of Constance or of Basle kept many masters
away from their chairs for months, sometimes years, disrupting the teaching
schedule and leaving the way open for a whole number of different abuses
(courses of study being curtailed and examinations a mere formality).
If we consider the case of a doctor who fulfilled his teaching obligations in
accord with the statutes of his university, we may ask what the conditions
were, practically speaking, under which he worked.
19 Bellomo, Saggio (note 3), 208.
20 CUP, vol. II, 200-1, no. 741.
THE TEACHER IN HIS SCHOOL
A teacher's basic context was his school or schola. Materially, it consisted,
first of all, of a room, whose features are familiar to us from the copious,
though somewhat stereotyped, iconographic sources of the period. It had a
magistral chair, students' benches, sometimes supplied with desks upon
which books might be placed (often for the following of the master's lesson,
usually without writing in them), a few cupboards along the walls, and the
floor strewn with straw in winter. These rooms were generally hired by the
regents, at their own expense. It was only belatedly that the universities themselves owned their own buildings, the University of Paris at the end of the
fourteenth century, and those of Oxford, Cambridge, Coimbra, Salamanca,
Avignon, Poitiers, etc. in the 1430s. In the universities of the empire and of
eastern Europe, such as Prague, Leipzig, and of Cracow, lecture courses were
often held in the colleges.
But schools also had a human and pedagogic dimension. They were sometimes likened, at any rate in the early days, to a 'society' (societas) consisting
of the master and his pupils. What did this mean?
A student arriving at a university had to appear before the university
authorities, but the crucial act, by which he became a genuine member of the
university, was his registration as a member of a school, 'under' a given
master. He would often have a few days in which to make up his mind. What
were the criteria? One could apply to a compatriot or else opt for the most
famous school. At any rate, as the first statutes of the University of Paris put it
(1215), there could be 'no student without a master'. All medieval universities
were in face obsessed by the struggle against the 'wandering', uncontrolled
student, who went from one master to another.
The master was supposed to keep a register of those students who matriculated with him (if only in order to claim the collecta from them). He was
responsible, to a certain extent, for their conduct, although the jurisdiction
which the masters had originally held over their pupils would seem to have
given way to that exercised by university officers (rector, chancellor). His
main responsibility was to assure that they made good progress in their
studies. It was he who decided (and the statutes often gave him some leeway
here) when the student, having been for several years a virtually silent listener
to lectures and disputations, could accede to the 'determination' or to the
baccalariatus, which would one day entitle him to play a more active role,
that of a kind of assistant. These assistants would provide answers in the
disputations and deliver some of the extraordinary lectures, which knocked
the rough edges off the novice students and prepared them for following the
course of magistral lectures. The masters would also, at the appropriate
moment, 'present' their 'formed' bachelor [baccalarius formatus) for the
licentia and 'doctorate' examinations.
Jacques Verger
One can readily understand how very strong personal ties, of both an intellectual and an affective nature, could well have bound a master to his
students (even if freshmen were sometimes a little disorientated at first by the
lack of immediate constraints), especially if one bears in mind the duration of
a course of studies, the onerous nature of the timetables, and the importance
of oral examinations. A teacher's former pupils, particularly if he had subsequently been promoted to high office, were fond of talking of 'my master'
{dominus meus) and of calling upon the good graces of him who had once
formed and protected them.
This is of course a somewhat idealized picture. In practice, things might
well pass less smoothly, with students proving critical of their master, judging
him to have a difficult character, to be incompetent, or, conversely, to be the
kind of person to indulge in vain subleties. It is rare for such protests to leave
any trace,21 but one can guess what the practical consequences might have
been. Some students would switch schools in the hope of finding a more
erudite master somewhere else or, conversely, a more accommodating one.
Many students hesitated before taking so drastic a step but tended rather, in
various ways, to display a manifest lack of enthusiasm for the official pedagogic formulae (as did a number of their masters), and on an ever-increasing
scale in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
Students were never shut up in their schools, with no contact with the
outside world. Whenever a disputation was held, all the bachelors of a given
faculty would meet in turn in each of the schools. Examinations were also
held in the presence of juries upon which sat all or a part of the masters of the
faculty. A master was therefore not free to do what he wished in his school,
especially since the statutes bound him to particular syllabuses, timetables,
and methods.
Nevertheless, the traditional forms of instruction seemed onerous and
inappropriate to some. This is why many bachelors, especially in theology,
tended to break free and to give a deeper and more personal form of teaching,
especially in their reading of the Sentences. It also accounts for the sometimes
bewildering proliferation of 'extraordinary' or optional exercises and courses,
sometimes given privately or during the vacations, by licentiati or by bachelors, the success of which would seem to be explained by their more practical or more modern character (this was often how humanism, for example,
found its way into the universities).
The proportion of these 'informal' teachings, only vaguely defined or even
opposed in the official statutes, was certainly rising, especially where the most
inquisitive and demanding students were concerned. Even if it is scarcely
21 J. Leclercq, 'Lo sviluppo dell'atteggiamento critico degli allievi verso i maestri dal X al XIII
secolo', in Universita e societd, which draws mainly, as regards the thirteenth century, upon
some Parisian quodlibeta; these disputes may very well have served as an outlet for such a
possible for us to gauge their exact importance and their real efficacy, they
plainly represent a new intellectual orientation. This same tendency may be
held to account for the development of teaching within the colleges, where a
new system for the allocation of pupils was emerging (with age being the
criterion that determined their place in a particular class, each one of which
had its own regent). In a somewhat analogous manner, the fifteenth century
saw the masters of arts in a number of universities in Germany (Leipzig) and
Scotland sharing out, through a system of yearly rotation, the various books
on the syllabus, with the students passing from one teacher to the other. So it
was that the restrictive framework of the school, in which year after year the
students used to follow the same courses given by the same teacher, gradually
gave way to more flexible and more progressive systems.
One would be better placed to understand the position of a medieval professor with regard to his students if one knew just how many of the latter
there were. Obviously, numbers varied with the importance of the university,
the size of the teaching staff, and the particular circumstances of the time. At
Paris, where the number of regents was always high, the schools would probably have had on average, in the fifteenth century, only ten to twenty pupils,
and still fewer in medicine.22 But numbers of pupils tended in general to
increase. In the big colleges, one would generally expect to find twenty to
thirty pupils per regent.23 Some famous jurists claimed that their reading
drew dozens, if not hundreds, of listeners and, in those universities in which a
small group of ordinary regents had managed to win a monopoly, they could
count on having a substantial audience, which might perhaps vary from one
school to another depending upon the reputation of the master.24
RELATIONS BETWEEN COLLEAGUES
If the relations between the master and his pupils, which were of a largely
oral nature, often elude us, those of a master with his colleagues are somewhat better known. The documentation tells us for the most part of situations of tension and conflict. There were conflicts between immediate
colleagues, involving accusations of the theft of their respective students
(together with the associated profits, the collectae and the examination fees).
There were conflicts between the masters of the various faculties. At Paris,
22 I have used here the estimates given by J. Favier for the numbers of students of the University
of Paris between 1400 and 1450, in Paris au XVe siecle. 1380-1500
 , 69—72.
23 In the College de Navarre (Paris), there were three masters for, respectively, twenty pupils in
grammar, thirty in logic, and twenty in theology; the colleges of the faculty of arts at Greifswald anticipated having ten regents and 340 students (Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, 511;
vol. II, 2.72). One could give any number of other examples.
24 At Avignon, in the fifteenth century, four ordinary regents in law were jointly responsible for,
on average, 200 to 300 students , 489-504).
Jacques Verger
for example, the members of the arts faculties used to complain of the surveillance exercised by the theologians over their teaching, and in other places
the arrogance of the doctors of law was denounced. There were conflicts
between masters of different statuses, the most famous being those which
placed lay teachers and mendicants in opposed camps, as at Paris (especially
in 1250-39 and 1387-1403), at Oxford (1303-20), and at Cambridge (1303-6).
Conflicts of this latter kind were partly concerned with matters of doctrine
but the immediate causes were exclusively to do with questions of corporate
identity. Thus, the secular teachers, whether masters of arts or theologians,
having allowed the mendicant studia the same status as their theology
schools, charged the friars with exploiting their presence in the university (in
order to recruit new brothers or to win university degrees) without, at the
same time, submitting to the rules of the university community. They refused,
for example, to have anything to do with strikes in defence of the university's
freedoms, they founded new chairs without being authorized to do so, or they
disdained preliminary training in the arts faculty, on the grounds that they
had their own network of preparatory studia. These conflicts culminated in
various kinds of compromise, none of which ever posed any threat to the
dominant place that the mendicants had won in the teaching of theology.25
Finally, there were conflicts between masters of different origins, as at
Prague, where a feud between Czech and German masters only ended when
the latter were expelled, in 1409.26
These strictly professional conflicts were compounded by intellectual
clashes also. In almost all the theology faculties of the northern half of
Europe, the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries saw a confrontation between
the 'ancients' (Thomists, Scotists) and the 'moderns' ('nominalists'), with its
parade of invective, condemnation, and exclusion. A number of German
universities (Heidelberg, Freiburg, Ingolstadt, and Tubingen) withdrew from
this by establishing two separate paths (the via antiqua and the via moderna),
so that masters and students could opt for one or the other according to
Finally, the universities were not immune to political divisions either.
These were especially severe at Paris, where, at different periods, the supporters of Philip the Fair and those of Pope Boniface VIII, those of the pope and
those of the Council at the time of the Great Schism, and those of the Armagnacs and those of the Bourguignons at the end of the Hundred Years War
25 For information regarding the conflicts between secular masters and mendicants, one should
consult, as far as Paris is concerned, M.-M. Dufeil, Guillaume de Saint-Amour et la polemique
universitaire parisienne, 1250—1159 ; for Oxford: History of Oxford, 205-8; for
Cambridge: A. G. Little, 'The Friars versus the University of Cambridge', English Historical
50 , 686—96.
26 F. Smahel, 'The Kuttenberg Decree and the Withdrawal of the German Schools from Prague
in 1409: a Discussion', History of Universities, 4 , 153-66.
struggled with one another. Sometimes this could lead to the exclusion of one
party or another.
One should not conclude that members of universities lived in an atmosphere of underhand jealousies or of open quarrels. The great debates mentioned above mainly affected the arts and theology faculties of Paris and
Oxford. Elsewhere, in the faculties of law and of medicine and in the smaller
universities founded at the end of the Middle Ages, tensions seem to have
been far less severe and the inevitable conflicts were quickly settled.
Moreover, such quarrels were always counterbalanced by bonds linking the
masters to each other, old ties of comradeship formed in student days, a
shared awareness of the need to safeguard the independence of the university
community by ensuring that it remained on an even keel, and the need to
make a show of solidarity against outside threats. This collective feeling had
undoubtedly grown weaker by the end of the Middle Ages, especially as a
result of pressure from the state,27 but the relations between teachers did not
necessarily deteriorate as a consequence. It was simply that the age old solidarity of the first masters, mindful of the need to struggle for the emancipation of the studium, was replaced by a sociability of notables, the conformism
of professional regents concerned to defend their common interests.
KNOWLEDGE AND AUTHORITY! THE TEACHER'S IMAGE
Finally, if we are to understand the medieval teacher, we need to consider his
sense of his own identity and the image that he wished to project of himself. It
is not easy to discern just what this image was, for medieval university teachers did not leave any autobiographical works. When teachers speak of their
function, it is in glosses, scholarly tracts, and official texts (inaugural lectures
{proemia) and harangues), and such sources only give us idealized portraits.
Similarly, university statutes merely describe the norm. As for literature
which was not directly connected to teaching, such as pedagogical treatises
like the De disciplina scolarium or the various De modo studendi, the texts of
moralists ('mirrors' or confessors' manuals), and sermons,28 these might
contain numerous allusions to masters and scholars, to their virtues and vices,
but they were often pitched at so general a level that it would be difficult to
relate them to the concrete realities of the time.
However, a number of themes in these texts serve to define the ideal that
medieval teachers (allowing for variations with respect to discipline, country,
and period concerned) sought to realize.29
27 J. Verger, 'Universite et communaute au Moyen Age', CRE-Information,
62 , 21-44.
28 P. Riche, 'Sources pedagogiques et traites d'education [au Moyen Age]', in 'Les entrees dans la
vie. Initiations et apprentissages', Annales de I'Est, 34 (special issue) , 15-29.
29 In particular, Post, Giocarinis, and Kay, 'Medieval Heritage' (note 12); J. Leclercq, 'L'ideal du
theologien au Moyen Age. Textes inedits', Revue des sciences religieuses, 21 , 121-48;
G. Le Bras, ' "Velut splendor firmamenti": le docteur dans le droit de l'Eglise medievale', in
Jacques Verger
The crucial idea was that the teacher was a man of authority. The title of
master or of doctor, guaranteed by his peers and by the church, was not
merely a professional qualification to teach or a corporate rank. It defined a
status, a dignity, and an order. It gave its holder access to a lofty social
position which, naturally enough, many university members, especially if they
were jurists, compared to that of the nobility. Like a noble, a doctor was
'illustrious'; in a city, he would be numbered among the 'greats' (majores).
He had greater authority and power than did an ordinary knight, or so Simon
of Borsano, a Bolognese doctor of the fourteenth century, claimed; he had,
therefore, to be granted precedence, to enjoy privileges and immunities consonant with his dignity.30
This conception was not everywhere accepted, however. Theologians and
moralists stressed the temptation of pride and reminded their audiences of
the precept of the Gospel: 'But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master
...' (Matthew 23.8). The ancient conception had generally involved counterposing the wisdom of the cleric to the violence of the knight but, in the
society of orders which was consolidated at the end of the Middle Ages, each
had to stick to his own place, and from then on the doctors seemed greedy to
be assimilated into the ruling elites.
The authority which the masters and doctors assumed had two main
aspects. First of all, it was intellectual. A doctor was a scholar, endowed with
a science that was at once perfect and finished. His authority found its justification in the dignity of the knowledge he possessed. For the masters were
also hired, on the whole with success, to sing the praises of their discipline, to
defend scholastic theology against the attacks of the mystics, justifying their
recourse to the liberal arts notwithstanding their pagan origins, just as the
church fathers had done, exonerating law (which was a divine science, a res
sanctissima, as Placentinus had declared as early as 1186) and medicine from
the charge of being somewhat lucrative or mechanical affairs.
Was a doctor's science given, once and for all? Admittedly, people in the
Middle Ages were ignorant of the modern notion of scientific progress.
Nevertheless, many texts emphasized that a doctor should be zealous in his
work and assiduous in his teaching. He should make progress or, at any rate,
seek to make his formulations approximate ever more closely to the truth. It
is in these terms that he would deserve not only glory, the respect of his
contemporaries, and the admiration and the gratitude of his pupils, but also
the salary he asked of them.
Yet a true doctor was also supposed to be humble. He was meant to be
humble before God, the source of all knowledge, and before the providential
Melanges offerts a Etienne Gilson , 373-88; A. L. Gabriel, 'The Ideal
Master of the Mediaeval University', Catholic Historical Review, 60 , 1-40.
30 D. Maffei, 'Dottori e studenti nel pensiero di Simone da Borsano', Studia Gratiana, 15 ,
order of the creation, which the hierarchical arrangement of disciplines
merely reproduced. He was therefore warned not to stray from his own
domain, a warning which was especially aimed at the philosophers in the arts
faculties, who were tempted to free themselves from the control of theology
or, indeed, to invade its domain. This warning was to prove all the more
necessary once certain regents of arts, especially at the time of the great
'Averroist' crisis in Paris in the 1270s, had openly criticized this conception.
'Is humility a virtue? No', Siger of Brabant had written. Through his knowledge, a teacher - or a 'philosopher', as the members of arts faculties termed
him - attained to 'all the goods accessible to man', 'the best of all possible
conditions'. In a world subject to the astral determinisms of Aristotelian cosmology, the sole wisdom was that of the philosopher, and the sole freedom
was that offered by knowledge. Propositions such as these, in the formulations that were condemned in 1277, have a provocative aspect; they may,
however, have served to express a new aspiration to a kind of 'laicization' of
knowledge, of 'scholarly neutrality', and of the genuine social and intellectual
emancipation of the teacher.31
These were not the dominant conceptions of the time, though, nor were
they encouraged by the church. In its view, a doctor's authority was not only
intellectual, but moral also. Science was indissociable, especially where teaching was concerned, from the uses to which it was put in the social world, and
the teacher was eminently responsible for such uses. 'It is by his acts rather
than his condition that a doctor earns his "aureola" [ = his prestige]', stated
Henry of Ghent in a question of 1277.32
A master should therefore be above reproach, in his life and in his morality,
and he was scrutinized with this in mind when he was examined for his licentia. He was supposed to practise all the Christian virtues and, above all, those
appropriate to his condition (impartiality, goodwill towards his colleagues
and his pupils, keenness in work), and, conversely, to avoid those sins which
directly threatened it (financial rapacity, negligence, vanity). The gravity of his
deportment was meant to honour the science whose representative he was.
Above all, if we set this practical deontology aside, a teacher was supposed
to be conscious of his social responsibility. Thus, 'vain curiosities' or 'useless
subtleties' were of no value to students; doctrinal errors represented so great
a risk that he should, under threat of revocation,33 submit his teaching to the
judgement and to the correction of his peers and of the church. A theologian
was supposed to bear in mind that he was training priests and preachers,
31 J. Le Goff, 'Quelle conscience l'universite medievale a-t-elle eue d'elle-meme?', in J. Le Goff
(ed.), Pour un autre Moyen Age. Temps, travail et culture en Occident: 18 essais ,
32 Quoted in Leclercq, 'Ideal du theologien' (note 29), 146.
33 There are in fact very few attested cases of a master falling into destitution; it is worth
mentioning, however, the Parisian 'nominalist' Nicholas of Autrecourt, who, in 1346, was
stripped of his degree of master of arts (CUP, vol. II, 576-87, no. 1124)
Jacques Verger
whose behaviour would influence the faithful; a jurist was supposed to be
aware that his opinions contributed to 'common opinion', that is, to the
elaboration of law, and therefore to all of social and political life. Masters in
medicine had a still more immediate responsibility, for they were acknowledged to have a right of control over the legal exercise of their profession, and
over the whole of public hygiene.
Concretely, such responsibilities were first of all exercised within the university itself, on examination boards and on the various committees, both
permanent and occasional, which had to assess the orthodoxy of texts circulated by bookshops or to pass judgement respecting denunciations which
were sometimes levelled against the teaching of one or other of their colleagues or of their bachelors. The many condemnations and censures which
mark the doctrinal history of the medieval universities almost always had
their origin in conflicts arising within the faculties themselves, between one or
more teachers and the majority of masters.
Members of the universities were especially vehement in asserting their
social and political responsibility in the more troubled periods, in particular
at the beginning of the Great Schism, when they considered themselves
entitled to proffer solutions to the crisis.34 At times they also sought to play a
role in affairs of state. Thus, the masters of the University of Prague played a
major part in the revolt of Bohemia in 1419.35 Likewise, the masters of Paris
offered to collaborate with the king in promoting the 'reform of the kingdom'
in Charles VFs reign, which provided ample justification for the chancellor
John Gerson's explanation, in his great speech of 1405 (Vivat rex), as to how
the university, through its four faculties, 'represented' the totality of accessible human knowledge, in both its theoretical and its practical dimension, and
how, furthermore, through the recruitment of its members from every
country and every state, it served as a microcosm of the whole society, and
therefore the best of all interpreters of 'common utility'.36
'Of what value would science be', asked Gerson, 'if it was not put into
operation?... One does not learn solely in order to know but also in order to
demonstrate and to act.' There is some temptation, on the basis of this praise
of political commitment, to define the teachers of medieval universities as
'intellectuals', but this would only be accurate if one specified that, in contrast
with what nowadays would be regarded as normal for intellectuals, they
never meant their interventions to be in the service of a will that was subversive or even merely critical of the established order. They were not, save
for a few exceptions, men of violence, leading revolts or encouraging popular
34 R. N. Swanson, Universities,
and the Great Schism
 .
35 H. Kaminsky, 'The University of Prague in the Hussite Revolution: the Role of the Masters',
in Universities
in Politics,
36 J. Gerson, Oeuvres completes, ed. P. Glorieux, vol. VII: 1, L'Oeuvre francaise. Sermons et
discours , 1137-85.
heresies. Being the bearers of a knowledge deemed stable and perfect, whose
truth had been established once and for all at the creation, they simply wished
to play their part, in face of all the disorders of their time, in healing the
breach in this ideal order.
Of course, only the masters of the great universities (such as Paris, Oxford,
or Prague) ever really had to play a role of this kind. But, even in universities
that had been founded more recently or that were of only secondary importance, the teachers were undoubtedly aware that their social responsibility
consisted in ensuring the best possible functioning of the civil and ecclesiastical institutions through the intellectual training of elites, at any rate local
ones, elites to which they, as teachers, therefore felt themselves to belong.
This does not mean that they invariably sought to obstruct every kind of
social advancement through study, or that they tried in any systematic sense
to discourage poor students. The significant point to note, rather, is that they
henceforth considered, to a much greater degree than at the origins of the
institution, the perfect accommodation of their work to the requirements of
the existing social and political order to be one of the normal demands of
their metier.
THE PLACE OF TEACHERS IN MEDIEVAL SOCIETY
The texts mentioned above all emanate, by and large, from the doctors themselves. But did their contemporaries really acknowledge the rightfulness of
their claims?
Official texts were usually not sparing in their praises of the doctors. From
the time that the universities had first emerged, popes had been in the habit of
describing them as 'lights of the church, shining as brightly as stars in the
firmament'. In spite of the reticence of urban populations, princes did not
begrudge them honours and prerogatives either. Such authorities were
anyway undoubtedly convinced of the usefulness of the universities, for they
were tireless in their attempts to protect and to develop them, sometimes at
great cost, and they were likewise convinced of the value to them of the
masters, whose appointments they often supervised. Those outside the university who dared to criticize it were few and far between, and they were
often disillusioned ex-university members. For example, Geert Groote
(1340-84), the founder in the Low Countries of the movement of the Brothers
and Sisters of the Common Life, which was a movement of popular and
evangelical devotion, attacked the pride and stupidity of the Parisian masters,
who were responsible, in his view, for the ruin of the church (he himself was
a former master of arts at Paris): These men wreck all piety, make fun of
ordinary folk, and deceive the people.'37 Some humanists were just as harsh
37 G. Epiney-Burgard, Gerard Grote (1340—1384) et les debuts de la devotion moderne , 31.
Jacques Verger
in their condemnation. This was the case with, for example, Lorenzo Valla
(1407-57), after his unfortunate experience at the University of Pavia, where
he was the object of attacks by colleagues hostile to his new ideas. Yet the
universities and the masters seem by and large to have enjoyed, up until the
end of the Middle Ages, a real prestige, especially as far as the social and
political elites were concerned.
One should note, however, that honorific titles and displays of generosity
multiplied just when the universities' independence was rapidly being eroded
by the increasing pressure from the state, and just when the latter was making
it increasingly plain that it expected the universities not only to form the
competent and devoted servants it needed but also, as a body, i.e. above all in
the person of their teachers, to uphold and second its political actions.
How did such developments affect the social recruitment of the teachers?
This is a problem that has not yet been very deeply studied, but it would seem
that this recruitment did not differ fundamentally from that of the other
graduates. However, even if the lesser nobility were fairly often recruited,
especially in the case of teachers of law, students of the loftiest social origin
do not seem to have been much attracted to the teaching profession. With the
same degrees, other types of career, whether civil or ecclesiastic, would have
seemed preferable to them, undoubtedly more remunerative, and more suited
to their familial position.38 They may have acknowledged the prestige of
teaching as a profession, but this did not therefore mean that they desired to
practise it.
Indeed, teachers seem to have been recruited in the main from among
students whose social origins were lowly (this was the case with Wyclif,
Gerson, and John Huss) or middle ranking. For such men, their wealth consisted, above all, in their intellectual gifts, and access to a regency was
undoubtedly a form of social advancement. In addition, as time went on,
regencies tended increasingly to be handed down to one's sons or nephews.
Many special statutes, for example, dispensations concerning the duration of
a course of study, exemptions from examination fees, or derogations to the
numerus clausus imposed in the doctors' colleges, also did much in many
universities, especially in the fifteenth century, to establish small teaching
dynasties, in control of regencies which were anyway better and better established in their authority and their incomes. In 1317, the great Bolognese jurist,
Johannes Andreae even went so far as to inscribe in the statutes that his
descendents would enjoy, in perpetuity, a prior right to apply for the university's salaried chairs.39
38 This would at any rate seem to be the case with the universities of the south of France; J.
Verger, 'Noblesse et savoir: etudiants nobles aux universites d'Avignon, Cahors, Montpellier
et Toulouse (fin du XlVe siecle)' in P. Contamine (ed.), La Noblesse au Moyen Age. Xle-XVe
siecles. Essai a la me'moire de Robert
 , 289-313, especially 311.
39 Bellomo, Saggio (note 3), 212.
This tendency of regents to constitutue themselves as a caste, which went
along with their professionalization, never resulted in a complete closure;
teaching always remained, in the Middle Ages, a possible path to social
advancement. The inheritance of offices was anyway everywhere on the
increase among lawyers (who were for the most part graduates) during this
period, and the case of regents is therefore not unique. But what position did
they occupy, as caste or subcaste, within this social group as a whole? There
have as yet been no studies comparing, in terms of prestige, income, and
connections, regents with other categories of graduates (judges, the king's
secretaries, etc.) However, one has the sense that, with only a few exceptions,
such as the great Bologna jurists (Accursius in the thirteenth century, Johannes Andreae, Bartolus de Saxoferrato, and Baldus de Ubaldis in the fourteenth century), whom the universities quarrelled over and whom the princes
deigned to greet and to consult, they tended to be situated at the lower end of
the social scale. This factor also probably helped to renew the group from
generation to generation.
In spite of the lofty conception they entertained of themselves, and in spite
of the fulsome praises that were lavished upon them, the teachers in medieval
universities, inasmuch as they constituted an identifiable group, only held a
restricted and fairly modest place in the social and political elites of the time.
The best and most ambitious of such men, if they really wanted to pursue a
glittering career, whether in the church (which undoubtedly for a long time
continued to offer the most possibilities to graduates) or in the service of a
prince, were therefore compelled to desert the universities fairly rapidly. The
teaching dynasties tended also to end fairly quickly, when the last heir, even
though he had pursued the same course of studies as his predecessors,
decided to give up teaching and to try for a more prestigious and more remunerative post.40
One certainly ought not to speak only in terms of social factors and of
incomes. If teachers seemed disaffected, this was also because behind the
regent's lassitude there lay an awareness of the crisis of traditional university
pedagogy and, at the same time, of the difficulty of effecting a fundamental
reform of the universities at a time when their ancient independence was
being eroded. In such cases, the quest for alternative careers might also be a
quest for more lively cultural activities and milieux (the courts and the chancelleries).
The Middle Ages thus witnessed, in its universities, the birth, or rebirth, of
the profession of teacher, even if it was the case that, up until the fifteenth
century, many courses of teaching were still provided by temporary or occasional teachers. Yet this profession remained a difficult one to define, for it
was still marked, as the Middle Ages came to an end, by certain ambiguities.
40 See chapter 8.
Jacques Verger
As a profession, its fate was bound up with the formation of social elites, yet
those elites made sure that it was kept at arm's length. Moreover, for all its
lofty claims about its intellectual and moral responsibilities, the teaching profession had in fact to serve ends which ultimately eluded it.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bataillon, L. J. 'Les conditions de travail des maitres de l'universite de Paris au XHIe
siecle', Revue des sciences philosophiques et theologigues, 67 , 417-33.
Bernstein, A. E. 'Magisterium and License: Corporate Autonomy against Papal Authority in the Medieval University of Paris', Viator, 9 , 291-307.
Gabriel, A. L. 'The Ideal Master of the Mediaeval University', Catholic Historical
Review, 60 , 1-40.
Grandi, R. / monumenti dei dottori e la scultura a Bologna (1267-1348), Bologna,
Leader, D. R. A History of the University of Cambridge, vol. I The University to 1546,
Cambridge, 1988, 242-63.
Le Bras, G. ' "Velut splendor firmamenti": le docteur dans le droit de l'Eglise medievale', in Melanges offerts a Etienne Gilson, Toronto/Paris, 1959, 373-88.
Leclercq, J. 'L'ideal du theologien au Moyen Age. Textes inedits', Revue des sciences
religieuses, 21, , 121—48.
Leclercq, J. 'Lo sviluppo dell'attegiamento critico degli allievi verso i maestri dal X al
XIII secolo', in Universita e societd nei secoli XH-XVI, Atti del nono convegno
internazionale di studio tenuto a Pistoia nei giorni zo-z$ settembre 1979, Pistoia,
1982, 401-28.
Miethke, J. 'Die Welt der Professoren und Studenten an der Wende vom Mittelalter
zur Neuzeit', in K. Andermann (ed.), Historiographie am Oberrhein im spa'ten
Mittelalter und derfruhen Neuzeit, Oberrheinische Studien, 7, Sigmaringen, 1988,
Paquet, J. Salaires et prebendes des professeurs de l'universite de Louvain au XVe
siecle, Leopoldville, 1958.
Post, G. 'Masters' Salaries and Student Fees in the Mediaeval Universities', Speculum,
7 , 161-98.
Post, G. 'Parisian Masters as a Corporation, 1200-1246', Speculum, 9 , 421-45.
Post, G., Giocarinis, K., and Kay, R. 'The Medieval Heritage of a Humanistic Ideal:
"Scientia donum Dei est, unde vendi non potest"', Traditio, 11 , 195-234.
Verger, J. 'Les professeurs des universites francaises a la fin du Moyen Age', in J. Le
Goff and B. Kopeczi (eds.), Intellectuels francais, intellectuels hongrois, XHIe-XXe
siecles, Budapest/Paris, 1985, 23-39.
Zanetti, D. 'A l'universite de Pavie au XVe siecle: les salaires des professeurs', Annales
ESC, 17 , 421-33.
P A R T III
RAINER CHRISTOPH SCHWINGES
If one disregards the considerable distances and numerous obstacles and
hardships involved in journeys in the Middle Ages, it was in fact relatively
easy between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries to attend university and
become a student. European universities had no national, social, intellectual,
or linguistic requirements for admission. The formal requirements were also
relatively few and, in any case, they did not exceed requirements connected
with matriculation. There were not even fixed periods for this or for commencing one's studies. Any day of the year was equally suitable. Even
requirements for a minimum age did not exist. Minority was a problem only
when taking the matriculation oath, not when being accepted at university, as
numerous instances in the vast number of sources in university archives
The only criteria for admission, in addition to the self-evident one of
being baptized as a Christian, seem to have been of a moral nature: they
were criteria which everybody could, in principle, meet. The criterion of
'moral conduct' - which applied also in admission to the clergy, to citizenship, or to membership in a guild of a town - included proof of legitimacy
of birth, but in practice this frequently amounted only to an affirmation that
one believed oneself to be legitimate. Such affirmation was necessary only if
one wished to acquire an academic degree, and, at some universities or arts
faculties, it was required only before the conferring of the degree of magister
artium.1 Since, up to modern times, the award of a degree even at the lowest
level of bachelor - baccalaureus artium - and thus admission to every type of
examination - affected only a minority, the question of legitimacy of birth
must never have been a particularly pressing issue for the majority of
1 Kaufmann, Deutsche Universitdten, vol. II, 302, 3ioff.
Kainer Christoph Schwinges
THE ACCESSIBILITY OF UNIVERSITIES
If on the one hand there were no particular requirements for admission and
attendance at a university, so there were no particular rights of admission on
the other hand. The universities accepted everyone wishing to become a suppositum or a membrum universitatis. Neither origin nor rank, neither proximity of residence nor distance, neither poverty nor wealth, neither health nor
physical handicap influenced acceptance. Even blindness presented no
obstacle. The case of the later professor artium et juris, Nicasius de Voerda
from Mechelen in Brabant, who had been blind since the age of two, is
perhaps only an especially prominent example of this: he attended the
Universities of Louvain (1459) and Cologne (1489) and was awarded at the
former a magister artium and a licentiatus of theology, and at the latter a
doctor decretorum.2
Despite all the mania for statutory regulation, which often endeavoured to
control university life down to the smallest and most petty detail, the important gateway to the universitas thus remained open to individuals who
desired entry, provided that they had the necessary resources. This applied
primarily in the case of the faculties of arts, but in principle it applied also to
the higher faculties. In the latter case, however, after the late fourteenth
century, preparatory study in the faculty of arts, regardless of where and in
what manner the preparation had been obtained, had become established in
There were essentially two reasons for this fundamental accessibility. The
first reason has to do with the characteristic form of the pre-modern university as a community constituted primarily as an association of individuals.
The second reason derived from the general system of education which prevailed in the Middle Ages.
Regarding the first, European universities were for long periods of their
early history far from being the formally organized institutions and educational establishments which, with all their particular variations, are to be
found today in European societies. They were dominated rather by those
forms of communal corporate organization which were characteristic of
collective life in guilds, confraternities, colleges, and families. Thus, the subsequent history of universities is the history of the progressive institutionalization, rationalization, and finally 'depersonalization' of the universitas
studii. The process continued, of course, despite crises, fluctuations, and
transformations, well into modern times, and can be traced both in the
'younger Europe' of the centre, north, and east of the continent, and the
'older Europe' of the north-west, west, and south (see chapter 8). Each part of
2 J. Wils (ed.), Matricule de VUniversite de Louvain, vol. II, i , 67, no. 65; H.
Keussen (ed.), Die Matrikel der Universitat Koln, vol. II , 255, no. 68.
the continent had its own distinctive cultural, social, economic, and political
traditions.3 In each, however, the same trend occurred.
The old universities consisted of quite fluid communities of individuals of
the most varied hue. The association of students formed around a teacher,
the schola or familia of the master, constituted the pattern of university life
over the whole of Europe; and, in principle, whether based on the Paris or
Bologna model, the university could be conceived as the aggregate of all familiae or schools formed around the individual magistri. There is, indeed, no
pictorial or figurative representation of the medieval university other than
that of the familia or the schola of the master teaching his students; and there
are innumerable scenes of such teaching depicted in miniatures in manuscripts and in woodcuts in books. The well-known reliefs in Pistoia cathedral
and the old university buildings in Siena and the University of Salamanca
present the same pattern. There is also extensive official evidence in university seals, e.g. the seals of Paris, Oxford, Vienna, and Erfurt, which show the
master surrounded by a circle of his pupils. A different image of the universities, for example, that of the main building as a symbol, belongs to a later
stage in the history of universities; it was scarcely to be seen anywhere in
Europe before the middle of the sixteenth century. Its appearance represented
a large step away from the idea of a university as an association of individuals
around a teacher towards that of an institution.
Within the medieval framework, attendance at a university and the pursuit
of one's studies mean no more than associating oneself with the magister and
his pupils, regardless of the particular part of the university involved, whether
it was a faculty, a college, a hall (bursa), or a nation. Formal requirements for
admission and attendance were secondary, therefore, to participation in an
association of individuals. The latter had, however, been obligatory since
earliest times. As early as 1215 it was said that nobody was a student of the
University of Paris if he did not have a permanent teacher - nullus sit scholaris
Parisius qui certum magistrum non habeat. There was no departure from this
principle throughout the whole of the Middle Ages in any of the European
universities, in so far as they conformed to the Paris model. By contrast, at
those law universities which followed the pattern of the University of
Bologna, the student societates and nationes were more prominent. Even then
the teacher remained the central figure.4
3 O. G. Oexle, 'Alteuropaische Voraussetzungen des Bildungsbiirgertums - Universitaten,
Gelehrte und Studierte', in W. Conze and J. Kocka (eds.), Bildungsburgertum im 19. Jahrhundert, vol. I , 29-78,49ff.; Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher. Concerning inequality even in the European educational systems, see P. Moraw, 'Uber Entwicklungsunterschiede
und Entwicklungsausgleich im deutschen und europaischen Mittelalter, ein Versuch', in N.
Bestmann (ed.), Hochfinanz, Wirtschaftsraume, Innovationen. Festschrift fur W. von Stromer,
vol. II , 6o7ff.
4 CUP, vol. I, 79, no. 20. Similar cases occurred in Montpellier in 1220: Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. II, 5; in Oxford before 12.31: S. Gibson (ed.), Statuta Antiqua Universitatis Oxoniensis
 , 82; in Cambridge after 1236: M. B. Hackett, The Original Statutes of Cam-
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
The magister naturally played a prescribed role primarily in the exercise of
discipline over generally very young students, who were thus under his protection, control, and power. In the main, relations between masters and
students were not formally defined with quantitative specifications or purely
intellectual criteria. Nor, however, were they established by chance. Rather,
individuals were bound together in accordance with the traditional social
norms which prevailed in European societies. The student, upon entrance to
the university, selected his magister in accordance with the rules of local
provenance, friendship, acquaintance, introductions, and patronage. In such
familiae, prior affirmation of locality and region predominated. Thus, from
the very outset, it was left to the individual university teacher, but not to the
university as a whole, to assess his clients' capacity for study. Given the basic
accessibility of the universities, the link with the magister was in the last
analysis the sole, serious criterion by which every individual was admitted
into the academic community; and this remained the basic pattern, even
though regulations governing enrolment became more strict during the late
Middle Ages.
Regarding the second reason for the fundamental accessibility of the
universities, it should be pointed out that, if one thinks of admission in terms
of certain standards of education, a certain level of substantive knowledge,
and a certain extent of prior intellectual training, then such a concept of
admission scarcely applies to the medieval university. There were no prerequisites. Previous attendance at school was not a precondition, nor was it
absolutely necessary. This was just as true for the mastery of Latin, the universal lingua franca of the secondary world, as it was of academic instruction
in general. It is not even certain, indeed, that all those attending university
could actually read and write. The statutes of the University of Perpignan
referred specifically to this.5
All this flowed from the fact that, although the medieval system of education, particularly in the later Middle Ages after the thirteenth century, was
already differentiated, schools and universities were not directly linked in a
functional way. Levels of education and educational tasks were not pursued
through a series of stages in which each step invariably preceded the next.
There was no orderly pattern of education which imparted a standardized
body of basic knowledge. Rather, each part of the educational system whether monastic schools, endowed schools, municipal Latin schools, parish
schools, simple schools for teaching the written vernacular, private tutorial
schools, or universities - was independent of all others. Moving from one to
bridge University. The Text and its History , 72,211. Examples from universities in central Europe: R. C. Schwinges, 'Sozialgeschichtliche Aspekte spatmittelalterlicher
Studentenbursen in Deutschland', in Schulen und Studium, 527-64, 535ff.
5 Fournier (ed.), Statutsy vol. II, 660; § II.5; A. Wendehorst, 'Wer konnte im Mittelalter lesen
und schreiben', in Schulen und Studium, 9—33; J. Coleman, Medieval Readers and Writers
1350-1400 .
another, including moving from university to school and back again, was
quite common. It would be anachronistic to expect even the beginnings of the
modern, hierarchically ordered educational system in the Middle Ages.
The fact that the terms pupil and student were scarcely distinguished from
one another is evidence of the absence of clearly defined boundaries between
universities and schools. Those attending both schools and universities were
called scholares; this term referred primarily to the character of the relationship between the magister and his schola and to the status of the former. This
was true even for the scholares graduati in the higher faculties of medicine,
law, and theology. The terms studens and studentes were more likely to refer
to the activity of studying than to a particular status in the university. Consequently, pupils at religious or municipal Latin schools could be studentes.
This shows that the category of student in the modern sense of an individual
having been admitted in accordance with formally stated criteria has no
medieval equivalent. And this is even more true as far as the substance of
knowledge is concerned.6
Furthermore, there were schools which were not merely equal to but
superior to faculties of arts with respect to educational standards and educational achievement. This, too, was a result of the general development of
schools, which led sooner or later - almost in parallel with each other - to the
development of the universities. Schools such as these offered genuine alternatives to attendance at a university. Like universities, many of them had a
high percentage of students who came from outside the locality and even
from outside the region. The competence which they offered in the subjects
that were taught in the faculties of arts sufficed for the majority of professions
requiring the ability to write.
The schools and seminaries of the Brothers of the Common Life in the
spirit of the devotio moderna, such as the schools at Zwolle in the Netherlands and at Liege in present-day Belgium, fall into this category. So, too,
does the famous 'humanist school' at Schlettstadt (Selestat) in Alsace and the
'school-city' at Erfurt in Thuringia, where some of the schools were well
known even before the founding of the university there in 1392. There were
others in this category such as the cathedral schools and colleges, so rich in
tradition, like Exeter and Winchester in England, Reims and Soissons in
France, or the endowed school at Deventer in the Netherlands. (Towards the
end of the Middle Ages the master of Deventer was the distinguished humanist educator, Alexander Hegius, whose students included Buschius, Erasmus,
Murmellius, and Mutianus Rufus.) In Spain, too, some chapter and municipal
schools enjoyed high status, among them those at Saragossa, Valencia, and
6 J. A. H. Moran, The Growth of English Schooling 1340-1548 , 64H.; G. A.
von Miilverstedt, Beitrage zur Kunde des Schulwesens im Mittelalter und iiber den Begriff
scolaris (Magdeburg, 1875), especially 2iff.; Kaufmann, Deutsche Universitaten, vol. II, 56f.,
268ff., 315.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Huesca, the status of which was, for most of the Middle Ages, halfway
between school and university. From the time of Dante, many schools in
northern and central Italy, both within and outside university towns, were of
high quality. Florence was probably only an especially outstanding centre,
with Mantua, Milan, Verona, Urbino, and Genoa being of a very similar
standing. Finally, the studium generale offered by the religious orders also
provided a genuine alternative to study at a university, particularly those of
the four great mendicant orders, i.e. the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the
Augustinian Hermits, and the Carmelites.7
The decisive advantage that the universities enjoyed over all types of
schools was their privileged position and their concomitant right to set examinations and to award academic degrees, status in studio. Those graduating
from the best schools, such as the pupils of Hegius, also made sure of enjoying this advantage. Some individuals who were already teachers - teaching
was by no means an academic profession in the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries, despite certain tendencies in that direction - matriculated in order to
gain a bachelor's or master's degree in the faculty of arts at the end of the
customary period of study. A Latin school comedy dealt with this subject in
1485, naturally in a disparaging manner, since the veteran schoolmaster, a
veritable codrus^ was striving too hard for academic distinction.8 But even
without an intention to graduate - this was the normal situation in western
and central Europe around 1500 - the universities were sufficiently attractive
because they enabled students to learn more at them than at the average
endowed or municipal school, to say nothing of the much greater opportunities and social contacts which the universities offered.
Although it was, in principle, possible to attend university without any
prior education, things were increasingly different in practice. Since the late
twelfth century, towns had established their own 'municipal' schools, partly
in intense competition with the educational system of the church. The
process began in those areas of 'older Europe', the economies of which developed first in the towns of northern Italy, southern France, and the north-west,
varying, as they did, in size and importance. Schools also sprang up sooner or
later in the other parts of Europe, with greatest frequency - according to the
available evidence - in the fourteenth and late fifteenth century. In about
1500, in the period prior to the Reformation, either an ecclesiastical or a
'municipal' school was to be found in almost every town, however small. Yet
these schools are not to be thought of as being any more institutionalized
than the universities. Educational continuity depended on the influence of
7 Concerning schools, see select bibliography.
8 W. Schulze, 'Codrus. Lateinische Schulkomodie aus dem Jahre 14851, Archiv fur Literaturgeschichte, 11 (1882), 328-41. Other cases: Keussen (ed.), Matnkel Koln (note 2), vol. I, 277, no.
17, 285, no. 39; in England: N. Orme, 'Education and Learning at a Medieval English Cathedral, Exeter 1380-1548', Journal of Ecclesiastical History, 32 , 265-83, especially 27off.;
Moran, Growth (note 6), 66.
individuals, and much still depended on the mobility of the school-teachers.
Unfortunately, the state of the evidence does not permit us to say much about
General educational development was, of course, of exceptionally great
significance for attendance at universities. Wherever this can be assessed
quantitatively, i.e. wherever the location of schools can be related to the
places of origin of students, as is demonstrable in the 'catchment areas' of the
German universities, the evidence shows that, from the fourteenth century
onward, schools formed the 'normal' precondition for university attendance.
This is true, for example, of three-quarters of all students at the University of
Cologne in the late Middle Ages.9
Whether or not particular formal academic requirements were met, the
masters of the faculties of arts took it upon themselves to make up for the
diverse amounts of knowledge initially possessed by their students, who came
from the most heterogeneous national backgrounds. To become a member of
a group formed around a magister, it was necessary to be able to do the most
basic (Latin) exercises, and masters accordingly provided private tuition.
Quite early on, so-called paedagogia were provided in the faculties of arts,
where initial basic knowledge was necessary for successful participation in
the cursus of the faculty. In some university towns, the Latin schools took
over the functions of the paedagogia, partly still under the supervision of the
local church, as in Cambridge, Coimbra (Santa Cruz), and Paris (Notre-
Dame), and partly also under the supervision of the universities, as in Oxford,
Salamanca, and Vienna (St Stephen). In Vienna, the schoolmasters themselves
belonged to the university.10
MATRICULATION
Although the prospective student and the person attending the university
became a member of the group through joining the association centred
around a magister, it was only by matriculation under the authority of the
rector that he also became a member of the legally defined community and
thereby of the privileged community. Only by doing this did he become a
membrum universitatis. Matriculation, which was one of the highest functions of the university authorities, was also the formal act which conferred a
legally recognized status. This involved the student taking an oath of matriculation, paying a statutorily required matriculation fee, and registering his
name in a specially provided register (matricula album registrum) which had
9 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher, 330—41. Concerning the development of schools, see select
bibliography.
10 Denifle, Entstehung; Rashdall, Universities; I. Hajnal, UEnseignement de Vecnture aux umversites me'die'vales, 2nd edn ; A. L. Gabriel, 'Preparatory Teaching in the
Parisian Colleges during the Fourteenth Century', in A. L. Gabriel, Garlandia. Studies in the
History of the Medieval University , 97-124.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
to record both the oath and the payment of fees of each matriculated individual. To distinguish such registration more clearly from other types of
registration, including faculty, collegiate, or national registration, it might be
described as the 'general university registration' or the 'rector's registration'.
What was recorded in the register fully met with the formal requirements for
attendance at university.
This was the situation at the end of the fourteenth century and throughout
the fifteenth century in 'younger Europe', from Lou vain to Cracow, from St
Andrews or Copenhagen to Vienna and Basle. Matriculation in special documentary registers thus represented a relatively well-established procedure.
The administrative arrangement associated with it through the rector marks
a new stage in the development of the universitas as an institution. Particular
national and territorial powers were increasingly displacing the earlier 'universalism' which, in the 'older' parts of Europe, was most enduringly
embodied in the University of Paris. In the 'era of universalism', university
rectors in Italy, France, the Iberian peninsula, and England had never kept
their own general registers, although, in many university statutes since the
early fourteenth century, the maintenance of the inregistratio fell within the
scope of the rector's duties. Even their successors in the age of particularism
did not do so until the threshold of modern times, undoubtedly because of the
tenacious traditional patterns of organization of the universitas into familiae,
colleges, and nations.11
In the universities of the 'era of universalism', particularly universities consisting of faculties of arts, theology, and medicine, at least north of the Alps,
'matriculation' was from the outset a responsibility of the individual magister. As student numbers increased, teachers in the large faculties of arts seem
to have begun to register the names of their students. This occurred quite
early in Oxford - prior to 1231 - and in Cambridge from 1236 to 1254, and
also in Paris at a later date, when the faculty made a formal decision about
registration in 1289. Since the number of students whose names were not
known had obviously become a problem, there was a need for a 'master's
registration book' (rotulus, cedula, matricula magistri) which would set out
information enabling the master to survey and record the performance of
participants at particular exercises and readings, and to distinguish genuine
students from those spurious students who merely wished to enjoy the privileges of the university (Paris: boni ac legitimi aut ficticit scholares
discernere) .12
11 For a survey of matriculation lists in Europe: B. Schmalhaus, Hochschulmatrikeln. Verzeichnis der Drucke nebstanderen Nachweisen ; E. Giessler-Wirsig, 'Universitatsund Hochschulmatrikeln', in W. Ribbe and E. Henning (eds.), Taschenbuch fur Familiengeschichtsforschung, 9th edn , 141—80.
12 Oxford: Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 4), lxxxii, lxxxix, 6of., 82,107,227. Cambridge: Hackett,
Statutes (note 4), 72, 211, 330. Paris: CUP, vol. I, 35^, no. 561. A discussion of the problems
Thus, in accordance with the flexibility of the statutes, the magistri themselves verified the formal membership of their scholae in the university. Such
appears to have been the prevailing situation throughout the Middle Ages.
Soon magistri in other faculties began to draw up lists of names (cedulae),
which they then turned over to the faculty, from which, sooner or later, but
probably around the middle of the fourteenth century, genuine faculty
registers emerged.13 Understandably enough, practically none of these registrations has survived: they were private rather than official university documents. One manuscript, a collection of excerpts from Aristotle's logic, dating
from before 1268 and belonging to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge,
has none the less survived. On its margin a magister had jotted down sixty
names, and in each case the name is accompanied by numbers, which are
presumably the number of years which each of the named students had studied.14
At those universities which had only law faculties - especially in Italy,
Bologna, Padua, and Pavia amongst others, and, in France, Orleans and
Angers - the student nations, faithful to their social conventions, undertook,
perhaps from the outset, the matriculation of their prospective members. The
procurators of the individual nations at the universities functioned like
masters elsewhere and rectors later on; but in this instance, too, the general
register was mentioned in the statutes, if sometimes only at a much later
period. Apparently, the two types of registration were carried out concurrently in Prague and Vienna.15 The oldest register of this kind - and one of the
most significant for central, eastern, and northern Europe - was the Bologna
matricula nationis Germanicae, which was kept from 1289. Such registers of
nations ought not be confused, however, with those of Paris, which only
recorded graduates by their particular nations.16
Thereafter, the most important - and as a rule the most complete - entries
concerning university attendance and admission were to be found in the
general registers of matriculation or in the rector's register. They were regularly kept only at the central European universities, beginning in about the
second half of the fourteenth century. The first 'new' type of matriculation
can be found in J. Paquet, 'L'Immatriculation des etudiants dans les universites medievales',
Pascua Mediaevalia. Studies for Prof. Dr. J. M. de Smet , 159-71.
13 CUP, vol. I, 701, § 45, no. 1189; vol. IV, 703, no. 2671; Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. II, 70,
§ 36; 83. Cf. Paquet, 'Immatriculation' (note 12), i6if.
14 Hackett, Statutes (note 4), 167.
15 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. I, 257, no. 356 (Orleans); 334, § 8 (Angers); F. Doelle, 'Ein
Fragment der verlorengegangenen Prager Universitatsmatrikel aus dem 14. Jahrhundert', in
Miscellanea F. Ehrle, vol. HI, Studi e Testi, 39 , 88-102, probably only concerning
the Saxon nation at Prague; P. Uiblein, 'Zur Quellenlage der Geschichte der Wiener Universitat im Mittelalter', Osterreich in Geschichte und Literatur, 7 , 161-6.
16 E. Friedlander and C. Malagola (eds.), Acta Nationis Germanicae Universitatis Bononiensis
(1289-1543) (Berlin, 1887); H. Denifle and E. Chatelain (eds.), Auctarium Chartularii Universitatis Parisiensis, 6 vols. .
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
register was the matricula, now lost, belonging to the arts, theological, and
medical faculties of the University of Prague; this probably began before 1367.
The matriculation register of the law university at Prague of 1372 has survived and may be considered the oldest rector's register in Europe.17 The fact
that both the universities in Prague kept the first general registers can hardly
have been a coincidence. Indeed, the studium Pragense of 1348 constituted
something of a turning-point in the transition from the universal to the
national era of the history of European universities.
Although the traditional constitutional and social forms retained their
force in central European universities as well, they were none the less being
subjected to considerably stronger pressure for standardization and
centralization than was the case in western and southern Europe. Vienna
from 1377, Heidelberg from 1386, Cologne from 1388, Erfurt from 1392,
Cracow from 1400, Leipzig from 1409, Rostock from 1419, and Louvain from
1426, to name only the oldest universities, followed Prague as universities
maintaining matriculation registers. Finally, in the course of the sixteenth
century, the rector's register spread throughout the whole of Europe as the
central record of new arrivals. Probably the oldest surviving rector's register
in Italy, the matriculation register at Perugia, is representative of this pattern.
Although it was decreed in 1487, entries were made only from 1511. A comparison with the matriculation register for the German nation at Perugia,
which contains a far more complete list of names than the central register of
the university, shows how markedly and for how much longer the 'new' form
was disregarded in favour of the 'old' one. This was a consequence of the
persistence of the more traditional social patterns of society at large.18
Wherever the 'newer' form was taken up, the individual attending the university was obliged to be matriculated by the rector within a specific period,
normally anything up to a month. This could be done on every day of the
year, even on high holidays.19 The general university statutes constantly
stressed this obligation, especially in those passages which were to be read
out regularly to the university public. Masters and doctors, too, were referred
to the basic obligations to matriculate their students, while the heads of
colleges and halls (bursae) were bound to accept only matriculated students
who were genuine membra universitatis into their houses and teaching
arrangements.
The ideal was set out in the 'information booklets' for new students, which
were intended to provide introductory orientation, often in dialogue form,
for those attending university. The new student presented himself to the
17 Monumenta Historica Universitatis Carolo-FerdinandeaePragensis, vol. II, Album seu Matricula Facultatis Jurisdieae Universitatis Pragensis ab anno Christi 1372 usque ad annum 1418
(Prague, 1834).
18 F. Weigle, Die Matrikel der Deutschen Nation in Perugia , 7, i^ii.
19 Concerning the procedure, see the introduction in the matriculation lists of, for example,
Heidelberg, Leipzig, Freiburg, Louvain, Cologne, and Vienna.
magister of his choice. His origins, parents, financial status, and academic
interests and ambitions were discussed until finally, having concluded that the
candidate had a serious intention to study, the magister requested his new
pupil to accompany him to the rector to set the matriculation procedure in
motion.20 At the University of Louvain, new students belonging to the four
main halls were regularly matriculated as a body in the register on the occasion of the inauguration of a new rector; this occurred on or about 26 February and 31 August.
The obligation to matriculate was a product of the university's legal or
financial interests, or most frequently of both together. The legal interests of
the university remained essentially the same as they had been in the thirteenth
century in Oxford, Cambridge, or Paris: namely, to control the granting of
privileges and to record the names of those granted the privileges in order to
distinguish them from those who had not been granted such privileges.
Through the listing of names and surnames, origin and status, day and year of
matriculation, veri scbolares could easily be identified should they require the
protection and assistance of the university. They could also be distinguished
from falsi scholares. At the Universities of Bordeaux and Valencia, it was
declared to be absurd if a mother did not know her sons' names.21
In the course of the fifteenth century, it came to be less a matter of
excluding the falsi scholares than of enforcing a universal registration.
Anybody who disregarded this or even flouted it was in some places considered almost a rebel.22 Finally, it was with the aid of the universal matriculation registers that the university was able to control its 'most sacred duty',
which was the award of academic degrees, of doctorates, along with the grant
of the licentia docendi to those who were regarded suitable for it.
Yet supervision by masters or administration by rectors did not necessarily
work smoothly or even completely. It was not unusual for doctors and
masters first and foremost to be entrepreneurs, especially if they taught in
private houses or colleges and halls. Many made their livelihood exclusively
from the fees of paying guests and 'auditors'. Here and there, they satisfied to
their own advantage the demand for 'private' affiliation to a university. Many
of those attending the university were able to enjoy exemptions from judicial
proceedings and taxes while there. They were even able to study and to graduate 'unofficially', without complying with the legal and financial claims of
the university as a whole. There were also students who dealt with the central
authorities of the university by simply disregarding them. A comparison
20 M. Bernhard, Goswin Kempgyn
de Nussia, Trivita studentium.
Eine Einfuhrung
in das Universitatsstudium
aus dem 15. Jahrhundert
 , 61.
21 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. Ill, 352, § 47 (Bordeaux 1482); 394ff., § 15 (Valence 1490).
22 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. I, 492, § 39 (Toulouse 1314); vol. Ill, 103, § 9 (Dole 1424).
Similar cases can be found also in Heidelberg 1442; E. Winkelmann (ed.), Urkundenbuch
Universitat
Heidelberg,
vol. I (Heidelberg, 1886), 145, no. 100.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
between the rectors' registers and the deans' registers or faculty registers at
various central European universities provides evidence for this.
OATHS AND FEES
The oath (juramentum) was the symbol of all the legal grounds for the
requirement of matriculation. Normally, taking the oath was the first and the
most important act in the proceedings. Without the oath, the rector simply
refused matriculation. Above and beyond the family-like relationship
between the magister and his students, it was only the oath which sealed the
voluntarily chosen bond with that corporation of individuals, the 'university',
which was no different from other universitates and corpora in the 'older
Europe' in being a corporation based on oaths. Students swore the oath to
their university just as new townsfolk swore it to their town, or merchants
and craftsmen to their respective guilds.
Naturally, the swearing of the oath varied in form and content from one
European university to another. Four common features, however, can be
identified as apparently indispensable elements. The newcomer swore obedience to the rector holding office at the time - in England, to the chancellor often with the addendum in licitis et honestis, i.e. in so far as it was morally,
legally, and socially permissible and honourable. He swore to abide by and to
preserve the statutes of the university already enacted, as well as those to be
promulgated in the future. He swore also to promote the welfare of the university to the best of his ability, regardless of the academic degree, status, or
rank he might one day achieve. Finally, he swore to renounce any form of
private vengeance for injustice which he might suffer, in favour of the rector's
'public order', by which was meant the maintenance of peace both within
and outside the university.23
The sworn individual attending a university who had taken the oath and
thus fulfilled his obligations could now rely on the rector to perform the
obligations of his office, namely, to strive to defend the rights and freedoms
of every individual membrum universitatis, to defend them tenaciously and
rigorously when necessary, against everyone else. The history of universities
offers innumerable examples of this.
It is not surprising that, in the national-territorial era of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, many forms of the oath created a bond between the
person attending university and the prince. In this respect, too, the studium
generate of the University of Prague appears to have been in the lead. All new
arrivals, not merely native Bohemians, promised in the first instance loyalty
to king and realm, regi et regno fidelitatem, and, then only, obedience to the
rector. The situation at the University of Caen was similar, the oath of obedi-
23 Examples in Paquet, 'Immatriculation' (note 12), 164L
ence being sworn to the king of England as the ruler of that territory. In
Freiburg im Breisgau, too, students bound themselves to do nothing during
their stay at the university which might affront the honour of the house of
Austria. This address of loyalty was understandably linked directly with the
concern, attested by oath, for the well-being of the university, which had been
the territorial university of 'Vorderosterreich' since 1460.24
The taking of an oath presupposed the attainment of either the minimum
age for swearing an oath or the age of majority. As a rule, canon law was
followed, according to which the completion of the fourteenth year was sufficient. However, dates of the attainment of majority in the Middle Ages varied
among the universities and, over a period of 200 years, ranged from ten years
at Toulouse, to thirteen at Leipzig and sixteen at Oxford.25 Accordingly,
those who did not meet the minimum age or who were minors were not
allowed to take the oath, although they could be in attendance in great
numbers at universities which had no minumum age for admission. In
Rostock, for example, in some years they constituted up to one-third of the
enrolled students. In Cologne, during the fifteenth century, they amounted to
between 2 and 3 per cent of all students. They were also quite common at the
law universities in Italy, Spain, and France, where, however, youthfulness and
high rank were closely correlated.26 Since, for obvious legal reasons, there
could be no exemption from the oath, there was no provision for such
exemption in the university statutes; the rector therefore granted deferment
on condition of a promise by a minor, although most commonly this was
made by his father, relative, teacher, or preceptor, that the oath would be
taken, once the age of majority had been attained.
Thus the individuals who swore the oath were normally aged fourteen or
fifteen. The vast majority of new entrants to the university were of this age.
Universities following the University of Paris pattern, predominantly made up
of students in the faculties of arts, could be called 'juvenile universities'. The
students of law, medicine, and theology were, as a rule, about four or five
years older than those in the faculty of arts, apart from the exceptions made
for those of high rank. The higher faculties and the law and medical univer-
24 Prague (c. 1368): H . Jirecek (ed.), Codex
Juris Bohemia,
vol. II: 3 (Prague, 1889), 277, § 17;
281, § 29. Caen (1457): Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. Ill, 211, § 13. H . Mayer (ed.), Die
der Universitat
Freiburg im Breisgau,
vol. I , iff.
25 Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. I, 472, § 17 (1313); G. Erler (ed.), Die Matrikel
Universitat
vol. I (Leipzig 1895), lix (1543 and fifteenth century); Gibson, Statuta
392ff. (1564-5); the statutes of 1581, Gibson (note 4), 421, leave a margin of twelve to sixteen
years. In Cambridge fourteen years, but here too with a later document, see Hackett, Statutes
(note 4), 167 n. 3.
26 A. Hochmeister (ed.), Die Matrikel
der Universitat
vol. I (Rostock/Schwerin, 1899);
Keussen (ed.), Matrikel
Koln (note 2), vol. I, 35*ff.; 193"'? table 3; S. Stelling-Michaud,
L'Universitede Bologne et la penetration des droits romain et canonique en Suisse aux XIHe et XlVe
siecles , 82; D. Illmer, 'Die Statuten der Deutschen Nation an der alten Universitat Orleans von 1378 bis 1596', Jus commune, 6 , 10-107, especially 79.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
sides of the continent were, by contrast, 'adult universities'. For example, the
'novices' belonging to the German nation at the University of Orleans
between 1444 and 1546 were almost exactly twenty years of age on admission
to the university. In contrast with modern practices, the medieval concept of
the student comprised a wider range of young age groups.27
In fact, however, the matriculation oath was not as unavoidable as it
seems. Not only was it possible to postpone the taking of the oath, but dispensations and limitations were also allowed for legal or social reasons. The
mere additional formulae in licitis et honestis and often also pro posse concerning obedience to the rector and the statutes - reveal possibilities of
evasion which the medieval casuists had little difficulty in elaborating. The
status of the law university of Bologna, deriving from the first half of the
fourteenth century, provided for a formal exception in the event of a justa
causa - in other words, if there were good grounds for the exemption. Under
the cover of the 'master's register' and of obedience towards 'one's magister\
this was also possible in Cambridge at a quite early date, without in either
case any legal reason being adduced.28 Among the most important reasons
for the practice were presumably conflicts of interest affecting persons who
were simultaneously members of two groups legally defined as different.
Thus, according to the fourteenth-century statutes, citizens of the municipality
and the surrounding district of Bologna, Padua, Perugia, or Lerida in Aragon
could not be forced to take the oath. They were, it is true, subject to the
authority of the rector, but they were not, strictly speaking, members of the
corpus universitatis and consequently could not be entered in any rectoral
matriculation register. Political developments at the close of the fourteenth
century led to change here, including a change in the matriculation itself- for
which in Bologna, for example, a liber specialis was to be established.
In addition, there were special regulations for members of orders, who
either took a limited oath, in so far as their religious and university obligations could be harmonized, or first required the permission of their abbot
or superior before taking the oath in full.
In most European universities such exceptions were provided for without
any formally enacted arrangment. There were special regulations, however,
for the higher clergy and the higher nobility, especially for students who held
the rank of prince, count, or nobleman and who were at universities in the
Holy Roman Empire; the variety and social and legal status of the regional
nobility were explicitly taken into account. Heidelberg was content with an
27 See chapter 7, pp. 195-202. Concerning the age of students, see Rashdall, Universities,
35zff.; Mayer (ed.), Matrikel
(note 24), vol. I, lxxxviff.; Moran, Growth
64H.; Universites
en France, 93; R. L. Kagan, Students
and Society in Early Modern
 , 32; Illmer, 'Statuten' (note 26), 79; Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
28 C. Malagola (ed.), Statuti delle universitd e dei collegi dello studio Bolognese (Bologna, 1888),
13; Hackett, Statutes (note 4), 211.
affirmation of honour, Cologne had a special 'nobleman's oath', while Tubingen and Basle always adapted the form of the oath to the status of each
new entrant.29 Thus, the matriculation oath adapted itself to the student's
position. It was an oath which varied with status so that the concepts of
scholaris and membrum universitatis had the most varied content. The newcomer did not divest himself of his status on entry to the university, but
entered a university which was just as much defined by inequality as the
surrounding society. It was only in the upper-class setting of Italian lawyers in
Bologna, Padua, Florence, and Perugia that distinctions of status did not have
to be emphasized. As a result of this, everyone had to take the oath except the
legitimate sons and brothers of kings.30
The pecuniary interest in the matriculation of students was at least as
important as the legal consideration. The admission fees laid down in the
statutes were applicable de jure for all students, but de facto they applied
primarily to the vast majority of 'middle-class' students, who faithfully fulfilled the obligations of matriculation; thanks to their numbers, their fees kept
the universitas alive. They were generally called divites, i.e. the rich. As a rule,
the obligatory fee was determined by the weekly charge for maintenance.
Over the long run, the sums specified in the statutes could naturally only be
fictitious.
In fact, the fees varied from one university to another, and, as a result, a
distinction was drawn between 'more expensive' and 'less expensive' universities. Within the Holy Roman Empire, Rostock, Greifswald, and Erfurt
belonged to the first category, while Leipzig, Cologne, and Vienna fell into
the second category. In Italy, Padua and Florence were among the more
expensive, while Bologna and Ferrara fell into the category of the less expensive.31 In some respects, the social atmosphere of a university was affected by
this difference.
Like the oath, the fees also had a social aspect. Depending on position and
financial resources, the customary fee could exceed or fall short of the
required fee, or it could also be waived. Many universities, particularly those
in central Europe, had special paragraphs on fees in their statutes, in which
fees subject to status were often dealt with in very differentiated fashion.
According to rank and office, a particular fee above the average was required
from the nobility and the senior clergy who were attached to cathedrals or
collegiate churches. In addition, a donation over and above this was expected
everywhere. Class behaviour and the practice of payment therefore caused
29 G. Toepke (ed.), Die Matrikel
der Universitat
Heidelberg,
vol. I (Heidelberg, 1884), 190 and n.
1; Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
378ff. and n. 19.
30 H. Denifle, 'Die Statuten der Juristen-Universitat Bologna vom J. 1317-1347, und deren Verhaltnis zu jenen Paduas, Perugias, Florenz', Archiv
fur Literatur-
und Kirchengeschichte,
(1887), 358; H. Denifle, 'Die Statuten der Juristen-Universitat Padua vom Jahre 1331',
fur Literatur-
und Kirchengeschichte
des Mittelalters,
6 (1892), 410. See also chapter 7, p. 208.
31 Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
424; Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, 226; vol. II, 54.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
those concerned to enjoy special privileges at the university. However, everybody else could also manage to obtain those privileges if the required fees
were paid sub forma nobilis - as if the student were from the nobility.32
The proceeds of matriculation fees made up one of the most important
sources of revenue for medieval universities, as grants from the state were
rather meagre. Indeed, the universities were in great measure dependent on
fees. For this reason, particular attention was devoted everywhere to the
matter of fees. At many universities, therefore, 'matriculation' or 'registration' was not the popular term; instead 'intitulate' and 'intitulation' were
used in acknowledgement of the financial element of the act of admission
(intitulatura). Evidently, this was considered so important at the law universities of Bologna and Parma, that the terms matricula and liber solventium
were used synonymously.33 Wherever possible, the rector and the treasurer
were obliged to accept the payment of fees in cash and to record them with
care in the register (dedit or solvit totum, for instance), or to note expressly
deficient payments or the complete failure to pay the fees (for example, nihil
dedit, petivit dilationem tenatur dare). On account of this, some of the registers kept by the rectors read like account books.
Some of the fees went into the university treasury, while some went to the
rector and his assistants to compensate them for their 'expenses' in administering oaths and intitulation. This introduced a certain element of arbitrariness into the system of payment, in so far as the rector was allowed a certain
latitude to allow the partial or total waiver of fees. However, in the course of
the fifteenth century, the rectors tended to be encouraged to be strict in the
enforcement of the university's scale of fees on every newcomer, for fiscal
The rector's discretionary power was limited to two groups of varying size,
which can be categorized as belonging to the upper and lower ends of the
student body. The group at the lower end were the pauperes, the poor
students who wished to make use of the privilegium paupertatis of canon law
to obtain a dispensation. At the other end, there were highly placed individuals and dignitaries belonging to the nobility and to the clergy, holders of
the doctorate from foreign universities, as well as students enjoying special
patronage, whose reverentia or testimonials conferred prestige and social
benefits on the university; these were also granted dispensations.
Naturally, the two groups differed markedly from each another. What was
conferred on one group as a formal honour on admission to the university
was often a matter of urgent necessity for the other group.34 Poverty was no
obstacle to admission, but in general no particular consideration was shown
32 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher,
33 Malagola (ed.), Statuti
(note 28), 74; Paquet, 'Immatriculation' (note 12), 166.
34 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher,
as far as the payment of fees was concerned. Those who set the fees in each
case had to examine the ability or inability of the student to pay. The poor
students were urged to meet as far as they could the financial obligations
connected with their matriculation. Strictly speaking, deferment of the
payment of fees was to be allowed only ad pinguiorem fortunam, i.e. until the
onset of better fortune.
As a rule, formal admission to university took place in the sequence swearing the oath, payment of fees, and registration. If, as mentioned at the outset,
the new student was actually able to write, then he sometimes entered his
own name in the register. This, however, was normally done by the rector or
the notarius - the clerk - of the university. The important registers of the
German universities have almost all been preserved more or less carefully by
university staff. Detailed information about the students was first written
down on slips of paper and later transferred partly in chronological order,
partly in the order of social status, to the general register. Thus, an ordinary
entry in the Cologne University register, dated 14 October 1478, reads as
follows: Conradus Pijckell de Swefordia, dioecesis Herbipolensis, artes,
juravit et solvit. The student subsequently became the famous humanist
under the name Conrad Celtis, from near Schweinfurt in the diocese of Wiirzburg; born in 1459, he entered Cologne University at nineteen years of age to
study the liberal arts, took the matriculation oath in its entirety, and paid the
usual fees.35
THE FREQUENCY OF MATRICULATION
Wherever general registers were, in fact, kept by the rectorates of the universities, they reveal the bases and motives for the university taking an interest in
the numbers of new students. Some universities, such as Leipzig, Erfurt, and
Ingolstadt, tended to count up the total of all matriculations since their foundation, thus expressing a collective consciousness that had a historical reference; the matriculation or the oath created a permanent membership and
legal relationship. Other universities, such as Heidelberg, Erfurt, Rostock,
and Greifswald, drew up a numerus intitulatorum from the records of the
rectorate; this was probably connected with calculation of income derived
from matriculation fees. Fluctuations in student numbers could thus be kept
in view, particularly if figures of attendance remained static or were decreasing; the latter was always critical, and on occasion it could be an event that
threatened the very existence of the university as a whole. Perhaps this was
why, at the Universities of Orleans and Paris, for example, something which
resembled at times an inventory of the universitas at a particular moment was
35 Keussen (ed.), Matrikel Koln (note 2), vol. II, 49, no. 18.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
drawn up.36 Until well into modern times, it was only the diminution and not
the increases in attendance and matriculation which aroused a response.
However, one of the most interesting and most momentous features of
attendance at medieval universities is the fact that, in the long run, the
number of students who matriculated continuously increased. In central
Europe alone, from the middle of the fourteenth century to the end of the
Middle Ages, almost a quarter of a million individuals acquired the status of a
student. A conservative calculation suggests approximately that threequarters of a million students attended university in the whole of Europe over
the same period.
These figures have to be judged, however, in the light of the growth of the
population of Europe as a whole during this period. Disregarding national
and regional variations, the population fell sharply all over Europe as a result
of the recurrent plague epidemics between 1348 and 1450. Then it became
stable, beginning to rise gradually only in the final quarter of the fifteenth
century. Accordingly, the growth in university attendance and the growth of
population moved in opposite directions for some decades.
In the Holy Roman Empire, where a precise account can be established
because of the nature of the sources, the average rate of increase in the
Reichsfrequenz (matriculations within the Holy Roman Empire) between
1385 and 1505 reached a high point of 1.75 per cent yearly, despite a concurrent decline in the population growth.37 From the middle of the fifteenth
century, between 2,500 and 3,000 students entered the universities of the
Empire annually from Louvain to Vienna, from Rostock to Basle. The student
body of the Polish University of Cracow also increased between 1400 and
1510, helped, however, by a high percentage of a mixture of foreign students
who made up between 30 and 50 per cent of the total.38 The supply of
students, which was already high by medieval standards, was greater than the
demand from the courts, the towns, the schools, the law courts, and the
church. This was the first 'crisis of oversupply' in the German or central
European university system. The crisis occurred after the 1480s, and it is
possible that it occurred also in the western and southern European university
36 Orleans 1412: Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. I, i94ff., no. 263 M . Spirgatis,
Personalverzeichnis
der Pariser Universitat
von 1464 (Leipzig, 1888). A declaration of intent in Toulouse 1314:
Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. I, 492, § 39.
37 Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
3off.; R. C. Schwinges, 'Universitatsbesuch im Reich vom 14.
zum 16. Jahrhundert: Wachstum und Konjunkturen', Geschichte und Gesellschaft, 10 ,
5-30, especially 14ft. 'Reichsfrequenz' is the sum of matriculations of those universities of the
Empire in the Middle Ages which kept registers: Vienna, Heidelberg, Cologne, Erfurt, Leipzig,
Louvain, Rostock, Greifswald, Freiburg im Breisgau, Basle, Ingolstadt, and Tubingen.
38 Z. Pauli, B. Ulanowski, and A. Chmiel (eds.), Album studiosorum universitatis Cracoviensis,
vols. I—II (Cracow, 1887-1892). Cf. I. Kaniewska, 'Les etudiants de l'Universite de Cracovie
aux XVe et XVIe siecles (1433-1560)', in D. Julia, J. Revel, and R. Chartier (eds.), Les Universite's europe'ennes du XVle au XVIIle siecle: Histoire sociale des populations etudiantes, vol. I
 , 113-33.
regions. Furthermore, there are certain indications, at least, that the same
occurred in England.39
The larger number - as many as 3,000 new students annually, which
corresponded to a total capacity of more than 6,000 students anually40 - was
essentially the result of the closing of the gap between the central European
universities and their established counterparts in 'older Europe'. In contrast
with France, England, Spain, Portugal, and Italy, the countries of central,
eastern, and northern Europe developed a comparable university life of their
own only relatively late. There was a time-lag of between 100 and 200 years.
Not only was the gap closed by the end of the Middle Ages, but, as far as the
Holy Roman Empire was concerned, a stage of parity had been achieved both
with respect to the number of universities - which did not necessarily progress at the same rate - and the total number of students. Some of the old
universities which are still in existence today and which have grown into
large-scale academic enterprises had their periods of greatest growth in
student numbers in the fifteenth century. It was only in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries that expansion again occurred on a comparable scale.
However, there was no uniformity in the patterns of growth. As early as
the late Middle Ages, an extraordinary variety emerged among the universities of Europe. Universities were of a wide range of sizes. It is extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to draw on relatively reliable and comparable data
for all of Europe. Nevertheless, the following can be stated:41 universities
which were large by medieval standards, that is, universities with capacity for
a minimum of 1,000 students and with a frequency of matriculation of at least
400 to 500 students annually - in short, universities with a relatively high
power of attraction for students - were on occasion to be found in Paris,
Toulouse, Avignon, and Orleans, in Oxford and Cambridge, and in Bologna
and possibly also other northern Italian universities such as Padua and
Ferrara. From time to time, there were also large universities existing in
Prague and, after the second half of the fifteenth century, in Salamanca,
Vienna, Erfurt, Leipzig, Cologne, and Louvain. Beside them there were
medium-sized universities with a frequency of matriculation of about 150 to
200 new students annually in almost every European country, and there was a
substantial number of small universities, too, with sometimes barely 50
matriculations a year. Cracow, Rostock, Heidelberg, Ingolstadt, Siena,
Perugia, Naples, Montpellier, Angers, Perpignan, Lerida, and perhaps
39 Cf. G. F. Lytle, 'Patronage Patterns and Oxford Colleges c. 1 3 0 0 - c. 1500', in L. Stone (ed.),
The University
in Society; vol. I , 111-49, especially n^tf.; T. H. Aston,
'Oxford's Medieval Alumni', Past and Present, 74 , 3-40, especially 3off.
40 For a stay of about two years.
41 For the universities of central Europe, see note 37. See Schwinges, Universita'tsbesucher,
problems relating to numbers in matriculation analysis. See also Cobban, Medieval
Universities, 121-2; Kagan, Students and Society (note 27), i96ff; Universites en France, 8off; contributions in Julia et al. (eds.), Universites
europe'ennes
(note 38), with further literature.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Lisbon-Coimbra belonged to the category of medium-sized universities, while
Greifswald, Mainz, Freiburg, Basle, Tubingen, Cahors, Caen, and the city of
Rome belonged to the category of the smaller universities, which flourished
particularly in the post-universal, territorial epoch of the history of the European university. Piacenza, Pavia, Florence, and Pisa perhaps also fell into the
same category, although here there are grounds for suggesting a larger estimate. There were undoubtedly many more smaller universities in France,
Italy, and Spain, although at present there is no documentary evidence to
support this.
St Andrews and Glasgow in Scotland and Copenhagen and Uppsala in
Denmark and Sweden, as well as the Hungarian universities of Pecs, Buda,
and Pozsony, were also small; they were never free from the danger of going
out of existence in the Middle Ages. Even in the sixteenth century, Scots,
Scandinavians, and Hungarians continued to attend foreign universities.42
These differences in size were, to some extent, affected by the quality of
the university towns as towns, as well as the standing of the region for which
they served as centres. With the sole exception of the two English universities,
all the large universities of Europe were situated in medieval cities with a
population of over 10,000. They were all important trading and handicraft
centres, market-towns or sites where fairs were held, and were located within
an economic and geographical network. Because of roads and other means of
transportation, they were ideally situated and easily reached. They either
belonged to old, already consolidated areas of princely or municipal government, or were surrounded by or part of the areas which, since the fourteenth
century, had been successfully organized by governmental authority. This
was true of a majority of the German regional universities. All these propositions apply also, if to a lesser extent, to those universities which exercised
only average or small powers of attraction. Some Italian universities are
exceptional because the number of their matriculated students bore no relation to the population of the cities in which they were located, e.g. Florence.
However, patterns were not rigid. There was no university in Europe
which achieved a continuous increase in student numbers. The figures for
matriculation, much affected by fluctuations in political, economic, and social
conditions, often fluctuated several hundred per cent within a few successive
years. Periods of growth alternated with periods of stagnation and the absolute size frequently changed. Paris, Orleans, and the universities of southern
France, as well as those of Prague and Bologna, reached the height of their
attractiveness in the fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. At the time of
42 Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher, 234-44; J. M. Anderson, Early Records of the University of
St Andrews ; J. Pinborg, 'Danish Students 1450-1535 and the University of
Copenhagen', Cahiers del'lnstitutdu Moyen Age Grec et Latin, Universitede Copenhague, 37
 , 70-122, especially 95ft.; S. Lindroth, A History of Uppsala University, 1477-1977
 , 10; A. L. Gabriel, The Medieval Universities of Pecs and Pozsony .
the Council of Basle from 1431 to 1449, it was even feared that the University
of Paris might lose all of its students. This was a matter of perspective, since
Paris was probably the largest medieval university; the incomplete inventory
of 1464 recorded almost 2,500 individuals, masters, students, and others connected with the university.43 Prague, which in the 1380s had become possibly
Europe's largest university, just after Paris, fell back to the status of a 'midget
university' after 1409 and almost completely disappeared from the university
pattern of central Europe with regard to the attraction it exercised on
students from afar. By about the middle of the fifteenth century, after a
growth of more than 100 per cent, Cambridge managed to approximate to
the size of the student body at Oxford. In the course of the fifteenth century,
Bologna's star waned while the stars of Padua, Pisa, Siena, and Perugia rose.
On the whole, the centre of concentration of matriculations in central
Europe shifted greatly during the fifteenth century. It had moved from the
south-east of the Holy Roman Empire in Vienna across central Germany -
Erfurt and Leipzig - to the north-west, to the large region which embraced
the Rhine and the Low Countries and which was, at this period, economically
and demographically one of the leading regions in the empire. The figure for
matriculations at Louvain and at Cologne must certainly have been equal to
those at Cambridge, Oxford, Padua, Salamanca, or Paris towards the end of
the Middle Ages. Underlying these shifts were the consolidation processes
which occurred all over the European university system, and which were, as a
rule, borne by the larger and mostly older universities of the continent.
The rise and fall in the number of matriculated students were not random
phenomena. They were responses to events of fundamental importance
which occurred outside the universities and which brought the universities
and their students into very direct relationships with the surrounding society.
These events followed a cyclical pattern; the many thousands of decisions
made by individual students to attend university and to submit to matriculation were themselves cyclical in pattern. Although the process can be
demonstrated only from German sources, it can be put forward plausibly as a
hypothesis that can be applied to other universities.44 The fluctuations were
determined by economic factors, which were as relevant to the pattern of
attendance at universities as the increase in the number of students, and there
were both shorter and longer cycles within the pattern.
Even the cyclical process which underlay the growth of the numbers of
students was variable, and was decisively altered on several occasions in the
period between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Structural variations
in cycles of varying lengths in successive sequences of growth and stagnation
are to be found in four different periods. There were two phases of growth,
one between the late fourteenth century (around 1385) and approximately
43 Spirgatis, Personalverzeichnis
(note 36), 3f.
44 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher^ 185-220.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Table 6.1 Periodization of the history of university attendance
Cycles of 7-11 years
Cycles of 3-5 years
Cycles of 2-3 years
Heidelberg
(Tubingen)
Freiburg im Breisgau
Greifswald
Ingolstadt
1480; this may be regarded as the 'take-off stage' of matriculations in central
Europe. Then there were two periods of stagnation, one between about 1430
and 1450. The second, which had more of the features of a grave crisis, ran
from 1480 to about 1505. This was the period leading up to the 'crisis of
oversupply' in the Holy Roman Empire.
These several cycles and their turning-points in about 1430,1450, and 1480
may be viewed as constituting a periodization of the history of university
attendance - granted, of course, that individual universities did not necessarily conform completely with the general pattern; no two universities
'enjoyed a boom' in matriculations at the same time. Given deviations, three
distinct patterns may be distinguished in the second half of the fifteenth
century, as shown in table 6.1.
These three groups disclose a coherent pattern. The longer cycles (I),
which represent less severe fluctuations in numbers of students, were concentrated in places which were parts of the large western Rhine 'catchment area'
along the main artery of traffic of the Holy Roman Empire. It was here, too,
that the centre of gravity in the growth of student numbers was to be found in
the late Middle Ages. There were pronounced economic fluctuations to a
considerably greater degree in the numbers of matriculated students at the
other universities; most intensively and most critically in a central region,
more or less the 'heartland' of Germany (III), and somewhat less at the peripheries, in the Baltic sea region and in the south-east in the case of Vienna
(II). The fact that Tubingen here was marginal (I) is less significant than the
fact that the experience of Freiburg, in contrast with that of neighbouring
Basle, does not belong to the category of Rhenish universities but is incorporated in category II, within a social and economic area under the dominion of
the Habsburgs, which included Vienna.
The reasons underlying this very heterogeneous pattern of numbers of university students, including the long-term 'education explosion' and the cyclical pattern of matriculation, had little to do with the internal life of particular
universities. They had little connection with the characteristics of the institutions, the content of their teaching, or the personal qualities of their teachers.
This was also true in the case of humanism, an intellectual movement which
might have been expected to have precipitated an increased attendance at the
universities. Instead, the academic centres of humanism in the Holy Roman
Empire - Erfurt, Basle, Ingolstadt, Tubingen, and Vienna - suffered several
decreases in numbers of matriculation at the end of the fifteenth century.
Such, according to the known figures, was also the case in Italy.45
The reasons for these cyclical patterns lay outside the universities, not so
much in spectacular events, such as wars, revolts, and plagues, but in fluctuations in agricultural prices and, through them, in a cluster of variables
affecting the level of other prices in medieval agrarian society. Within the
context of regional and supraregional geography, attendance at university
and the conditions prevailing in the market in the area where the university
was located were closely related to each other. As a rule, the correlation was
an inverse one. Upward movements in the number of matriculations corresponded to periods of low prices; and periods of stagnation in the number of
matriculations were concurrent with periods of high prices. Depending on
good or bad harvests, the prices of cereals determined the disposition to
matriculate; they even determined the students' social status. Periods of high
prices depressed the numbers matriculating, and they simultaneously allowed
the number of students from poor families to increase beyond normal expectations. The long-term secular decline in grain prices, the so-called agrarian
depression of the late Middle Ages, was, however, advantageous for the
urban economy and hence for the long-term increase in the numbers of matriculations as well; hence the 'education explosion', which lasted from the
fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries. Attendance at university was always
largely an urban affair,46 and the 'golden age of handicrafts' in the towns
seemed to be also the golden age of admission to university.
45 R. L. Kagan, 'Universities in Italy 1500-1700', in Julia et al. (eds.), Universites
europeennes
(note 38), 155ff.
46 See chapter 7.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bowen, J. A History of Western Education vol. II, Civilization of Europe, Sixth to
Sixteenth Century, London, 1975.
Cantarino, V. 'Mediaeval Spanish Institutions of Learning: a Reappraisal', Etudes
lslamiques, 44 , 217-29.
Engelbrecht, H. Geschichte des osterreichischen Bildungswesens vol. I, Von den
Anfdngen bis in die Zeit des Humanismus, Vienna, 1982.
Enseignement et vie intellectuelle (IXe-XVIe siecles). Actes du 95^ Congres National
des Societes Savantes Reims 19jo, vol. I, Paris, 1975.
Frank, I. Die Bettelordensstudia im Gefiige des spdtmittelalterlichen Universitatswesens, Stuttgart, 1988.
Fried, J. (ed.) Schulen und Studium im sozialen Wandel des hohen und spa'ten Mittelalters, Sigmaringen, 1986.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Garin, E. Ueducazione in Europa 1400-1600, Rome/Bari, 1957, 3rd edn, Rome, 1967.
Julia, D., Revel, J., and Chartier, R. (eds.) Les Universites europeennes du XVIe au
XVHIe siecle: Histoire sociale des populations etudiantes, Paris, 2 vols, 1986-89.
Manacorda, G. Storia della scuola in Italia, vol. I, // medioevo, Palermo, 1913.
Moran, J.A.H. The Growth of English Schooling 1340-1548, Princeton, 1985.
Moraw, P. 'Uber Entwicklungsunterschiede und Entwicklungsausgleich im deutschen
und europaischen Mittelalter, ein Versuch', in U. Bestmann (ed.), Hochfinanz,
Wirtschaftsra'ume, Innovationen. Festschrift fur W. von Stromer, vol. II, Trier,
1987, 583-622.
Orme, N. English Schools in the Middle Ages, London, 1973.
Pare, G., Brunet, A., and Tremblay, P. La Renaissance du Xlle siecle. Les ecoles et
Venseignement, Paris/Ottawa, 1933.
Parias, L.H. (ed.) Histoire generale de Venseignement et de Veducation en France,
vol. I, Paris, 1981, esp. the article by M. Rouche.
Paul, J. Histoire intellectuelle de VOccident medieval, Paris, 1973.
Piltz, A. The World of Medieval Learning, Oxford, 1981.
Post, R.R. Scholen en onderwijs in Nederland gedurende de Middeleeuwen, Utrecht,
Schmid, K.A. Geschichte der Erziehung vom Anfang bis aufunsere Zeit, vol. II: 1-2,
Stuttgart, 1889-92; reprint, Aalen, 1970.
Schwinges, R.C. Deutsche Universitatsbesucher im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert: Studien
zur Sozialgeschichte des alten Reiches, Stuttgart, 1986.
Le scuole degli ordini Mendicanti (secoli XH1-XIV), Todi, 1978.
Verger, J. 'Universites et ecoles medievales de la fin du Xle a la fin du XVe siecle', in
G. Mialaret and J. Vial (eds.), Histoire mondiale de Veducation, vol. I, Paris, 1981,
Wiihr, W. Das abendld'ndische Bildungswesen im Mittelalter, Munich, 1950.
STUDENT EDUCATION,
STUDENT LIFE
RAINER CHRISTOPH SCHWINGES
THE STUDENT: CONCEPT AND TYPOLOGY
At European universities and in European societies the concepts 'university',
'faculty', 'doctor', 'master', 'student', and the like have been in use for virtually
800 years. Despite this long usage, however, the realities behind the words
have only ostensibly remained the same. In general, modern notions are of
little help when it comes to understanding medieval phenomena, and this is
particularly true of the social phenomena of universities organized around
groups of individuals. Particularly in a chapter devoted to the 'medieval
student', one must be aware from the outset that concepts can be no more than
linguistic shells housing a great variety of different meanings, each dependent
on its age. One should therefore approach the matter gingerly, seeking to find
neutral terms like 'scholars', 'enrolled members', or 'matriculants' whenever for reasons of historical fact or linguistic form - it is called for. For the sake of
clarity, the term 'university attender' will be used in this chapter.
When one surveys the European scene, it is striking that there is not a single
university in any country for which one can paint a generalized picture of the
medieval student - and this irrespective of century. The mere issues of
admission and matriculation serve to show how diffuse the concept is: there
was no more or less uniform secondary education, school and university
shading into one another, and no hard-and-fast distinction was made between
the concepts 'pupil' and 'student'. Both were members of the university and of
the school. Students were also members of a great variety of different age
groups - from children under the age of fourteen to adults in their twenties or
thirties. Such institutions as the 'oath appropriate to rank' and the 'rank fees'
rendered at matriculation ensured that the status of students was not equal
even on a legal plane, let alone socially.1
1 Cf. chapter 6, pp. 177-86.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
That, however, is not the end of the story. In contrast to today, there were
substantial discrepancies in status between those studying in differing faculties or 'specialist' universities, notably in the universities of arts or of law discrepancies which could occasionally break out into fullfledged discord.
This was the case with the so-called secession in Prague in 1372 when, under
the one roof of the studium Pragense, two universities with two rectors were
established: on the one hand the universitas of the men of arts, theology, and
medicine and on the other hand that of the men of law. The threat of such a
development existed until the end of the Middle Ages and was even especially
acute again in the opening phase of the University of Basle, when the students
of law refused to make common cause with others attending the university. In
the final analysis, the reason was always the mutual incompatibility of two
social environments in one and the same universitas. Only with the emergence of the modern princely state and municipal government as bearers of
the universities of the post-universal age could these dualistic tendencies be
prevented. To keep up the old reserves and preserves it was sufficient to
employ symbolic actions and exhibit a different life style.
Modern notions are equally unhelpful when one enquires into the objectives the students had in studying. From the perspective of today, the great
proportion of medieval university attenders would have to be classified as
drop-outs or even failures. As late as 1500, it was by no means normal to sit
any form of examination. The vast majority were satisfied to attend and
belong. The social possibilities opened up by the university did not yet require
control by a special system of entitlement based on examinations and
graduation.
Among those attending the medieval universities of Europe, at least five
types of student can be detected. These types simultaneously make up a
pyramid-shaped diagram of university attendance, the pyramid having a
quantitatively broad base and relatively narrow apex.
The first type is to be found in the faculties of arts. The student is, in the
vast majority of cases, a young man of between fourteen and sixteen years of
age, who is, as a rule, matriculating at a university for the first time and who
meets the prescribed legal and financial conditions of admission as well as he
can. His social background is likely to be 'middle-class', with a broad range
from rich to poor, corresponding to the spread among overall university
attenders. In all probability, he has previously attended the Latin school in his
home region and has acquired at least a basic knowledge of reading and
writing as well as of Latin grammar. He attaches himself to a master of his
choice and begins in school-like fashion under the latter's supervision to
deepen his knowledge in the arts cursus or, if that is insufficient, to bring
himself 'up to date' with the so-called paedagogia. This does not, however,
make him the typical beginner. Such a perspective would be anachronistic
since it is not his intention to achieve at university all that could be achieved
Student education, student life
there - up to a doctorate in medicine, theology, or law. His attendance is
limited to an average duration of only 1.8 years (the estimate for German
universities); the reality, however, is liable to have been below rather than
above that figure. This type of student sits no examinations and acquires no
academic title - and hence also no status in studio. The universities of the
time called him the scholaris simplex. He is found most frequently in the
developed four-faculty universities of 'younger Europe' as well as in 'older
Europe' north of the Alps (see chapter 8), particularly in Paris and at the
English universities. Not infrequently he accounts for 50 per cent or more of
the total attendance and can therefore, with full justification, be described as
the leading actor among students at medieval universities.
The second type of student is also to be encountered in the faculties of arts.
His university attendance is, at first sight, not much different from that of the
first type. In age, prior education, and social background there is little to
distinguish them, except that the proportion of poor students - in German
and central European universities the figures can be given with exactitude rises as time goes by. This is presumably an indication of the fact that this
second type represents, albeit on a very low level, hopes of social
advancement via university and education. In contrast to the first type, this
second types wishes to limit or - in the language of the time - to 'determine'
his studies, i.e. to demonstrate the skills he has acquired. The goal is the
degree of baccalarius artium, which can be gained after two to two-and-ahalf years working with the actus scholastici under a chosen master. The
student is then about sixteen to nineteen years old. If one wanted to employ a
modern analogy, one could compare this graduation with the secondary
school examination preceding the one for university entrance. The bachelors
of arts account - between 1350 and 1500 - for approximately 20 to 40 per
cent of university attendance and are thus the second largest grouping, with
incidentally the same 'spread' as the first. For fully two-thirds of them, this is
the only degree which they will obtain or wish to obtain at university; it is the
precondition for acceptance as a fellow in most of the colleges in Spain,
France, or England.
The third type, too, is associated with the faculties of arts, but has
objectives which go beyond them. Starting as a rule with the baccalarius,
this type of student acquires after two to three further years the degree of
master of arts, analogous in the modern age to university entrance. By this
stage he has usually reached the age of nineteen to twenty-one. The social
background remains the same, although the proportion of poor students has
gone down again substantially in comparison with the second type. If he
does not leave the university with this degree - which is linked to a
two-year teaching obligation in the artes, from which, however, dispensation is increasingly granted as the centuries pass - he then takes up studies
in the higher faculties of medicine, theology, or canon or civil law. This
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
'master-student' is found throughout Europe, but most frequently at the
universities which, by and large, followed the 'Paris model'. Only at first
glance does he bear any resemblance to the freshman of today. The numbers
themselves are markedly down when compared with the two preceding
types. On average - though varying from university to university and from
the thirteenth to the fifteenth century - he represents just 10-20 per cent of
those in attendance. More decisive, however, is that, while still formally a
student, he is simultaneously active in teaching, with the notions of student
and professor being in many cases no longer clearly separable. The masterstudent, usually in theology or maybe medicine, teaches the younger
members of the faculty of arts - those of the first or second type who have
chosen him as their master. Around him congregates a clientele, his schola,
his familia. Many students of this type finance through this source alone their
further studies, the next 'hurdle' being the bachelor's degree of one of the
higher faculties. More fortunate colleagues have access in addition to paid
professorships, college headships, scholarships, prebends, and university or
church bursaries. Such a master-student can assume a series of official
functions: he can become dean of the faculty of arts and even, if he is held in
especially high regard, rector of the university. The best chance of achieving
this was always to be found in Paris, where the rector was chosen solely from
the arts faculty.
The fourth type of student is fundamentally different from the three previous ones. He encounters at university all the advantages of class and status
which he has enjoyed elsewhere. He is already 'someone' before he ever
crosses the university threshold. He is characterized by high rank, by high
regard for his person and family of origin, by nobility, by the possession of
church livings, or by 'middle-class' prosperity. If he is a member of the
nobility or acts the nobleman, he arrives at university with a retinue oifami-
Hares - servants ranging from his private tutor to his groom. Socially, the
typical and fitting place for him is not the faculty of arts, or the socially
related environment of the students of medicine or theology, but the higher
faculty or university of lawyers. His prior education to something approximating to master's level he acquires through private tutors rather than
through schools for the public - or he attends arts courses 'alongside his main
studies', without either having or desiring to demonstrate his knowledge in
examinations. The teaching activity associated with graduation in the arts
would be detrimental to his social status. The same holds even for degrees
awarded by the higher faculties up to the level of doctor. Whether an
academic title is appropriate to one's rank or - as usually the case with the
higher nobility - unacceptable depends on one's social origins. Seeking social
advancement through the university, as perhaps done by the average masterstudent, is something this type of 'student of rank' has no need of. He is
found in all European universities, admittedly in greatly varying numbers. But
Student education, student life
he is to be found above all in the law universities or law faculties of older,
southern Europe. Up to and into the fifteenth century, the 'international'
centre for students of rank from Portugal to Scandinavia, from Hungary to
the British Isles, is Bologna. Thereafter Padua, Pisa, Pavia, Perugia, Siena, and
other Italian universities close the gap in reputation and attendance figures.
The Bologna matricula nationis Germanicae, which despite its name contains
law students from almost the whole of central, eastern, and northern Europe,
documents the numerous figures of rank and name from 1289 on. Major
centres for students of rank are also the universities of southern France and
Spain, in Avignon and Toulouse, Salamanca and Lerida, where the law faculties seem by themselves to outstrip in numbers those for the arts. Orleans is a
similar case. North of the Alps in younger Europe, however, the situation is
quite different, with four-faculty universities in which students of the arts
form around 80 per cent of those in attendance and seem to set the tone even
in large institutions. Here too, however, it is social quality which is of greater
importance. It is a matter of pride to admit the prestigious student and he is
accorded the customary privileges as if this were a matter of course. Preferred
universities in central Europe are, for example, Erfurt, Basle, Freiburg, and
Ingolstadt, the three latter serving, as it were, as a springboard for the Italian
journey. Just as the master-student is characteristic of the Paris model, so the
student of rank is characteristic of the Bologna model. He is also similar to
the master-student in that, in the universities (and faculties) of his choice with
Bolognese privileges, he assumes similar functions and can, for example, with
the agreement of his peers, become rector. In universities following the Parisian model, on the other hand, he would at most, assuming he had sufficient
social standing, accept an honorary rectorship.
The fifth and last type would seem closest to the modern student, since it is
his intention to conclude the major part of his studies with an examination and perhaps with a doctorate, too. As a rule this 'specialist student' continues
his studies after his baccalarius from one of the higher faculties and takes a
licentiate in medicine, theology, or canon or civil law or both - a degree
which also accords teaching rights {licentia docendi) in the faculties in question. If he so desires or is in a position to afford it, he subsequently takes a
doctorate. Like the modern student he, too, is well into his twenties or thirties. There, however, all analogy ends. The very numbers tell a different
story. Having arrived at the pinnacle of the 'attendance pyramid', one discovers this type to be only the few remaining per cent of the total. Very few
are to be found in the universities of younger Europe north of the Alps (2-3
per cent of all those in attendance at German universities), and most in the
classical university regions of older Europe, in the strongholds of medicine
and law in Italy and France as well as in the theological faculties at Oxford
and Cambridge, especially during the fourteenth century. In the universities
of Italy, admittedly, the numbers of specialist students from abroad is par-
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
ticularly high; the majority of students and doctoral candidates come from
what are called the German nations. This type is characterized by elevated
social standing - knightly descent or membership of the urban 'upper class'
or 'upper middle class'. For a poor student, it would take a mighty leap to
reach this level, a leap hardly conceivable without intensive social support.
What, however, notably distinguishes the medieval 'specialist student' from
his modern counterpart is the fact that he is not out to find the crock of gold
through university attendance and study, but has already found a firm footing
in society well before or during his period of study: in municipal service, at
the court, or most often in church offices. The licentiate and doctorate simply
give him additional honours and prestige.
These five ideal types - the scholaris simplex, the baccalarius, the masterstudent, the student of rank, and the specialist student - never constituted a
closed system. A number of mixed characteristics always existed in reality.
'Course-hoppers' - almost exclusively students of law and medicine - can be
observed who had not first passed through the arts courses but who nevertheless laid claim to a status akin to that of master, without necessarily being
students of rank. Not infrequently, too, the social rules of old Europe could
cut across the above categories. Social ties, friendships, kinship, patronage,
and family structures could all influence status and study objectives. The
individual ability of the 'student' and sound assistance from his teachers
worked within these contexts. Special advantages, for instance, could be
enjoyed by well-protected minors even if they were not members of the
appropriate 'class'. Not capable of taking the oath but assuredly capable of
study, they could - having as a rule attained the age of adjuration on completion of their fourteenth year - immediately be graduated if, for example,
they had done the prescribed courses for the baccalarius artium. One prominent example of this is Philip Melanchthon, who took up his studies of the
arts as a twelve-year-old in his home town of Heidelberg and became a
master of arts in Tubingen at the age of seventeen; being the nephew of
Reuchlin, he had been well provided for and given every encouragement, but
had nevertheless taken a completely normal length of time over his studies. In
such contexts one should exercise caution when trying to interpret the subsequent significance of early academic honours.
There were, however, two common features which linked together all the
student types. On the one hand, they were clerics - almost without exception
in the early years of the universities and then in decreasing numbers, first in
older, then in younger Europe. On the eve of the Reformation the clericstudent was probably already in the minority in Europe as a whole. This
declericalization, however, should not be misinterpreted as being at the same
time a secularization of the university or of university education. In the
context of the developed university of the late Middle Ages, the term clericus
is highly problematic. It denotes merely formal and legal membership of the
Student education, student life
ordo clericalis, the legal purview of the church; in terms of a typology or
social history, however, the concept is diffuse and wholly unrevealing. It can
be used only to describe categories - in a broader sense from the pope down
to the ostiary, the holder of the lowest consecrated rank, and in a narrower
sense the holders of the so-called minor holy orders below the subdiaconate.
In addition, when dealing with matriculated clerici one encounters problems
of source interpretation. The state of being a clericus was, at least until the
mid-fifteenth century, so common in Europe as a whole that the rectors,
deans, or procurators of nations in charge of the matricula set no great store
on systematically registering clergy membership. To calculate the proportion
of clerics in individual annual cohorts of matriculants is hence of little use. It
is only over a longer period that the above-mentioned decline can be traced.
Being a clericus at university, however, came to mean less and less in terms
not only of statistics but also of a way of life. The roots of this development
are to be traced back to the early Middle Ages, to the beginnings of university
growth, when the educational monopoly of the clergy was still intact and the
litterati, the men of learning, could be equated with the clerici. The term
clericus finally became a synonym for anyone who knew how to write: the
path towards modern usage - clerc in French or clerk in English - was open.
Following the same trend, the term laicus took on, beside its connotations of
the non-ecclesiastical, a dimension of ignorance. In German university towns
at the close of the fifteenth century, it was common to distinguish between
priests, students, and laymen, thus emphasizing the intermediate position of
the student - an emphasis at times verified linguistically by the term 'halfpriests'.2
Those 'half-priests' who had become clerici^ moreover, in the strict legal
sense of belonging to minor holy orders, had not thereby taken on any obligation towards the church. This is demonstrated by the occurrence of clerici
uxorati, married clerics, among students of all types. Such a student would
merely make use of certain rights, of his own legal status for example,
although, in the already privileged university, this was not so important as the
inestimable benefit of possibly being in receipt of a church living with its
guarantee of life security, if not of life tenure. For the many, however,
especially for the growing throng of students up to the master type, such a
post was no more than a possibility. Nevertheless, all this did not mean
immediate secularization. Many took holy orders only after matriculating,
during their term of study or even later. Yet it would be anachronistic to
believe that the church was no longer the partner of the university, and even
more so of those attending the university. Though never an institution of the
church, the university was always close to it. The church remained the largest
subsequent employer and wage-payer of medieval students, often even when
2 Rashdall, Universities, vol. HI, 393ff.; Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher, 4o8ff.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
they entered the service of kings, princes, lords, and municipalities; for
powerful people of all kinds tried first of all to remunerate their graduate
servants with church livings before reaching into their own pockets. At the
end of the Middle Ages the secular world and the church were still not clear
alternatives. The student-monks - mostly from the mendicant orders - who
flourished in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in the strongholds of arts
and theology (Paris, Oxford), and who accounted for most of the specialist
students of theology at this time, are a special problem, to which this reference must here suffice.
The world of the medieval student was thoroughly masculine. For the girl
or woman student this world had no place - a fact for which the ecclesiastical
ties were not responsible: even with the increasing declericalization of the
universitas nothing changed in this respect. Ostensible exceptions can, as a
rule, be accounted for by a particular social background, sometimes even by
the closeness of a prince or king. Leading families, noble and bourgeois alike,
above all in southern Europe, had their sons and daughters educated in like
manner by private tutors and partly even by renowned university scholars. In
this way some women achieved a high level of knowledge in all subjects, even
in law, and were able - in the Renaissance Italy of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries this was apparently not uncommon - to enter into contact
with university circles as if they were 'students of rank'. Magdalena Buonsignori, for example, or Novella d'Andrea, the daughter of the celebrated and
wealthy Bologna professor Johannes Andreae, studied in accordance with
their rank and became famed scholars of law. Or there was the Latin scholar
Dona Beatriz Galindo, who had evidently been educated in Salamanca close
to the university and who was from there summoned to the court of Isabella
the Catholic to give the queen instruction in Latin.3 Such exceptions,
however, which seem, incidentally, to be restricted to the south of the continent, in the final analysis show only too clearly that the time was not yet
ripe for the education of women within the universities. Nevertheless, women
could legally be university members. As wives or maids of professors, as
serving-maids, errand-girls, or cooks in colleges or student houses, they were
considered university associates like the syndics and scribes, the apothecaries,
the paper, and parchment-makers, or the book-printers. Consistent with this
they were therefore also matriculated like the latter - the most meticulous
instance seeming to be in the rector's matricula at the University of Louvain.
ORIGINS AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE
Whether one has in mind Salamanca or Bologna, Oxford or Paris, Cracow or
Heidelberg, the medieval university was in every instance an organized
3 W. Steffen, Die studentische Autonomie im mittelalterlichen Bologna , 173ft.;
Rashdall, Universities, vol. II, 88.
Student education, student life
grouping of individuals, a 'societal community'. As such it was the faithful
reflection of its surrounding society, living like the latter by the traditional
rules of old Europe. Yet, though standardized and privileged in legal terms, it
was, like every other universitas, burghers' community, guild, or church, far
from matching its togetherness in law with a social togetherness which might
annul the status differences of those attending it. Of social integration, lifting
the university out of its environment and transforming it into an egalitarian
community based on shared 'academic activity', there was not a trace. Like
every other group within society, the university, too, was subject to the
prevailing social and economic criteria of stratification, including the conditions of economic growth already referred to in chapter 6 in the context of
matriculation figures. Thus every student-in accordance, as it were, with his
type - brought his personal and family rank with him to the university,
seeking either to maintain and uphold it there or, within the realms of social
acceptability, to improve it. His origins thus predetermined the social structure and social image of each and every university in a decisive manner. A high
proportion of simplices or master-students or even students of rank made all
the difference in prestige - between older and younger Europe in general, as
already noted, but also within the individual university networks of Europe.
Origin had not only a social but invariably also a geographical dimension.
The latter was fundamentally determined by what one might term the
regional existence of a university community, the regionalism of a university
being to a great extent governed by the regionalism of its university town. Just
as the latter was the nodal point coordinating the social, economic, and
cultural life of a region, so the university community equally laid claim to a
heartland in which, as a social grouping, it could have its roots. Wherever a
new university followed this rule it met with success and was, above all,
ensured long-term survival. This held true both for the older universities with
their informal origins and for the younger with their formal foundations. This
underlying structure of regionalism has occasionally been misunderstood as
narrowness; it should, however, be seen as propinquity, which has nothing to
do with provinciality but a great deal to do with the functionality of the
surrounding area. The dominant part played by propinquity was evident at all
universities, both in central Europe and at its periphery. Even 'international
centres' such as Paris, Avignon, and Bologna owed their century-long existence not to recruitment throughout Europe but first and foremost to their
regional existence. The character of student origin naturally gave each university and indeed each of its parts - its faculties, nations, colleges, and students'
hostels - a spatial identity of its own. This was true even in insular England,
where Oxford and Cambridge each secured a distinct catchment area. In the
final analysis, the upshot of all this is that, despite the numerous interchanges
occurring over broad areas of the European university network, it hardly ever
happened that one community prospered at the expense of another.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
All kinds of factors, from the mere nature of a place of origin as a town,
market-town, village, or monastic or castle domain, through the number of
inhabitants, the economic circumstances, the travel facilities, the churches,
and the schools, up to and including the complex character of circumstances
of rule and land-ownership and the question of the stability and continuity of
local power, left their mark on university attendance and on the composition
of the student body in both geographical and social respects. The wealth of
observations possible here forces one to be selective.
The background of all student types - and this is one of the most important
findings concerning the universities of central Europe and the German lands was essentially urban. At the end of the fifteenth century, one town in two in
the Holy Roman Empire (if one proceeds on the basis of around 4,000 towns
and market-towns in the overall Empire, including the Netherlands) sent
students to one or more universities. Consequently, the extremely rapid
growth in student matriculation in the Empire was accompanied by a
continuous process, whereby places of origin came to be increasingly concentrated in the towns. With the exception of England, where there was apparently a rural majority, this was also true elsewhere, for example in Poland,
France, Castile, and throughout the classic town networks of older, southern
Europe. Urbanization and university education were closely connected in
scale. One should not for all that, however, underestimate the village and
rural element in university attendance. It is true that, in the university system
of the Empire, one naturally has to cope with marked regional fluctuations in
the proportion of 'village students', yet similar to the municipal process, there
was also a process of village and rural concentration, especially in the
immediate vicinity of the universities.
The university was peopled, according to the primitive polarizations of the
general university statutes, by grand folk and small (magni and parvi) in a
social sense, by rich and poor {divites and pauperes), by those of higher and
of lesser rank {superiores and inferiores), and by especially marked illustrious, noble, honourable, and meritorious personages and dignitaries (illustres, nobiles, honesti, meriti, tenentes statum honestum, habentes magnos
status), all of whom stood apart from the merely simple or common (simplex
or communis). All, whether noble or not, rich or poor, had, it is true, in the
event of any dispute, the right to the same statutory and duty-bound
treatment by the rector or other leading university figures - yet students knew
full well that their community, like any other social formation, was governed
by an 'order of difference'. Meticulous and fitting regard for the personal
rank of university members was seen as one guarantee of the continuing
existence of the university, because no community could sensibly exist
without such regulations of distinction. What was meant by this was by no
means only the internal differentiation in terms of faculties and graduates,
but even - and sometimes especially - in terms of such public matters as the
Student education, student life
regulation of positioning for the public and non-public acts of the university
at sessions, disputations, quodlibets, or church services, orders of procession
for when the community presented itself to the outside world, even orders of
enrolment for supplications to the pope, which in many universities even
served as general ordinances, and not least even orders of graduation. Universities responded to the pronounced need of noble and bourgeois, clerical and
lay people of the day to think in terms of rank and standing; as succinctly
expressed at Oxford in the year 1432, all were always to be accorded the
accustomed honours (consueti honores).4
Particular care was, of course, called for when, at the start of a procession,
an order of seating according to graduation or social status had to be transformed into a moving column with university members aligned alongside and
after one another. The university proctors and 'protocol officals' specially
appointed for the task had to supervise both seating and marching order. One
can be sure that, within the formal framework of statutory orders, there were
informal wrangles about the placement of individuals. University servants
were threatened with severe fines if they ushered somebody ad locum sibi non
competentem - to a place not fitting for him. After the rector were placed
students of rank and specialists, both thus coming before, or at least
alongside, the doctors at the apex of the graduate hierarchy; then came the
master-students on a par with the lower students of rank - the university also
thus demonstrating the reality of social inequality in nobility and church; and
finally, the baccalaureate students and the throng oisimplices, who in theory
came from all faculties but in practice tended to be from the arts. The world
of the university and the world outside were deliberately interlaced - racione
gradus aut status, as it was put in Vienna, according to academic rank or
social position.5
This can be seen in more or less distinct form at all the universities of
Europe. Many of them had rigid, formal ordinances which read almost like
administrative regulations - for example, those in Prague, Vienna, and
Heidelberg, in Erfurt and its entire 'statute family', in Oxford and Avignon,
Toulouse, Aix, Bordeaux, Cahors, Valence, Dole, Orleans, and Caen, and in
Coimbra, Salamanca, and Huesca as well as in Perpignan, which at that time
belonged to Aragon. For many universities - for example at Paris, at Cologne,
and at its 'daughters' Louvain and Copenhagen as well as at most Italian
institutions, for example Bologna, Perugia, Pavia, and Florence - informal
rules were clearly sufficient, without the differencia to be regulated for ever
being forgotten on either side of the Alps. The ordinances listed, which
covered a period of around 200 years, from the early fourteenth century
4 Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher, 343ft.; S. Gibson (ed.), Statuta Antiqua Universitatis Oxoniensis , 2.39.
5 R. Kink, Geschichteder kaiserlichen Universitdtzu Wien, vol. II , 91, no. 14.
Kainer Christoph Schwinges
(Toulouse 1313) to the close of the Middle Ages (Valence 1490/1513), werecompared with each other - certainly stable over a period of time, as is to be
expected from statutes, but nevertheless sometimes becoming more severe and
exact as time passed (though it was not until the fifteenth century that some
universities put in written form what they had presumably always practised).
Besides placement, other visible tokens of rank were differing fees, tied to
faculty and status, paid on entering the university and its subdivisions. Noble
birth, high standing in church and society, and the readiness to pay high fees
were always convertible into privileges that could be exploited throughout the
university. During teaching, prelates, and the sons of the aristocracy and
monied aristocracy naturally sat in the front rows. As in the university
churches during meetings, services, and disputations, so in the lecture halls as
well, the seats at the front were reserved for the nobiles, honesti, and notabiles
-the noble, honourable, and high-ranking. In Aix-en-Provence, such 'separate
seating arrangements' were explicitly justified in the new statues of 1420-40 by
the argument that it was not seemly to place high-ranking people on the same
level as lesser mortals. Always, however, students of (urban) bourgeois origin
had the possibility of buying themselves a statum honestum on the 'noble
bench'. For the universities of medieval Europe were from the outset urban
phenomena, responsive to the economic power and culture of the bourgeois
majority. It was even possible, as at the Prague law university after 1372, to
acquire higher social prestige after the event and as it were, in instalment
payments, by subsequently adding to the normal seating price first paid the
price difference for the noble bench. In the 'refined milieu' of Orleans, a
gradation in seat prices was fixed as early as in the statutes of 1307: for a place
in the first row ten shillings were payable, for one in the second six shillings,
for the third four, and for the fourth and every subsequent row two, unless one
were excused by poverty - which, however, amounted only to saying that the
poor student had virtually no chance of ever getting farther forward than row
Roughly speaking, the student body normally consisted of three strata: the
large central stratum of the rich (divites) was flanked on either side by more or
less broad peripheral groups against which it stood out: above, the nobility,
church dignitaries, and other people of status {nobiles statum tenentes), and,
below, the poor students {pauperes). This division into nobiles, divites, and
pauperes was to be found throughout Europe, occasionally expressed in
different terms - for example in the Iberian peninsula where the corresponding
distinction was between ricos, medianos, and pobres? In addition, there was a
6 Aix: Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. Ill, 12. § 32. Prague: Monumenta Historica JJniversitatis
Carolo-Ferdinandeae Pragensis, vol. II, Album seu Matricula Facultatis Juridicae Universitatis
Pragensis (1371-1418) (Prague, 1834), 162. Orleans: Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. I, 23, § 30.
7 C. M. Ajo Gonzalez de Rapariegos y Sainz de Ziiniga, Historia de las Universidades His-
Sy vol. I, Medievo y Kenacimiento Universitario , 387 (Lisbon—Coimbra).
Student education, student life
plethora of intermediate forms from half-rich to half-poor, which reveal
awareness of the fact that none of the social strata could be socially homogeneous and that there were grey areas in both the upper and lower regions. It
goes without saying that, quite apart from the European north-south divide,
all these things were also subject to temporal change.
University attendance was neither a matter of course for the nobility of the
Middle Ages nor at all necessary. The host of privileges which the universities
granted, especially to the students of noble rank, bore no relation to their
numbers. Probably, they nowhere exceeded the proportion of the nobility in
the population at large. The lay nobility, whose political and military functions were still dominant, had no need of a university background. The case
was somewhat different for the noble clergy, who came via their benefices at
cathedral and collegiate chapters to the university, even if only to do the
prescribed biennium, the two-year training course within the framework of
the basic arts or, mostly, the basic law programme. Yet even clerical nobles
remained relatively few. It is true that the universities of older Europe had,
almost as one might expect, somewhat higher numbers of student-noblemen
than those of younger Europe, above all in the fourteenth century in the
vicinity of the French or papal courts at the law universities of the Midi, but
also those of Italy and Spain (Salamanca, Lerida) - and this irrespective of
the fact that many of these universities, such as Avignon, Montpellier,
Bologna, and Padua (Orleans should also be added), were centres of international rank, goals for the educational journeys of the European aristocracy.
In the Holy Roman Empire, but also in Poland and England, the attendance
figures for students of noble rank rose only in the last decades of the fifteenth
century at the dawn of the modern period, when the nobility of Europe as a
whole set about regaining lost ground in state and church in the only way
open to them, in view of the severe competition from a bourgeoisie now
self-confident in the social and economic spheres and increasingly well educated at school and university. In order to counter education and training
with more than just honourable birth, they likewise decided to embark on
university education - a step which was all the easier to take as they did not
have to forgo their accustomed privileges.
Apart from the aristocracy and high ecclesiastical dignitaries, who as a rule
sought to be near popes, kings, princes, or high-ranking churches, the overwhelming majority of students all came from within the vicinity of the universities. A tightly spun web of social geography comprising familiae, table companionship, and patronage groups, mostly based on kinship, friendship, or
compatriotism, surrounded the university. In the medical university at
Bologna, for example, brothers, sons, and nephews were given preference
over others as a matter of course and in 'full knowledge of the statutes'.
High-ranking men in the church and at court, members of parliament in
England, university professors, legal scholars and practitioners, merchants,
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
and burghers (especially town councillors) - such was the family background
of the proteges. Admittedly, they often arrived at university without office or
title and hence were 'not yet anybody', but this was more than compensated
for by their origins and connections. And yet, for all this, this exclusive group,
exempted from the normal fees even at matriculation on account of their
'wealth of connections', were only the tip of the proverbial iceberg; familia
structures for the most part permeated the entire student body.
Of all the strata in the student body it is precisely the most numerous
whose composition is the most difficult to grasp. If one follows the sources,
above all the matriculae, one can characterize this broad central stratum of
the rich {divites, solventes) only from outside, from what it is not. Its
members were neither of rank, nor already in office, nor again linked to a
clientele, nor finally dependent on remission of fees like the poor. About
where they came from, about the standing and profession of their fathers or
other relatives, medieval sources - the named excepted — rarely give any
information. The members of this central stratum have only one thing in
common: on their path through university, faculty, nation, and college, they
always and everywhere paid the fees and honoraria demanded. Small wonder
that they were described as divites pure and simple. Through all the
economic, political, and demographic fluctuations of the age, the universities
of older and younger Europe alike, the strongholds of law and of the arts in
equal measure were continually concerned to attract a sufficiently large
number of rich students to ensure their continuing viability. Divites were the
representatives of almost all the collective characteristics of university
attenders from the simplex to the specialist student. The patterns of living
and studying were geared to them, above all. After all, they were the ones
who really carried the university in a social and financial sense, thus helping
substantially to guarantee its regional existence.
Like every stratum, that of the divites was rich in social gradations. Doubtless there was little difference from the social stratification in the place of
origin, since every person who matriculated brought with him his rank and
that of his family. An analysis of stratification would hence have to be transferred from the university to the place of origin, where the students' families
and their position in the local social matrix could be traced. Here, however,
there is a lack of local research into the correlation between university attendance, education, and stratification in towns and villages, both on a regional
and, even more so, on a national and international level. In addition, in most
European countries, the very prerequisites in terms of university sources,
which would make such an undertaking feasible, are absent. And so one must
rely on conjecture. For the Holy Roman Empire, one fact can be established
by way of comparison: in the course of the late Middle Ages, and with special
impetus in the second half of the fifteenth century, there was a push to university education by a group from the leading political and economic echelons of
Student education, student life
towns great and small - a group restricted in rather large numbers but largish
relative to the population as a whole. In the university towns of Cologne,
Heidelberg, and Vienna these people were members of merchant, commercial, and often burgher families with entrepreneurial tendencies and the
capital to match. Their activity and comparatively higher incomes were
paralleled by higher matriculation numbers. In contrast, although the 'golden
age of the craftsmen' did admittedly bring the greater number of their sons to
university, they were less strongly represented in comparison with their presence in the population at large. This did not, however, prevent the majority of
them from joining the broad circle of students of adequate means in the
central stratum. It seems as if the merchant and craftsman professions characteristic of the many different towns - in conjunction for the most part with
generally higher incomes - displayed the greater attraction to university education. Among the families of origin in the crafts, the armourers of Cologne
were matched by the shoemakers of Heidelberg and the pewterers of Vienna.
Within the Holy Roman Empire, all the above holds equally true for those of
village and country origin.
The poor (pauperes) - without means, often without name (family name),
and above all without connections - formed a problem group at the lower
end of the community, in many respects disadvantaged, to a large extent
separated from the other student groupings, and even lacking in cohesion
among themselves. The medieval university had no social commitment to
improve their lot. On the contrary: the path through the university held far
more obstacles for them than for others, all the more so since social attitudes
towards poverty took a turn for the negative in the period 1200 to 1500, the
old idealization of voluntary poverty becoming a thing of the past. The
universities - i.e. the rectors, treasurers, and accountants, the doctors,
masters or master-students, and specialist students, who often lived, as it
were, as educational entrepreneurs from the revenue from fees and honoraria
- were increasingly demanding: individual solvency or insolvency was
appraised from the standpoint of total self-interest. Only thereafter did they
accept or grant a certificate of poverty. The University of Freiburg im Breisgau kept a special book, the liber taxatorum, to keep a check on the recognized poor. Nulli parcere - to spare no one - was the strictly kept precept in
Erfurt.8 There existed all kinds of facilities for the poor: dispensation from
fees, special lectures, or the awarding of doctorates by the pope - in forma
pauperum. However, these facilities had connotations of social lowering and
were, at best, commitment through passive encouragement, which, in the
final analysis, helped only to cement the marginal position of the poor.
Moreover, scholarships and special places for pauperes were a rarity, particularly at the end of the Middle Ages. Nor were they to be expected accord-
8 H. Weissenborn (ed.), Aden der Erfurter Universitdt, vol. I (Halle, 1881), 12.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
ing to the traditional rules of community in medieval societies. A pauper's
living or a place in a hostel for poor students (domus pauperum) was allocated not according to proven want and actual need but often according to
the quality of the social ties between the usufructuaries and the benefactors,
who were invariably private individuals and who everywhere gave preference
to relatives, friends, and compatriots. Scholarships in English colleges, as
Rashdall remarked, 'were filled with men whose parents were quite well able
to pay for the support of their sons',9 and elsewhere in Europe things were no
different. Among the first institutions to break through this kind of social
conditioning, at the close of the fifteenth and the outset of the sixteenth
century, were the Standonck Colleges. The theologian John Standonck
from Mechelen, who, though himself the son of a poor cobbler, had attended
university in Louvain and Paris, knew the situation of the pauperes at first
hand. Colleges named after him appeared first in Paris at the Collegium Montaigu in 1490 and later in Louvain - whose statutes explicitly admitted only
the genuine poor and not the sons of the rich and mighty, as improperly
occurred everywhere. If, however, one believes Erasmus of Rotterdam, then
the poorhouse of Montaigu seems to have been a pretty wretched place with
a repressive style of management.10 Nevertheless, between 15 and 20 per cent
of the students attending the universities of both older and younger Europe at least north of the Alps - were poor, though the exact figure depended on
the economic cycle.
Indeed, the poor were not easily shaken off their university attendance by
external influences (e.g. wars and plagues) - with, of course, the exception of
rising prices. There was no sharply defined boundary between 'rich' and
'poor' at the universities but rather a fluctuating border crossed and recrossed by 'commuters on the economic cycle'; in the matriculae they were
fittingly described as semidivites or semipauperes. Poor students often
ignored the universities close at hand, preferring the large and above all cheap
universities with less social prestige in the big cities of easy access (in the Holy
Roman Empire: Vienna, Leipzig, Cologne, and Louvain; and the Anglo-
German nation in Paris). Here they could still live relatively cheaply even in
periods of crisis and perhaps had a better chance of finding occasional jobs or
of begging. In this environment of poverty, the only ones who could attend
university according to the social rules were those who successfully managed
to acquire a social partner by acting as a live-in servant {famulus). Such positions - mostly within the framework of the university and far removed from
mere occasional jobs - were obtained by patronage. Recommendations from
acquaintances, friends, and relatives and often also the same place of origin as
the master proved more decisive than the 'free market'. The social advantage
9 Rashdall, Universities, vol. Ill, 412.
10 M. Godet, La Congregation de Montaigu (1490-1580) , 3iff., 144. Erasmus: C.
Dupille, Les Enrages du XVe siecle. Les etudiants au Moyen Age , ii3ff.
Student education, student life
of belonging to the familia of a university teacher (of as high a rank as possible) perhaps made up for the onerousness of service. At least, this form of
student support seems to have been the type most suited to the Middle Ages.
STUDENT ASSOCIATIONS
Although the medieval university was organized in individual bond groups, it
was not organized hierarchically. Faculties, nations, colleges, student hostels,
and other groups were, for all the variety of the respect in which they were
held, relatively independent units on a shared organizational level. They were
sectional parts with many areas of overlap, though linked together like the
cells of one organism drawn from among the individual families of doctors
and masters.
The oldest and at the same time the most significant groups to which those
attending universities belonged were the 'nations'.11 Their heyday,
admittedly, was limited by and large to the universal phase of European university history before the schism of the papal church in 1378 and was hence
necessarily confined to the universities of older Europe in the west and south.
Largely independent of linguistic, political, and geographical boundaries, university nations were anything but nationally-minded constellations or even
agents of national ideology as the term 'nation' might suggest. Nations were
rather organizations of convenience based on like interests ranging from the
welfare of members to a share in the government of the overall university.
Accordingly, wherever they sprang up, the nations defined themselves as
fraternitates,
societates, congregationes,
corpora, or collegia - as
brotherhoods, associations, congregations, corporations, or colleges; they
were the living communities in the university towns and cities, which for
most students constituted an unknown, alien environment. Their significance
and weight varied greatly from one university and country to another,
depending on the influence of their representatives (procurators or councillors) or on the political and social government of the university (for example,
in the election of the rector). It also depended - a factor directly connected
with the above - on the student group from which the majority of their
members were typically drawn. Here one can observe a substantial disparity
between the older and the younger social forms: in Bologna and other law
universities, where the administration tended to be decentralized, the
students of rank and specialist students were in preponderance; in Paris, it
was the baccalaureates of arts and the master-students who dominated, to the
complete exclusion of the simplices, who were not even registered in the
matriculae of the nations and gained entry only through being linked to a
master; and in the younger universities, which already had a central admin-
11 Kibre, Nations, 137 ff. See chapter 4, pp. 114-16 and chapter 9, pp. 282-4.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
istration - such as Prague, Vienna, or Leipzig - all student types were represented, but in proportions which meant that precisely the simplices were the
overwhelming majority of the 'regular' members. The latter were thus the
social linchpins of the nations there but they did not have a parallel political
function and were hence of only subordinate importance. In the jobs they
performed for the communities, however, all nations more or less resembled
one another: they all had their own leaders and administrators, procurators,
proctors, money-receivers, and notaries; they all had their own seals, matriculae, and budgets; they took care of discipline and organized supervision and
training courses; they had their own celebrations and special church services,
thus honouring their own patron saint; and the longer the Middle Ages continued the more they saw it as their paramount task to support their members
away from home and in any situation of danger, to give them succour in
times of need and illness, and, in the event of death, to arrange a worthy
Alongside nations, colleges, halls, and bursae, there was also a wide variety
of completely free student associations, of which, however, little is known.
Many ostensibly had organizations like the then customary brotherhoods of
merchants, craftsmen, and priests. One of the rare examples hails from
Avignon, where in 1441 more than 200 students of law founded a Sebastian's
Brotherhood. Under the leadership of a prior and twelve-strong advisory
council it was to organize common divine service and processions, to foster
communal and harmonious living among its members, to care for them in
times of illness and want, to support them in conflicts with outsiders, and, if
need be, to give deceased brethren a decent burial. These were the same tasks
as were otherwise performed by nations, only here the origin of the brethren
was of no significance. Elsewhere, student brotherhoods with a regional or
local emphasis were formed. One of these was the Brotherhood of 'Our Dear
Lady' for Paris students (mainly of arts) from Ypres, which received official
approval in 1331; in Paris it had links with the Picardian nation. The special
thing about this kind of community was that it brought together in their place
of origin students and non-students, present and former students, clergy and
laity, men and women, and, beside the usual functions of a brotherhood, also
concerned itself with the financial support of students. In Italian university
towns, students, craftsmen, and merchants from north of the Alps came
together in unique societates which pursued common religious and cultural
but also economic interests. Thus, in Perugia, there was from 1441 a documented Franco-German Confraternitd or Compagnia degli Ultramontani do
theodeschi e franciosi. In the course of the fifteenth to sixteenth century, its
organization was taken over by the students (mostly lawyers), who then gradually forced the others out. Eventually, the two nationalities also separated.12
12 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. II, 417-20, 44off.: P. Trio, 'A Medieval Students' Confraternity at
Ypres: the Notre Dame Confraternity of Paris Students', History of Universities, 5 ,
Student education, student life
Below the formal level of the university and its sectional units, table companionships, and brotherhoods, students of all types met in small groups
which had often coalesced on the journey to the university town and had been
continued during the time of study. Forming groups and joining motley
travelling associations were nothing uncommon, given the general hazards of
medieval travel; these small groups, however, were something special. They
were entered by the university rector in the general matriculae and thus
received a good deal of attention from university officialdom. On account of
the sources, admittedly, these small groups can be observed only in the
universities of central Europe, from Louvain to Cracow and from Rostock to
Vienna; there, however, they are so omnipresent on the scale of 15 to 30 per
cent that - not least in the light of the 'Italian journey' phenomenon - one can
probably view their existence as the general state of affairs.13 The composition of the groups and the number of their members varied. There were
groups of masters and students, groups of monks, groups of noblemen with
their retinues, groups of relatives, and, as the substantial majority, open
groups of compatriots. The close identity of home region, which obtained so
often, defined all five types. Numerically, the type found most frequently at
German universities was the 'cluster of two' or Paargruppe (70 per cent). This
was clearly the most appropriate type of group formation, both on the
journey to university and at university, in the bursa and the familia of the
master: quite apart from the student world, it was a basic pattern of medieval
mobility in general, affecting other social forces as well, such as the
journeyman-craftsman. It was, above all, the equal rank of the members that
gave these small groups - with the exception of the lord-and-servant groups their stability. Poor and rich students mostly kept company with their peers.
Over a long period of time, nations and faculties employed for themselves the
term collegium, as befitted their character as individual bond groups.
Alongside them there had existed since the thirteenth century a further sectional unit of the university, for which the term collegium was also used, denoting a more rigid form (more of an institution, a specific form of organization
and living for students of all types). This institution was - it could hardly
have been otherwise - close to the church, in part even down to its architectural shape, being comparable in form both to the monastery and to the colle-
15—53; F. Weigle, Die Matrikelder deutschen Nation in Perugia (1579-1727) ,
8. See also chapter 9, p. 285.
13 R. C. Schwinges, 'Studentische Kleingruppen im spaten Mittelalter', in H. Ludat and R. C.
Schwinges (eds.), Politik—Gesellschaft—Geschichtsschreibung. Giessener Festgabe fur Frantisek Graus , 319—61. S. Stelling-Michaud, L'Universite de Bologne et la
penetration des droits romain et canonique en Suisse aux XHIe et XlVe siecles ,
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
giate church. The architectural configuration of the college, that is to say,
buildings grouped in a square around a central court and generally including
a dining-hall, living-rooms and bedrooms, a kitchen and cellar, a lecture hall,
a library, and a chapel, was in its developed form to leave a decisive mark on
the institutional self-understanding of the university, first in older and then in
younger Europe.
One of the very first, the renowned college of La Sorbonne in Paris,
founded in 1257 by the chaplain of Louis IX, Robert of Sorbon, formulated
the central idea of the future college system in exemplary fashion: vivere
socialiter et collegialiter, et moraliter, et scholariter — a formulation which
implies the existence of a study community organized in the form of a
brotherhood and living together in regulated and moral fashion.14 As
opposed to mere hostel foundations and elementary forms of collegial living,
such as the College des Dix-huit with beds for eighteen 'poor clerics' in the
hospital of Notre-Dame (1180), or the College des Bons Enfants de St Honore
(1208-9),tne 'Sorbonne type' brought with it two novelities, above all.
On the one hand, such institutions were endowed with at times substantial
holdings in land, property, and fixed-interest capital, which could be considerably increased during the course of the Middle Ages by the acquisition of
benefactions and by ground-rent. In addition, they could have special privileges which, for example, facilitated cheap housekeeping by granting the right
to produce or to import duty-free commodities such as bread, meat, beer, and
wine. The college fellows benefited from all this, as if they were holders of a
scholarship. They received free board and lodging and a weekly allowance the bursa (purse) - and, not infrequently, even a contribution towards their
summer and winter clothing or academic dress. The number of college
members {bursarii, collegiati, socii) corresponded to the financial strength of
the individual foundation. The length of stay in the college was in principle
limited: in practice, however, it was extremely flexible even within one and
the same institution.
On the other hand, there was a new pattern to the day, regulated by the
college's own statutes, with most of the time taken up by disciplined studying. The latter was, it is true, still strongly indebted to church models, but it
can be seen as the first pedagogical scenario for communally organized study
outside the educational world of the church and monastery. At first, this
activity was restricted to repetition of an exercise in material encountered
outside. During the later Middle Ages, however, university courses in all subjects, but especially in the arts and in theology, were transferred into the
colleges themselves. At the end of our period, the situation over much of
Europe was dominated by the colleges, above all in England and France; in
Paris, in 1445, it was baldly said that the entire university was situated in its
14 P. Glorieux, Les Origines du college de Sorbon , 17.
Student education, student life
colleges, and this statement held equally true for Oxford and Cambridge.15
By then, even non-college members were attending the college courses. The
faculties did little but organize examinations and award degrees. In this form,
the college system also exerted influence on other spheres of education, for
example on the famous English public schools of Winchester (1382) and Eton
(1440), on the arts and grammar schools in Languedoc, instituted by Pope
Urban V (1362-70), and also on the extra-university study foundations in
Spain, from which subsequently, through papal grants of privileges and the
right to award doctorates, the new type of 'college university' could emerge first in Sigiienza (1476-89), and then also in Alcala (1499) and Seville (1502-5).
The constitution of the colleges was essentially no different from that of
the other sectional parts of the university. They took care of their own privileges and statutes, and ran their own administration over a varying range of
affairs. Just as nations and faculties were under the proctor and dean, so all
college members and their associates, servants, and chaplains came under a
principal (a dean, rector, regent, or warden), who was himself more or less
stringently responsible for his college to the university governing body, to the
chancellor or the diocesan bishop concerned, to superintendents appointed
by princes or municipalities, or to especially instituted visitors.
The colleges were clearly moulded by the social milieu of their age. This
was due in part to their founders and conditions of foundation. The benefactors were usually the great figures of the land: kings and queens, princes and
princesses, together with the remaining aristocracy, the pope, cardinals,
bishops, and canons of major churches, councillors to kings and princes,
municipal authorities, and even professors, who admittedly had habitually
earned their foundation capital through some characteristic dual role as men
of the church, personal physicians, law scholars, or court theologians. Bourgeois foundations were still rare in comparison, even if behind not a few royal
or princely names (e.g. Queen's College Cambridge, 1448) there was a good
deal of bourgeois money. Those most likely - qualitatively and quantitatively
speaking - to emerge as benefactors were personages in high offices of state,
court, or church. This was the case in Paris with Robert of Sorbon, the royal
chaplain and canon of the cathedral of Notre-Dame and - to name but a few
instances-in Bologna (Collegio di Spagna 1364) with Cardinal Gil Albornoz,
dubbed the second founder of the church state, in Valladolid (Colegio Mayor
de Santa Cruz 1479) with Cardinal Pedro Gonzales de Mendoza, the chancellor of Castile, and, it would seem, especially in England with English prelates: all the larger English colleges were founded by bishops who were or had
been lord chancellor of England, as for example was the first, Merton,
founded by Walter de Merton, bishop of Rochester, in 1264. The selection is,
at least in geographical terms, not entirely arbitrary, for such benefaction
15 Rashdall, Universities, vol. I, 519.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
was, until the close of the Middle Ages, a phenomenon more of the west and
south than of the remainder of Europe.
Whatever the rank and size of the foundations, the motives of the founders
were usually similar. However much they changed in the course of the later
Middle Ages or were complemented by charitable, educational, intellectual,
or political factors, two fundamental motives - one religious and one social remained relatively continuous. The first was a formal religious motivation,
in that the foundation arose out of concern for the founder's own soul and
that of his family (donatio pro anima). College members, as beneficiaries, had
the duty of rendering perpetual prayer and divine service for the founder's
salvation. Closely connected with this as part and parcel of the life pattern of
traditional societies were social motives. It was not that the founders had
social engineering at heart. In the Spanish College in Bologna, even highranking members received elemoysinas - alms - but the reality of the allocation of places allegedly reserved for pauperes belied the name.16
The social motivation had instead a familia character; naturally, this was
first and foremost true of secular foundations and less of those of monastic
orders. The chance of college membership was closely linked to the local and
regional network of the founder's familia^ be it that of a prince, of the church,
of a municipality, or of a private individual. In most cases, preference was
given, in hierarchical order, to relatives, family and friends, and family associates, the inhabitants of the founder's town of birth or town of origin, compatriots, or diocesan members. The patronage of the founder was disseminated through the administrators of the foundation and the visitors to the
college members, who had family connections of their own and could accordingly co-opt further members. Links between regions and foundations could
be numerous: in Paris, for example there were the Colleges des Daces,
d'Uppsala (des Sueses), de Skara, des Ecossais, des Lombards, and des Allemands. The Spanish College in Bologna admitted by statute first and foremost Castilians, then Aragonese, then Portuguese, and lastly Italians, on the
condition that these 'foreigners' would have to withdraw if further Spanish
applicants were to come forward. New College, Oxford, was, by the founder's stipulation, reserved primarily for students from the bishopric of Winchester; the family connections of the fellows allowed additional emphases to
emerge, with several areas and even small townships receiving special preference. In Germany, the professor of medicine Amplonius Ratingk had designated his Erfurt college foundation Zur Himmelspforte (Porta Coeli 1412) to
be almost exclusively for the students from his home region in the electorate
of Cologne and, above all, for inhabitants of his small native town, Rheinberg
am Niederrhein. In the fifteenth century the latter thus became, on a head
count, one of the leading 'graduate towns' of the Holy Roman Empire. In
16 Seep. 118. B. M. Marti, The Spanish College at Bologna in the Fourteenth Century , ijii.
Student education, student life
comparison with these widespread social-geographic factors, all other admission criteria were of lesser importance.
Among those attending the universities of Europe, college members were
thus a privileged and protected minority, though they were not a socially
homogeneous group or a closed-circle elite. The differing rank and capital of
the founder, the personal rank of the college member, and not least the faculties attended ensured this. Many colleges were modest and small, catering for
the young arts student of the simplex or baccalaureate type and for his social
background. Others again were open almost exclusively to students of the
higher faculties, to master-students and specialist students, or solely to graduates, with bachelors of arts being the least frequently accepted unless nongraduates had sufficient prestige or prior education. For a long time, students
of theology or of arts and theology were in the majority - and not only in the
institutions of the various monastic orders. From the fourteenth century on,
however, students of law - both canon and civil - gained more and more
college places and began to push back the arts and theology predominance.
The arts colleges founded at the University of Cahors in the second half of the
fourteenth century were clearly so uncommon in the 'law area' of southern
France by that time that they were transformed into colleges of law in the
following century. Kings and princes and men of court and of church increasingly used their foundations of those entrusted to them to strengthen their
staffs, recruiting the next generation of legal scholars for the church and the
civil service. Older Europe, especially Oxford and the universities of the
south, were in the vanguard here. One should, however, beware of overestimating things. The majority of students of law, being as a rule specialist
students and students of rank, had no need of college places. Thus, at a
decidedly legal university such as Orleans there were no such foundations;
and it was not by chance that Italy and the Iberian peninsula had relatively
few colleges; only in the sixteenth century, under different conditions, did the
situation change. The situation may have been similar for the medical scholars, who did, it is true, receive individual places at colleges, but rarely - with
the exception of Montpellier - had entire colleges founded for them.
The colleges of the Holy Roman Empire followed a path of their own. The
members of the Prague Carolinum, the Vienna Collegium Ducale, or the
Major and Minor Colleges in Leipzig were, admittedly, in the majority of
cases, master-students and specialist students like many of their European
fellows; yet, from the very outset, they were employed to teach in the faculty
of arts by the university founders, who - territorial rulers, princes, and municipalities alike - were also the founders of most of the colleges. The college
member who had at least the master of arts degree was a magister regens and
hence a professor for the arts students; his position was the forerunner of a
chair in this faculty and his scholarship money consequently a remuneration
of his teaching. This 'German model', which incidentally had its imitators
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
elsewhere in younger Europe, in Scotland and Poland and probably in
Sweden also, had little to do with the ancient and widespread practice of
younger students receiving teaching and guidance from older students - the
tutors of the English colleges. In the German case, the student element always
had a professorial overlay.
Despite their contemporaries' alacrity in establishing new colleges, the
great majority of students of whatever type and whether graduate or not had
to look around for accommodation, even in richly endowed Paris, where
during the fifteenth century at most 15 per cent of university attenders had the
benefit of college membership.17 Basically, there were from the outset only
two possibilities: either one lived alone or with others in rented or subrented
private accommodation, or one lived in communal fashion in a student house
licensed or supervised by the university, for which there were several different
terms current: domus, hospicium, paedagogium, contubernium, regentia,
bursa, aula, or in English 'hall' or 'hostel'. As a rule, the house was run by a
master of the arts, who likewise had to have a licence for the job, or by a
specialist student with a higher degree.
The former possibility was the habitual state of affairs in the lawyerdominated universities of western and southern Europe, from Orleans to
Bologna and Salamanca. Students of almost all types resided as lodgers
(cameristae) in the houses of townsfolk, in student boarding-houses or in the
households of their professors, arranging to be fed and looked after either
there or elsewhere as table companions (commensales) or paying guests for
meals (portionistae; in Spain, pupilos). In the arts-and-theology environment
north of the Alps, with its large numbers of young arts undergraduates,
private lodging was largely restricted to masters and specialist students and to
groups on the margin of the student body: on the one hand the high-ranking
students from the nobility, the upper reaches of the clergy, and the rich bourgeois class, who often took up accommodation with their servants and
private tutors, and on the other hand the poor students, who could neither
afford the hostels nor obtain places there or elsewhere as servants. Not everywhere were there, as in Vienna, special Bettelkotter {coderie) - cheap and
lowly digs where the poor rubbed shoulders with the poor.
The second possibility, which the universities always encouraged, had
economic good sense and social behaviour patterns on its side: when away
from home, students and masters of the same language and origin naturally
tended to come together to live in communities suitable to them; this met the
need of a connection with the master and his familia and in addition fulfilled
the desire of the university administration and of other secular and ecclesi-
17 J. Verger, 'Collegium', in Lexikon des Mittelalters, vol. Ill , 41. In Oxford and
Cambridge 10-20 per cent also: T. H. Aston, G. D. Duncan, and T. A. R. Evans, 'The Medieval Alumni of the University of Cambridge', Past and Present, 86 , 14. In the Empire the
estimation is lower than 5 per cent.
Student education, student life
astical bodies to oversee housing. From the fourteenth century on, this latter
desire led to a general residence requirement. Around 1410, for example, and
again - with royal support- in 1420, Oxford impressed upon all attending the
university, even young students of law, the obligation of residence either in
the colleges or in the authorized halls. The hope was that this would put a
check on the 'chamberdeacons' - students living at large in the town without
permission or ties, allegedly sleeping by day and by night leading a shocking
life of plunder and murder in the taverns and brothels. The general tenor of
such ordinances, which acquired the rank of statutes, can also be found
throughout the northern part of the continent - in 1410 in Vienna against the
outside students {extra bursas stantes), and in 1452-7 in Paris against the
so-called Martinets (swallows). Nowhere, however, were such efforts very
successful in practice. As the modern period approached, private lodgings
proved more and more attractive, even north of the Alps: the many cameristae in Louvain were one good example.18
Like the colleges, the English halls (Oxford) or hostels (Cambridge), the
Parisian hospices or paedagogia, and the bursae of the Holy Roman Empire
were genuine sectional parts of the university. For the majority of their
inmates, the hospites or bursales (from which is derived the later German
term for a student, Bursche), to attend a university was often no more than to
be linked to such an institution, in the geographical, social, and intellectual
sense. The head of the 'house', the principal (rector, regens, conventor) accredited by the university, was himself - or with the help of further masters responsible for the appropriate furnishing of the building he had bought or
rented, as well as for board, lodging, and academic teaching and learning. In
return, his student familia paid him the weekly purse, the fee for board,
lodging, and study, customarily calculated on a weekly basis.
The communal life naturally gave such student houses their own unique
regional and social characteristics. In general, these resembled those of the
colleges (and in part also of the nations), since both were based on a familia
or compatriot footing as well as on the rules of social propinquity. The will of
the college founder was merely supplanted by the pull of the ruling master.
And so, according to the origin of their principals, the student houses represented particular spectra of the university catchement area - spectra which
could of course shift in the course of time - or were downright exclusive,
such as St Edmund Hall for the Welsh in Oxford, the Olavsbursa in Rostock
largely preserved for the Norwegians, the Swabian Bursa in Heidelberg or the
Hungarian Bursa in Cracow, which, however, by no means accepted all Hungarians but only those from certain towns, especially Szeged, Pest, and
18 Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 4), 2o8ff., 226ff.; Kink, Geschichte (note 5), i}4ii; Rashdall,
Universities, vol. II, 526; E. De Maesschalck, 'De "goede" en de "eeuwige student". Tucht
en huisvesting te Leuven in de 15c en i6e eeuw', Alumni Leuven, 9: 1 , 11-15. For the
figures see chapter 4, p. 118.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Ofen.19 The social character of the institutions, all too closely linked to particular regions, depended solely on the status and financial means of the
inmates. Bursae, halls, and hospices were anything but charitable foundations, even if, in certain cases, there were a few free places. The poor were,
as a rule, granted admittance only as servants, and thus worked to pay all or
part of their weekly fee. Student hostels, one presumes, ranked the higher the
more favourable was the proportion of communarii to semi-communarii (in
Oxford, 'battelers'), or, in more general terms, of rich to poor. The weekly
prices were staggered accordingly: at the bottom of the list, in Vienna - if one
ignores the special houses for the poor - were the 'twopenny halls' {Zwei-
Groschen-Bursen); in Erfurt the sum would have just sufficed to obtain a
midday meal at table in one of the big colleges. There followed 'threepenny
halls' and perhaps halls in upward gradations of a penny a time. Presumably,
there were similar subdivisions in many other university towns; in general, at
any event, from Portugal to England, universities sought to control rents.
The number of self-supporting student houses in the various university
towns depended on demand and on the degree of institutionalization. It thus
went up and down over the years with the economy, the fluctuations being
far greater than in the case of the colleges. As a result, the number of houses
can rarely be ascertained with any accuracy. Numerous hospices, halls, and
bursae must have been so small and have had so short a life that they left no
trace in the sources. In Paris, there was no doubt a thoroughgoing 'school
industry', but without it being at any time quantifiable. Things were similar
in Italy, Spain, and the lands on the periphery of the European university
system. A point of reference can be found in Oxford, where, around the year
1313, the names of 123 halls were recorded; in the first half of the fifteenth
century, however, they numbered around seventy and in the second half
approximately fifty, with a mere eight remaining in 1530. In mid-fifteenthcentury Cambridge, probably no more than seventeen hostels were being run.
At the University of St Andrews in Scotland, there was only one paedagogium
and one college, with students from 1506 onwards being entered in the matricula as belonging to the one or the other. As early as before 1400, there were
'many houses' (and six mentioned by name) in Prague. In 1413, Vienna had
twenty-nine bursae^ and thirty years later still eleven with six coderie for the
poor. In Basle, there were seven bursae before 1496 and thereafter only four.
The remaining universities of the Holy Roman Empire registered fluctuating
figures; two to four institutions would seem, however, to have been generally
sufficient.
These figures, of course, are not directly comparable - and not only on
account of the completely haphazard nature of the sources: a further problem
is that the individual institutions had vast differences of capacity. To establish
19 K. Schrauf, Regestrum Bursae Hungarorum Cracoviensis (Vienna, 1893), xixff.
Student education, student life
a recognized community, the bursa Integra of a master-principle, it was adequate in Vienna to have three to four students; elsewhere, six would generally
suffice. The upper limit was bounded only by the room facilities available and
by student attendance figures. Thus, in the main bursae at the major German
universities, several hundred persons could be accommodated; around 1450,
for example, 294 and 246 students of the arts, respectively, were living and
working in the two bursae of the Majus and Porta Coeli colleges at Erfurt; the
building complex of the latter contained twenty rooms (commoda), each thus
housing on average twelve persons. In Paris around the same time, hospices
such as the Sainte-Barbe are likely to have had seventy and more places on
offer, a figure similar to the big colleges. In Cracow, the Jerusalem Bursa was
set up in 1454 for a hundred inmates. On the other hand, the many halls at
Oxford housed in mid-century an average of eighteen students, of arts and
law alike; the approximately eleven arts hostels at Cambridge, meanwhile,
accommodated from twenty-five to thirty on average, and the six law hostels,
eighty. In contrast to Oxford, where the 'single-halP type predominated, the
hostels at Cambridge were larger and more ambitious in their facilities,
having more rooms and buildings and, not least, more continuity. In this, they
resembled a number of large bursae and paedagogia on the continent.
A phenomenon common throughout Europe was the decline in student
houses in the course of the fifteenth century, a decline quite evident in the
cases of Oxford and Vienna. One can perceive here a process of concentration in which many of the smaller units failed to stay the course or were
annexed by larger units, or eventually became outdated as forms of community. In western Europe, as the modern period approached, this process
favoured the colleges or the emerging 'college-universities' as a whole. Parallel to this came a rise in the latter's capacity for foundation. For some time
now, there had been an ever stronger flow of inmates from the hospices,
halls, and hostels moving as paying guests into those colleges which had
already taken up the full business of academic teaching; independent units
were being transformed into places of residence which, though not incorporated, were affiliated to the colleges and thus came under their supervision.
Even before the century came to an end, for example, Merton College,
Oxford, had acquired a ring of satellite halls - St John's, St Alban's,
Colishalle, Knyght, and Nunn Hall; as a rule, they were overseen by older
fellows, who became their principals. In Paris, too, masters and students
gradually left the paedagogia and schools on the rue du Fouarre in favour of
that good third of the colleges (some eighteen in number) which, around
1500, were already organizing all of the teaching (colleges de plein exercice).
In the universities of central Europe, the colleges also profited from the
demise of the student houses and indeed helped to bring it about. From the
very outset, 'college professors' ran bursae of their own, which were, in some
cases, integrated into their colleges to the extent of forming part of the build-
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
ing itself. Such college bursae, in which the bursales had to pay rent and
board but did not have to contribute to the upkeep of their magister regens,
must have been an unparalleled attraction in the university towns. In their
shadow, the private entrepreneurial bursae had little chance of establishing
themselves. This was undoubtedly the general run of events, true also in the
case of halls, hostels, and hospices. Where the entrepreneurial bursae had to
compete with the - mostly larger - college bursae, the course of the
fifteenth century regularly saw the former squeezed out, all the more so
since they also suffered keen competition from one another. Only 'specialist
institutions' - grammar schools and humanist circles with special syllabuses
and teaching styles, which at the same time often betokened a higher social
level - were able to hold their own. The competitive situation is underlined
by the repeated ban on soliciting freshmen, the often cheap-jack-like
advertisement of individual bursae to freshmen - in Basle, for example,
when their Rhine ships had just moored and they were in the process of
disembarking.
The entrepreneurial bursa was able to come into its own only when there
was no competition from college foundations, as was, remarkably, the case in
Louvain and Cologne, the two most westerly universities in the Holy Roman
Empire. Here, the entrepreneurs and their employees, who were employed as
it were as 'drillers' {magistri exercentes), represented almost the entire arts
faculty. In contrast to the college bursae, which in actual fact offered only
exercises to accompany a course of study elsewhere, the attempt was made
from the middle of the fifteenth century onwards to concentrate the entire
training of arts students in these bursae, thus largely extinguishing the minor
competition from four principals' bursae in Cologne and four paedagogia in
Louvain. This was a close approximation to the western forms of college
education. In Louvain, the paedagogia came in part under strong influence
from foundations and colleges even before the Middle Ages had drawn to a
close; in Cologne, on the other hand, the principals' bursae evolved in the
sixteenth century into grammar schools {Gymnasien), thus successfully surviving in type, albeit in different circumstances, whilst the rest of the bursae
network in the Holy Roman Empire gradually disappeared. In western and
now also in southern Europe, the great age of the college-universities was
now dawning, while, under the influence of the sectarian age, and universities
of the Holy Roman Empire and of its northern and eastern neighbours began
to follow a logical course of development into professorial universities; the
old masters' or professors' colleges of arts dissolved together with the student
bursae. At the end of the day, there were professors with a bourgeois position
and students with freedom to move and choose.
Student education, student life
STUDENT LIFE
None of the five types of European student seems to have enjoyed a good
reputation. From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century the same laments are
heard again and again from all quarters. Students are bawling and brawling,
carousing and whoring, singing and dancing, playing cards and chess, are
addicted to dice and other games of chance, are up and about town day and
night, are swanking around in inappropriate, fashionable clothing, are behaving provocatively to burghers, guild members, and town law-and-order
forces, are carrying arms, and are even making use of them. It is not the
university and knowledge which attract them but the diversions and seducations of town life.
The University of Paris, preached Cardinal Jacques de Vitry (d. 1240), was
an international parliament of sin, a rendezvous for vice-ridden souls the
world over. The students of Paris - the cardinal continued - studied only in
winter and spent the summer roaming far and wide; they went from one
teacher to the next, attending no course to its conclusion, just doing the bare
minimum to avoid losing their student privileges; they would, if need be,
attend lectures in canon law solely because they took place at an hour when
they had awoken from their slumbers, but they were nevertheless foolish
enough to give themselves scholarly airs by the demonstrative carting around
of ponderous folios.20 The chorus of the churchmen was taken up by the
professors, who (in a stereotyped reaction which has held until today) were
dissatisfied with the lifestyle and the work of their students. Odofredus de
Denariis (c. 1200-65), one of the renowned glossators in Bologna, observed
and commented forthrightly on the student's excesses, penchant for luxury
and pleasures, liking for fine clothes and amorous adventures, and predilection for dice, dance, and drink. The cardinal had in mind, above all, the
young students of the arts, the simplices and baccalarii: the learned jurist, on
the other hand, was referring to the elevated clientele of the students of rank
and the older students of law. The tenor, however, was the same. In the Italy
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the professors - lawyers and grammarians alike - issued warnings in unison against idleness, upholding themselves and their profession as an example: the famed Azzo dei Porci of
Bologna, they claimed, had lived so conscientiously that he had been ill only
in the holidays and had even died when on vacation. In the late Middle Ages,
such criticism took on an admixture of derision at the human failures which
eventually resulted: risible, dissolute creatures - known in the Holy Roman
Empire as henselini (nincompoops) - who had frittered away their youth at
university, squandered their father's money, learnt nothing but how to bring
in the wine, and finally taken back home only shame. Such was the vision of
20 Rashdall, Universities, vol. Ill, 43^ff.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
the professor of canon law in Basle, Sebastian Brant, who found room for
students in Das Narrenschiff {The Ship of Fools), his great social satire of
Many such remarks and assessments, if taken together, would amount to
an unmitigated histoire scandaleuse. Yet it would be no more true than the
opposite tale of the diligent student fulfilling equally the academic and religious tasks of the age and dividing his university day between chapel and
study, meal-times, and sleep. Both the vice-ridden and the dutiful student
were, in most cases, the distorted products of cautionary tales. Literary confirmations could be collected without difficulty, from the carmina burana of
the twelfth-century vagantes through the Canterbury Tales of Geoffrey
Chaucer (b. 1440), to the ballads of Francois Villon (b. c. 1465). For the
historian, the situation is a wretched one. Before the sixteenth century there
are virtually no personal accounts from students which could offer a contemporary challenge to the anecdotal and rather haphazard source material
which is available. Student letters were, as a rule, 'SOS' entreaties to parents,
uncles, or patrons, full of woe at the deprivations of life, now in prose now in
verse, but forever pleading for release from problems of finance and apparel so much so that one is tempted to believe that the letters must often be based
on models in widespread circulation.22
Student behaviour was least felt to need regulation in the older law universities, above all in southern Europe, and most in the younger universities of
central Europe. Judging by the number of pertinent statutes, it was here that
university life was most closely superintended. One cannot, however, deduce
from this that those attending the universities of central Europe were wilder
than those elsewhere. It is true that the vast majority of them were young arts
and masters students between the ages of fourteen and twenty; yet this was
the case in, say, Paris as well, or at the English universities, without producing
similar administrative measures there. It was also a constitutional question:
whilst elsewhere the overseeing of students remained to a greater extent and
longer in the hands of the old sectional associations - the nations, faculties,
and colleges - in the universities of the Holy Roman Empire, which were
from the outset centrally administered, student life was also centrally regulated to a far greater extent and in a substantial number of ways. A comparable
state of affairs was not brought about elsewhere until the Paris reform of
1452 and the Oxford statuta aularia of 1489; in the remainder of Europe,
however, such steps were not taken. One can see here a parallel to the rectoral matriculae, which are exlusively to be found in younger Europe.23
21 Steffen, Studentische
(note 3), 122-6; Sebastian Brant, Narrenschiff,
Zarncke (Leipzig, 1854), cap. 27, 29, 35^ff.
22 C. H. Haskins, Studies in Mediaeval
Culture , 1-35 ('The Life of Mediaeval
Students as Illustrated by Their Letters').
23 Cf. chapter 6, p. 179.
Student education, student life
The general statutes established norms for all matriculated members of the
university from the doctor of theology to the beginner in grammar. In the
medieval world there was nothing special about this and it should not only be
associated with monastic rigours. Strict rules and regulations were ubiquitous: there were guild regulations, regulations for craftsmen and apprentices,
regulations for burghers' clothing, regulations for patrician community
houses, regulations for princes' courts, and more besides - all of them governing many different human groups and differing classes in their day-to-day
dealings, leisure time, and social gatherings. In the statutorily governed
colleges and student hostels it was not only knowledge, methods, and other
standards of academic life that were purveyed but also social skills and patterns of behaviour, whose function was to facilitate the way the entire community dealt both with its own members and with the less privileged world
outside. The often elaborate commandments and prohibitions, which might
well seem to be grotesque coercion when viewed against the backdrop of
modern academic freedom, had beyond doubt their stabilizing function.
There was a general concern - the earliest documentary evidence of which
can be found in Cambridge (1236-54) - for the preservation of the public
Honeste se gerrere, decent behaviour, meant - from Lisbon-Coimbra to St
Andrews - above all else, four things. First, it meant avoiding contact with
women of all kinds, both outside and even more so inside the hospices,
bursae, and colleges. In a close-knit, exclusively male society, which produced
a surplus of men in every university town, thus disturbing the balance of the
sexes and for that reason alone sowing the seeds of conflict, this was an
understandable ban. Married doctors, masters, and students were relatively
few north of the Alps even around 1500. In the south, on the other hand, they
could be found more frequently. This different attitude towards women in
the south is, moreover, documented by statutes.25 The second ban was on
bearing arms, above all at night and on principle in any gathering or lesson of
the university - calamitatibus provideri, as the phrase went at Bologna and at
related Italian universities, to obviate misfortunes among the students and
between them and townsfolk.26 Apart from the battles of the Paris nations
among themselves and the continual frictions between town and gown, there
were nevertheless occasional armed conflicts and serious 'student wars': in
1278 in Paris, for example, in 1332 in Toulouse, in 1355 m Oxford, in 1387 in
24 M . B. Hackett, The Original Statutes of Cambridge
University.
The Text and its History
 , 2iiff. Oxford: Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 4), 81.
25 For example, Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. Ill, 13ff., § 36 (Aix 1420-40). On married medical
students and masters, see chapter 11.
26 H. Denifle, 'Die Statuten der Juristenuniversitat Bologna vom Jahre 1317-1347 und deren
Verhaltnis zu jenen Paduas, Perugias, Florenz', Archiv fur Literatur- und Kirchengeschichte, 3
(1887), 363, § 71 (also Perugia and Padua). U. Gualazzini (ed.), Corpus Statutorum almi Studii
Parmensis, 2nd edn , 151, § 64.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
Orleans, in 1410-11 in Salamanca, and in 1422 in Heidelberg. The third prohibition concerned the wearing of fashionable clothes and above all the
display made of them. Unobtrusive and simple apparel, a habitus honestus,
was demanded. This 'academic dress', however, which developed only gradually from its clerical origins, was so varied in its forms that it is impossible to
determine its shape and colour even in individual countries and periods (see
chapter 4). The fourth thing to be prohibited throughout Europe was insults
in word and deed against fellow students and professors. What was at stake
here was personal honour - but also, and more so, the avoidance of internal
conflict. In Prague, which was so to speak the bridge between the older and
younger university forms in Europe, there is even a list of the most common
forms of verbal insult employed: ribaldus, nequam, and mendax - 'scallywag', 'good-for-nothing', and 'liar' - were the relatively harmless and
received milder punishment than filius meretricis, spurius, fur, and traditor,
'son of a whore', 'bastard', 'villain', and 'traitor'. It was also from Prague that
the curious 'hurling paragraph' on bodily injuries reached the statutes of
some German universities, a paragraph in which the vary facts of intent
behind each object cast - an unaimed throw, an aimed throw, a hit, and
finally an injury - were treated with textbook casuistry as deserving increasingly severe punishment.27
Alongside these absolute commandments and prohibitions there was a
welter of further regulations, which were given varying degrees of emphasis
at the individual universities, thus revealing the social rank of the student
bodies in the various university regions. In the law citadels of the domini
studentes in southern France and Italy and, in part also, on the Iberian peninsula, special emphasis was laid on restraining the extravagant 'aristocratic
life style': luxurious clothing, the number of scribes and servants, the games
of chance such as dicing for money (ludus taxillorum), which was denounced
in Perugia and Florence ahead of all other misdemeanours, and in addition
the keeping and equipping of horses, dogs, and birds for hunting (which in
Coimbra and Salamanca were expressly forbidden except for the high
nobility). In Lerida, riding to courses was forbidden except in cases of necessity. The ban on weapons, on the other hand, was somewhat relaxed in Italy:
it was no longer valid when their lordships the lawyers of Bologna, Padua,
Perugia, or Parma needed to display themselves to the world at funerals, in
processions, and on other ceremonious occasions.28 In the universities north
of the Alps, with their habitual predominance of arts and theology students,
however, other problems were more pressing. Here there was a need to regu-
27 H. Jirecek (ed.), Codex Juris Bohemici,
vol. II: 3 (Prague, 1889), 278ff., § 21.
28 A. Gomes da Rocha Mahadil (ed.), Livro verde da Universidade de Coimbra (Cartulario do
seculo XV) , 13; P. U. Gonzalez de la Calle and A. Huarte y Echenique (eds.),
Constituciones de la Universidad de Salamanca (1422) (Madrid, 192.7), 73ff. Lerida: Liber constitutionum, J. Villanueva, Viaje Literario a las iglesias de Esparia, vol. XVI (Madrid, 1851),
230; Denifle, 'Statuten' (note 26), 363, § 71: Gualazzini (ed.), Corpus (note 26), 151, § 64.
Student education, student life
late the large numbers of simplices, the normal, young students, the majority
of whom had no degree and left relatively soon. Consequently, the bulk of
time and effort was devoted to the overseeing of student hostels, with the aim
of ensuring that students were in the hostels at the appointed times and not
roaming the streets and squares or frequenting ale-houses and other 'suspect
places'. Colleges, hospices, halls, or bursae were to be locked after the ringing
of the evening curfew - in summer between 8 and 10 p.m., in winter between
7 and 9 p.m., or, as in Paris and Oxford, at 9 p.m. the whole year through and to remain locked until 5 or 6 a.m.
It goes without saying that many regulations were frequently breached and
that many bursa entrepreneurs turned a blind eye. The universities reacted
with sanctions which, in the long term, probably did have a stabilizing and
educative effect. Each single statute was accompanied by a specially formulated threat of punishment. Repeated recitations of the statutes - for example,
whenever a new rector took office - were intended to impress both on the
mind. Official university denunciantes, proctors, and other watch-dogs had
the task of ensuring that the rules were everywhere kept and that those in
breach of them were brought to book. One of these overseers was the notorious lupus (wolf), whose duty it was to watch over the use of Latin in the
student hostels and colleges. His activities were no doubt not restricted to the
universities of central Europe alone. Speaking Latin was understandably a
chore for the many young people whose intention it was, after all, to live in
the social environment of their home country and native tongue even when in
their university town. From the Heidelberg Manuale scholarium, a kind of
introduction to student life from the late fifteenth century, one can learn how
frequently speaking in the vernacular was prosecuted and thus how successful
the lupus was, but also how furious the students were about this.29 The
means of sanction employed by the universities were fines, graded according
to the number of repetitions and the severity of the offences; in severe cases
the culprit landed in the detention cell or was even 'excluded', thus losing the
important protection of university privileges. With the exception of a few
individual cases very late in the day, corporal punishment was unknown
throughout the Europe of the Middle Ages. Fines were extremely repressive
instruments: from Copenhagen to Padua and Salamanca they hit all culprits
where it hurt most - their purse - naturally hurting those most who had the
least to spare. In Paris and at the German universities at least, the pauperes
would seem, by and large, to have received severer punishments and to have
been more often criminalized and expelled than others.
Life was probably at its most strict in the colleges and the student hostels
affiliated to them. By way of example, one can study the regulations of the
Collegium Sapientiae in Freiburg im Breisgau, a foundation of the Freiburg
29 Manuale in F. Zarncke, Die deutschen Universitaten im Mittelalter (Leipzig, 1857), 28ff.
Kainer Christoph Schwinges
theologian and suffragan bishop of Augsburg, Johannes Kerer von Wertheim
(1497).30 The twelve college members could be made up of students from all
levels; they lived communally under a head who had to be a specialist student,
that is, at least a baccalaureate of a higher faculty. Women and girls were not
allowed to visit college members or set foot on the premises, except as washerwomen or night-nurses in the event of severe illness - and even then only on
condition that they were of blameless character. The college members themselves were responsible for board on a weekly rota basis: each week, one of
them served at table, both bringing in and carrying away the dishes, cleaned
the dining hall, and presumably also did the cooking himself, either alone or
with assistants. Going by the bill of fare prescribed by the founder, this can
have been none too difficult:
Since wisdom is not found in the countries of those who live in sumptuousness,
and since our house bears the title 'Home of Wisdom', and it being our wish
that wise men be educated there in reverence of God, the true wisdom, it
follows that sumptuous feasting and all creaturely pleasures are, like wanton
sirens, to be kept distant from it.
Each day for the midday or evening meal there was half a pound of cooked
meat per person with root vegetables, cabbage, pease-pudding, or other vegetables. The meal was usually accompanied by wine. Roast meat was served
only on high feast-days, on the admission of new members, or on the anniversaries of the founder and his brother. The procurement of specialities or
special rations was explicitly prohibited; the kitchen and cellar were under
watch. Exemption from table service could be granted to graduates. All slept
in the same dormitory, which, however, was subdivided into separate
sleeping-compartments to be entered by no one but the owner; there was
normally no heating; during the hours of sleeping a lamp was to remain lit,
the charge of the rota man of the week, who also cleaned the dormitories; the
compartments were cleaned by their individual owners, 'so that the dirts is
not a burden to the soul'. In other ways too, care of the soul was an essential
part of the household regulations. Mass was celebrated daily, a sermon was
delivered once a week, and, at least on all feast-days, confession was to be
made. The concern for physical well-being may seem rather summary. Yet,
among the smaller foundations in Germany and beyond, the Collegium Sapientiae was relatively richly endowed. It had substantial holdings of land and
perpetuities, its own chapel and library, simple furnishings but copious and
valuable kitchen-ware and table-ware - in part even of silver, which was in
the safe-keeping of the college head. As everywhere, however, discipline was
strict: punishment was threatened, especially for those breaching the peace of
the college (breaches included the playing of musical instruments, cards, and
30 H. Beckmann, Johannes Kerer, Statuta Collegii Sapientiae 1497, facsimile (Lindau/Constance,
Student education, student life
dice, with only the clavichord and chess being permitted); equally liable to
punishment were leaving the premises with impure motives, and insults in
word or deed, which had to be atoned for on the same day. In severe cases for example, concerning whether a culprit was to be excluded temporarily or
permanently from a living - the decision was taken by the university rector,
but in all other cases punishment was meted out by the college head, in the
form of the denial of food and especially wine on one or more days. In the
circle of dining comrades such punishments may have been even harder to
bear than others. Above all other injunctions - in Freiburg as much as elsewhere - was the commandment to attend courses and the admonition to
acquire an academic degree.
As for free time and holidays, there were enough of these to make the
business of teaching and learning bearable. Here, admittedly, extreme variations existed between universities and even between faculties: each
organized its own calendar. The cause of this was that the universities were
basically operational the whole year through and many offered courses - the
extraordinary lectures and revision exercises - during the vacations and on
Sundays and holidays (but never on a Sunday in Salamanca). Right into the
fifteenth century the 'ordinary books' determined the rhythm of the academic
year (which began on i October): the longer period from the beginning of
October to the end of June was known as the magnus ordinarius and the
shorter from July to the end of September as the parvus ordinarius. A different subdivision of the year was into semesters, trimesters, or four terms (at
Oxford), interrupted by the Christmas, Easter, and Whitsun holidays as well
as by the two-month-long 'great vacation' stretching, with differences from
faculty to faculty, from the Feast of St Peter and St Paul (29 June) to Michaelmas (29 September). Many would travel home in these periods, returning
with money and foodstuffs.
The good number of teaching-free days alongside the official Sundays and
holidays were meant for relaxation - something for which there was little
room in day-to-day life as determined by statute. Of Bologna it was mockingly quipped that the number of vacations almost exceeded the number of
working-days. The anniversaries of the patron saints of the faculties, nations,
brotherhoods, or particular university regions were commemorated with
great ceremonies, church services, processions, and various amusements.
Especial fun for the many young students of arts was in prospect on St Nicholas's Day, which was commemorated with processions and games - such as
the Bishop's Game in Paris or the Christmas King Game in Oxford - and by
all kinds of mummery. In Aragonese Perpignan in 1381, the authorities felt
compelled to prohibit what was clearly an established tradition among the
students of arts (and practised in Lerida, too) of dressing up and running
around, on St Nicholas's Day and the days of the popular St Catherine and St
Eulalia into the bargain, as Jews, Saracens, and women - something which
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
was felt to bring hurt and shame upon the aped parties.31 These 'spare-time
activities' were augmented by carnivals, May-time, and excursions 'into
nature', and presumably by many things done in nations, colleges, halls, and
bursae or in private groups - from the free days which the Scottish universities set aside for cockfighting to the 'Feast of the First Snow' and the banquets on each month in Bologna. Assuredly, the vacations were also taken up
with all that the statutes forbade or restricted; with 'wine, women, and song',
with raucous behaviour and music-making in the streets, houses and taverns,
with quarrels with the townsfolk, with sauntering about, with dancing, chess,
and games of chance, with ball-games, fencing, jousting, and hunting - all, of
course, depending on the age and rank of the students. The extent to which
the customary social order also affected such shared free time and festivities
is demonstrated pars pro toto by the 'Snow Festival' in Bologna: first, the
high-up students of law were allowed to offer the citizens snowballs in
exchange for money, wine, or food for their evening festivity, and only then
was it the turn of the common students of medicine and arts.32
A welcome occasion for celebration on any day was provided again and
again by the admission of freshmen - bejauni, beani (greenhorns) - into the
community of older students, a procedure which involved all kinds of pranks,
to some extent rough treatment, and of course a redeeming drinking session
at the newcomer's expense.33 With the exception of the Italian law area, this
custom seems to have been, with various nuances, widespread throughout
Europe since time immemorial. In western Europe, from southern France to
the British Isles (of Spain we know only that the custom as such existed),
various forms of purification (purgatio) were known, in which water or
beating played a part. The latter form was found, for example, in Aix-en-
Provence, even in lofty social circles, although noble ladies present could put
in a plea for leniency; elsewhere, the freshmen were put 'in dock' before the
'students' abbot', where they had to display humble and servile behaviour
towards the older students until being cleansed with water from the taint of
newness (Avignon, Paris). In central Europe, on the other hand - above all in
the Holy Roman Empire - there developed the depositio cornuum, the
striking-off of the horns, whereby the 'wild beast' of the freshman was to be
transformed into a 'civilized student creature'. As early as around 1400- and
not only towards the beginning of the modern age, when the process of
striking-off became an obligatory part of the academic ceremonies in
Germany - it was not uncommon for a good deal of rough-and-tumble to be
31 Fournier (ed.), Statuts,
vol. II, 674, § 35; Villanueva, Viaje (note 28), 231; Ajo Gonzalez de
Rapariegos y Sainz de Zufiiga, Historia
(note 7), 246.
32 Steffen, Studentische
(note 3), i22ff.
33 Derived from the French bee jaune (in German Gelbschnabel);
CUP, vol. II, 523 ff. (Paris,
1342); Fournier (ed.), Statists, vol. I, 121—6 (Orleans 1366-8); vol. II, 238 (Montpellier 1465);
vol. II, 440 (Avignon c. 1450): vol. Ill, izif. (Aix 1420-40). Summarized in Rashdall,
Universities, vol. HI, 376-85.
Student education, student life
involved. From the fourteenth century on - earlier in France, later in the Holy
Roman Empire - the statute-making powers of the universities hence tried to
regulate this practice of bejaunium or beanium, which they could not suppress, in order to avoid excesses, extortions, bullying, and above all robberywith, however, only limited success. In line with the character of the medieval
student and professorial bodies, above all in the arts-and-theology centres,
the guardians of the peace were baccalarii, master-students, or specialist
students, and as such 'merely students' - that is, they were all too often
themselves involved.
No student at any university between Salamanca and Copenhagen would
have had any difficulty in complying with the admonition to attend courses
and acquire an academic degree. For at the universities of medieval Europe
and in their four faculties nothing was so uniform and relatively stable over
time as the content and form of academic teaching.34 True, there were differing emphases, concerning for example the full programme of the artes in the
trivium and quadrivium, which in the absence of sufficiently large numbers of
teachers and students could not everywhere be carried through as in, say,
Oxford, or concerning also the position taken in the philosophical querelle on
the old or new way, realism or nominalism. Certainly, grammar teaching in
Renaissance Florence, Bologna, or Padua was qualitatively different from
the teaching dispensed in Greifswald, Uppsala, or Aberdeen, the names of
universities north of the Alps naturally being interchangeable. Nowhere,
however, would one have found the Holy Scripture, the writings of Aristotle,
Euclid, and Ptolemy, the books of canon and civil law, the writings of Hippocrates and Galen together with their systematizing sententiae, summae,
glosses, and commentaries being taught and learnt any differently than in the
originally established manner, which was valid everywhere.
This, of course, was the view of the fully developed fourteenth-century
university, whose faculties had already cast their syllabuses into statutes.
What dynamic potential there may have been in the thought and methodology of scholastic rationalism in the period prior to and in the early years of
the European university, from the eleventh century to the thirteenth, was now
ensconced in an almost immutable doctrinal structure. The student of whatever level did not receive a 'scientific' education, but was rather introduced to
a tradition of knowledge accumulated and commented on by recognized
authorities. To acquire, absorb, and transmit this knowledge as a firm, secure
stock of insight were the tasks of teacher and student alike.
It was not the 'academic personality' of the teacher that was important but
34 See part IV: 'Learning' (chapters 10-13).
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
the content and its transmission. In such a system, teachers were interchangeable - especially the all-rounder arts men, who, unlike the lawyers, theologians, medical students, and humanist poetae, could not develop into
specialists for particular books. At the beginning of each academic year, the
heritage of knowledge and commentary was shared out among the teaching
masters of the faculty in packages of books or chapters, following a particular
rota by choice or by the drawing of lots, or simply according to time already
spent in studio. At the universities of younger and older Europe, it was thus
established which teacher had to teach which texts in which sequence at
which time per day and per course and for what fee. Theoretically, each
teacher was sometimes to benefit from having the well-attended courses and
the remunerative books: in practice, however, the principals and the 'governing masters' ensured that it was they who had first choice. A key factor here
was the categorization of books - practised in all faculties - according to
their importance in the syllabus, a distinction being drawn between ordinary
and extraordinary books (libri ordinarii, extraordinarii). Over the course of
time, these distinctions became linked to questions of remuneration and
status, all the more so as the presentation of extraordinary texts was, until
well into the fifteenth century, left to baccalarii.
The material was conveyed to the students of all faculties in the everywhere identical forms of the lecture {lectio) and the disputation (disputatio),
the two forms being closely related. In the lecture, the master read out the
canonical text ascribed to him and explained it in segments. The audience
followed the lecture in their own copies of the text and made notes. In order
to remedy the lack of expensive, handwritten texts there were also dictation
sessions {pronunciare); the main task of the lecture, however, was always
explanation. In line with the importance of the books, the lectures were also
divided into ordinary and extraordinary; as a rule, the one type of lecture was
delivered in the morning, the other in the afternoon. While the function of the
lecture was to acquaint students with material and to ensure that it passed
down from one generation to the next, the disputation was concerned with
the material's application. Here, scholasticism was in its element. Teachers
and pupils practised the solution of contentious quaestiones of philosophy,
theology, and medicine or the resolution of casus, (disputed) cases in the two
kinds of law. For the arts and, in principle, for the other faculties as well there
were three types. On the one hand, there was the disputatio ordinaria, the big
weekly disputation, which in small universities would probably be attended
by the entire faculty. One of the masters presided and posed the quaestio;
other masters and baccalarii argued and opposed, while the beginners, the
simplices, probably tended to restrict themselves to listening; if necessary, the
presiding master intervened in a guiding capacity and would finally put an end
to - or determine - the disputing of theses and counter-theses on the solution
of the problem posed by means of his magisterial synthesis. On the other
Student education, student life
hand, once or twice a year the disputatio de quodlibet was held, a public
demonstration of the scholastic method as applied to any questions whatsoever, freely chosen. This form of disputation, which in the early period of
the university - say, in the Paris of the thirteenth century - could freely tackle
difficult issues of the moment, even delicate religious and political problems,
became in the course of the later Middle Ages diluted into, at worst, a formalistic nonsense-event. The notorious question as to how many angels could
stand on the point of a needle has its origins here. It was from the third type
that students benefited most, the simplices and baccalaureate students as
much as their teachers, the master-students and specialist students. In exercises and repetition work (exercitia, repetitiones, resumptiones), which took
place in the afternoons and partly also in the evenings following the lectures mostly within the circle of one's own master's family in colleges, at the
master's house, or in student hostels - they memorized the material and the
technique of school-like distinguishing and arguing. Practice was gained in
the use of authorities, commentaries, and rational proofs - and not least in
the continual employment of scholarly Latin. This form of collective intellectual training was probably the medieval university's most creative contribution to European education.
For all this, the extent of the written element should not be overestimated.
On the one hand, 'oracy' was a natural goal of education: the aim was to keep
texts and arguments readily available for a wide variety of occasions - some
of them beyond the bounds of the universities, in courts of law, in administrative offices, and in the church, for instance while preaching. And, on the other
hand, it could not be presupposed that expensive manuscripts and law-books
were in everyone's possession. Right into the modern period, until the technology of book-printing had been able to take widespread effect, there was a
great difference between the purchasing power of 'their lordships' the
students of law and that of the medical students and theologians, not to
mention the mass of arts students. The major factors behind this were age
and differences in status. Swiss students of law in thirteenth and fourteenthcentury Bologna - most of them students of rank, who already 'were somebody' before they went to university - are said by the end of their studies to
have owned between ten and thirty manuscripts each.35 Given a comparable
social background, these figures can presumably be generalized and also
applied to the last century of the Middle Ages, all the more so as Bologna and
related law universities, together with Paris and Orleans, had developed a
special system of issue and reproduction of books (the pecia system) operated
by university stationarii - 'booksellers' - who also issued texts to be copied.
Yet even in this system the completion of a legal manuscript took ten to
fifteen months and, depending on the quality of its production, was still a
35 Stelling-Michaud, Universite de Bologne (note 13), 100-14.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
dear purchase costing from twenty to sixty pounds of Bologna pennies. The
overwhelming majority of the students, even among law students, would
have owned substantially fewer writings, as a rule perhaps no more than a
few 'study books' containing lecture transcripts, text excerpts (peciae), and
personal notes. The universities of the thirteenth century still had no public
libraries. University libraries emerged only from the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries onwards, with the usual time-lag between older and younger
Europe; the pioneers were the libraries of the colleges, whose basic stocks
were mostly made up of their founder's book collections. Important
examples were the libraries of the Sorbonne in Paris, of Merton and New
College in Oxford, and of the Amplonianum (Zur Himmelspforte) in Erfurt.
The minority of students who embarked on the by no means usual course
of setting out to acquire a degree were systematically guided to success by the
formalized syllabus. The study or cursus of arts normally lasted four to five
years and consisted of approximately half of material from the baccalaureate
and half of material from the master's course. For each part a certain quantity
of knowledge and skills were prescribed, and evidence of attending the compulsory number of lectures and disputations had to be provided. This was
done in most cases by the affidavit of the student's own teacher or, if the
student had changed university, by a formal certificate of study sealed by the
rector of the other university. Latin grammar and the logical writings and
parts of the Physics of Aristotle were compulsory in the first stage; in the
second came the remaining writings of 'the philosopher', the rest of the
Physics, Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics, and - depending on the capacities of
the faculty - mathematics, astronomy, and music. If everything was in line
with the statutes, and if the candidate proved to be a matriculated member of
the university and had paid all the required fees, then he was allowed to
proceed to examination. In the presence of the chosen examiners of the
faculty, he 'determined' under his master and acquired the degree of baccalarius I baccalaureus artium. For by far the greatest proportion of students this
meant the end of the course and of their days at university; only a small
minority took the next step and received - formally, through the chancellor the following degree of licentiatus artium, which concluded academic training in the arts and was linked to permission to teach a course of one's own
{licentia docendi). The inceptio magistri - the so-called inaugural lecture of
the new master to the assembled faculty - was only the ceremonious conclusion to the procedure, in which the master's biretta, the symbol of the status
in studio acquired, was also presented. According to the statutes, the new
master should be between twenty and twenty-one years of age; like the length
of the course itself, this was naturally only a guideline.
Depending on the size of the university, the examinations of the baccalaureate students took place two to four times a year, those of the masterstudents usually only once. For each examination date a group of candidates
Student education, student life
was gathered together, each individual receiving a certain ranking {locus)
according to his 'qualities in examination'. These results, which were
recorded in the faculty matriculae or the dean's books, were by no means
wholly, and not even mainly, determined by actual examination performance.
The students in the top places were not necessarily the best in their year;
ranking order, which could certainly have consequences for the timing of a
candidate's subsequent rise in the academic hierarchy, was instead decided by
age, date of matriculation, duration of study, patronage, and not least by
personal and family status. Even in the university province par excellence, the
awarding of degrees, regard had to be paid to particular and social considerations: noblemen and holders of church livings were given preference. The
fact that passing the examination, even if at times cum difficultate, was the
absolute rule fits into this picture. Rejections of candidates on grounds of
crassly poor performance were (if one goes by German sources) extremely
rare: failure tended to be justified rather by the reproach of immoral conduct.36
The sequence of degrees in the higher faculties - baccalaureate, licentiate,
master, or doctor - resembled that in the faculties of arts, with the sole
difference that the courses of study took longer from degree to degree, so that
the master-students and specialist students (with the exception of students of
high rank) were substantially older - or, to put it another way, the age qualifications for the various graduations were higher. In both types of law and in
medicine, six to eight years were required before proceeding to the licentiate;
in theology, even fifteen years, the doctorate there being unobtainable before
one's thirty-fifth year. These particulars were no more than guidelines,
however: they could - as usual under the dictate of social or economic circumstances - be shifted both downwards and upwards.
COSTS OF LIVING AND LEARNING
For all students, attendance at university was relatively expensive, but the
pressure to pay for study and living costs naturally varied from one university
town to the next across the spectrum of poor to rich. Most students had to
meet two sets of needs - their actual studying costs and the cost of living.
Only those taking degrees had increasing costs from level to level consisting
of fees for admission and examination and, as a rule, of the often high costs
of the graduation ceremonies and celebrations. Studying costs included
one-off and ongoing expenses. A typical one-off payment was the matriculation charge. Depending on the university, up to three different fees could be
payable: fees for registration in the general rectoral matricula, in the faculty
matricula, and, if there were university nations, in their matriculae as well -
36 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher, 355 ff.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
this being payment for the documentary and social act of admission to the
university and its sectional parts. In addition, at many universities there was
the so-called bejaunium or beanium^ a kind of 'entrance fee' into the student
body demanded by older students from the freshman {beanus) and without
upper limit, even if universities did try by statute to avoid abuses and
Among the ongoing costs were the doctors' and masters' fees for their
courses (collectae pastus). These fixed costs, the admission fees and the
tuition fees, which were relatively inflexible even over longer periods of time
and economic change, were everywhere linked to personal status within and
outside the university. Graduates paid more than undergraduates, the 'rich'
more than the 'poor'. In Lisbon-Coimbra, for example, following a decree of
King Juan I in 1392, the rich students of law had to give their professors a
lecture fee of forty pounds (libre); the 'middle-class student's (medianos)
were to pay twenty pounds and the poor ten.37 What was here ordained by
the king was elsewhere organized by the authorities themselves: the burden
the poor had to bear was eased, but nowhere - apart from totally exceptional
cases - was it removed completely. Ongoing costs were incurred further and relatively regardless of status - for texts and books, parchment, paper
and ink, quills and penknives, and for the purchase and care of or the hiring
of the student's habit. Quite frequently, too, there was the cost of borrowing
texts which one could copy (or have copied, thus incurring further costs for a
public or private scribe). To be added to the general costs of study were fees
for writing out and certifying study documents and various testimonials, as
well as fees for the proctor and occasional special expenditure, for example
for university ceremonies, for the kitting out of university envoys, or for being
listed on a papal supplication rotulus.
Among the costs of living were a lump sum for board and lodging, for
clothing, footwear, bed-linen, laundry, and repairs, for creature comforts
(baths, barber, and doctor), for fuel and lighting (candles), for journeys
between university and home, for messengers, for leisure-time activities of all
kinds, for fines, and, not least, presumably for interest on borrowed money.
Lodging and credit costs were, of all burdens, those most prey to arbitrary
interpretation. From early times, therefore, the universities sought to regulate
the conditions of rents and loans. In the lawyer citadels of older Europe,
accommodation committees of (law) students and citizens were formed, first
in Vercelli in 1228, then in Naples, Salamanca, Lerida and Orleans; the Bolognese regulations of 1317/47, according to which the committees of the socalled taxatores hospiciorum determined the rent of the accommodation
(pensio), agreed annual or half-yearly payments and fixed the price for three
years, became standard for the entire southern region. In Paris, Oxford, and
37 Ajo Gonzalez de Rapariegos y Sainz de Zufiiga, Historia (note 7), 387.
Student education, student life
Cambridge, masters and citizens likewise assessed the rentable value of suitable student dwellings jointly. In the centrally administered universities of
younger Europe, on the other hand, where from the very outset the emphasis
was on collective living in bursae, the cost of boarding-houses was also centrally dictated and supervised.38 Regulated and favourable terms of credit and
pawnbroking were equally in the interest of the universities, especially in the
big 'international' university towns such as Bologna, Padua, or Paris. The
statutes in Bologna and Padua demanded the annual re-election of suitable
merchants and money-lenders for whom, in an official and controlled way,
credit could be received and money borrowed on pledges of books. In addition, professors sometimes made their students loans - something which
proved a highly successful side-line. As a rule, however, it was always a question of short-term credits (with Swiss law students, three to four months on
average), which ensured that the interest-rate burden (up to 20 per cent) did
not grow too forbidding before parental assistance arrived via courier or
bank. In Oxford, from 1240 on, several loan chests emerged - five between
1293 and 1323 alone - where students could obtain advances to the tune of
their status; around 1375 there were sixteen such loan chests and around 1500
twenty. Paris also had an institutionalized system of money-lending; selected
citizens under oath to the university, the so-called 'grand messengers' {nuntii
maiores), agreed to supply creditworthy students with money within the
framework of the nations. The demand can best be gauged by the fact that, at
one time, the Gallic nation was employing 164, the Anglo-German nation 60,
the Norman 16, and the Picardian 14 nuntii maiores.39
All of this was naturally conditional on subjective needs and possibilities,
on the changing level of prices in large or small university towns - a level
which was itself a factor of the economic cycle - and on the readiness to
adapt to a different setting. Though many had a familia to support beside
grooms and horses, others had quite enough problems on their own. Europe's
'normal students', the mass of the mediani in the south and of the divites in
the north, could, it is true, normally bear the costs accruing, but they tended
all to be of modest means. In the arts-and-theology enclaves of the Holy
Roman Empire, this meant that their minimum annual budget, above all for
board and lodging, amounted between c. 1368 and 1500 to something above
the twelve and later above the twenty florin mark. These two amounts
38 Denifle, 'Statuten' (note 26), 346—55, §§ 64-74; Gonzalez de la Calle and Huarte y Echenique
(eds.), Constitutiones
(note 28), 74ff., § 25; Villanueva, Viage (note 28), 231; K. A. Schmid
(ed.), Geschichte der Erziehung,
vol. II: 1 (Stuttgart, 1892), 5ioff; D. Illmer, 'Die Rechtsschule
von Orleans und ihre deutschen Studenten im spaten Mittelalter', in Schulen und
423; CUP, vol. I, 597ft., no. 511; Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 4), 71; Hackett, Original
(note 24), 317.
39 Denifle, 'Statuten' (note 26), 283ff., § 21 with Padua; Stelling-Michaud, Universite de Bologne
(note 13), 92; A. Budinszky, Die Universitat
Paris und die Fremden an derselben im
Mittelalter
 , 42; Schmid (ed.), Geschichte
(note 38), vol. II: 1, 528; J. I.
Catto, 'Citizens, Scholars and Masters', in History of Oxford, 172.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
delineated, as it were, the 'official' boundaries between poor and rich, which
on account of the decline in purchasing power of the Rhenish florin (fl.),
especially in the second half of the fifteenth century, shifted from 12 fl. at the
outset (Prague, Vienna, Heidelberg, Cologne, etc.) through 16 fl. (Tubingen
1478) up to 20 fl. (Louvain 1500). Anyone whose income was below these
levels - irrespective of his goods and chattels, his clothes and books - could
be recognized as a pauper. There was a certain band of tolerance for the
many semi-poor or - depending on one's perspective - semi-rich: for
example, the 1452 statutes of the Heidelberg Dionysianum house for the poor
decreed that an inmate should have to leave not, as hitherto, if his annual
income rose above 12 fl. but only if it exceeded 20 fl.40 This amount, the
approximate equivalent of the income of urban craftsmen and service people
of the 'lower middle class', seems to have enabled a student to manage more
or less well at German universities, depending on their 'tone'. At any event,
the sum of 20 fl. was widely accepted as the lower standard, whereas the
minimum allowance for noble students of the arts and for really rich students
from the bourgeoisie was 50 fl.41
In the opinion of Amerbach, the renowned Basle book-printer, this should
also have been the case in Paris, where he sent his two sons to study the arts
from 1501 to 1506 as magni portionistae (paying members) of a college. For
three years he paid them an allowance of 50 fl. per head, but then decided to
reduce the sum to 21 or, at most, to 27 fl. The higher rate may have been
offered in view of the cosmopolitan nature of Paris, but would nevertheless
not have been appropriate. For the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries the
overall costs of a simple Paris arts scholar originating from elsewhere have
been estimated at about 75 livres, or some 45 fl.; 12 to 36 livres are the
amount reckoned for academic matters and 50 for suitable board and lodging
in a college. For Parisians who lived with their parents the costs were reduced
to a good third. In Oxford the lower limit in the thirteenth century seems to
have been around two to two-and-half pounds sterling per year: loans or
money against security from the loan chests was given only to such as could
give proof of an annual income of at least two pounds. The normal annual
loans made by the colleges to undergraduates and junior fellows were on the
same scale. From 1264, Merton College was to pay two pounds to each admittedly without lodging; in 1266 Balliol College paid two pounds five
shillings, and in 1340 two pounds seven shillings and sixpence with free
lodging. With the development of purchasing power, the lower limit probably
shifted upwards by about one pound by the end of the Middle Ages. At New
College, members had to leave if their annual budgets exceeded five silver
40 E. Winkelmann (ed.)> Urkundenbuch
der Universitat
Heidelberg,
vol. I (Heidelberg, 1886),
41 E. De Maesschalck, 'De criteria van de armoede aan de middeleeuwse universiteit te Leuven',
Revue beige de philologie et d'histoire, 58 , 337-54.
Student education, student life
marks (three pounds six shillings and eightpence). Around 1424 Merton
College granted two pounds five shillings and sixpence for three terms - that
is, nine months, the holidays not being included - and towards the end of the
fifteenth century for the same period two pounds twelve shillings and sixpence. For a whole year that would have been three pounds and eightpence or
three pounds ten shillings, respectively. If one goes by the college bills, these
sums seem to have covered the entire cost of undergraduate education in
Oxford from the tuition fees through food and drink, paper, ink and candles,
clothing and footwear to the cost of the journey home during the vacation.
Admittedly, the students so favoured were members of the founder's kinship,
so that they were perhaps a little better provided for than others.42
The expenses of the - generally older - masters and specialist students in
the higher faculties or universities were naturally greater than such threshold
values. Higher tuition fees and, above all, the cost of obtaining degrees had
now to be met. More so than among students of the arts one can find among
theologians, medical students, and lawyers extraordinary differences in costs
over the European university network as a whole: there are discrepancies
within the individual regions, let alone between south and north, between the
'rich' universities of Italy, the Iberian peninsula, the Midi, and Orleans and
the more modest establishments of central Europe. The information available, however, often gives only individual items, fragments, or exceptions and
little 'normality'. Even within Italy, Bologna was the most expensive university town for ultramontane students of law. The 'poor' among the highranking students were those members of the lofty Spanish College, whose
incomes could by statute not amount to more than 50 Bolognese gold florins
(= 75 lire). In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, however, 100 lire were
called for: 20 to 50 went on lodging and board, the remainder on sundry other
requirements and on tuition. At least as much again was required for doctorates, examinations, celebrations, and gifts (of money and gloves) for the
examiners and doctors, and the proctors, servants, and notaries. The level of
these outgoings may have been a contributory factor in the decline in matriculations in the course of the fifteenth century in favour of other Italian
universities. Not infrequently, students would merely attend the University of
Bologna and acquire their doctoral biretta elsewhere, in Ferrara, Siena,
Perugia, Pavia, or Padua, where the degree could simply be had more
cheaply.43
42 Schmid (ed.), Geschichte
(note 38), vol. II: 1, 523ft.; L. W. B. Brockliss, 'Patterns of Attendance at the University of Paris, 1400-1800', Historical Journal, 21 , 529ft.: Catto, 'Citizens' (note 39), 171; J. M . Fletcher and C. A. Upton, 'The Cost of Undergraduate Study at
Oxford in the Fifteenth Century: the Evidence of Merton College "Founder's Kin" ', History
of Education,
14 , 1-20.
43 J. Paquet, 'Cout des etudes, pauvrete et labeur: fonctions et metiers d'etudiants au Moyen
Age', History of Universities, 2 , 17, with n. 4 (literature concerning individuals); G.
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
We know little about the way in which studies were financed.44 First and
foremost it was probably - entirely or in part - a matter for parents and
relations, the ecclesiastical uncle supporting his nephew becoming already a
kind of institution. Beside this, there was a series of other sources, not
infrequently interwoven with the parental, though available in Europe's
different university regions in varying developmental stages, emphases, and
amounts; for many they took on increasing relevance only with advancing
status in studio. Among these were the college foundations already mentioned above. With their college places they offered a broad spectrum of
sufficiency scholarships. Church livings, for simple altar benefices to important canonships in a cathedral church, were a further way of supporting
students. The universities, especially the French on account of the nearby
papal court in Avignon, furthered this form themselves by their own supplication scrolls, in which the Pope was asked to grant benefices to the University members listed. Admittedly, one can hardly draw a line here between the
scholarship character of such livings and their character as a remuneration
for a church office which could, in certain circumstances, be for life, even if
the residence requirement at the place of office was lifted for the duration of
the stay at university. The papal church was here benefactor and employer at
one and the same time. Priests, canons, and prelates often enough returned to
offices after attending university (or continued to enjoy their livings). Only in
the second half of the fifteenth century, in the wake of a certain professionalization of church vocations and parallel to the almost complete demise of the
practice of supplication in Europe, did the sequence gradually change:
increasingly, tenure of an office presupposed university study. Pious benefactions, wills, and legacies in favour of one or several students were a further
form of financing, albeit one hardly researched and the extent of which it is
hard to estimate. In line with the traditional rules, these boons again favoured
relatives and compatriots first and foremost. Such benefactions, known in
western Europe as bursae volantes - 'flying' because they were not tied to a
college or other institution - could be found in Paris as early as the first
decades of the thirteenth century. The benefactors were at first high members
of the clergy, but subsequently well-to-do burghers, merchants, widows, and
professors joined them. Older Europe naturally had a lead here, whilst in
younger Europe noteworthy funds from private donation came into evidence
only on the threshold of the modern period and especially after the Reformation. The same holds true for the brotherhood-like organizations which gave
students support and particularly for measures of support undertaken by
Pardi, Lo studio di Ferrara nei secoli XV e XVI , 2o6ff; Stelling-Michaud,
Universite de Bologne (note 13), 88ff.; Steffen, Studentische Autonomie (note 3), 185ff., zozii.
44 See, in particular: Paquet, 'Cout des etudes' (note 43), 15-52, and P. Trio, 'Financing of
University Students in the Middle Ages: A New Orientation', History of Universities^ 4 ,
Student education, student life
princes and states. The kings and ruling houses of western Europe and Spain
and the aristocracy also patronized students from the thirteenth century on,
even beyond their own college foundations, while the Holy Roman Empire
lagged behind in this area. One of the major reasons for this lay in the differing ways in which the respective constitutions and statehoods developed.
Before the time of Maximilian I, the Holy Roman (or Roman-German)
Emperor was not involved at all in the foundation of universities. Universities
were founded by the territorial rulers, but their interest was directed less at
the students than at subsequently employable graduates. Among the few
exceptions were the comparatively modern Netherlands and the German
Order in Prussia, which systematically gave grants to suitable young people.
Finally, students of all types covered a substantial part of the costs by
work, mostly through teaching and other services rendered. For baccalaureates, master-students, and specialist students, teaching was done on the
one hand within the framework of normal university education, instructing
younger students in the subject in question on an individual fee basis, and on
the other hand privately, working as teachers in schools or rich houses, giving
coaching (ruminare) in colleges and student hostels, or accompanying prosperous wandering students through their studies in the capacity oipaedagogi
and praeceptores. The possible services to be rendered, from which the
pauperes could profit above all, were many and various. They could be found
as scribes and secretaries, as copiers of manuscripts and text books, as personal servants {famuli, servitores) to professors, rectors, deans, college principals, and other university officials, as servants to church dignitaries or to
noble or well-to-do fellow students, as serving staff and porters, as cooks,
kitchen hands, and table-servants in colleges, hospices, halls, and bursae, as
chancel assistants and choristers in town churches, as street singers like the
Bons-Enfants in Paris or the Litaneibuben in Vienna, as occasional workers in
trade and commerce, as salesmen of, for example, foodstuffs from their home
region (which, in theory, they could bring in free of customs duty only for
their own consumption), and - last but not least - as beggars. In the university towns of Europe, of course, the service-sector market was not always the
same. It depended substantially on the type of the university, on its law or
arts-and-theology atmosphere, on the size of the town, and on its economic
importance. Thus in the universities most heavily frequented by noblemen
and the sons of the rich bourgeoisie, above all in the south from Orleans to
Bologna and Salamanca, it was not service in houses but primarily personal
services that understandably found a larger market than in the college or
bursae universities located north of the Alps.
It is thus clear that the medieval student as such does not exist in reality.
Various types of student can be differentiated, depending on geographical
Rainer Christoph Schwinges
and social origins. It is even more true to say that the university in the Middle
Ages was less democratic than has been stated in a number of older works on
medieval university history. In the next chapter, the career possibilities of
these different types of student will be examined.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
See also the select bibliography of chapter 4.
Aston, T. H. 'Oxford's Medieval Alumni', Past and Present, 74 , 3-40.
Aston, T. H., Duncan, G. D., and Evans, T. A. R. 'The Medieval Alumni of the University of Cambridge', Past and Present, 86 , 9-86.
Boiraud, H. Contribution a Vetude historique des conges et des vacances scolaires en
France du Moyen Age a 1914, Paris, 1971.
Brizzi, G. P. 'I collegi per borsisti e lo studio Bolognese. Caratteri ed evoluzione di
un'istituzione educativo-assistenzialo fra XIII e XVIII secolo', Studi e memorie per
la storia dell'universita di Bologna, new series, 4 .
Cabanes, D. Moeurs intimes du passe, vol. W, La Vie d'etudiant, Paris, 1949.
Di Fazio, C. Collegi Universitari Italiani, Rome, 1975.
Dulieu, L. La Medecine a Montpellier, vol. I, Le Moyen Age, Avignon, 1975.
Dunlop, A. I. 'Scottish Student Life in the Fifteenth Century', Scottish Historical
Review, 26 , 47-63.
Dupille, C. Les Enrages du XVe siecle. Les etudiants au Moyen Age, Paris, 1969.
Fletcher, J. M. The Liber Taxatorum of Poor Students at the University of Freiburg
im Breisgau, Notre Dame, Ind., 1969.
Gabriel, A. L. 'The College System in the 14th Century Universities', in F. L. Utley
(ed.), The Forward Movement of the 14th Century, Columbus, Ohio, 1961,79-124.
Gabriel, A. L. 'Motivations of the Founders of Medieval Colleges', in P. Wilpert (ed.),
Beitrage zum Berufsbewusstsein des mittelalterlichen Menschen, Berlin, 1964,
Garcia Mercadal, J. Estudiantes, Sophistas y Picaros, Buenos Aires, 1954.
Hajnal, I. UEnseignement de Vecriture aux universites medievales, 2nd edn, Budapest,
Hargreaves-Mawdsley, W. N. A History of Academic Dress in Europe until the End
of the Eighteenth Century, Oxford, 1963.
Haskins, C. H. Studies in Mediaeval Culture, New York, 1929. ('The University of
Paris in the Sermons of the Thirteenth Century', 36-71; 'The Life of Mediaeval
Students as Illustrated by Their Letters', 1-35.)
Kagan, R. L. Students and Society in Early Modern Spain, Baltimore, 1974.
Kibre, P. The Nations in the Medieval Universities, Cambridge, Mass., 1948.
Kiene, M. 'Die Grundlagen der europaischen Universitatsbaukunst', Zeitschrift fur
Kunstgeschichte, 46 , 63-114.
Kuhn, W. Die Studenten der Universitdt Tubingen zwischen 1477 und 1534, 2 vols.,
Goppingen, 1971.
Lytle, G. F. 'Oxford Students and English Society c. 1300-c. 1510', Ph.D. dissertation,
Princeton, 1975.
Miiller, R. A. Universitdt und Adel. Eine soziostrukturelle Studie zur Geschichte der
bayerischen Landesuniversitdt Ingolstadt 1471—1648, Berlin, 1974.
Student education, student life
Paquet, J. 'Cout des etudes, pauvrete et labeur: fonctions et metiers d'etudiants au
Moyen Age', History of Universities, 2 , 15-52..
Paquet, J. 'Recherches sur l'universitaire "Pauvre" au Moyen Age', Revue beige de
philologie et d'histoire, 56 , 301-53.
Paulsen. F. 'Organisation und Lebensordnung der deutschen Universitaten im Mittelalter', Historische Zeitschrift, 45 (1881), 385-440.
Post, G. 'Master's Salaries and Student Fees' in the Mediaeval Universities', Speculum.
7 , 161-98.
Rait, R. S. Life in the Medieval University, Cambridge, 1912.
Reynier. G. La Vie universitaire dans Vancienne Espagne, Paris/Toulouse, 1902.
de Ridder-Symoens, H. 'Adel en universiteiten in de zestiende eeuw. Humanistisch
ideaal of bittere noodzaak', Tijdschrift voor Geschiedenis, 93 , 410-32.
de Ridder-Symoens, H. 'L'aristocratisation des universites au XVI siecle', in Les
Grandes Reformes des universites europeennes du XVI au XXe siecle. Zeszyty
Naukowe Uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego DCCLXI, Prace Historyczne, Z. 79,
Warsaw/Cracow, 1985, 37-64.
Rosenthal, J. T. 'The Universities and the Medieval English Nobility', History of
Education Quarterly, 9 , 415-37.
Riickbrod, K. Universitd't und Kollegium, Baugeschichte und Bautyp, Darmstadt,
Samaran, Ch. 'La vie estudiantine a Paris au Moyen Age', in Aspects de Vuniversitede
Paris, Paris, 1949, 103-32.
Schulze, F. and Ssymank, P. Das deutsche Studententum von den altesten Zeiten bis
zur Gegenwart, 2nd edn, Leipzig, 1910.
Schwinges, R. C. Deutsche Universitdtsbesucher im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert. Studien
zur Sozialgeschichte des alten Reiches, Stuttgart, 1986.
Schwinges. R. C. 'Migration und Austausch: Studentenwanderungen im deutschen
Reich des spaten Mittelalters', in G. Jaritz and A. Miiller (eds.), Migration in der
Feudalgesellschaft, Frankfurt-am-Main/New York, 1988, 141-55.
Schwinges, R. C. 'Sozialgeschichtliche Aspekte spatmittelalterlicher Studentenbursen
in Deutschland', in J. Fried (ed.), Schulen und Studium im sozialen Wandel des
hohen und spaten Mittelalters, Sigmaringen, 1986, 527—64.
Seifert. A. 'Die Universitatkollegien-Eine historisch-typologische Ubersicht', Lebensbilder deutscher Stiftungen, 3 , 355-72.
Trio, P. 'Financing of University Students in the Middle Ages: a New Orientation'.
History of Universities, 4 , 1-24.
Verger. J. 'Prosopographie et cursus universitaires', in N. Bulst and J.-P. Genet (eds.),
Medieval Lives and the Historian, Kalamazoo, 1986, 313-32.
Wieruszowski, H. The Medieval University: Masters, Students, Learning, Princeton,
N.J., 1966.
CAREERS OF GRADUATES
PETER MORAW
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN UNIVERSITY AND SOCIETY
The university is anchored in society by those who attend it and those who
leave it. The word 'university' denotes a social body for its members. The
nature of this anchorage in society is difficult enough to see in our own day,
despite the fact that modern industrial societies, and, so it often seems,
modern universities, have become very much alike. The question is more
difficult for the very diverse societies and universities in the long stretch of
time from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries. Of no aspect of early university history is less known. The number of universities which came into existence in Europe in that period is known, but who knows how many different
societies there were and how many local and regional elites within them?
This also explains the lack of a complete social history of medieval Europe
and a comprehensive theory of its social history.1 To the question of the role
of the university graduate in medieval society, only provisional and simplified
answers are possible and even these apply only to limited areas. The present
state of research permits us, however, to discern certain uniformities, particularly in those features which were important for the implantation of
universities in society: a minimum of freedom and mobility for many and a
minimum of legal stability for most social orders, which though hierarchical,
were seldom static or impermeable; demographically, economically, and
socially concentrated centres, i.e. cities; a gradual mutual differentiation
between churches and states; respect for education and culture; special
groups of agents servicing these and other demanding social functions.
To this inchoate mass of actual situations, the social data of the universities
1 Cf., for example, R. Fossier, Histoire sociale de I'Occident medieval ; Handbuch
der europdischen Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte, vol. II, ed. J. A. van Houtte , vol. Ill, ed. H. Kellenbenz ; O. Brunner, Neue Wege der Verfassungsund Sozialgeschichte, 2nd edn .
Careers of graduates
and their members can only be related intelligibly if certain emphases are
accepted, specific aspects brought out, and a number of interpretative principles assumed which are partly hypothetical and require further research.
Yet, as long as certain precautions are taken, and despite geographical and
historical differences, non-synchronic economic fluctuations, crises, intervals,
and delays, the social history of Europe can be seen as a comparatively
advancing process. It was undoubtedly a process of increasing differentiation
and complexity, i.e. of 'modernization' in the broad sense.
If the social history of Europe, for all its geographical and historical diversity, is to be understood in this relatively unitary way, a model is required
which interprets these differences wherever possible as shifting phases. Such a
model appears to be available.2 It begins by distinguishing between an 'older'
and a 'younger' Europe. 'Older' Europe consisted, on the one hand, of Italy
and southern France, together with parts of Spain perhaps, and, on the other
hand, of northern France and the imperial territories west of the Rhine,
together with England. To some extent, this 'older' Europe was the direct
heir to Roman antiquity, which still influenced and found expression in urban
culture and in relatively less feudalized churches, for example. 'Younger'
Europe - in the centre, east, and north - was able to assimilate this heritage
only belatedly and never completely during the Middle Ages, by laborious
processes of equalization.
Before the beginning of the university era and well into it, the church was
culturally and socially the prima causa and chief base of the groups and
concerns which were important for the social history of the universities.
Throughout the whole medieval period, the world of the universities was in
the main that of the church. The city, with its social and economic consolidation, complexity, division of labour, mobility, and accumulation of
resources, became increasingly, and soon decisively, the milieu and sine qua
non of the history and social development of the university and its graduates.
The interaction between university and society is also quantitative. Unfortunately, reliable statistics are almost completely lacking for the period up to
the late fourteenth century and, where they exist, apply only to a part of
Europe. Only from this time, moreover, can we estimate the economic and
cyclical fluctuations connecting the overall impression of a long-term numerical growth with reality. The proportion of graduates among the total of
university students may, by and large, have increased, but the proportion of
both graduates and non-graduates in the whole population at any given time
remains uncertain throughout the whole period. In any case, only a minority
of students graduated and only a proportion of these can be traced from
successful careers.
2 P. Moraw, 'Uber Entwicklungsunterschiede und Entwicklungsausgleich im deutschen und
europaischen Mittelalter', in U. Bestmann (ed.), Hochfinanz, Wirtschaftsraume, Innovationen.
Festschrift fur W. von Stromer, vol. II , 583-622.
Peter Moraw
Contemporaries were never in a position to analyse either the development
of society as a whole or even basic aspects of this development. While the
universities were being founded or expanded, there was no conscious intention of influencing social conditions generally. Far more important were the
'prestige' and the practical, economic, and administrative benefits accruing to
communities and rulers. Many of the social changes produced by university
men must be regarded as an unintended 'spin-off of quite different concerns.
We should thus be chary of speaking of a 'labour market' and its supply and
demand, and can only speak about specific instances.
Mere attendance at university and even graduation were not automatically
respected and welcomed as new qualifications for the furtherance of a career.
The traditional qualifications of birth and property put up a stiff resistance to
such newcomers. Graduation was seldom more than just another qualification among those a person possessed or lacked. Its function within a set of
qualifications varied widely and depended on a graduate's birth or property
qualifications. Only gradually did the newcomer gain a foothold and establish
himself within the old conditions or even create quite new ones, though much
became established practice without leaving any identifiable trace. Yet there
could be no question of monopolistic claims on the part of graduates prior to
the end of the medieval period.
One of the paradoxes of the universities and their components is that they
tried to claim social autonomy in many detailed respects without being
socially autonomous at all, let alone socially powerful. In fact, in order to
maintain their position, they strove to conform to the regional milieu.
Students brought with them the social rules of their personal background and
tried to maintain and develop their particular position. Before and after the
start of a career, both within the university and outside it, the governing
principles were patronage, privilege, and inheritance. A family's wealth was
put to use in the promotion of certain expectations. The expense of a chosen
course of study and the faculty and university selected varied considerably,
and the career was meant to prove that this investment had been worth while.
Universities and faculties differed in status and this affected the social value
of the degrees they conferred. In 'younger' Europe, at all events, the social
cachet attached to graduation diminished with the passage of time, chiefly
because of the growing number of graduates. No less far-reaching in its
effects on the same milieu was the relative equalization of the four faculties
within the increasingly narrow structure of the territorial university. All this
brought graduation closer to our modern view of it as a certificate of achievement. Up until then, however, the important thing was the diversity of
'graduation' as a social starting-point.
Despite all this, the universities enjoyed a certain autonomy and even had
an inherent dynamic, which became, in time, a social factor. This is already
shown simply, yet decisively, by their longevity; they gradually assumed new
Careers of graduates
social roles unimaginable at the outset. The relative autonomy of the university system was due mainly to those who, after graduating, continued their
careers in the university and so fulfilled the basic function of that graduation.
The autonomy of the university is also recognizable from the spatial structure
which developed around a college or university location and which, in due
course, also began to influence careers. The medieval university can already
count it as an outstanding achievement to have gradually clawed its way into
and increasingly merged with its regional milieu, with all this implied for
THE BEGINNINGS IN ITALY AND FRANCE (TWELFTH CENTURY
UNTIL AROUND I2OO)
The social position of university-leavers is most difficult to establish for the
early period of the universities and, above all, for their prehistory. What we
call 'graduation' existed only in a rudimentary form. Many accounts refer
only to a small group of university men or even to a single individual. At best,
what emerges are the worlds these people inhabited: the towns, churches, and
courts of 'older' Europe. The lead established by the northern Italian towns is
clearly visible in the eleventh century. They were bigger, more prosperous
and more 'aristocratic', more active politically and economically, more
diverse and mobile socially, more effectively laicized, and more interested in
education and culture than all other contemporary communities. It was here
rather than in the rest of Europe that an independent and literate laity first
appeared and developed with surprising speed. This was connected with early
rationalism, and the development of law and 'modern' constitutional forms.
Out of these there gradually developed the professions of the jurist, the
notary, and the physician.
The law schools of Bologna were the focal point for the jurists. These
schools had existed on a private basis since the second half of the eleventh
century, and were united to form a 'university' after 1180. They made possible the emergence of groups of persons who, as legal experts, occupied
posts of growing importance for the life of society. The communities needed
these specialists for their domestic administration and legal system, in the
quest for increasing autonomy and in the competitive struggle with their
neighbours. Already in this early period, the general point made above
applied: it was a question of introducing something new. Here the high social,
aristocratic position of the causidicus (advocate) or iudex (judge) was
primary, whereas the exploitation of legal knowledge must be seen at first as
only a secondary concern. Two legal experts from Bologna appeared in this
capacity before the Emperor Henry V in the year 1116. Judicial practice
having paved the way, the practice of law as an urban profession emerged
during the twelfth century. The persons concerned were laymen, who have to
Veter Moraw
be seen against the background of a steadily growing literate urban laity. The
posts now being gradually opened to those trained in the law schools had
formerly been occupied by persons well versed in customary law. In the
second half of the twelfth century and connected with this phenomenon, a
constitutional and social change took place from an aristocratic to a podestd
constitution. As leaders of the cities, podestd appointed for one year took
over from the old aristocratic families. Although themselves of noble birth,
these podestd were above all professional administrators, having studied law
at Bologna. They went from one city to another, accompanied by a small
group of judges, notaries, and secretaries, who also had had some legal training. The specialist qualification thus increased in importance compared with
evidence of birth. Moreover, more posts were available. The speed but also
the sporadic character of this development must be stressed. Only in this
qualified way can we speak here of the emergence, for the first time, of an
academically trained class. In contrast to the situation in Paris during the
same period, in Bologna well-to-do persons normally studied jurisprudence
and soon began to do so with a fairly clear professional interest focused on
the community.
Law graduates were at work from a very early date in one or two courts,
beginning with that of the countess of Tuscany (before noo) and continuing
under the emperor (1112). After the middle of the century, a first high-water
mark was reached at the time of Frederick I Barbarossa (1155 et seq.). Clerics
also studied in Bologna, especially canon law. Increasing numbers of canons,
archdeacons, and bishops were trained in law schools. From 1153, a canonist
headed the papal chancellery. The great Pope Innocent III (1198-1216) was a
former student of Bologna. Finally, aside from all community employment,
we can also discern in early Bologna - as, too, at Paris, though fewer in
number - the figure of the intellectual, who was socially and professionally an
ambiguous 'outsider'. The cultivation of the artes in Bologna indicates a less
strict professional attachment and this, too, had its roots in the eleventh
century. Masters of arts (especially of grammar and dictamen, the art of
letter-writing) were often trained notaries as well, the most widespread semilegal professional class of medieval Italy.3
Paris, along with its very advanced and differentiated urban society, was at
the centre of the early history of the university in the northern half of 'older'
Europe in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Despite numerous personal
contacts, however, the world of its studies was basically different from that of
northern Italy. The surrounding city, despite its considerable size and many-
3 J. Fried, Die Entstehung des Juristenstandes im 12. Jahrhundert ; M. Bellomo,
Saggio sull'universita nell'eta del diritto contune ; / ceti dirigenti dell'eta comunale nei secoli XII eXIII ; P. Classen, 'Richterstand und Rechtswissenschaft in italienischen Kommunen des 12. Jahrhunderts', in P. Classen, Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed. J. Fried , 27-126.
Careers of graduates
sided importance, was an indispensable soil rather than a formative factor in
the social life of the university. The church milieu in the broadest sense was
more important. From the forties of the twelfth century, former Paris
students achieved pre-eminence in the papal court, in the college of cardinals,
and then in the papacy itself. One in six of the cardinals appointed by Innocent III had studied or taught in Paris, one in two of those appointed by
Gregory IX (1227-41).4
The University of Paris came into existence as a social factor almost anonymously. The only way to evaluate its social influences is to analyse the available information about the group of masters. In many respects, beginning
with age, the active masters were like the law students of Italy, in contrast to
the young students of the arts. Here we must bear in mind the basic twofold
division, which is important in any assessment of the universities in the Parisian tradition. As has been shown in chapter 5, they fulfilled at one and the
same time the role of present-day colleges (for many pupils) and that of
present-day universities (for a small minority). As teachers of the arts,
masters could also be students in a higher faculty. Our knowledge of the Paris
masters and those of other schools prior to and around 1200 is slight. Certainly, the master's career was more fluid and uncertain than that of the law
student, at least the urban Italian law student. But we know virtually nothing
of the masters' social origin. In most cases we do not even know exactly
where they had studied. The most plausible hypothesis about employment is
that there was a steady increase in the proportion of those actively engaged in
the court life of the French and English kings or of French and English
bishops, for example, in the emergent office of the 'official'. One possible
periodization for France would be: first traces, 1140 to 1180; discernible
growth, 1180 to 1220; finally, a fairly clear increase from 1220 onwards. The
percentage of masters who were also bishops confirms this evolution: 3 per
cent in the royal bishoprics in France under Louis VII (1137-80), 20 per cent
under Philip II Augustus (1180-1223) - whereas the English percentage was
already approaching 30 per cent- and 41 per cent under Louis IX (1226-70).
On average, the English kings employed at least twice as many masters as the
French sovereigns.5 As will be explained later, the leading position of the
English administration can be documented almost a century before 1200 and
the gap was hardly made good before 1250. Conditions in the imperial
diocese of Liege (including Aix-la-Chapelle, the imperial city), which was part
of 'older' Europe, fit smoothly into this chronology. The existence of some
4 P. Weimar (ed.), Die Renaissance der Wissenschaften im 12. Jahrhundert ; P. Classen, 'Die Hohen Schulen und die Gesellschaft im 12. Jahrhundert', in Classen,
Studium und Gesellschaft (note 3), 1-26; J. W. Baldwin, Masters, Princes, and Merchants, 2
vols. .
5 J. W. Baldwin, 'Studium et Regnum. The Penetration of University Personnel into the French
and English Administration at the Turn of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries', Revue des
etudes islamiques, 44 , 199—215.
Peter Moraw
thirty 'masters' in the twelfth century has been traced, almost all after 1170.
They were employed in the churches of Aix-la-Chapelle and Liege, or formed
part of the retinue of important lay lords.6 The extent to which the process of
equalization had at that time prospered in 'younger Europe' east of the Rhine
is dicussed below.
Finally, no account of the masters would be complete without reference to
the fact that very little is known of the lives and careers of the vast majority of
those Paris students around 1200 who did not graduate. A wide social range
and an infinite diversity of individual circumstances can be assumed.
THE BEGINNINGS IN ENGLAND, IN THE IBERIAN PENINSULA, AND
IN 'YOUNGER' EUROPE
The University of Oxford (before 1214) was only a few years younger than
the University of Paris and, in many respects, was very similar to it, in the
range of disciplines, for example. Not surprisingly under an Angevin
monarchy, conditions in state and church were also similar, except for
England's less direct involvement with the papacy. Yet it was a decisive
century later than in Italy or France that potentially rival school activities
were established in Oxford, clearly not earlier than around 1185. The careers
of the English students and teachers provide the best explanation of this.7
Prior to 1190, those who attained onerous ecclesiastical dignities and court
offices, or who wrote important works or even merely became schoolmasters,
always spent a longer time on the continent, especially in Paris or Bologna.
Foreign students did not come to England. On the other hand, we find a great
many Englishmen among those Parisian masters around 1200 of whom a little
more is known. In the second half of the twelfth century, a loose association
of English scholars existed, which, not long after 1200, became the 'English
nation' in Paris. All this was despite the fact that the island monarchy was
more modern and disposed of an elite in the shape of a group of educated
experts, the royal clerks, as well as the fact that well-educated laymen already
cultivated law very actively and independently within the royal court, and the
fact that literature and culture were highly regarded in the royal entourage. In
this respect, England counted as part of 'older' Europe, even if no urban
milieu capable of assuming responsibility for higher education yet existed. An
important university came into existence in Oxford, even though the town
itself could by no stretch of the imagination be compared with Paris or
6 C. Renardy, Le Monde des maitres universitaires du diocese de Liege 1140-1350 ;
C. Renardy, Les Maitres universitaires dans le diocese de Liege. Repertoire biographique 1140—
1350 .
7 G. Stollberg, Die soziale Stellung der intellektuellen Oberschicht im England des 12. Jahrhunderts ; Baldwin, 'Studium et regnum' (note 5), 199—215; J. Dunbabin, 'Careers
and Vocations', in History of Oxford, 565-605.
Careers of graduates
As for the Iberian peninsula, there is little known for sure about the University of Palencia (n8o?-i243/63) in Castile. We should therefore stress the
presence of Spanish and Portuguese students in Italy and France. Most of
these probably were or became canons.8
When we turn from 'older' to 'younger' Europe, it is possible, on the
whole, to envisage the latter as divided into two parts. On the one hand, there
was the centre of the continent, open to and in some measure comparable to
the west, widely dominated economically and socially by the Rhineland (part
of 'older' Europe). On the other hand, there was the periphery in the east and
north where conditions were still retarded: density of population, the urban
milieu, and the superstructure of church and state are taken here as the indicators. These conditions did not favour interest in the new knowledge. Quite
apart from this, however, the new could even appear alien from the standpoint of the traditional Ottonian and Salic educational system of the centre.
Nevertheless, the new was in fact received. Broadly speaking, however, it was
not yet supported by any general demand; its reception remained, therefore,
the outcome of individual decisions taken against the background of an
already customary mobility of students and teachers.
When the situation of the English in Paris is compared with that of the
Germans, Danes, or Hungarians, typical differences can be noted. The
number of visiting students who subsequently distinguished themselves by
their careers (and are therefore the only ones of whom we have any knowledge) was clearly smaller in the case of those from the periphery. The arrival
date of those from the periphery is later than that of those from the centre;
the success of students from a distance was less than that of those whose
homes were closer. On the other hand, to the extent that it is known, the
social rank of the students from far away was above the average. This was
natural enough, since those advantaged by birth and property were enabled
to continue even in difficult circumstances and were undeterred by failure. A
centuries-old wind was blowing through Europe in the new-style educational
system, mostly from west to east but also from south to north. It was not easy
for anyone without special advantages to resist this trend. Even two centuries
later, the two eastern 'nations' of the jurists' university in Prague were plainly
more aristocratic than the two western ones. In other words, the further west
we look, the more modern the social world we find and the more chances
someone with fewer or no advantages of birth and property had than in the
east. The differences could be glaring, moreover. We have already mentioned
the somewhat better-known Paris masters around 1200. The geographical
origin of forty-two of them is known. Sixteen were English and only one - a
Dane - came from 'younger' Europe. It is no accident, of course, that the
latter was far and away the highest-born of the whole group. Among the
8 J. Verissimo Serrao, Les Portugais a I'Universite de Montpellier ; A. Garcia y
Garcia, Iglesia, Sociedad e Derecho .
Peter Moraw
seven identifiable teachers singled out for mention by John of Salisbury
(d. 1180), only one was not from 'older' Europe.9
In 'younger' Europe, the situation best known is that of Germany.10
Almost simultaneously (between 1153 and 1156), university men became
leading figures at the papal, English, and imperial courts; yet the only aristocrat among them (and certainly the least educated) was the imperial chancellor, Rainald of Dassel. If measured by the title of master of the western
pattern, the imperial court was not behind the times compared with the papal
court and was even in advance numerically of the French court. What Frederick I Barbarossa (1123-90) already had, only Philip II Augustus (1165-1223)
attained. The data about German dioceses in the forties of the twelfth century
point in the same direction as in the west. But whether the title of master
meant academic studies or the old-fashioned dignity of the scholasticus of a
cathedral or collegiate church becomes increasingly uncertain the further the
distance from the new educational institution.
Yet study does not appear as an effective motor for promoting a career or
even as a factor in the establishment of 'professional groups'. We have evidence that, of the German bishops between 1002 and 1197, only 4 per cent
attended foreign education centres (25 out of a total of 646), fifteen of whom
spent some time in Paris in the twelfth century. In this group, which into the
thirteenth century included a majority unable to write, aristocratic birth and
influential patrons were more important than a period of study. If the social
conditions of'younger' Europe in the twelfth century are considered, successful careers which included university studies could only end up in church
posts. If this was already true for Germany, it was even truer for the east and
north of the continent, with sharply diminishing numbers.
Together with the introduction of Christianity in the northern countries
(eleventh till early thirteenth centuries), a well-educated higher clergy had to
be established. Pope Gregory VII proposed in 1079 to the kings of Norway
and Denmark that they send some well-born young men to the curia to be
instructed in canon law. In the second half of the twelfth century, Paris was
the educational centre for the Norwegian and, to a lesser extent, for the
Danish and Icelandic higher clergy. Indeed, after the introduction of Christianity in Iceland in the year 1000, this island showed a remarkable interest in
learning and education. Sweden and Finland followed the same pattern, but
9 P. Riche, 'Jean de Salisbury et le monde scolaire du XHe siecle', in M. Wilks (ed.), The World
of John of Salisbury , 39-61.
10 J. Ehlers, 'Verfassungs- und sozialgeschichtliche Studien zum Bildungsgang Erzbischof Adalberts II. von Mainz', Rheinische Vierteljahrsbldtter, 42. , 161-84; R.M. Herkenrath,
'Studien zum Magistertitel in der friihen Stauferzeit', Mitteilungen des Instituts fur Oesterreichische Geschichtsforschung, 87 , 3-35.
Careers of graduates
also with a time-lag of one (Sweden) or two (Finland) centuries, compared
with central European countries.11
THE UNIVERSAL AGE (1200-I380)
The 'universality' of the age 1200-13 80 was due to the existence and influence
of the papal church. The universities were primarily and essentially clerical
institutions, even when the university's pathway slowly began to lead out of
and away from the shelter of the church, or even - in the communal universities of northern Italy and southern France - to bypass it to a large extent.
Outside Italy, their members were for the most part clerics. The 'younger' a
surrounding society was by the yardstick of European development, the more
clearly was this the case. The universal age of university history ended with
the Great Schism of 1378, the division of the papacy between Rome and
Avignon, with its consequent exposure to the pressure of regional powers.
Until then, the increase in the number of university students in the individual
medieval societies can be estimated roughly and compared with their advance
in church administration. Of the 134 cardinals in the Avignon curia
(1309-78), 66 were university graduates. The social status of the various disciplines is, on the whole, reliably reflected in the fact that, of these 66 cardinals,
71 per cent had graduated in law, 28 per cent in theology, and 1 per cent in
the arts.12
Everywhere and at every level, a church emerged in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries which was, in general, legalist in emphasis. The synodal
system, fiscalization, and transactions between local churches and the curia
all contributed to this general trend and to a growing demand for university
graduates. Avignon became a main centre of the university's social success,
one of the most important focal points for the establishment of personal
contacts and a whole network of personal relationships. To be close to an
important personage in the curia was an advantage for a graduate's career.
However, a sober assessment is necessary when the situation is viewed
from the angle of the career-hungry individual. He was no more aware of
how many people like him were studying in Paris or Bologna, still less of the
state of the 'employment market' in his profession, than were the responsible
contemporary leaders then or are the historians today. The social range of
students at university may have been very wide and the geographical area
from which they were drawn extremely vast, but this is not to be misinterpreted as an ideal come true. It was indicative, on the contrary, of
11 S. Bagge, 'Nordic Students at Foreign Universities until 1660', Scandinavian Journal of
History, 9 , 1-29.
12 B. Guillemain, La Cour pontificate d'Avignon 1309—1376. Etude d'une societe ,
Peter Moraw
uncertainties and incalculable risks. Yet the individual needed some predictability, and this only existed in the regions.
This regional emphasis was thus a prevalent feature already of the universal era. The catchment area of a whole series of universities was never other
than regional in character; indeed, the importance attached to the 'nation'
reflected the need for regional anchorage. We would completely misunderstand the nature of university studies and careers in this period if we were to
link them with complete freedom of movement throughout Europe. A person
who lost the permanent link with his region was rootless and socially handicapped. If it were impossible to assume that this anchorage in the (often
modest) home society with the aid of non-academic qualifications was seen as
the primary and essential element, the picture we should have to paint of the
early universities would be a very sombre one, considering the relative
paucity of outstanding posts available in churches, courts, and cities - with
the possible exception of northern Italy. This anchorage was either modified
positively by university studies or, in the event of failure, not modified at all.
Since attendance at university without graduation was regarded as quite
normal, however, the notion of 'failure' was far from clear. In the case of the
successful and the unsuccessful, a career was normally pursued in the individual's home milieu. Central career posts, which now appear as supraregional (in papal or royal courts), were no less controlled by certain pressure
groups than minor career posts, and in this way localized.
Nor should the choice of a specific university be seen as the exercise of a
preference, since, here again, the career was normally the determining factor
in the choice. For the end of this era, this is confirmed by the precise data
from the only university of 'younger' Europe which was for a time 'universal',
i.e. that of Prague. Many scholars were drawn there from the disadvantaged
half of the continent, some of them from great distances. But, despite the
common use of the Latin tongue, hardly a single student came from 'older'
Europe outside the German-speaking area. Such a student would have compromised his position socially.
Finally, broad interactions between the university and society can be illustrated by careers within the university itself. The case of the university
teacher is examined in chapter 5. But the churches, lords, and communes also
claimed the services of professors for their own ends. The extent of these
services in comparison with teaching provides a reliable test of the social
value of the university as a whole. The churches and the courts were obviously the stronger parties, so that professors came to have second or 'underthe-counter' careers and the most successful left the university altogether.
The most important of these social developments was established in the thirteenth century, namely, the separation of graduation from the replenishment
of the ranks of university teachers. Still fundamental even today, this decision, by which graduation was left to the university and the majority of grad-
Careers of graduates
uates were sent out into the world, was accepted by society. It was an acceptance all over Europe which only the church could have brought about. The
opportunity of having a qualification which was largely or to some extent
independent of birth and property was important everywhere, but supremely
important in the modernization of less advanced societies.
THE UNIVERSAL AGE IN OLDER
The urban societies of northern Italy in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries were the most developed in Europe. Strongly expansive forces were
operating there, to which, as elsewhere - by 1350 at the latest- the brake was
suddenly applied. Given the endless variety of detail and the lack of representative statistics, all we can attempt here is a brief outline of the general
developments.13
In the first place, alongside the usual social classes, certain factors dependent on 'market mechanisms' should be noted. Mobility between aristocratic
and common birth was nowhere greater than in Italy. An aristocracy which
had lost most of its resources came to terms with the wealthy bourgeoisie,
which felt the attraction of the courts. Knowledge and culture as administered by the universities were hardly less helpful here than the already tried
and tested field of law. In the communes, minimum standards were established for active jurists in the thirteenth century, and this meant not so much
graduation as a minimum period of study. Only two centuries later was this
the case in France. To a far greater degree than elsewhere in Europe, the
Italian university also lived off the city in the cultural area of rhetoric and
dictamen as part of political and administrative life. A developed educational
system offered further opportunities for arts graduates, not only as teachers
but also as secretaries in the chancelleries of princes or towns. Physicians
appeared as practitioners, scholars, and members of the urban elite. More
properly here than elsewhere we can thus speak of 'professions'.
For France in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the view from the
south is instructive, especially if, out of the wealth of facts, we emphasize
only the historically very important role of the jurists, who implemented the
royal policy of establishing a strong, expansive, and unifying monarchy. For
the beginning of the period, however, the difference between north and south
and the latter's connection with northern Italy should be stressed. A relatively
uniform north-western Mediterranean area, including parts of Catalonia, is
evidenced later on as a largely urbanized and laicized region through trade,
13 C. Lefebvre, 'Juges et savants en Europe (i3e-i6e s.)', Ephemerides iuris canonici, 22 {1966),
76-202; 23 , 9-61; T. Pesenti Marangon, 'Universita, giudici e notai a Padova nei primi
annidedominioEzzeliniano (1237-1241)', Quaderni per la storia dell'Umversitd di Padova, 12
 , 1—61; W. M. Bowsky, A Medieval Italian Commune. Siena under the Nine, 1287-1355
 .
Peter Moraw
communications, and the legal system. The Italian influence on the spread of
the consulate system, the notariate, and even jurisprudence in southern
France can be traced step by step. Bologna influenced legal culture from the
beginning of the twelfth century. Many Frenchmen from the south had
studied there, but most of these returned home for their careers. Since
Bologna was so easily accessible, effective law teaching was not established in
the Midi earlier than around 1260-70 - in Toulouse a generation later, in
Montpellier earlier than the official foundation of the university (1229,1289).
An almost 'Italian-style' legal landscape, with written law even in the private
sphere, already existed at that time.
Here it is possible for the first time to gain a more precise idea of academic
careers. In the five senechaussees of the south between 1280 and 1320, 189
jurists are named as being in royal service, 131 of them as judges, and 58 as
advocates and procurators, with 54 of them bearing the title of doctor.14 This
is a figure which would have to be regarded as unimaginable in 'younger'
Europe even centuries later. Work for private or public employers in the
towns of the region was regarded as normal. Service in the royal entourage
was not eagerly sought; it was poorly rewarded and only on a short-term
basis. No more than ten or eleven jurists found their way to the king or
parliament in Paris. The jurists outside the royal service created a legal
climate which kept the acts of the monarchy under constant surveillance, in
the formal expert way at least. As a result, the king's servants also had to be
sufficient in number and of good enough quality to avoid wasting time in
parliament. For the king's opponents employed advocates, too. The cities in
particular hired them in growing numbers, and, from the fourteenth century,
an increasing number of jurists also figured among their consules, with the
exception of Montpellier. The new legal culture thus spread in terms of both
'style' and personnel, providing employment for other colleagues. Even the
offspring of aristocratic families became doctores, though most of the latter
were bourgeois. Most of them continued to be interested solely in the problems of the regions to which they returned after university. There were exceptions, of course, such as Guillaume de Nogaret, professor of Roman law in
Montpellier, and Pierre Flote, well known as royal ministers with few scruples. At home, hopes of rising into the patriciate were cherished. As examples
of careers from Lyon show, it was necessary to invest a considerable sum of
money and this the family had first to find. Without it, success was hard to
come by.15
In the north, which gradually gained the upper hand politically, we have
14 J. R. Strayer, Les Gens de justice du Languedoc sous Philippe le Bel , 2off.
15 Universites en France, 95—108; J. Verger, 'Les rapports entre universites italiennes et universites franchises meridionales (Xlle-XVe siecles)', in Universitd e societa, 145-72; A. Gouron, Le
role social des juristes dans les villes meridionales au Moyen Age', Annales de la Faculte des
Lettres et Sciences Humaines de Nice, 9-10 , 55—67; R. Fedou, Les Hommes de loi
lyonnais a la fin du Moyen Age. Etude sur les origines de la classe de robe .
Careers of graduates
documentation of conditions from the royal court and the churches. Jurists
from both the south and (more numerous) the north were in royal service.
However, after 1285 and with the advent of Philip IV the Fair, one finds
above all jurists from the northern part of the kingdom trained at Orleans
working in the parliament, the public accounting office, and the
chancellery.16 As everywhere in Europe, compared with the knightly aristocracy on which every ruler continued to be dependent, they constituted a
minority in the royal court. There were, however, posts which only jurists
could fill competently, and these were growing in number. After a preliminary stage under Philip II Augustus and Louis IX (1214-70), jurists were regularly present. Around 1300, an era matured. Careers began to emerge which
had originated in the bailliages and senechaussees. Self-recruitment in social
groups became a familiar phenomenon. From around 1280, jurists are to be
found among the counts of Flanders, who were particularly dangerous
vassals; twenty or forty years before this, there were magistri who may have
been jurists.17
Under Pope John XXII (1316-34), the entire world of the French church
can be surveyed in terms of the system of benefices.18 Numbers which
command respect clearly show the superiority of France, at all events on the
continent north of the Alps. Of 16,773 papal interventions in the French and
Burgundian churches, 4,879 were concerned with graduates. If the accumulation of benefices is considered, 14,000 persons were involved, of whom
around 4,000 were graduates. More than half of these, i.e. 2,836 clerics, had
studied jurisprudence. We find the amazing figure of 1,255 doctorates and
licentiates in civil law, to which figure must be added 252 canon law titles and
329 from both disciplines. Finally, of the 556 who graduated in more than one
faculty, another 403 were jurists of all grades. This leaves a total of 381 arts
men, 359 physicians, and 305 theologians. Only 442 figure as non-graduates.
The best individual example in the long run is the royally connected cathedral
chapter of Laon.19 From 1272 to 1412,48 per cent of 850 canons were masters
or held a higher degree. Prior to 1200, the proportion was 15 per cent, rising
to 22 per cent between 1200 and 1220 and then, from 1240 to 1280 and thereafter until 1378, already to 45 per cent and 43 per cent, respectively. After
1378, the proportion was 65.5 per cent. One hundred and sixty canons were
jurists, n o of them doctors or licentiates. Not more than 15 per cent of the
16 R. Cazelles, Societe politique, noblesse et couronne sous Jean le Bon et Charles V ; R. Cazelles, 'Unechancelleriepriviligiee: celledePhilippe VI de Valois', Bibliothequede
I'Ecole des Chartes, 124 , 355-81.
17 B. Guenee, Tribunaux etgens de justice dans le bailliage de Senlis a la fin du Moyen Age (vers
1380-vers 1550) ; J. Gilissen, 'Les legistes en Flandre aux XHIe et XlVe
siecles', Bulletin de la Commission royale des anciennes lois et ordonnances de Belgique, 15
 , 117-231.
18 L. Caillet, La Papaute d'Avignon et I'eglise de France . See also note 12.
19 H. Millet, Les Chanoines du chapitre cathedral de Laon 1272-1412 .
Peter Moraw
canons were of noble descent, though most of the rest were not really bourgeois in the broad sense but - as befitted a church with royal and papal
connections - members of a bourgeois church officialdom. Since statistics of
this kind must mostly do service for general social conditions, even in large
nations, another of the few still known groups of data is added here. If the
names of all known French health specialists (physicians in the strict sense, as
well as barbers and surgeons) are arranged chronologically, the resultant
picture is of a fairly clear increase from the first half of the twelfth to the
second half of the fifteenth century, though at different rates, of course. The
largest increase occurred in the second half of the thirteenth century and the
smallest in the fourteenth century. The numbers for the first half of the
twelfth century are related to those of the second half of the fifteenth century
in the proportion of one to five.20
It is difficult to obtain more than an accidental glimpse into less lucrative
professions than those of jurists and physicians. This is the case, for example,
when an attempt is made to demonstrate the difficult position in which
masters of arts, no less than other arts men, found themselves. Even at an
advanced age, 'ordinary' masters found themselves badly provided for in the
way of benefices attached to teaching posts for permanent servants of the
university. That makes sense since, in this respect, the pre-state university fell
between all possible stools. In the first instance, secular and ecclesiastical
patrons were obliged to provide for closely connected persons, so that there
was rarely anything left over for the 'free enterprise' of the masters. The
simple masters of arts, if they did not obtain a sufficient ecclesiastical benefice, often had to resort to modest employment as schoolmasters. Although
masters of theology had better chances, either in high offices of the church or
in better endowed professorships, they suffered from the competition of the
jurists in their careers. The luckiest were those who belonged to mendicant
orders and who generally attained high posts in their respective orders.21
The Iberian peninsula's part in the universal age of university history was
more passive than active. The most valuable input came from the Universities
of Salamanca (from 1218-19), and Lisbon-Coimbra (from 1288-89). Particularly in the thirteenth century, however, the migration to Italy and southern France, and also to Paris and even to Oxford (in both instances for theology, which was lacking at home before the Great Schism), seems to be more
important. This was true, above all, for canon law, though the Iberian universities followed the Bologna model. But there was no urban milieu, as in Italy,
nor was there any early laicization; rather the dominant role of monarchies
and churches prevailed. In Castile, however, the two universities - Salamanca
20 D. Jacquart, Le Milieu medical en France du XHe au XV'e siecle .
21 T. Schmidt, 'Pariser Magister des 14. Jahrhunderts und ihre Pfrunden', Francia, 14 ,
103-38; J. Verger, 'Pour une histoire de la maitrise-es-arts au Moyen Age: quelques jalons',
Medie'vales:
13 , 117-30.
Careers of graduates
and Valladolid - which were both protected and financed by the king and the
towns, trained a not insignificant number (though inferior to the numbers
trained in France or England) of letrados, masters of arts and law graduates,
who subsequently found employment in the royal, ecclesiastical, or municipal
administrations and tribunals. However, given the 'feudal' structure of the
country, which was still predominant, the group of letrados, while becoming
increasingly important during the course of the fourteenth century, never
really became autonomous; many graduates entered the entourage of the aristocracy.22 This situation already announced that of the countries belonging to
the Holy Roman Empire.
Of English bishops between 1216 and 1499, 57 per cent studied at Oxford
and another 10 per cent at Cambridge. The numbers increased from century
to century, so that in the fifteenth century, for example, the proportion of
bishops having attended one of the two universities rose to 91 per cent; under
Henry HI (1207-72) the figure was 51 per cent and under Edward III
(1326-77) it was 70 per cent. The proportion of theology to law, which in the
beginning was surprisingly high, declined to what was still a high level, i.e.
around 40 per cent. At a very rough estimate, a fifth of all Oxford students in
this period attended a higher faculty. Given the overall situation, it is not
surprising that graduates not only followed the customary road into cathedral
and collegiate chapters but also, to an internationally exceptional degree
perhaps, into the parish clergy. Already between 1280 and 1317, the highest
figures in some dioceses were 26 per cent and the lowest 7 per cent.23
Again, we have no comparable statistics for the secular field, that is to say
for judges and other civil servants of the crown. As in France, the erasure of
the boundary between clergy and laity within the group of 'clerks' in the
thirteenth century was an important factor. In point of fact this accelerated
the laicization of society.24 The discernible trends are, as expected, in the
direction of really 'modern' conditions. Among the graduates, for example,
the success of arts men continued to diminish. Despite the fact that judicial
careers were still pursued in the field of customary law far from the universities, the most effective way of entering administration of all kinds was to
have studied civil law or, at a pinch, canon law, at the university.
22 A. Rucquoi, 'Societes urbaines et universites en Castille au Moyen Age', in D. Poirion (ed.),
Milieux universitaires
et mentalite urbaine au Moyen Age , 103-17.
23 T. H. Aston, 'Oxford's Medieval Alumni', Past and Present, 74 , 3-40; T. H. Aston,
G. D. Duncan, and T. A. R. Evans, 'The Medieval Alumni of the University of Cambridge',
Past and Present, 86 , 9-87; R. B. Dobson, 'Recent Prosopographical Research in Late
Medieval English History: University Graduates, Durham Monks, and York Canons', in
N. Bulst and J. P. Genet (eds.), Medieval
Lives and the Historian.
Studies in Medieval Prosopography
 , 181—200.
24 Cf. J. R. Strayer, 'The Laicization of French and English Society in the Thirteenth Century',
15 , 76—86.
Peter Moraw
THE UNIVERSAL AGE IN YOUNGER
Only from the last period of the universal era of university history did a
university also exist in 'younger' Europe. What does this imply for the period
before 1348 and what changed after that date?
Despite considerable regional differences, central Europe is to be seen as a
unity. From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century, a significant acceleration
and equalization took place in medieval university history, once this central
area had, in some measure, reached the demographic and urban level of the
west (but not of the south), and once the clerical monopoly of literacy had
begun to be broken. The chronology of this process is still insufficiently
known. At all events it was characterized, as normally happens in historical
developments, by speedy accommodation at the summit and a slower effort,
intensively and qualitatively speaking, on a broad front. Studies and careers
were more clearly separated than in 'older' Europe. There was less social
mobility; usually it was more a matter of redistributing existing resources
than of securing fresh ones. The decisive change in the direction of an
academic 'competitive society', already existing in the northern Italian cities
to a great extent, did not take place here until the late fifteenth century.
Although there were a number of quasi-university institutions - the result
of efforts mostly in the first half of the thirteenth century - studies in
'younger' Europe relied on migration to the 'older' European centres, since
the domestic educational institutions did not offer graduation. For the many
who subsequently occupied leading posts, the experience abroad was of
supreme importance, particularly for the Germans. Unfortunately, we have
more or less precise knowledge only of the 'upper class', comprising those
who followed successful careers. They probably numbered altogether several
thousands in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Round about 1300, the
German nation of the University of Bologna regularly totalled more than 200
students.25 From the very beginning, however, there must also have been a
migration of poor students, often in the wake of the powerful, though it is
still hardly possible for poor people to be identified as individuals. Even in
Germany, the university, once it existed, was mainly an urban phenomenon.
In the measure that university study was followed by a successful career, it
was for the Germans, none the less, an aristocratic privilege. Only in the
lower Rhineland was the situation somewhat different; the behaviour pattern
there was part of 'older' Europe. Moreover, in many areas it is not easy to
distinguish between the lesser nobility and early urban leadership groups.
Only in the later fourteenth century do we find the vital social changes
25 S. Stelling-Michaud, L'Universite de Bologne et la penetration des droits romain et canonique
enSuisseauxXHIeetXlVesiecles
 ; A. I. Pini,' "Discere turba volens". Studenti
e vita studentesca a Bologna dalle origini dello Studio alia meta del trecento', Studi e Metnorie
per la Storia deH'Unwersitd di Bologna, new series, 7 , 62-9.
Careers of graduates
taking place, with the participation of many from the bourgeois class as well
as with the beginnings of laicization.
A second mark of the first successful students was their church connection.
In contrast to the situation in 'older' Europe, here the study of canon law was
the main discipline for politics and higher administration. Except in the lower
Rhineland, Roman law remained a luxury discipline up to the fifteenth
century, until the emperor finally made this an option for Germany as well,
and not exclusively one for his Italian subjects (as during the Salian and
Staufer period already). The elite usually pursued their studies after having
first secured a canonry or similar benefice on the basis of birth. This led to
attitudes of superiority and even arrogance in centres such as Bologna, Padua,
and Orleans. At first, therefore, there was a tendency in Germany to stress
rather than ignore the old differences in development. Most of the benefices
in cathedral and collegiate churches were in the west and south, since the
north and east were often poorly provided for in this respect. An aristocratic
student or jurist still belonged to a minority in his own aristocratic society,
which continued to fill posts by regional family alliance. Noble birth made
successful study possible, but successful study was not a typical sign of
nobility. Even up until about 1350, there were many noble canons able, at a
pinch, to read, but unable to write. The attitude of a collegiate chapter to
study largely depended on regional and social conditions. It was in the
fifteenth century that the sudden change came about. Whereas 29 per cent of
the canons in the cathedral chapter of Breslau (1341-1417) and 21 per cent of
those in the cathedral chapter of Bressanone (Brixen) (1300-1400) were
students, the percentage soon after increased sharply, to 60 per cent in Bressanone, for instance.26
A third characteristic of aristocratic study was its markedly minority role
at the moment when it became possible for the masses to enter the arts
faculties. Even in the fifteenth century, less than 3 per cent of all German
university students managed to obtain a degree in a higher faculty. The
opportunity of becoming a graduate in this way was good for someone of
noble birth or - from the fourteenth century - of wealthy urban origin. In
other words, the division between the haves and have-nots was fairly clearly
reflected in the faculties. Jurisprudence was the science for the elite even in
the church, which, in Germany, was still largely 'feudal' in the higher ranks.
The arts and theology faculties were bastions of the middle class and poorer
classes, particularly of social climbers - though mostly only up to a stage
below the really important posts. One reason why the faculties of medicine
were the smallest among the higher faculties north of the Alps (see chapter
11), and enjoyed less esteem than the others, was due to the fact that, of all
the graduates, medical doctors frequently received the lowest recognition in
26 L. Santifaller, Das Brixner Domkapitel in seiner personlichen Zusammensetzung im Mittelalter, 2 vols. , especially vol. I, ii4ff.
Peter Moraw
medieval society. Doctores medicinae or physici, as they were also called,
were few and originated from the middle or artisan classes (often surgeons'
sons). Medical education and the medical profession were often tied to
certain families.27
As for jurists, what happened in the courts of the king and princes is this
time better known than in 'older' Europe. The numbers were fewer in comparison, the degrees more modest, and social relationships more oldfashioned. Just as clearly observable as in the west and south of the continent,
however, is the evidently irresistible tendency for all higher administration to
be brought under the control of the jurists and the increasing range of career
possibilities accompanying this process. The number of jurists who had
business with the ruler multiplied sixfold from King Rudolf I (1273-91) to the
Emperor Frederick III (1440-93) - 230 persons in all. The princes of the Holy
Roman Empire followed suit with their legal staff (some 700 persons from
1250 to 1440), depending on the challenges facing the princes and the situation of their country's development. As usual, the west and south of the
empire were favoured.28
Despite the relatively homogeneous social background of the jurists, there
was no uniform recruitment pattern for the Holy Roman Empire as a whole.
Decisions were made regionally depending on the situation at the centre of
government. Until the fifteenth century, study abroad continued to be a
socially more valuable qualification and here, apart from west of the Rhine,
Italy was the clear favourite. From around 1370, jurists would appear to
occupy posts on the basis of their training at German universities, with the
result that those with an urban background became increasingly important.
Although the university founded in Prague in 1348 closed down after two
generations it was of fundamental importance for the relation between higher
education and society in 'younger' Europe. There were fewer possibilities for
careers, and the accessibility of less modern societies was more limited, given
the practically irreparable backlog of a century or more. Prague could never
become Paris or Bologna, any more than could Vienna or Heidelberg. These
and other 'daughter' institutions of Prague were implanted by the authorities,
as in Prague itself; there was no development in stages. Because of their
poverty, they were subject to the pressure of the need for constitutional and
social unity and, later on, to the pressure of the regional lord in favour of
'rationalization'. The rectorial register, henceforth the most important source
for the social history of universities, since it enables us to replace guesses by
27 E. T. Nauck, 'Die Zahl der Medizinstudenten deutscher Hochschulen im 14.-18 Jahrhundert',
Archiv fur die Geschichte
der Medizin
und der Naturwissenschaften,
38 ,
175—86; Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
28 P. Moraw, 'Gelehrte Juristen im Dienst der deutschen Konige des spaten Mittelalters (1273-
1493)', in R. Schnur (ed.), Die Rolle der Juristen bei der Entstehung des modernen Staates
 , 77-147; I. Mannl, 'Die gelehrten Juristen im Dienst der deutschen Fiirsten im
spaten Mittelalter (1250-1440)', dissertation, Giessen, 1986.
Careers of graduates
statistics, was itself the product of such straitened conditions. It is no accident
that the oldest one we have is that of the jurists' University of Prague (1372-
The social situation of Prague can be seen as a continuation and development of the two-stage study pattern of the migration period. Over and against
the 3,563 inscribed jurists, there were at least five times as many arts students,
the vast majority of whom did not even obtain the lowest degree. University
attendance thus meant very different things. The first signs of the social
modernization processes (of which we shall speak later) began to appear
towards the end of the century, for example, in the remarkable devotion to
the study of arts and theology in Bohemia. There seemed to be too few suitable posts in churches and administration, however. The university crisis,
which, after 1400, culminated in the Hussite question, was also connected
with the over production of masters or arts who wished to prolong their stay
at university.29
Prague University initiated for future leaders experiences of the kind that
had previously been provided by the south and west of Europe for the benefit
of central Europe. But this 'international' role of Prague concerned only
'younger' Europe in a surprisingly strict way. The Scandinavians soon
switched from Paris to Prague and, after Prague's demise, mostly to Leipzig
(from 1409) and Rostock (from 1419), so that a part of Europe was
reoriented. The same principle applied in other eastern European countries,
such as Poland and Hungary. The highest input of students was from Poland.
The fact that the leading urban groups were often of German origin made it
easier for students from Poland and Hungary, and perhaps also from Sweden,
to pursue their studies in Germany.30 The main social attributes of German
students can be found some time later in Scandinavia, firstly in Denmark,
then in Sweden and Norway, and finally in Finland. Studying in Italy continued to be important because of the high social rank of students and the
corresponding likelihood of their subsequently occupying high positions,
mostly in the churches.
From the fourteenth century, nearly all the Nordic bishops had studied and
about half of the canons of the cathedral and collegiate chapters, including
those from Finland. The number of educated clergymen increased constantly
until the Reformation in all the northern countries. Lay graduates from the
upper social strata could also follow a career in the king's service. The
Norwegian royal administration had more educated non-noble laymen than
the Swedish or Danish. Both Denmark and Sweden had a wealthier and more
29 P. Moraw, 'Die Universitat Prag im Mittelalter', in Die Universitat zu Frag ,
30 G. Bonis, 'La penetration du droit romain dans les pays slaves et hongrois', Recueil de Memoires et Travaux publie par la Societe d'Histoire du Droit et des Institutions
des Anciens Pays de
Droit Ecrit, 6 , 75-83.
Peter Moraw
privileged aristocracy, whose education conformed more to the normal
pattern of aristocratic families in central Europe.31 All in all, there were
enough career opportunities for wealthy students coming home after having
spent some years at a foreign university. It is, however, difficult to know to
what extent an academic education stimulated social mobility.
THE NATIONAL AND REGIONAL ERA IN OLDER
(138O-I5OO)
The third phase of European university history may be described as one of
concentration i.e. of both intensification and narrowing, as with many other
contemporary developments. The concrete event which serves as the caesura
here - the Great Schism of 1378 - points both to the decline of the universal
church and the growth of the individual state. Equally important, at a time
when the total population was sharply decreasing, was the relative and somtimes absolute increase in the number of university students. From around
1450, this was once again offset by a general increase in population. Instead of
small groups of students, as was the case prior to and around 1200, we are
now able to envisage totals running into hundreds of thousands, even when
some of the older universities encountered a period of difficulties during the
course of the fifteenth century (Avignon, Montpellier).
In this phase, urban northern Italy, still the most modern of the four main
contexts of medieval universities, also offers the least clear profile. It would
be presumptuous to venture any summary. We can, however, consider the
dozen or so more or less successful Italian universities existing around 1500 as
a single system in which students often moved from one place to another.
This was independent of the fact that these universities, too, were increasingly being pressed into the service of the states. At the same time,
throughout the fifteenth century, the social mobility within these universities
remained considerable.
When we compare its jurists and educated physicians, certain features of
the leading and also most attractive community, namely Florence, are characteristic of the wider picture.32 These are significant groups (163 individuals
from 1380 to 1530,150 individuals from 1350 to 1450) with radically different
social patterns. On the basis of a far better quality of biographical material
than exists for all the above-mentioned groups, one common feature which
could previously be presumed but is now demonstrable was that a career did
not depend solely on the study pursued. Both career and study are part of a
long-term and broad-based ensemble of social connections, which have to be
interpreted in terms of the family destiny at their centre. The decision to
31 Bagge, 'Nordic Students' (note 11), 8-13; H. Holma and A. Maliniema, Les Etudiants
finlandais au moyen age , 13—15.
32 L. Martines, Lawyers and Statecraft in Renaissance
 .
Careers of graduates
study and the choice of discipline were not just autonomous options marking
a fresh start, but were often determined by factors which continued to affect
the career beyond the study period.
For the groups of Florentine patricians and leading social climbers whose
success was already evident, a period of legal studies was, in the first place,
the consequence of a successful family history, now consolidated after generations of risky trading: one's son and grandson would study jurisprudence.
This pattern reminds us of capable upper middle-class merchants north of the
Alps and their efforts to establish themselves in their more traditional milieu
by 'old-fashioned' land ownership and noble rank. Those jurists practised
their profession but it was not a profession of the kind familiar to us in the
modern struggle for existence. It was only the third group of Florentine jurists
that came close to assimilating this active model, since those who belonged to
it had to offset their foreign origin; but they were of respectable status, too,
otherwise they would have had no chance of success at all. To achieve
success, hard work was indispensable. There was no fourth group worth
speaking of. Not surprisingly, in view of the increasing complexity of conditions both at home and abroad, the commune recruited from these subgroups on the basis of individual achievement, with opportunities diminishing proportionately from the first to the third of them, those jurists who
served as political leaders in Florence- and, all in all, they were an impressive
number. A similar process has also been established in the case of Milan and
Venice, here with political conditions of an even pricklier kind. Even smaller
towns like Pistoia increased the number of posts to be filled by jurists.33 In
Florence, if nowhere else, it was an elite of a kind rarely encountered with
such a clear profile.
To be a physician on the Arno, on the contrary, was much more 'modern'
and also more uncertain and the prospects were poorer, not to mention the
dangers of the profession in times of major epidemics. This may have been a
major reason why the group of 'incomers' from the rural districts and from
beyond the frontiers was the largest; this was already the occasion of much
unrest in the social history of the medical doctors. But even among the Florentines, who found themselves increasingly in a minority, the study of medicine and the careers to which it led were, from the angle of family history,
only a first and usually the only step upwards for secondary health agents,
minor traders, and notaries, and even artisans (but very seldom - only three
cases have been identified). Three doctors came from the aristocracy, fifteen
were recognized social climbers. Medical studies were very expensive and
subsequently extremely rewarding financially. The mercenary factor was
much more prevalent than among the jurists. The medical profession had no
powerful tradition, received less support from family connections, and had
33 D. Herlihy, Medieval and Renaissance Pistoia .
Peter Moraw
less traditional influence on sons than was the case with the jurists. When, as
in three instances, a doctor broke into the limited circle of those with some
political influence, this was certainly an individual achievement of some
weight by comparison with the fifty jurists who did likewise.
The better-known French conditions none the less need to be commented
upon in any attempted survey, even if it is only possible to speak of trends
rather than quantities.34 One fundamental feature of what also happened
here was the process of regionalization, characteristic of the world into which
the eight universities founded in the fifteenth century were born (on the
whole, these remained relatively small). This regionalization affected even
Paris and, to an increasing extent, the 'customers' of the universities, even the
royal institutions. The French law faculties developed into almost exclusively
professional and largely laicized training schools. By 'professional' here we
mean not so much immediate applicability but a general training in legal
thinking and, even more, the process of socialization among one's peers. At
all events, the universities established very concrete contacts with the families
which sent them their sons, ties which even tended to transform the social
structures of the university. The heavy fees typical of the system meant that
the profession was restricted almost completely to well-off families. All this
was hardly possible except on the basis of an expensive and private preparatory education at school or at home. It was a far cry from the traditional
Parisian 'general' arts courses open to all and which, judged from the standpoint of social success now (and probably earlier), turned out to be vague and
ineffectual. A second Paris was never established in France. It remains unclear
how large arts faculties should be judged, whether as more advanced philosophical schools or as training grounds for beginners, differing little from the
school milieu. Even the higher level of the lawyers was full of uncertainties. It
is astonishing, or perhaps indicative of fluctuations in social life, which must
be assumed to have been widespread, that the pool of French jurists studying
at one and the same time (estimated as from 3,000 to 3,300 in all) changed its
proportions within a few years (1393/94-1403): a two-thirds majority from
the south was changed into a two-thirds majority from the north, with the
total figure remaining unchanged.
For canonists, the churches were the main employers. Yet graduates in
Roman law enjoyed greater prestige; even in the church, they often occupied
the highest positions. But it was obviously the king, important princes (duke
of Burgundy, duke of Brittany, count of Provence), or the cities which nor-
34 In addition to references in notes 15-17: J. Favier, 'Les legistes et le gouvernement de Philippe
le Bel', Journal des Savants , 92-108; J. Verger, 'Sul ruolo sociale delle universita: La
Francia tra Medioevo e Rinascimento', Quaderni storici, 23 , 313-58; A. Gouron, 'Le
recrutement des juristes dans les universites meridionales a la fin du XIVe siecle: Pays de
canonistes et pays de civilistes?', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, 524-48; A. Rigaudiere, 'Hierarchie socioprofessionnelle et gestion municipale dans les villes du midi francais au
bas Moyen Age', Revue historique, 269 , 25-68.
Careers of graduates
mally made use of their competence. Compared with Italy and the south of
France, the laicization of northern lawyers and the advance of northern
jurists in the cities was clearly belated, not occurring until the second half of
the fourteenth century. Once again, this advance had a twofold thrust; it
served the ambitions of newcomers who wished to rise in the world and,
later, the further consolidation of existing leading families or those still of
secondary rank. Examples from Lyon, Poitiers, or smaller towns show that
here, though a start was made later than in Florence, the success was greater.
This was probably due to the fewer political demands made under the cloak
of the monarchy and to a more restrained political climate. In the leading
cities, at all events, after earlier beginnings, roughly between 1430 and
1456-60, jurists became so firmly established in the ranks of lay assessors and
councillors that it became possible to speak in superficial terms of a predominance of doctors and licentiates. What this amounted to, however, was
not only a dissolution of the old aristocracy but also a new legitimacy of
hitherto leading families. The result was a transformed urban world. At the
same time, graduates were well represented amongst the clergy, especially in
the cathedral chapters; many canon lawyers served both the state and the
church. The spread of Gallicanism and the retreat of papal intervention in the
fifteenth century did not permanently exclude graduates from ecclesiastical
benefices; they were too numerous and too indispensable.35
In the fifteenth century, the development of the power of the monarchy
was also dependent on leading groups of various kinds and was seriously
hindered by fickle political fortunes. However, the social factors proved the
most difficult to master. A group of jurists on whose expertise every monarch
increasingly depended reacted with temporary changes rather than with a
really fresh start. The Paris parliament - the supreme royal court - and the
central administration outside the court were two groups each consisting of
roughly a hundred persons with very extensive structures by European standards. The parliament (we have details of 678 of its members between 1345
and 1450) was undoubtedly the more compact group. Perhaps with the exception of the papal court, this parliament contained more legal expertise in an
increasingly concentrated social form than anywhere else in Europe. The data
on graduation show the expected increase, but it is generally agreed, with
more reason here than elsewhere, that possession of a degree is already to be
assumed as normal practice around 1350. During the latter part of the
fifteenth century, the practice of handing down an office in the family, which
as a widespread normal practice hardly raised an eyebrow any longer, also
existed in the group of members of parliament. However, the hereditary
nature of an office did not imply abandoning one's law studies, as the act of
studying had become a family tradition.
35 H. Millet, 'Quels furent les beneficiaires de la soustraction d'obedience de 1398 dans les
chapitres cathedraux fran^ais?', in Bulst and Genet (eds.), Medieval Lives (note 23), 123-37.
Peter Moraw
The extent of the legal complexion of the teams of twenty-seven bailiffs
and twelve seneschals was clearly less than the number of posts available, i.e.
two or three in each case. Here, again, an increase was possible, but hardly
prior to 1500. At the end of the fifteenth century, as illustrated by the case of
the small bailliage of Senlis, north of Paris, not only the two or three royal
judges of the tribunal but also the advocates and even the mere attorneys
were increasingly university graduates.
From 1434, five new provincial parliaments were created. This made it
possible for advocates, who were now - with increasing frequency - licentiates and doctors, to establish a permanent place in administrative and judicial circles. In many cases the way was opened to wealth and nobility. All
these posts, however, lacked any supreme decision-making authority. Posts
with such authority were still reserved for the ruler's aristocratic ministers,
although, before the end of the fifteenth century, hardly any thought was
given to supplementing their training with legal education. There were never
more than a few jurists in the royal council.
The year 1450 is the rough boundary between the earlier stagnation and
the extension of possibilities. Henceforth we can reasonably speak of a legally
educated leading stratum independent of the church. The next step, which
appears logical but which was only tentatively taken prior to 1500, was to
establish conditions for controlling admissions to the legal 'professions', too.
As dates, 1490 may be indicated for advocates and 1499 for the lieutenants
generaux of the bailiffs and seneschals. This was not so much the creation of
something entirely new, but rather the confirmation of customary practice in
written form. Correspondingly, perhaps also as the result of an oversupply,
the importance of graduation to some extent declined. The same thing is
found in other countries as well, so that licentiates and doctors are now
found occupying posts which previously seemed inappropriate. This reversal
applied still more to graduation in the arts. Apart from individual cases,
however, we still do not know which professions the masters and students of
the large Paris faculty entered before and after 1450. Certain masters of arts
became attorneys, others schoolmasters; many remained in the lower ranks
of the urban clergy.
There was little change in the main features of English university history in
the fifteenth century. The first interesting point is that, with an estimated
2,000 persons studying contemporaneously at Oxford and Cambridge prior
to 1400, and with the increase in this figure to roughly 3,000 around the year
1450, the student population was very large in proportion to the population
as a whole. It was certainly higher than in France and far higher than in
central Europe. 'Older' than in France or Italy, however, was the fact that in
England all this was closely connected with the church. Here again, we must
remember the gradual blurring of the boundaries between clergy and laity.
The situation was not greatly altered by the Reformation.
Careers of graduates
The registers of New College, Oxford (founded in 1379), enable us for
once to cite original 'statistical' data for medieval England. An analysis of the
background of students (937 in all, excluding unclear cases), which presents a
rather more 'conservative' picture than the university average, shows that,
from 1380 to 1500,63.2 per cent of the students came from the rural areas; the
majority of them may have belonged to families of 'smallholders'. Only 21.8
per cent were urban residents, and one in seven of them from the urban
'aristocracy'. The proportion of gentry (including state officials in this group)
amounted to 12.5 per cent. Only six persons were nobles in the narrower
sense and only two from the lower class. A very remarkable fact is that 45 per
cent of the 'smallholders' lived on college land.36 A study of the careers of
2,040 persons (42.5 per cent of these are unclarified cases or early deaths)
demonstrates the overwhelming predominance of church posts, also for the
period from 1451 to 1500: 39 per cent joined the ranks of the parish clergy, a
further 5 per cent of clergymen went into church administration and the
courts, another 2.5 per cent into an amalgam of church and secular administration and justice, and finally 7.5 per cent into other clerical posts. For only
2.5 per cent is there evidence of posts exclusively in the lay world (officials,
judges, schoolmasters). If we examine the same source material for the longer
but less uniform period from 1380 to 1520 (with 44 per cent of unclarified
cases or early deaths), we find that at least 46 per cent entered the ecclesiastical sphere and only 5.5 per cent that of the laity.37
As everywhere in 'older' Europe, in England civil and canon law stood side
by side and even attracted increasing numbers of students from around 1460,
but both were primarily in the service of the church. In contrast to the situation in highly urbanized northern Italy, the laity may well have represented
the more modest part. In these circumstances, the benefice situation was
hardly less fundamental than in Germany. Fluctuations in the attitude of
those with disposal rights became vital questions for the university - a situation very different from the one prevailing in the Mediterranean area. Clerical activities to a large extent overlapped with secular ones. Equally 'medieval' was the open rivalry between graduates and otherwise qualified persons
for posts outside cathedral chapters and large collegiate churches. This, of
course, was another aspect of the continuing relatively high social mobility,
even into the rank of bishop. On the other hand, the element of 'self-recruitment' was not absent in official circles. As for the career opportunities of the
36 G. F. Lytle, 'The Social Origins of Oxford Students in the Late Middle Ages: New College, c.
1380-c. 1510', in Universities
in the hate Middle
Ages, 426-54.
37 In addition to references in note 23: J. T. Rosenthal, 'The Fifteenth-Century Episcopate:
Careers and Bequests', in D. Baker (ed.), Sanctity and Secularity
 , 117-27; R. N.
Swanson, 'Universities, Graduates and Benefices in Later Mediaeval England', Past and
Present, 106 , 28-61; R. N. Swanson, 'Learning and Living: University Study and Clerical
Careers in Later Medieval England', History of Universities,
6 , 81-103.
Peter Moraw
poor, nothing can be said with certainty.38 Yet the fairly high proportion of
pauperes in the combined English-German 'nation' in Paris (1425-94: 17.6
per cent) will probably not have been the situation of the continentals only. In
short, though we may know little of the social history of the English universities, the distinctive position of the kingdom of England between the main
landscapes of Europe emerges very clearly.
The most important general change in the career of Spanish students took
place not long before 1500.39 In a period of rapid economic growth, 'modern'
monarchies needed far more good-quality officials than before. The number
of holders of higher offices with academic titles thus steadily increased, by as
much as 11.7 per cent in the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella (1474-1516). The
first appearance of these letrados can be traced back to the late fourteenth
century. The new foundations were state universities, to promote jurisprudence in the first instance. In the kingdom of Castile, the letrados trained
at the Universities of Salamanca and Valladolid continued to obtain high
clerical posts - in the fifteenth century, they represented almost half of the
members of the chapters of Valladolid - and offices in the royal administration. Barcelona, the capital of Catalonia, with its characteristics of Italian and
southern French communes, demonstrated from the late fourteenth century
considerable participation and influence of jurists in its municipal and private
affairs.40
THE NATIONAL AND REGIONAL ERA IN YOUNGER
Between 1348 and 1505, there were 200,000 German university students. This
figure is the first and only statement based on a reliable overall estimate. For
the generation prior to 1380 we have only to subtract a few thousands. For
1470-80, the number is reckoned as five times that for 1390-1400; there were
at the end of the period easily 2,500 new students each year. Around 1480,
the number becomes more or less fixed at this level. The total population of
Germany in 1500 can be estimated as roughly 15 million or more. A comparison between these two sets of figures brings out quantitatively what could
already be gathered from previous less accurate considerations: the 'student
38 N . Orme, 'Schoolmasters, 1309-1509', in C . H . Clough (ed.), Profession,
Culture in Later Medieval
 , 218-41; R.S. Gottfried, Doctors and
Medicine in Medieval
England 1340-1530
 .
39 R. L. Kagan, Lawsuits and Litigants in Castile 1500-1700
 ; W. D. Phillips Jr,
'University Graduates in Castilian Royal Service in the Fifteenth Century', in Estudios en
homenaje a Don Claudio
Sanchez Albornoz
en sus 90 anos , vol. IV,
475-90; M. Lunenfeld, Keepers of the City. The Corregidores
of Isabel I of Castile
(1474-1504)
 , 73-106.
40 Rucquoi, 'Societes urbaines', (note 22); C. Carrere, 'Refus d'une creation universitaire et
niveaux de culture a Barcelone: hypotheses d'explication', Moyen Age, 85 , 245—73; J. S.
Amelang, 'Barristers and Judges in Early Modern Barcelona: The Rise of a Legal Elite', American Historical
Reviewr, 89 , 1264-84.
Careers of graduates
density' in the centre of Europe was considerably less than in the west but,
despite the simultaneous decline and halt in population figures (between 1348
and 1450-70), the gap was in the end reduced. This was the result of the work
of fifteen new universities (founded before 1506).41
What is true of the Holy Roman Empire can be taken on the whole to
apply also to the north and east of the continent, but with considerable delay
and quantitatively on a smaller scale. Compared with the preceding period,
some essential changes took place in northern Europe. Since the Norwegian
king and his administration had moved to Denmark, the career opportunities
for the Norwegian aristocracy and bourgeoisie had considerably diminished.
For Norwegian students, mostly of middle-class origin, only the church could
henceforth provide comfortable positions. The impoverished nobility showed
very little interest in higher education. In Denmark the number of students
from aristocratic or upper middle-class origin grew constantly. The increasing centralization and bureaucratization which occurred during the period of
the Nordic Unions produced a demand for educated administrators
(lawyers). From the fifteenth century onwards, laymen gradually replaced
clerics in the central and local administrations. The Swedish part of Finland
followed the Swedish pattern of education. The cathedral and collegiate
chapters were filled with rather well-educated aristocrats. In contrast with
Sweden, however, the Finnish elites continued to visit Paris and perhaps not
German universities so frequently as their Swedish counterparts.42
An important difference between continental 'older' Europe (with the
exception of Paris) and 'younger' Europe is the higher proportion of arts
students in the latter. This could be as much as 75-80 per cent. Among law
students, the central Europe increase in numbers, at least around 1400,
appears to have been minimal, if there was any increase at all. The crisis and
disappearance of the Prague law university (1409-17) was a setback. Whereas
before and around 1400 the number of French jurists studying contemporaneously was 3,000, the German figures may have amounted to only 10-20
per cent of that figure, even in the Prague 'springtime' (1380-90).
Another essential condition of academic career opportunities in Germany
is the tendency to a levelling-down of the faculties in the four-faculty universities under the influence of the territorial state. With few exceptions, the new
universities were small and poor. They put down roots in the neighbourhood
and mostly lacked munificent bequests and foundations. In contrast to Paris
and Bologna, we have here a new, third, combined type of European university, with different implications for the careers of the students. There was,
therefore, a fairly clear twofold division between a student type continuing in
41 Schwinges, Universita'tsbesucher,
passim-, P. Moraw, 'Aspekte und Dimensionen alterer deutscher Universitatsgeschichte', in P. Moraw, and V. Press (eds.), Academia
 , 1-43.
42 Bagge, 'Nordic Students' (note 11), 13—17.
Peter Moraw
the aristocratic and propertied tradition and the 'exclusively' arts student
type now emerging into view, for the most part lacking in financial resources.
The career possibilities open to these two student types differed considerably.
The former type of student was recognizable among the Germans long before
their own universities emerged; they were relatively few in number and
tended to study law. They could also, if they wished, travel abroad in the
fifteenth century. That the main recruiting places were small towns and, not
infrequently, villages was mainly true of the second student type. The middle
classes and artisans supplied the majority of these students. Most of them
returned to their regional towns, since a high value was attached to the link
with the home region. They appear to have been particularly affected by the
oversupply crisis after 1480.43
As individuals, the better-situated students were less affected by the level of
development in their own region than the poorer students, as illustrated by
their status and number. The conditions in Brabant were probably the most
modern in the empire - whether in law studies in aristocratic, 'elitist' Orleans
or in participation in communal and territorial decision-making bodies at
home. Of the Brabant students in Orleans (from 1444) - and thus outside the
area of the new four-faculty universities - only 20 per cent came from noble
families, the majority being from prosperous bourgeois families, especially
from the large cities. The behaviour pattern was aristocratic to begin with,
but in the long run the aristocrat was introduced to the 'modern', urban style
of life. What emerges clearly here, too, is something that was true quite generally for the final phase of the medieval period: the social history of students
continued uninterrupted into the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Only in
the modern period does it turn out that the Brabant way produced a fairly
uniform group of 'jurist officials' from good backgrounds, who gradually
became qualified through their specialist and professional achievement.44 The
more or less parallel influence of Nuremberg and Augsburg can be traced
among the southern Germans, in Pavia, in smaller numbers and in a milieu
which was even more 'feudal'. If we look beyond into the sixteenth century,
the same was true in the long run for the 'aristocratic' University of Ingolstadt, which began functioning in 1472.45
It is in the church milieu that we can best approach the difficult question of
the temporal course of the most important changes. Increased participation
in study - though with a clear time-lag compared with western Europe - is
observable everywhere, even in whole dioceses, but most clearly perhaps in a
43 Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
44 H. de Ridder-Symoens, 'Brabanders aan de rechtsuniversiteit van Orleans (1444-1546). Een
socioprofessionele studie', Bijdragen tot de Geschiedenis,
609 , 195-347.
45 R. A. Miiller, Universitdt und Adel. Eine soziostrukturelle
Studie zur Geschichte der bayerischen LandesuniversitdtIngolstadt,
 . A. Sottili, 'La Natio Germanica
dell'universita di Pavia nella storia delPUmanesimo', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages,
Careers of graduates
'recent' case like that of the cathedral chapter of Roskilde.46 Until 1430, 55
per cent of the members of the Roskilde chapter had been former students;
then, until 1493, the percentage was 76.1 per cent. Only a small proportion of
these were graduates, with a steep decline in the proportion of jurists in the
early fifteenth century, due doubtless to the collapse of Prague. This shows
how flimsy the network of study connections was at the periphery. From 1418
onwards, conciliar decrees encouraged this development towards a growing
emphasis on study in the church, more or less successfully. A less easily
discernible change was far more important, however: the transition from
study based on an already acquired canonry to study with a view to securing
a benefice thereby. In this second more 'modern' case, all that was at first
offered was the chance to qualify by performance. In 'younger' Europe, this
was a change which began only in the fifteenth century.
Even in this century, study and careers in 'younger' Europe were still
related primarily to churches. But laicizing trends of the sort which were
already visible further south or even west in the thirteenth century are
unmistakable. In general, certainly in the second half of the fifteenth century
as far as the most modern careers were concerned, leadership passed to the
secular authorities. It was in the lower Rhineland that this succeeded the
earliest and also the most. Here, there was something like a legal, secular,
administrative and judicial 'career path' which it was possible to choose on
the basis of appropriate study. For the earliest successes of lay jurists in territorial administrations and judicial systems, reference is made once again to
Brabant, which itself was half a century late on the scene compared with
Flanders. Of the members of the Raad van Brabant (court of justice) in the
second quarter of the fifteenth century, 40 per cent were graduates; during the
next fifty years this proportion rose to almost 70 per cent.47 The urban career
involved entry into the administration and, finally, advance to the executive
decision-making bodies. Certainly caution is needed with respect to this final
stage, since it is possible that the existing ruling oligarchy - mostly trained in
economics - sought to keep jurists at a safe distance from its affairs. In this
case, it was necessary to wait until sons from the leading families were sent to
university, and this could take a long time. In Germany, Nuremberg
employed jurists early on (from 1366) with the title of doctor, on a permanent
basis and not just as 'lucky flukes', but for centuries it kept them at a distance
from the Rat. In the north-west, in Antwerp and Louvain, there was a more
46 E. Mornet, 'Preliminaires a une prosopographie du haut clerge scandinave: le chapitre cathedral de Roskilde 1367—1493', in Bulst and Genet (eds.), Medieval
Lives (note 23), 159-62.
47 H. de Ridder-Symoens, 'Milieu social, etudes universitaires et carriere des conseillers au
Conseil de Brabant, 1430-1600', in Recht en Instellingen
in de Oude Nederlanden
tijdens de
Middeleeuwen
en de Nieuwe Tijd, Liber Amicorutn
] . Buntinx
 , 257-301. H.
de Ridder-Symoens, 'Internationalismus versus Nationalismus an Universitaten um 1500 nach
zumeist siidniederlandischen Quellen', in F. Seibt and W. Eberhard (eds.), Europa 1500
 , 397-414.
Peter Moraw
open attitude; jurists appear there in 1431 and 1451 as lay assessors for the
first time, and the law qualification soon became a standard requirement. The
first graduate jurist in the Liibeck court of justice dates from 1460, in
Hamburg from 1465; the first doctor sat in the Cologne Rat in 1484. The
whole development lasted well into the sixteenth century. In the fifteenth
century, roughly three-quarters of the chief posts in the city administration of
Antwerp and Louvain were occupied by graduate jurists, and in the sixteenth
century practically all of them were. For the Holy Roman Empire, that was a
very modern attitude.48
From the fourteenth century in the Mediterranean area and from the
fifteenth to sixteenth century in the rest of Europe, medical doctors became
more important in society. The great plague of 1348-50 not only stimulated
the activities of the medical faculties, particularly in the field of consilia or
medical advice, but gradually persuaded city councils to appoint doctores
medicinae as town physicians. Before that time, medical doctors could mainly
find a position in the service of high-ranking people or hospitals, or they
could start up a private practice in a large city for well-to-do citizens. The
majority of the medieval population never saw a doctor who had graduated.
The barber-surgeon or quack doctor was their only succour.49
It continues to be difficult to obtain a clear picture of the careers of
students of lesser rank in Germany and the whole of 'younger Europe', and
still more of the 30,000 or so German pauperes. What happened to the
students of a whole university offers a fairly useful cross-section, but a study
of this kind exists only for the university founded in Tubingen in 1477.50 At
that time, this university occupied ninth place in the German university
system, with roughly a hundred new students annually. Until 1534, the
number of persons attending the institution was 5,800. It has proved possible
to quarry information about the careers of 28 per cent of them. Of the 1,627
students about whom we have more precise information, no fewer than 1,097
entered clerical professions; 314 are to be found in administrative and judicial
posts and n o in the university itself or in posts closely connected with it.
There were 33 physicians, 23 schoolmasters, and 13 notaries or advocates. A
48 F. W. Ellinger, 'Die Juristen der Reichsstadt Niirnberg vom 15. bis 17. Jahrhundert', in
Reichsstadt Niirnberg, Altdorf und Hersbruck , i3off. H. de Ridder-
Symoens, 'De universitaire vorming van de Brabantse stadsmagistraat en stadsfunktionarissen.
Leuven en Antwerpen, 1430-1580', Varia Historica Brabantica,6—j
 , 21-126; K.Wriedt,
'Das gelehrte Personal in der Verwaltung und Diplomatic der Hansestadte',
Geschichtsbldtter,
96 , 15-37; B. Moeller, H. Patze, and K. Stackmann (eds.), Studien zum
stddtischen
Bildungswesen
des spdten Mittelalters
und derfruhen
 .
49 A. W. Russel (ed.), The Town and State Physician in Europe from the Middle
Ages to the
Enlightenment
 .
50 W. Kuhn, Die Studenten der Universitdt
Tubingen zwischen
1477 und 1534, 2 vols. . Cf. comparative data in F. Smahel, 'L'universite de Prague de 1433 a 1622: recrutement geographique, carrieres et mobilite sociale des etudiants gradues', in D. Julia, J. Revel,
and R. Chartier (eds.), Les Universite's europeennes du XVle au XVHle siecle. Histoire sociale
des populations etudiantes, vol. I , 65-88.
Careers of graduates
comparable number were involved in the book trade in the broadest sense
and in the armed forces. Given the weakness of the higher faculties, what is
reflected here is the arts milieu as it appears to have been generally in
'younger' Europe, and therefore, for the most part, the middle and lower
levels of social life. The quota of graduates was highest among the clergy and
administrative and legal personnel. Existing family status and newly acquired
qualifications were here mixed in a way which now defies disentanglement.
Despite all provincialism, the tide of innovation also reached Tubingen. That
important trends won the day is evidenced by, among other things, the
advance of Roman law as the basis of a 'civil' career, which, around 1500,
was evidently the most respected one.
Further details serve to show that this whole situation is fairly typical of
the provincial milieu in central Europe. One basic fact was that so many
returned without discernible social change to their domestic urban life. It is in
the university towns that we can see most clearly that, for many, the university was a basic educational institution rather than a social one. Although, up
to the bachelorship of arts, the poor were more than averagely diligent, from
that point on, or at latest from their graduation as masters, they remained
practically without further possibilities; at this point a quite clear barrier to
social advance traversed the country, a fact which helps to explain the lot of
so many. From this angle, there were in fact two universities in one. The
pathway from being an artisan, which was the social background of many
scholars at the end of the medieval period, hardly led anywhere beyond the
lower clerical and scribal posts, where these existed at all. The 'better' families in the many small towns are typical of the background of many students,
but this status had little value in a faraway place or in the larger cities. Study
made little difference to the direction of the lives of numerous sons of patricians, still less in the case of the sons of artisans. They remained what they
were and, like their fathers before them, had to assert themselves on the basis
of qualifications other than those acquired by study. Is it cynical to say that all
that was achieved in this way was merely an enrichment of intellectual life?
Not altogether! The world was already being changed by the mere fact that it
became possible for almost everyone to meet people who had been to a university and had thereby caught at least a glimpse of the world of letters and
felt in some measure, at least, the power of the word. The university thus
came closer to everyday life. That, too, was a social fact.
It has been impossible until now to date in any consistent way the transition whereby study became a mass phenomenon in Germany and a changed
social and cultural situation emerged, without which the Reformation,
among other things, would have been inconceivable. Something decisive happened around 1470. This was chronologically connected, surely not accidentally, with the general economic change from a long period of stagnation to a
new upsurge which inaugurated the 'long' sixteenth century. With the
Peter Moraw
increase in the number of students, a period began in which civil authorities
exercised more control over society and the social classes closed ranks. The
fragile social body of those who had attended university was unable to breach
this situation but had to accommodate itself to it. The pressure of supply
which undoubtedly existed in the last quarter of the century could find no
other outlet than in the increasingly muscular struggle for existing posts; the
holders of higher degrees contented themselves with posts which had previously been filled by those of more modest rank. Changes in the power to
dispose of church benefices seem, at the same time, to have come about in the
shape of a retreat of the papacy. Perhaps they had important repercussions on
the German 'employment system' for university students. An unregulated
social system, left to shape itself painfully and unconsciously, tried - as in
every previous generation - to achieve some sort of balance at the expense of
the weak. It was to be a long time before the strongest arguments would be
those of university students and graduates.
After the (re-)foundation of the University of Cracow (1400) and the foundation of the Scottish universities from 1412, Poland and Scotland were the
only countries of 'younger' Europe besides Germany that were in a position
to replace the migration of their sons to foreign countries by studies of their
own. Because of the attraction of Italian, French, and German universities,
however, these studies remained no more than a complement. Foundations in
Sweden and Denmark were too late and too small to have any remarkable
effects, while Norway and Finland had no universities. Again, the social
context of careers is quite comparable with earlier contexts, as in Germany,
for instance. Numbers were small, the role of the churches as employers was
always important, and laicization was late. In Hungary, for example, it did
not occur before the sixteenth century. But the general direction of 'modernization' remained the same.51
This first attempt to understand the social history of the European universities in the medieval period as the history of those who attended the universities and as a more or less integrated process leaves many questions
unanswered. Not surprisingly, therefore, the briefest conclusions sound
paradoxical. Born in social interstices and very fragile as a structure, the
universities nevertheless survived and became one of the phenomena
treasured by leaders of societies. That is an astonishing fact in itself. The
products of the university, both its graduates and those who failed to grad-
51 A. Kubinyi, 'Stadtische Burger und Universitatsstudien in Ungarn am Ende des Mittelalters',
in E. Maschke and J. Sydow (eds.), Stadt und Universitdt im Mittelalter und in der fruheren
Neuzeit , 161-5; J. Durkan and J. Kirk, The University of Glasgow 1451—
1577 ; J. Pinborg, 'Danish Students 1450-1535 and the University of Copenhagen', Universite de Copenhague, Cahiers de I'lnstitut du Moyen Age grec et latin, 37 ,
70-122; I. Kaniewska, 'Les etudiants de Puniversite de Cracovie aux XVe et XVIe siecles
(1433-1560)', in Julia, Revel, and Chartier (eds.), Universites europe'ennes (note 50), 113-33.
Careers of graduates
uate, emerged from that fragile structure, forced their way into numerous
societies, and, not without success, opposed their new qualifications to the
old traditional qualifications of these societies. The process of education and
training of people through universities was, as a whole, unplanned and unpiloted, only partly canalized and finally instrumentalized. Much remained a
spin-off of quite diverse individual intentions. Yet the university definitely
helped to modernize the medieval world, even if it only remained mobile by
adapting itself to external social rules and by willingly accepting the changes
taking place in the societies around it. It was a question of mobilization rather
than of mobility - in other words, more a case of oscillating movements in
different directions than of a straight path ahead.
Rapid advancement on the basis of university qualifications alone was rare,
however. From the standpoint of all the societies taken together, the influence
of the universities was in stabilizing systems rather than disturbing or even
shattering them; the changes they brought about helped to make the 'feudal'
or communal worlds capable of adaptation and survival. It was therefore an
appropriate price to pay for this when, as the new technicians of power, the
jurists pushed their way forward into positions of second or third importance. This served to stabilize the posts of first importance, which continued
to be occupied on the basis of birth and often of property and influence.
Graduation was, in the main, only one qualification among others on the
road to securing a post. The greatest success could be expected by young men
who combined the largest number of qualifications. Only in a long-term perspective does it become clear that all this was, at the same time, the first step
on the way to the modern goal of making the principle of achievement the
determining factor.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Autrand, F. Naissance d'un grand corps de I'Etat: les gens du Parlement de Paris
1345-1434, Paris, 1981.
Autrand, F. (ed.) Prosopographie et genese de I'Etat moderne, Paris, 1986.
Baldwin, J. W. Masters, Princes, and Merchants, 2 vols., Princeton, 1970.
Bartier, J. Legistes et gens de finances au i$e siecle. Les counseillers des Dues de
Bourgogne sous Philippe le Bon et Charles le Te'me'raire, Brussels, 1955-7.
Benvenuti, A. and Cardini, F. (eds.) Storia della societd italiana, parte seconda, vols.
VI and VII, Milan, 1982, 1986.
Bullough, V. L. 'Achievement, Professionalization, and the University', in J. IJsewijn
and J. Paquet (eds.), Universities in the Late Middle Ages, Louvain, 1978, 497-510.
Bullough, V. L. The Development of Medicine as a Profession, New York, 1966.
Bulst, N. and Genet, J.-P. (eds.) Medieval Lives and the Historian. Studies in Medieval
Prosopography, Kalamazoo, 1986.
Burke, P. The Italian Renaissance: Culture and Society in Italy, 1420-1540, Cambridge/Oxford, 1987.
van Caenegem, R. C. Judges, Legislators, and Professors, Cambridge, 1987.
Peter Moraw
Cazelles, R. La Societepolitique et la crise de la royaute sous Philippe de Valois, Paris,
/ ceti dirigenti nella Toscana del Quattrocento, Monte Oriolo, 1987.
Classen, P. Studium und Gesellschaft im Mittelalter, ed. J. Fried, Stuttgart, 1983.
Clough, C. (ed.) Profession, Vocation and Culture in Later Medieval England,
Liverpool, 1981.
Dotzauer, W. 'Deutsche in westeuropaischen Hochschul- und Handelsstadten, vornehmlich in Frankreich, bis zum Ende des alten Reiches', Geschichtliche Landeskunde, 5:2 , 89-159.
Dotzauer, W. 'Deutsches Studium in Italien unter besonderer Berucksichtigung der
Universitat Bologna', Geschichtliche Landeskunde, 14 , 84—130.
Ehbrecht, W. (ed.) Stddtische Fuhrungsgruppen und Gemeinde in der werdenden
Neuzeit, Cologne/Vienna, 1980.
Fried, J. Die Entstehung des Juristenstandes im 12. Jahrhundert, Cologne, 1974.
Fried, J. (ed.) Schulen und Studium im sozialen Wandel des hohen und spd'ten Mittelalters, Sigmaringen, 1986.
Garcia y Garcia, A. Iglesia, Sociedad y Derecho, Salamanca, 1985.
Gottfried, R. S. Doctors and Medicine in Medieval England 1340-1530, Princeton,
Gouron, A. La Science de droit dans le Midi de la France au Moyen Age, London,
Hattenhauer, H. Geschichte des Beamtentums, Handbuch des offentlichen Dienstes,
1, Cologne, 1980.
Jacquart, D. Le Milieu medical en France du XHe au XVe siecle, Geneva, 1981.
Kagan, R. L. Students and Society in Early Modern Spain, Baltimore/London, 1974.
Lytle, G. F. 'Oxford Students and English Society, c. 1300- c. 1510', Ph.D., Princeton,
Martines, L. The Social World of the Florentine Humanists 1390-1460, London, 1963.
Meuthen, F. Die alte Universitat, Kolner Universitatsgeschichte 1, Cologne/Vienna,
Moraw, P. 'Organisation und Funktion von Verwaltung im ausgehenden Mittelalter
(ca. 1300-1500)'. in K. G. A. Jeserich, H. Pohl, and G.-C. von Unruh (eds.),
Deutsche Verwaltungsgeschichte, vol. I, Stuttgart, 1983, 21-65.
Peset, M. 'Universidades Espafiolas y Universidades Europeas', lus comune, 12
 , 71-89.
Poirion, D. (ed.) Milieux universitaires et mentalite urbaine au Moyen Age, Paris, 1987.
de Ridder-Symoens, H. Tot nut of onnut van 't algemeen. De functie van de universiteit in de middeleeuwen, Inaugural Lecture, Vrije University, Amsterdam, 1987.
de Ridder-Symoens, H. 'Possibilites de carriere et de mobilite sociale des intellectuelsuniversitaires au moyen age', in N. Bulst and J.-P. Genet (eds.), Medieval Lives and
the Historian. Studies in Medieval Prosopography, Kalamazoo, 1986, 343-56.
Schilling, H. and Diederiks, H. (eds.) Burgerliche Eliten in den Niederlanden und in
Nordwestdeutschland, Cologne/Vienna, 1985.
Schnur, R. (ed.) Die Rolle der Juristen bei der Entstehung des modernen Staates,
Berlin, 1986.
Schuchard, C. Die Deutschen an der pdpstlichen Kurie im spd'ten Mittelalter (1378-
1447), Tubingen, 1987.
Careers of graduates
Storia della cultura veneta, vol. III:i, Vicenza, 1980.
Ullmann, W. The Growth of Papal Government in the Middle Ages, London, 1955.
Universite et cite: a la recherche du passe - Town and Gown: the University in search
of its origins, CRE—Information, new series, 62 .
Verger, J. 'L'histoire sociale des universites a la fin du Moyen Age: problemes,
sources, methodes (a propos des universites du Midi de la France)', in S. Hoyer and
W. Flaschendrager (eds.), Die Geschichte der JJniversitaten und ihre Erforschung,
Leipzig, 1984, 37-53.
Verger, J. 'Les universites medievales: interet et limites d'une histoire quantitative.
Notes a propos d'une enquete sur les universites du Midi de la France a la fin du
Moyen Age', in D. Julia, J. Revel, and R. Chartier (eds.), Les Universites europeennes du XVIe au XVHIe siecle. Histoire sociale des populations etudiantes,
vol. II, Paris, 1989, 9—24.
HILDE DE RIDDER-SYMOENS
THE MEDIEVAL LOVE OF TRAVEL
Medieval men loved travel. It mattered little that roads were few and that
they could go only on foot or on horseback, by cart or by boat. The twentieth
century thinks of the travellers thronging the roads of Europe in the Middle
Ages as the ubiquitous armies, merchants going from town to town, and
pilgrims. Especially pilgrims, for thousands and thousands of the faithful
went on pilgrimage to the holy places of Jerusalem, Rome, or Santiago de
Compostela, or to shrines nearer home. There was no lack of these in medieval Christendom, or of hostels, boarding-houses, inns, hospitals, and refuges
along the pilgrimage routes.
Until the end of the eighteenth century pilgrims or travellers (peregrini) of
another kind were also a familiar sight on the roads of Europe. These were
the university students and professors. Their pilgrimage {peregrinatio) was
not to Christ's or a saint's tomb, but to a university city where they hoped to
find learning, friends, and leisure.
Literary tradition represents medieval students as undisciplined, unprincipled, bohemian, violent, footloose, all for wine, women, and song. Among
the goliards there were of course real students, seekers for an alternative
culture, members of a medieval intelligentsia; in their critical attitude to
society they were at one with the motley crowd of clerical debauchees,
ribalds, jugglers, jesters, singers, and sham students who peopled the fringes
of society. Any study of wandering students must distinguish between writers
and singers of carmina burana and students bent on learning and a university
degree, with whom this chapter is concerned.
The European 'academic pilgrimage' {peregrinatio academica) merits definition. We mean by this a journey by students and teachers made in a European country or countries for the purpose of study. Until the seventeenth
century all universities taught in Latin and curricula and degrees were the
same. A student could therefore begin his course at one university, usually the
nearest, and continue it at another, or at several others.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, when there were not many universities and they were not widely distributed over Europe, the 'happy few' who
aspired to higher education had to leave home and travel long distances to the
stadium of their (rather limited) choice. Towards 1500, however, nearly every
territory in Europe had its own centre of higher education, and at all of them
the teaching methods, the subjects taught, and the degrees awarded were
much the same. From that time onwards one has to distinguish between what
could be called external migration - of students to a foreign country - and
internal migration, in the course of which a student attended several studia in
his own country. For Spain and France there is no difficulty. By the end of the
Middle Ages many universities had been founded there, and both countries
were so far consolidated territorially and politically that 'internal migration'
is no misnomer. In Britain, however, there was so much difference between
English, Scottish, Irish, and Welsh students that 'internal migration' hardly
seems the appropriate term. The situation is still more complicated in Italy
and the Holy Roman Empire, where from the fourteenth century onwards
local rulers founded universities in their own dominions to train officials for
their absolutist bureaucracy. Whether travel between their virtually independent states was internal or external migration becomes a matter of opinion;
we believe that, in the European context, 'academic pilgrimage' within the
Holy Roman Empire was internal migration rather than external. Our information on student migration comes mainly from university rolls of students,
and therefore includes student drop-outs as well as the earnest students
whose doctorate was the reward for long years of study. Partly for this
reason, no special attention has been paid to itinerant teachers; they have
been dealt with in chapter 5.
'Academic pilgrimage' did not come into being with the twelfth-century
university. Long before that, masters and scholars had set out for renowned
centres of learning, either a monastic or episcopal school (the most important
of these were between the Loire and the Moselle at Bee, Chartres, Laon,
Reims, Paris, and Liege) or a more specialized centre on the border of
Christendom like the school of medicine in Salerno or the translators' school
in Toledo, one of the main centres for the transmission of Arabic science and
learning to Christendom. Their masters attracted students from all parts from Germany, Britain, and Italy. A well-known early example is Gerbert of
Aurillac, the future Pope Sylvester II, in the tenth century. Dissatisfied with
his education as an oblate at the monastery of Saint-Gerault d'Aurillac, in 967
he accompanied the count of Barcelona to Vich in Catalonia, where he
studied mathematics, geometry, astronomy, and music (the quadrivium),
disciplines then hardly known in the west. Later he lived in Rome and at the
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
court of the Emperor Otto I, and continued his studies of dialectics in Reims,
where he became an eminent professor before taking up his political career in
the church.
Mobility among clerics - at that time all intellectuals were clerics - eroded
the European monastic ideal oistabilitas loci (stable residence), but the intellectual enthusiasm of the twelfth-century renaissance paid scant attention to
this. Twelfth-century intellectuals did not feel bound to any particular school
or curriculum; they freely chose their discipline and teacher (the autobiographical works of Abelard and his pupil John of Salisbury vividly portray
this international world of masters and scholars), and the first universities
arose in Paris and Bologna from the influx of students from the four corners
of Europe.
NATIONS, COLLEGES, AND FRATERNITIES
Lonely students in a foreign, sometimes hostile city formed associations
whose members spoke the same language or shared the same tastes. As a
group they could look after themselves better and cope more easily with the
difficulties of a long stay abroad. They hired houses in common, met at
church or at an inn to celebrate their national days, and organized postal
services between the university city and their homeland so as to keep in touch
with their family and receive from them money, letters, and parcels. In Paris,
Jacques de Vitry (i 160/70-1240), a famous preacher who had studied theology at the university there, listed twelve nations differing widely in their character and customs, and particularly in their vices. Foreign university students,
declared this eminent moralist, were responsible for the debauchery and
drunkenness afflicting the Latin Quarter.
The English are drunken cowards, the French proud, soft and effeminate; the
Germans are quarrelsome and foul-mouthed, the Normans vain and haughty,
the men of Poitou treacherous and miserly, the Burgundians stupid brutes, the
Bretons frivolous and flighty, the Lombards miserly, spiteful and evil-minded,
the Romans vicious and violent, the Sicilians tyrannical and cruel, the men of
Brabant are thieves and the Flemings are debauched.1
These de facto associations quickly became publicly recognized corporations. Under the name of Nations' (nationes) they were the mainstay of the
oldest universities; medieval university organization is founded on its nations
(see chapter 4).2
The nation to which scholars belonged depended primarily on their
mother-tongue, and secondarily on their birthplace, cultural community, or
1 Jacobus de Vitry, Historia occidentalis. 7, de statu Parisiensis civitatis, ed. J. F. Hinnebusch
 , 92 (Latin); English translation: D. C. Munro, Translations and Reprints,
vol. 11:3 (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, n.d.), 19—20.
2 General survey: Kibre, Nations.
shared history. Universities such as those of Bologna and Padua, which took
in a steady stream of students from elsewhere, could follow this practice
fairly strictly and form more than a dozen ultramontane and cismontane
nations covering most European regions or provinces. Other Italian universities had to make do with only a few nations covering much larger (and
therefore more arbitrary) geographical areas; the Perugia stadium, for
example, had three ultramontane nations, those of France, Germany, and
Catalonia, and four cismontane nations, those of Rome, Tuscany, Ancona,
and Sicily. These universities were nearer in organization to the University of
Paris and its imitators (Prague, Leipzig, Vienna, and Louvain), which had
only four nations, whose catchment area was somewhat fanciful or highly
inconsistent. In Paris only the well-attended arts faculty had nations. The
French nation comprised the masters and students of the He de France, the
south of France, the Iberian peninsula, and Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor.
The Norman nation drew its members from the geographical province of
Rouen, and the Picard nation from north-eastern France and the old Low
Countries as far as the Meuse. The English-German nation was a medley of
students from all the other countries of Europe. Each nation had its
'provinces' of members from a particular region, but was of such mixed composition that there were never-ending conflicts and 'nationalist' frictions in
that nominally international, not to say universal, institution, the university.
It is hard to say how far nations within a university were instrumental in
forging a common identity and 'nationalist' feeling, but clearly there was an
esprit de corps among fellow-countrymen and the growth of nationalism had
political repercussions. In the late Middle Ages political loyalties were often
stronger than linguistic or ethnic ones, as is shown by the Burgundian and
Armagnac factions at the end of the Hundred Years War. In 1470 400 subjects
of the Burgundian Low Countries were ordered to leave the University of
Paris although they were duly inscribed members of the German or Picard
nation.3 S. Stelling-Michaud has written that, from the fifteenth century
onwards, Swiss national feeling was fostered by prolonged contact in universities between confederates from different cantons and walks of life.4 In the
first decades of the fifteenth century, the University of Prague was a hotbed of
Czech nationalism and Hussite politics. Students from Bohemia, Moravia,
and Hungary formed the Bohemian nation, which included both Czechs and
students of German origin. All other students, the extranei, mainly from the
Holy Roman Empire, formed the Bavarian, Saxon, and Polish nations (very
loosely defined). Rivalry between the Czech and the German communities in
Bohemia came to a head in the student nations of Prague. The Bohemian
3 J. Verger, 'The University of Paris at the End of the Hundred Years' War', in Universities in
Politics, 47-78.
4 S. Stelling-Michaud, 'La Suisse et les universites europeennes du XHIe au XlVe siecle', Revue
universitaire suisse , 160.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
nation demanded three votes in the university council as against a single vote
for the three other nations, and this demand was granted in 1409 by the
Decree of Kutna Hora. The Germans refused to accept the decision and left
Prague to found a new university in Leipzig, modelled on the University of
Prague.5 By then the attachment to nations had lost most of its meaning, for
university recruiting was becoming regionalized, as will be shown below.
The new universities of Heidelberg (1385) and Cologne (1388) did not adopt
the system of nations.
Scotland, however, respected that tradition. The Universities of St
Andrews (founded 1411), Glasgow (founded 1451), and Aberdeen (founded
1495) kept the four nations in the arts faculty but named them after Scottish
districts - logically enough, as these universities recruited no foreigners
before the Scottish Enlightenment of the eighteenth century (see volume II,
chapter 10). Generally speaking, the names given to the nations are a pointer
to university catchment areas. By analogy with Scotland, the nations of the
Spanish studia, founded on the model of the University of Bologna, were
named after those regions of the Iberian peninsula from which nearly all their
students came. Oxford and Cambridge were a special case: there, division
into nations was still more arbitrary than elsewhere, and indeed meant
nothing, since more than 94 per cent of the students were English. The river
Trent divided the northerners (boreales) from the southerners (australes).
Scots had to register with the northerners, and the Irish, Welsh, and continentals with the southerners. The 'nationalities' in the two nations quarrelled so
bitterly that as early as the end of the thirteenth century the government of
the university took away all power and functions from the two nations.
Foreign students were also admitted to colleges reserved for natives of a
particular region, province, or diocese. As in all colleges, entrance was at first
restricted to poor students, but later well-off students were accepted against
payment. In the thirteenth century the 'College of Constantinople' was
founded in Paris on papal initiative, to house twenty or so young students
from Greece and Asia Minor who were to train as missionaries to evangelize
unbelievers in their home countries. This kind of 'national' college prospered
most in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, at the time of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation. There were, however, very few students from
regions under Byzantine or Turkish domination in the universities of medieval Europe. With rare exceptions they were in the Italian studia, particularly
that of Padua, because this was the university of the Venetian republic, which
had a thriving trade with the Byzantines and Turks.
In Paris the Germans, Swedes, Danes, Scots, Lombards, and other nationalities had their own colleges. In the Middle Ages only the Spaniards, the men
of Avignon, and poor students from the dioceses of Limoges and Toul had
5 S. Schumann, 'Die "nationes" an den Universitaten Prag, Leipzig und Wien. Ein Beitrag zur
alteren Universitatsgeschichte', Ph.D., Berlin, 1974.
colleges in Bologna, and they were equally rare in other Italian university
cities. In the fifteenth century regionalization and social change caused the
colleges to decline.
A less known and less common form of student's association is the confraternity for nationals of a particular country. At the end of the thirteenth
century a confraternity of clerics and students of the University of Paris called
the 'Confraternity of Our Lady of Douai', composed of students and former
students of the University of Paris who were natives of Douai, was formed to
support young fellow-townsmen in their studies and forge permanent links
between alumni of the University of Paris who came from Douai. In the
fifteenth century the confraternity became a literary society. In 1331 the statutes of a similar association for alumni of the University of Paris and other
universities were drawn up in Ypres. The list of members for the years 1330-
1600 shows that five members of the confraternity studied in Paris (between
1330 and 1450), two in Cologne (between 1400 and 1450), one in Orleans
(between 1330 and 1400), one in Montpellier (between 1400 and 1450), and
twenty-two in Louvain (between 1425 and 1600).6 The confraternity was
founded to support natives of Ypres studying abroad, but when the first
regional university was founded it lost this function and became merely an
association of academics from Ypres.
FROM INTERNATIONALISM TO REGIONALISM
Preference for a regional university or for the nearest university became
general at the end of the fourteenth century, and most marked in the fifteenth
century, when every state and political or ecclesiastical unit tried to found a
studium so that its citizens should study there instead of abroad. In this way it
kept their intellectual and ideological training under observation and prevented the flight of capital abroad, detrimental to local traders and craftsmen.
This policy succeeded by enacting laws forbidding students from frequenting foreign universities on penalty of exclusion from public office. When the
emperor Frederick II founded the Naples studium in 1224, to ensure its survivial he forbade his subjects to frequent any other studium. Similar protective
measures were taken to benefit the University of Pavia in 1361, 1392, and
1412, and the University of Padua in 1407 and 1468. To revive the declining
studium at Aix, the counts of Provence tried to oblige their subjects
throughout the fifteenth century to study there and take their degrees there.
Danes were allowed to study abroad after spending at least two years at the
6 G. Espinas, Les Origines de Vassociation, vol. I, Les Origines du droit d'association dans les
villes de VArtois et de la Flandre Francaise jusqu'au debut du XVIe siecle , 590-9;
P. Trio, 'A Medieval Students' Confraternity at Ypres: the Notre Dame Confraternity of Paris
Students', History of Universities, 5 , 15—53. See also chapter 7, pp. 211—13.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
recently founded University of Copenhagen (1498 and i522).7For political and
religious reaons, such regulations became more common in modern times.
Indifference to the plight of poor students was widespread in the fifteenth
century (see chapter 7), and hindered academic mobility. Students were now
predominantly laymen, and universities were becoming predominantly aristocratic institutions. The time was long past when a goliard, vagabond, or social
outcast could expect any sympathy, or even understanding, from public
opinion. Poor students {pauperes) now stayed at home, or made do with
internal migration to a less expensive centre of learning, many of which were
well endowed with colleges and scholarships, as in Cologne, Vienna, Leipzig,
and Louvain. The 'academic pilgrimage' was now the preserve of the happy
few, the sons of intellectual and financial elites. It is significant that as late as
the sixteenth century 25 per cent of students in the Holy Roman Empire (9 per
cent of them poor students) went to at least two universities. The second was
usually another popular studium in the Holy Roman Empire.8
In the first centuries of the universities' existence, rulers encouraged the less
wealthy to undergo dangers and fatigue to acquire a thorough intellectual and
professional training in a distant studium in preparation for an honourable
and lucrative career in the church or state. As the number of students - lay and
clerical - from the upper reaches of society grew larger, such encouragement
became less common. Poor students could still live abroad by taking service
under a rich student and following him in his foreign studies. This procedure
was especially popular at the time of the modern Grand Tour (see volume II,
chapter 10).
Thirteenth-century students did not have a great choice of universities.
Centres of higher education were few and far between, and fairly specialized.
For the study of canon and civil law the best university was Bologna; then
came a few other schools in Italy or Spain, or Montpellier or Orleans. The only
famous schools of medicine were at Bologna, Padua, Montpellier, and Paris.
For arts and theology the choice was theoretically wider, but in practice the
most important schools were at Paris and Oxford. There are all too few
exhaustive studies of university attendance by any one population in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and it is therefore not easy to say which were
the preferred universities. One of the few studies of this kind is C. Renardy's
work on the diocese of Liege between 1140 and 1350.9 Only for 85 of the 700
7 d'Irsay, Histoire des universites, vol. I, 201-2, 220, 238; Rashdall, Universities, vol. II, 21, 23,
189; Denifle, Entstehung, 71: E. Mornet, 'Le voyage d'etudes des jeunes nobles danois du XlVe
siecle a la Reforme', Journal des Savants , 299.
8 Schwinges, Universitdtsbe sucker, 463-4; E. Schubert, 'Motive und Probleme deutscher Universitatsgrundungen des 15. Jahrhunderts', in P. Baumgart and N. Hammerstein (eds.), Beitrdge zu Problemen deutscher Universitdtsgrundungen derfruhen Neuzeit , 29,
9 C. Renardy, Le Monde des maitres universitaires du diocese de Liege 1140—1350. Kecherches
sur sa composition et ses activites , 175, 182.
university students from Liege who were listed was she able to identify the
university they attended; 50 of them went to Paris (25 studied arts, 15 theology, 6 canon law, and 4 medicine); 14 to Bologna (canon or civil law 9, arts
and medicine 1, not known 4); 7 to Orleans (civil law): 6 to Montpellier
(canon and civil law 3, medicine 1, not known 2); 5 to Avignon (theology 3,
canon and civil law 2); 3 to Toulouse (canon and civil law), and 1 to Angers
(law). In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, intellectuals from the Vaud
attended university in Paris and Bologna, as far as can be ascertained from the
few available sources. After the year 1300 they preferred the nearer and more
accessible French law faculties in Orleans, Montpellier, and Avignon.10
With every new university foundation in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries university recruitment became more regionalized, so much so that in
the fifteenth century external migration actually came to a halt. Only under
the influence of Italian humanism did the academic pilgrimage regain its old
popularity. The statistics available for this period suggest that three-quarters
of all students at the end of the Middle Ages were content to go to a regional
university, usually the one nearest their homes. The journeys of the
remainder, especially the English, Spaniards, French, and Italians, and to a
lesser extent the Germans, were nearly always within their country of origin.
As will be seen later, circumstances in the smaller countries were different.
The real itinerant scholars - those who crossed Europe - were few, most of
them young people keen to continue their studies in an internationally
renowned university and in disciplines not taught in their own schools.
For example, at the start of the fourteenth century 301 doctors were registered in France; 57.8 per cent of them had studied in Paris, 35.2 per cent in
Montpellier, 2.7 per cent in other French faculties of medicine, and 4.3 per
cent abroad. At the end of the fifteenth century, of a total of 436 graduate
physicians, the alumni of Montpellier formed only 6.3 per cent and those of
Paris 47.5 per cent; other French universities now accounted for 27.6 per cent
and foreign faculties for 8.5 per cent. Paris, and even more Montpellier, lost
ground to Caen, Toulouse, and Avignon, or to Perpignan, Cahors, Angers,
Dole, Nantes, Poitiers, Bordeaux, and Bourges. The graduates of foreign
universities were nearly all foreigners who, after finishing their studies, practised in France. The nearby Louvain University was the most frequented
foreign studium (17 graduates); then came Salerno and Bologna, each with 10
graduates. Other Italian studia produced only a few graduates.11 W. Frijhoff
has identified 5 inhabitants of the town of Zutphen in Gelderland who
studied at university before 1350 (3 of them in Paris, 1 in Bologna, and 1 in
10 J.-D. Morerod, 'Le Pays de Vaud et les Universites aux Xlle et XHIe siecles', in A. Paravicini
Bagliani (ed.), Ecoles et vie intellectuelle a Lausanne au tnoyen age , 2.7-52,
11 D. Jacquart, Le Milieu medical en France du Xlle au XVe siecle. En annexe second supplement au 'Dictionnaire' d'Ernest Wickersheimer , 75-6, 365-6.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
Montpellier). Between 1350 and 1399 the number of university students
identified rose to 18, of whom 8 went to Paris and 1 to Bologna; the others
chose the new German universities nearer to their homes: Prague (1), Erfurt
(2), Heidelberg (3), and Cologne (3). In the fifteenth century students from
Zutphen showed a decided preference for German-speaking countries and for
the arts faculty (in the case of 132 of the 142 university students). Four men of
Zutphen registered with Louvain University, 1 with Bologna University, 1
with Orleans University, and 4 with the University of Paris; these were the
few doctors and jurists produced by the town of Zutphen.12 The pattern is
much the same among graduates from Reichstadt Schweinfurt in Franconia.
The first university student is reported in 1395. In the fifteenth century, with a
few exceptions (Padua 2 students and Cracow 3 students), all the students of
Schweinfurt went to German universities, preferring those nearest their
homes: Erfurt (35 per cent of the 247 university students), Leipzig (30.8 per
cent), and Vienna (17 per cent). In the sixteenth century some of them went to
Bologna and Ferrara Universities, and to the new humanist universities such
as Wittenberg; none yet went to a French university.13
By the fifteenth century, when large numbers of universities flourished in
Europe, there might be several reasons for choosing a foreign studium: firstly,
the discipline taught and the renown of the university; then came the
geographical reasons of proximity and easy access, the economic tie of
commercial links between towns and regions, and the political attractions
(scholarships offered by the university, and political and dynastic relations).
Some universities thrived for a time, not because they were famous as centres
of learning or for the quality of their teaching, but for extraneous reasons. A
notable example of this is the University of Avignon.
For political and religious reasons the studium at Avignon drew its
students from many more nations than its intellectual worth warranted. As
long as the popes were in Avignon (1309-78), despite the counter-attraction
of the studium of the Roman curia the University of Avignon thrived on papal
encouragement and the influx of student-clerics hoping for a fat papal benefice. Unfortunately, the first rotulus of any substance dates only from 1378,
the last year of the 'second Babylonian Captivity' and the beginning of the
Great Schism of 1378-1417. In 1378 Christendom split into two opposing
camps, one of them supporting the pope in Rome, Urban VI, the other the
pope in Avignon, Clement VII. States and universities supported one or the
other; France, Spain, and Scotland gave their unqualified support to the pope
in Avignon; Italy, the Holy Roman Empire, England, and the Nordic coun-
12 W. Frijhoff, 'Le role des etudes universitaires dans une societe locale: la ville de Zutphen en
Gueldre du moyen age au debut du XIXe siecle. Premier bilan d'une recherche', in Actes de la
VIeme session scientifique Internationale, Cracovie mai 198-/, Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu
Jagiellonskiego, Prace Historyczne (Cracow, in press).
13 M. Mahr, 'Bildungs- und sozialstruktur der Reichstadt Schweinfurt', dissertation, Wiirzburg,
1978, 217-22.
tries no less vigorously supported the pope in Rome. Some countries — Portugal, Iceland, Sicily, and some dioceses in the empire - wavered and changed
their allegiance. The General Councils of Constance and Basle only made the
rivalry worse by introducing voting by nation and not by diocese. The rotuli
for the years 1378-9 and 1393-4 mention students at the University of
Avignon as coming from 194 French dioceses on the western borders of the
Holy Roman Empire, and from the Iberian peninsula, but hardly any from
dioceses professing obedience to the popes of Rome.14 When the Great
Schism ended, Avignon lost its international attraction and the studium
became a centre training local jurists, like other universities in the south of
France at that time.
The Schism nevertheless had serious consequences for European universities, which had been obliged to trim their sails to suit the policy of their
dioceses. Paris was one of the principal sufferers from the rift in the church.
The nations of France and Normandy, and the three superior faculties,
rallied to Clement VII, whereas most members of the English-German and
Picard nations opted for Urban VI. Disputes in the German nation reached
such a point that in 1383 its masters and students left Paris for the German
universities of Prague, Vienna, Heidelberg, Erfurt, and Cologne; among them
were Marsilius of Inghen and Henry of Langenstein, to whom Heidelberg
and Vienna respectively owe their brilliant reputation of that time (see
p. 436). Fewer German and Scandinavian scholars went to other French universities or to the Urbanist Italian studia. Instead they attended the German
universities that came into being all over the empire. As these schools usually
taught only arts, canon law, and theology, students of medicine and civil law
who wanted first-class teaching still had to make their academic pilgrimage
abroad to study - in Italy, and after 1417 in France - after preliminary studies
at the nearest university in their homeland.
To take as an example law students of the Teutonic Order in the fifteenth
century, 22 of the 44 university students studied in the empire, most of them
in Leipzig and Vienna, 27 or 28 in Italy (Bologna 11, Padua 7, Perugia 4, Rome
4, Siena 1 or 2), and 1 at Orleans. They were simultaneously representatives
of the Order and carried out diplomatic missions.15 Nearly all the Carmelites
of the German province, however, most of them students of arts or theology,
attended only studia in the empire (of 3,349 registered students, 2,364 of them
attended the studia in Vienna, Cologne, Louvain, Trier and Mainz between
1281 and 1555). They ceased to attend French universities at the beginning of
14 J. Verger, 'L'universite d'Avignon au temps de Clement VIP, in Genese et debuts du Grand
Schisme d'Occident , 4-5.
15 H. Boockmann, 'Die Rechtsstudenten des deutschen Ordens', in Festschrift H. Heimpel,
vol. II , 364—5. The total number of registrations is higher than the total
number of students because several students went to more than one university.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
the Great Schism, and did not return to them later. Italian faculties of theology were not popular with ultramontane students.16
THE HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE
Nevertheless, the subjects of the Holy Roman Empire were the greatest
academic pilgrims of the Middle Ages and modern times. Before the first
university was founded in the Empire, would-be university students had no
choice but to leave their own country. The Authentica Habita constitution of
1155 (see chapter 3) reflects the German emperor's anxiety to have the services of experts in imperial Roman law, then recently rediscovered. From the
end of the twelfth century until the second half of the seventeenth century,
the Her italicum was popular with subjects of the Empire. Bologna was their
first choice in the Middle Ages, followed by Padua and in the fifteenth century
by Ferrara and Pavia; Pisa and Siena did not become really popular until the
second half of the sixteenth century. German students attended these universities mainly to study canon and civil law and medicine (the German universities specialized more in arts and theology, and some of them in canon law).
As will be shown later, English students flocked to Paris in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries; but in the fifteenth century the Germans began to oust
the English in the English-German nation. The foundation of the first university in the Empire, at Prague in 1347, did not at first much change the pattern
of academic pilgrimage, which remained unchanged until the Great Schism,
but the newly founded German universities were popular with less affluent or
more stay-at-home students, for whom foreign travel was not possible but
who wanted to study at university. Our figures for Bologna are eloquent of
this. In Bologna 3,230 law students registered as members of the German
nation of the university between 1289 and 1499. Before 1300 their average
number was 45; in the fourteenth and more particular in the fifteenth century
the average fell to below 10 a year and at the beginning of the sixteenth
century rose to about 30.17 These figures are roughly equal to those of the
English-German or German nation of the arts faculty in Paris. Between 1333
and 1494 approximately 3,300 members of the German nation sat for examinations at the arts faculty in Paris. According to M. Tanaka's meticulous
research,18 1,806 bachelors were admitted to that nation between 1333 and
1452; 1,116 of them (61.8 per cent) were natives of the Holy Roman Empire,
and 42 per cent of the ecclesiastical province of Cologne (759 of the 1,116,
one-quarter of whom came from the diocese of Utrecht). The Scots sent 229
16 F.-B. Lickteig, The German Carmelites at the Medieval Universities , 416-17.
17 A. Luschin von Ebengreuth, 'Vorlaufige Mitteilungen iiber die Geschichte deutscher Rechtshorer in Italien', Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-Hist.
Klasse, 127 (1892), 19-21.
18 M. Tanaka, 'La nation anglo-allemande de l'universite de Paris a la fin du moyen age', thesis,
Paris, 1983, 3off.
students (12.6 per cent), the province of Denmark-Sweden 79 (4.3 per cent),
the province of Bohemia 18, the province of Hungary 11, and the province of
Poland 4 bachelors. As these figures show, and as J. Verger and L. W. Brockliss have shown from other calculations, the University of Paris was not particularly international in the fifteenth century, when only 12 per cent of all the
bachelors in canon law came from other than French dioceses.19
Foreigners regarded the law university of Orleans as the faculty of civil law
of the University of Paris. The two cities were closely associated and very
many alumni of Orleans University had previously studied in Paris, without
necessarily following an entire university curriculum there. The German
nation in Orleans attracted fairly large numbers of young aristocrats, most of
them laymen intending a career in provincial and central government.
Between 1444 and 1499 that nation had 225 members, most of them from the
old Low Countries; between 1500 and 1546 their number rose to 1,040,
among them a growing proportion of Germans.20 A number of Germans
were also to be found in the Roman law studia of Angers and Poitiers, the
canon law and medical studia at Montpellier, the canon and civil law studia
at Avignon, and the Burgundian (later Habsburg) University at Dole. Other
French universities attracted Germans only occasionally.
From 1370 onwards, most students from the Swiss cantons attended the
universities of the Holy Roman Empire, particularly those of Vienna, Heidelberg, and Erfurt. In the fifteenth century many Swiss students also went to
Cracow University because of the close trade links of the time between
eastern Switzerland (especially the city of St Gallen) and Poland. Students
from French-speaking Switzerland still went in large numbers to French
universities. Until the mid-fourteenth century Bologna enjoyed a virtual
monopoly in the teaching of civil law; next in importance came Paris, and
then Montpellier. After 1460 Basle took over. S. Stelling-Michaud notes that,
between 1370 and 1470,1,488 Swiss students attended foreign universities and
400 attended Basle University. Between 1470 and 1525 Swiss students at Basle
University numbered 1,100 and those at other studia 1,90c21
THE NORDIC COUNTRIES AND EASTERN EUROPE
Students from Scandinavian countries, Iceland, Ireland, and Scotland had to
go abroad for university training because they had no studia in their own
country, at least until the end of the Middle Ages. Even then, if their country
19 J. Verger, 'Le recrutement geographique des universities francaises au debut du XVe siecle
d'apres les suppliques de 1403', Melanges d'Archeologie
et d'Histoire publies par I'Ecole Franqaise de Rome, 82 , 895; L. W. Brockliss, 'Patterns of Attendance at the University of
Paris 1400-1800', Historical Journal, 3 , 527.
20 H. de Ridder-Symoens, 'Les origines geographique et sociale des etudiants de la nation germanique de l'ancienne universite d'Orleans (1444—1546). Apercu general', in Universities in the
Late Middle Ages, 455—74.
21 Stelling-Michaud, 'Suisse et universites' (note 4), 148-60.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
possessed a university it did not keep young people at home. In most cases
they were content with a general training in their own arts faculties - the only
efficient faculties there before the sixteenth century. Historians of those countries, particularly the northern countries, have thoroughly investigated their
ancestors' academic pilgrimage.22
Once the Nordic countries were converted to Christianity between the
early eleventh century (in Denmark, Iceland, and Norway) and the midtwelfth century (Sweden in the early twelfth century and Finland in the midtwelfth century), the newly installed church needed ecclesiastical dignitaries
learned in Roman law - to administer it, for the cure of souls, and to found
an educational system. In 1219 Pope Honorius III encouraged them to study
abroad. Their academic pilgrimage falls into two main stages, one from 1200
to 1350, and the other from 1350 to 1530, the beginning of the Reformation.
In the first period the University of Paris, followed by the University of
Bologna, attracted by far the most students, three-quarters of them going to
Paris and the other quarter to Bologna. Fourteenth-century records show the
names of 128 alumni in Paris and 36 in Bologna. There are some traces - but
until the seventeenth century no continuous flow - of Scandinavian students
in Oxford and Cambridge in the thirteenth century. It would be misleading to
judge by the few Scandinavian scholars abroad, for the Scandinavian countries were thinly populated and those scholars were the entire ecclesiastical
elite - bishops, canons, and clerics in the king's service - almost without
exception members of the wealthier classes, that is, of the aristocracy.
Once the universities of the Holy Roman Empire were founded, academic
pilgrimage patterns underwent great changes. Prague, founded in 1348, supplanted Paris, just as Leipzig, founded in 1409, supplanted Prague, the Scandinavians having followed the Germans in their exodus from Prague to Leipzig.
From 1419 onwards Rostock, being nearer, was the favourite studium, then
in order of preference came Greifswald, founded in 1456, and Cologne,
founded in 1388. The importance of the Universities of Rostock and Greifswald in the Hanseatic League will be enlarged on below (p. 301). Orleans
took the place of Bologna in training experts in civil law, and few northern
students went to Paris any more. The foundation of the Universities of
Uppsala in 1477 and Copenhagen in 1479 did little to disturb established
habit; both universities probably met the growing demand for academic
training among the lower classes, for at that time the demand for university
graduates, lay or ecclesiastical, far exceeded supply. Social elites continued to
prefer study abroad. Figures of registered students in Uppsala and Copen-
22 S. Bagge, 'Nordic Students at Foreign Universities until 1660', Scandinavian Journal of
History, 9 , 287—318; J. Pinborg, 'Danish Students 1450-1535 and the University of
Copenhagen', Cahiers de Vlnstitut du moyen age grec et latin de Vuniversite de Copenhague,
37 , 74-81.
hagen Universities at that time are not available, but there is ample information on the number of students at foreign universities between 1350 and
1530. Denmark had 2,146 students abroad, Sweden 724, Norway 219, and
Finland 97. Some indication of the large numbers of Scandinavians studying
at foreign universities, and of the importance of their studies, is that nearly all
bishops of Nordic dioceses were graduates of a foreign university, usually
Paris and, rather less often, Bologna. More than half the canons in cathedral
chapters appear to have been at least masters of arts, who before the latter
half of the fourteenth century graduated in Paris, and later in the schools of
north-east Germany. These alumni helped to extend European culture to the
Nordic countries, and the jurists among them introduced Roman-canon law
into the church and state.
The studiosi of eastern Europe had similar academic difficulties and overcame them in the same way. Until Cracow University was founded in 1364,
Prague University, at that time not a flourishing one, was the nearest studium
for Lithuanians, Poles, and Hungarians. Until the seventeenth century Hungarians and Lithuanians had for all but a short time (1389 - c. 1450 at the
University of Buda, Budapest, 1367 - c. 1400 at the University of Pecs, and
1465 - c. 1492 at the University of Pozsony, Bratislava) to go to a foreign
university for their degree. Like the Scots, northerners, and Germans, young
east Europeans were fervent academic pilgrims. Neither Prague nor Cracow,
nor other more ephemeral centres, sufficed to keep ambitious students in
their home country. Available information shows that, throughout the
Middle Ages, the Universities of Bologna, Padua, and Paris took in a steady
trickle of students from those countries, even though many of them were
isolated individuals. In Bologna and Padua there was a nation of Bohemians,
Hungarians, and Poles; in Paris the English-German nation numbered several
provinces, one of them for students of Upper Germany. In the fourteenth
century a few Bohemians even crossed the Channel to study philosophy and
theology in Oxford. 'The high reputation which Oxford then enjoyed at the
Bohemia University is illustrated by a Statute of Prague passed in 1367, providing that students who dictated books to their fellow-students were to
dictate only works compiled by masters from the illustrious universities of
Prague, Paris or Oxford.'23 The condemnation of Wyclif s works and the
suppression of the Lollard movement severed the ties between Prague and
Oxford. Towards the end of the fifteenth century eastern Europeans went in
greater numbers to study in Paris and Italy. Towards 1500 seven messengers
were employed in maintaining contacts between Hungarians studying in Paris
and their families in Hungary. Most Hungarian students at that time went,
however, only to the Universities of Vienna and Cracow. Astonishingly few
R. F. Young, 'Bohemian Scholars and Students at the English Universities from 1347 to 1750',
English Historical Review, 38 , 72.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
Hungarians managed to graduate, but according to A. Kubinyi24 there was
little demand for graduates in Hungarian public services in the Middle Ages,
even in the church. Licentiates and doctors of law were to be found principally in the more important posts. University studies were regarded as intellectual training for the sons of the urban bourgeoisie, as a means of learning
foreign languages, making contacts, and cultivating group loyalties. Kubinyi
believes that is why the Hungarian universities could not survive until the
Hungarian establishment came to prefer graduates to patricians.
In Poland young people began their studies in Cracow or in a neighbouring
university before going abroad to graduate. They were few in number,
because in Poland too there was no real progress in professionalizing the
public services until the sixteenth century (see chapter 8).
GREAT BRITAIN
The Scots are known as great travellers. Diplomats, mercenaries, priests and
pilgrims, merchants, craftsmen, and students, all went to the continent.
Mark you what the proverb says
Of Scotsmen, rats and lice;
The whole world over take your ways
You'll find them still, I guess.25
Dr Watt has traced about 1,100 Scottish graduates between 1150 and 1410,
when the first Scottish university was founded in St Andrews.26 Available
sources are so incomplete that this figure is certainly less than the real
number. The foundation of national universities did nothing to reduce Scottish migration and even seems to have had the opposite effect. The universities most frequented by Scotsmen were those of Paris (260 names between
1340 and 1410), Orleans (60 alumni), and Avignon (34 alumni). The first
traces of Scots, as of Scandinavians, at the University of Paris date from the
beginning of the university. Contacts between France and Scotland were confirmed by the 'Auld Alliance', the treaty of peace and mutual aid against the
common enemy, England, concluded in 1295 and several times renewed until
1560. At all costs, Scots avoided going to Oxford and Cambridge studia their numbers there did not exceed 1 per cent of all the students - and they
therefore had to cross the Channel. They preferred Paris for arts, theology,
and canon law and Orleans for canon and civil law. The Scots had a college
24 A. Kubinyi, 'Stadische Burger und Universitatsstudien in Ungarn am Ende des Mittelalters', in
E. Maschke and J. Sydow (eds.), Stadt und Universitat
im Mittelalter
und in der fruheren
 , 161—5.
25 Quoted in A. I. Dunlop, Scots Abroad in the Fifteenth Century, Historical Association Pamphlet, 124 , 3; English translation of a French rhyme published in Pierre le Jolle,
Description
de la ville d'Amsterdam,
etc. (Amsterdam, 1666), 25.
26 D. E. R. Watt, A Biographical
Dictionary
of Scottish Graduates
to A.D. 1410 .
in Paris, founded in 1325, which was far from sufficient for their growing
numbers. That they formed part of the English-German nation did little to
make them less uncomfortable bedfellows. According to the chronicles of the
English-German nation,
The root and origin of almost all the scandals committed by [the Scottish]
students was vagabondage. There was no adequate provision of residential
colleges for Scottish scholars, who were thus the more prone to remove from
one master's house to another, to the obvious loosening of academic disciplines.
In 1469, therefore, certain masters of the province of Scotland were empowered
to choose an inquisitor to visit and examine the morals of the scholars.27
The Scots flocked to Paris before and after their exodus when the English
occupied the city in 1411. Between 1466 and 1500 approximately 350 candidates for the arts examinations appear in the registers of the English-German
nation.28 In Orleans the Scots had a nation of their own; the few English
scholars formed part of the German nation. The Scottish nation was in
decline because of the political situation in the early fifteenth century. As
stated above, the fillip given to the studium of Avignon by the presence of the
popes did not last.
The Hundred Years War brought about great changes in the Scots' iter
gallicum. When Paris fell into English hands in 1411 the Scots left Paris for
Cologne, and from 1425 onwards for Louvain, and continued to attend these
universities until the Reformation. In Cologne, 91 Scottish students registered
between 1400 and 1449 and 257 between 1450 and 1499; in Louvain 160 Scottish students registered between 1426 and 1484, and 182 between 1485 and
1527.29 There were economic reasons for their preference for these universities; the most important Scottish commercial bank in Europe was at Bruges,
and that city allowed Scottish merchants to send goods tax-free to their sons,
near relatives, and friends studying in Paris, Louvain, or Cologne.30 There
had been an English nation in Bologna and Padua since the thirteenth
century, but there were few Scottish scholars in Italy in the Middle Ages. The
English conquests in France had driven some Scots farther south, where,
however, their numbers did not much increase until the sixteenth century.
Only a few dozen names have been found in the archives for the Middle Ages
27 D. E. R. Watt, 'Scottish Student Life Abroad in the Fourteenth Century', Scottish
Historical
Review', 59 , 7.
28 J.-B. Coissac, 'Les etudiants ecossais a Puniversite de Paris', Revue Internationale
de Venseignement,
71 , 26-7.
29 J. H. Baxter, 'Scottish Students at Louvain University 1425-1484', Scottish Historical
25 , 327-34; A. Schillings, Matricule
de I'Universite
de Louvain,
HI. 1485-1527, 2 vols.
 , vol. II, tables, s.v.; H. Keussen, Die Matrikel
der Universita't
 , vol. Ill, tables, s.v.; Schwinges, Universitdtsbesucher,
30 'excepto eo quod predicti mercatores
mittere suis filiis aut parentibus
et amicis studentibus
in universitatibus
Parisiensi,
Coloniensi
et Lovaniensi\
d.d. 1-4—1470 n.s.: L. Gilliodts-Van Severen, Inventaire des archives de la ville de Bruges. Section premiere.
Inventaire
des Chartes,
vol. I (Bruges, 1876), 39.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
for the Universities of Bologna, Padua, Pavia, and Ferrara.31 It is noteworthy
that from the fourteenth century onwards, and particularly in the fifteenth
century, many Scottish graduates stayed on the continent as teachers or
members of religious orders. Frisian graduates too, like the Scots, were more
numerous than their national population and the backward state of their
urban economy would suggest, and had to seek a career abroad once they had
their university degree.
The Irish appear to have taken much less interest in university education.
For the whole of the Middle Ages, only thirty names of students from Hibernia (Ireland) have been found in documents pertaining to the University of
Paris, and hardly any such names in other continental universities. M. H.
Somers has identified forty-seven students from Ireland at Oxford University
in the thirteenth century, fifty-seven in the fourteenth, and eighty-three in the
fifteenth century, most of them of Anglo-Norman extraction.32 Few Irishmen
took part in the European academic pilgrimage.
Throughout the Middle Ages, English students studied mainly at the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, but towards 1200 there were large
numbers of English students in the French schools. Until 1215, 38 per cent of
all masters of arts in Paris were of English origin;33 thereafter, for political
reasons, their number so far declined that the English nation had to change its
name to English-German nation and then to German nation. In the Middle
Ages the universities of the Holy Roman Empire had little attraction for
English and Irish students, of whom there were not more than a dozen in the
various studia. Not many Englishmen went as far as Italy either; there were
only 20 English names in the thirteenth century, 55 in the fourteenth, 125 in
the fifteenth, and 55 names between 1500 and 1525.34 These English alumni of
the Italian universities were, however, of remarkable calibre. At an early date
they (William Grey, Robert Flemmyng, Thomas Linacre, William Grocyn,
William Lily, John Colet, Cuthbert Tunstall) introduced Italian humanism
and the teaching of Greek into England. Something similar happened in other
European countries, such as Portugal, Poland, and the Low Countries, where
a few graduates of Italian universities introduced humanism into their native
land in the fifteenth century.
Similarly, continental students showed little interest in the English studia.
Only 2 per cent of the students at Oxford and Cambridge came from the
Continent, and only 4 per cent were Welsh, Irish, and Scottish. Most of these
31 R. J. Mitchell, 'Scottish Law Students in Italy in the Later Middle Ages', Juridical Review, 49
 , 19-24.
32 M . H. Somers, 'Irish Scholars in the Universities of Paris and Oxford before 1500', Ph.D.,
City University of New York, 1979.
33 J. W. Baldwin, 'Masters of Paris from 1179 to 1215. A Social Perspective', in Renaissance
34 G. B. Parks, The English Traveller
to Italy, vol. I, The Middle
Ages (to 1525) ,
foreigners were members of the mendicant orders studying for a degree in
theology. The policy of those orders was to place monks as students in all
university cities of Europe where they had a cloister and/or studium of their
THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
Intellectual relations between England and Spain were close in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries because of the Toledo translators' school, where
Englishmen like Adelard of Bath, Robert of Chester, Alfred the Great, and
Michael Scot were active, but intellectual and academic relations between the
Iberian schools and those of north-western Europe did not endure. Few
Spaniards or Portuguese went beyond Paris, where they were inscribed in the
French nation; university lists from German-speaking countries mention no
more than five Spaniards or Portuguese. Although Spain did not lack studia
generalia teaching civil and canon law on the model of Bologna, Spaniards mostly Catalans - and Portuguese went on to continue their studies at the
universities of the south of France (Avignon, Toulouse, and Montpellier),
often using them as stages on their way to Italy. Bologna was the most important university city outside the Iberian peninsula - so important, indeed, that
in 1364 one of the few colleges for foreigners, the Collegio di Spagna (which
is still in operation), was founded there, and served as a model for the many
colleges founded in the Spanish studia in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Siena, too, attracted the Portuguese. Around 1500 the other Italian schools
were also popular with Spaniards and Portuguese. Available figures suggest
that hundreds of Iberian students attended the Italian studia before 1500,
and that about one hundred attended the French schools. For the thirteenth
century alone, more than a hundred references to Catalans in Bologna have
been found.35 Of course there were intensive contacts between the Spanish
and Portuguese universities. Salamanca had so many Portuguese students in
the Middle Ages that it could almost be considered a Portuguese university.36
Apart from Catalans and Basques, hardly any studiosi living east of the
Pyrenees attended Spanish universities.
35 R. Kagan, Students and Society in Early Modern Spain , 63,65; J. B.
Perez, 'La Tradicion espanola en Bolonia', Revista de Archivos,
Bibliotecas
y Museos, 3rd
series, 33 , 174-84; J. Miret y Sans, 'Escolares Catalans al estudi de Bolonia en la XIHe
centuria', Boletin de la real Academia de Buenas Letras de Barcelona, 59 , 154; V. Rau,
'Studenti ed eruditi portoghesi in Italia nel secolo X V , Estudos
italianos em Portugal, 36
(I973)> 7-73; M. Peset, 'Estudiantes hispanos en las Universidades francesas, siglo X I V , in
Estudios dedicados a Juan Peset Aleixandre,
vol. Ill , 273-94.
36 M . Peset, Interrelaciones
entre las universidades
y portuguesas
siglos de su historia .
Wide de Ridder-Symoens
ITALY AND FRANCE
The Italians were more stay-at-home than the Spaniards, but as is clear
throughout this chapter their schools attracted hosts of young scholars. Internal migration in Italy was intense. The Alps certainly formed a frontier,
academic if not political. The Sicilians congregated mainly in Bologna and
Padua, in numbers little affected by the foundation of the University of
Catania in 1434 (1444). Available sources record 53 Sicilian students at
Bologna between 1400 and 1442, 68 there between 1434 and 1499, and 101
and 109 at Padua for the same periods.37 The few Italian students to be found
beyond the Alps were in a few universities in frontier regions, in Basle and
Ingolstadt and in the Mediterranean region. The republic of Venice obliged
its students to study at Padua, except for those wanting to go ultramontes, i.e.
north of the Alps; but this did not stimulate Venetian youth to go abroad.38
Many of the Italian itinerant scholars belonged to religious orders. Before the
latter half of the fourteenth century regular and secular clergy wishing to take
a degree in theology had no choice but to cross the Alps, and were naturally
drawn to Paris by the renown as teachers of Albertus Magnus and Thomas
Conversely, Italian teachers were much sought after by ultramontane
universities in the fifteenth century. Certainly the spread of humanism in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries would have been impossible but for the her
italicum of hundreds or thousands of students and learned men from all over
Europe. Disciples of humanism sought to introduce the new culture into their
own country by all possible means. By offering attractive conditions they
attracted Italian humanists - second-rate in Italy but first-rate elsewhere - to
teach in their universities - at Salamanca and Lerida, Cracow, Paris, Orleans
and the south of France, Oxford and Cambridge, Erfurt, Leipzig, Strasburg,
Basle, Louvain, and Vienna.39
Academic relations between Italy and the south of France date from the
earliest times. In the twelfth century several Italian jurists trained in Bologna
worked and taught in the universities of southern France. In the thirteenth
century the influx was mainly of students from southern France into Bologna,
where the two ultramontane nations of Provence and Gascony/Auvergne
were there to welcome them. In the fifteenth century Italy lost its attraction
for scholars from southern France and for Frenchmen in general, for the
Great Schism hindered contacts with Italian intellectual centres. Moreover,
37 N. Rodolico, 'Siciliani nello studio di Bologna nel medio evo', Archivio
Storico Siciliano,
series, 20 (1895), 89—228; F. Marietta, 'I Siciliani nello Studio di Padova nel Quattrocento',
Storico per la Sicilia, 2-3 , 147-211.
38 R. E. Ohl, 'The University of Padua, 1405-1509: an International Community of Students and
Professors', Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania, 1980, 39, 53.
39 Many examples in R. Weiss, 'Italian Humanism in Western Europe 1460-1520', in F. J. Jacobs
(ed.), Italian Renaissance
(London, i960), 69—93.
the growth of French national unity, and consequently of government administration and royal justice, encouraged and indeed obliged future officials to
take their degrees at a local university. Only in the last years of the fifteenth
century and the first half of the sixteenth century did Italian humanism bring
the iter italicum again into fashion (for this pan-European phenomenon see
volume II, chapter 10).
Students from central and northern France had no particular liking for
travel. If they did go abroad to study they generally chose a not-to-distant
studium — Cologne, for the men of Champagne and Louvain for students from
the border regions of the Low Countries. Occasionally young French scholars
were encouraged to study abroad for circumstantial reasons - large numbers of
French students came to Pavia because of French political influence in the
duchy of Milan at the beginning of the sixteenth century, and also because
Pavia was the first university in Italian territory for travellers entering Italy
from the Riviera. Dynastic relations between two countries could also temporarily affect the influx of scholars - large numbers of Spanish students came to
Louvain in the first half of the sixteenth century, not only because of the success
of the humanist College of the Three Languages (Latin, Greek, and Hebrew),
founded in 1517 at the suggestion of Erasmus. The joint rulers, Philip the
Handsome and Charles V, improved relations between the Low Countries,
Spain and Portugal (only 5 Iberian students were registered at Louvain between
1426 and 1485, but 46 between i486 and 1527, and 180 between 1527 and
1559);40 but dynastic ties were not reciprocal; few subjects of the Habsburgs
from the Low Countries ventured beyond the Pyrenees to study. The Dole
studium^ which all Burgundian subj ects regarded as 'their' university, attracted
more students, and was often a transit university on the road to Italy.
TRAVELLING CONDITIONS
Academic pilgrimage was very dependent on roads. When international trade
revived in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a network of roads was made.
Tracks were given a hard surface and sometimes metalled, and bridges were
built at the busiest fords.41 Nevertheless, the poor quality of roads, bridges,
lodgings, and vehicles remained a major problem for travellers until the
eighteenth century. Robbers on land or water, undisciplined soldiery, prostitutes, vagabonds, and bad weather or other natural disasters added to the
dangers of travel. In populous areas travellers arrived every evening at a town
40 H. de Ridder-Symoens, 'Internationalismus versus Nationalismus an Universitaten um 1500
nach zumeist sudniederlandischen Quellen', in F. Seibt and W. Eberhardt (eds.), Europa 1500
 , 408.
41 There is an abundant literature on travel in the Middle Ages. Some examples: N. Ohler,
Reisen im Mittelalter
 ; A. Newton (ed.), Travel and Travellers of the
Middle Ages ; M. N. Boyer, 'Travel in Medieval France (1300-1450)' Ph.D.,
Columbia University, 1958.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
or village offering adequate lodging and food - Avignon at the time of the
popes had some sixty inns with beds. The most frequented universities of
Europe in the Middle Ages were all in thickly inhabited and easily accessible
areas. Travellers on foot could do 30 to 40 km (20 to 25 miles) a day and
horsemen 50 to 60 km (30 to 40 miles). Couriers managed 100 km (60 miles) a
The most accessible roads were the Roman ones, disused in the early
Middle Ages but restored when international trade revived.42 Several Italian
universities were connected by the Aurelian, Aemilian, and Flaminian Ways.
To reach Italy a traveller could travel via France or follow the 'Dutche road'
or 'merchandese road' through Germany. For Englishmen and continentals
living west of the Schelde, the best route - military operations permitting was from Paris to Dijon and thence to Lausanne and the Mont Cenis or the
Great Saint Bernard Pass, and then along the Aemilian Way to Pavia or
Bologna. Another easy road was from Paris to Orleans (the first paved
highway in France) and then to Lyon, whence travellers could continue
towards the Mont Cenis or follow the Rhone valley to Avignon, and then
take the road along the coast before picking up the Aurelian Way in Genoa
for Pisa, Siena, or Rome. As the Po was navigable as far as Ferrara, which
was connected by canal to Venice, students could easily reach the Universities
of Padua and Ferrara by following the French itinerary. Sir Richard Guylforde, an English pilgrim, noted in his diary in 1506 that his journey from Rye
(near Hastings on the English coast) to Venice took him 37 days: 26 days
overland, 6 by water, and 5 days' rest. The journey via Germany took about
as long, as Richard Torkyngton, also a pilgrim to Jerusalem, recorded in
1517. He reached Venice in 38 Vi days (23 days overland, 8 by water and 7 Vi
days' rest).43 From the Channel the Rhine road went to the university cities of
Louvain, Cologne, Heidelberg, Strasburg, and Basle before reaching Milan
and the Aemilian Way by the Saint Gotthard Pass. Farther east the Venetian
trade route crossed the Brenner to join the Hanseatic roads.
The Hanseatic League vastly improved the road system44 by building and
maintaining roads linking the towns that were members of the League.
Transport by the North Sea and the Baltic and on inland waterways was no
less important. Rivers were made navigable by locks and similar facilities,
and by building canals between natural waterways. There were no special
arrangements for passenger transport; travellers had to make do with what
little comfort they could get. Nevertheless, travel by barge had its advantages,
being less tiring than walking, more comfortable than an unsprung cart or
42 W. Gotz, Die V' erkehrswege
im Altertum
und Mittelalter.
Die Verkehrswege
itn Dienst des
Welthandels
 .
43 Parks, English Traveller
(note 34), 495-501.
44 F. Bruns and H. Weczerka, Hansische
Handelsstrassen,
2 vols., vol. I, Text, vol. II, Atlas
 , maps A and B; P. Dollinger, The German Hansa .
carriage, and fairly cheap. In moderately flat country travel was quicker
downstream. Many students reached their university by the Hanseatic trade
routes. From London to Bruges they could follow a trading caravan along the
Rhine to Basle (as stated above), or bear east to Frankfurt-on-Main and the
Brenner and then direct to Padua and Ferrara. Crossing the Alps was arduous
even in the summer. Pero Tafur, a Portuguese pilgrim, wrote in 1438:
The next day I arrived at the foot of the St Gotthard Pass, high in the Alps. It
was the end of August when the snow melts in the great heat, making the
crossing very perilous. An ox, accustomed to the ways, goes in front drawing a
long rope. To this a trailer is attached, on which the passenger sits, holding his
horse behind him by the reins. In this way, if any accident happens, only the ox
is imperilled.45
From Cologne several roads led direct to Rostock, Leipzig, Erfurt, Prague, or
Cracow. Northerners could travel down the Elbe to Leipzig or Prague or take
the road from Stralsund or Danzig to Cracow. Rostock University, founded
in 1419, is the only university that can be called Hanseatic. Its students were
nearly all from the area of the Hanseatic League - the Baltic and Scandinavian countries and the Low Countries. The Greifswald studium, founded
in 1456, was especially popular with Scandinavians, but was never as popular
as Rostock with students from the western Hanseatic cities, who at one time
in the fifteenth century accounted for one-quarter of all the students registered there.
Students going to Italy or Spain could perhaps follow in the train of a
personage of high rank - a sovereign, nobleman, dignitary of the church, or
diplomat - or join a merchants' caravan or group of pilgrims bound for
Rome, Jerusalem, or Santiago de Compostela. Four great itineraries crossed
France towards the holy shrine of Santiago de Compostela on the western
edge of Christendom, taking in the university cities of Paris, Orleans,
Bourges, Poitiers, Bordeaux, and Cahors. From the fifteenth century
onwards, travel guides became popular, written mainly for pilgrims but of
course equally useful to students. There is evidence to show that students
travelled in groups for safety and comfort: university registers show that
several scholars from the same town or region registered at the same time on
the university rolls. Other studiosi joined the group in its journey. University
messengers used the same routes, and where there was no messenger service
students resorted to merchants, fellow students, or visiting fellowcountrymen. From the thirteenth century onwards, young people studying in
university cities that were also busy trading centres had money sent to them
through bankers with offices and correspondents in the big European trading
Travellers had to face not only the dangers of the road but also customs
45 Quoted in M. Rowling, Everyday Life of Medieval Travellers , 38.
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
dues, tolls, and other taxes, levies, and exactions. Centuries before, the
Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa had tried to spare them all these in his
Authentica Habita constitution, and later sovereigns had granted many privileges protecting foreign students in many different ways. Even in time of
political tension or military operations, sovereigns from the Emperor Frederick I onwards protected itinerant students and their messengers, granting
them safe-conducts to cross territories in a state of war and exempting them
from customs dues on food and clothing. Sometimes, however, scholars were
imprisoned or molested while crossing an enemy country, or even expelled if
their host country was at war with their home country. In 1419 the French
regent Charles granted a safe-conduct to the members of the Burgundian
nation in Montpellier, who were subjects of his rival the duke of Burgundy,
granting them permission to live 'seurement et sauvement en ladite etude de
Montpellier sans que on puisse aucune chose demander, suppose qu'ils soient
dudit pays de Bourgogne ou d'autre qui ne nous soit pas si obeissant comme il
deust' (safe and sound in the said studium of Montpellier without anything
being required of them should they be of the said country of Burgundy or any
other country that is not as obedient to us as it should be).46 This precedent
did not deter King Louis XI from expelling 400 students from Paris in 1470
because they were subjects of Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy. In 1524
the procurator of the German nation in Orleans noted in the Book of Procurators that he himself and William Cupreus of Flushing were made prisoners
in Chateauneuf-sur-Loire by the duke of Luneberg, an ally of Francis I in his
war against the emperor Charles V. The procurator added that, although his
predecessor had omitted to mention it, he recorded this event as a warning to
his colleague to take due care in time of war, and not to leave the city of
Orleans without good reason in time of military operations.47
Other privileges relating to foreign currency, and the especially important
privilege of exemption from the right of escheat, were everywhere recognized. Exemption from the right of escheat meant that the property of
students dying abroad was not confiscated by the local ruler but was returned
to their heirs. If they did not claim the property it was sold and the proceeds
were spent on prayers for the dead man's soul, or for charitable purposes.
These privileges, and more general ones relating to justice or control of
rents or food prices (see chapter 4), made it possible for itinerant students to
survive. The use of Latin as a common language, and of a uniform programme of study and system of examinations, enabled itinerant students to
continue their studies in one studium after another, and ensured recognition
46 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. II, 183, quoted in M. Waxin, Statut de Ve'tudiant e'tranger dans son
developpement
bistorique
 , 67-8.
47 C. M. Ridderikhoff and H. de Ridder-Symoens (eds.), Premier Livre des Procurateurs
nation germanique de Vancienne Universite d'Orleans
1444-1546.
Premiere partie: Texte des
rapports des procurateurs
 , 263-4.
of their degrees throughout Christendom. Besides their academic knowledge
they took home with them a host of new experiences, ideas, opinions, and
political principles and views. Also - and this is important - they brought
back manuscripts and, later on, printed books. They had become familiar
with new schools of artistic expression, and with living conditions, customs,
ways of life, and eating and drinking habits all previously unknown to them.
As most itinerant scholars belonged to the elite of their country and later held
high office, they were well placed to apply and propagate their newly
acquired knowledge. The consequences of academic pilgrimage were, indeed,
out of all proportion to the numerically insignificant number of migrant
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aston, T. H. 'Oxford's Medieval Alumni', Past and Present, 74 , 3-40.
Aston, T. H., Duncan, G. D., and Evans, T. A. R. 'The Medieval Alumni of the University of Cambridge', Past and Present, 86 , 9-86.
Boyce, G. The English-German Nation in the University of Paris during the Middle
Ages, Bruges, 1927.
Budinsky, A. Die Universitat Paris und die Fremden an derselben im Mittelalter,
Berlin, 1876; reprint, Aalen, 1970.
Dotzauer, W. 'Deutsche in westeuropaischen Hochschul- und Handelsstadten, vornehmlich in Frankreich, bis zum Ende des alten Reiches. Nation, Bruderschaft,
Landmannschaft', Festschrift L. Petry, Geschichtliche Landeskunde, 5 ,
Dotzauer, W. 'Deutsches Studium und deutsche Studenten an europaischen Hochschulen (Frankreich, Italien) und die nachfolgende Tatigkeit in Stadt, Kirche und
Territorium in Deutschland', in E. Maschke and J. Sydow (eds.), Stadt und Universitat im Mittelalter und in der friihen Neuzeit, Sigmaringen, 1977, 112-41.
Kibre, P., The Nations in the Mediaeval Universities, Cambridge, Mass., 1948.
Miethke, J. 'Die Studenten', in R. Schultz (ed.), 'Unterwegssein im Spatmittelalter',
Zeitschrift fur Historische Forschung, (special issue) , 49—70.
Pini, A. I.' "Discere turba volens". Studenti e vita studentesca a Bologna dalle origini
dello studio alia meta del trecento', in G. P. Brizzi and A. I. Pini (eds.), Studenti e
Universita degli studenti del XII al XIX secolo, Bologna, 1988, 45-136.
Schwinges, R. C. 'Zur Prosopographie studentischer Reisegruppen im fiinfzehnten
Jahrhundert', in N. Bulst and J. P. Genet (eds.), Medieval Lives and the Historian.
Studies in Medieval Prosopography, Kalamazoo, 1986, 333-41.
Simak, J. V. 'Studenti z Cech, Moravy a Slezska na nemeck ch universitach v
XV.-XVIII. st.' (Students of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia at the German Universities in the Fifteenth - Eighteenth Century), Casopis Ceskeho Musea, 79 ,
290-7; 80 , 300-5, 5IO"39-
Trombetti Budriesi, A. L. 'L'esame di Laurea presso lo studio bolognese, Laureati in
diritto civile nel secolo XV, in G. P. Brizzi and A. I. Pini (eds.), Studenti e Universita degli studenti del XII al XIX secolo, Bologna, 1988, 137-91.
Verger, J. 'Geographie universitaire et mobilite etudiante au moyen age: quelques
Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
remarques', in A. Paravicini Bagliani (ed.), Ecoles et vie intellectuelle a Lausanne au
ntoyen age, Lausanne, 1987, 9-24.
Verissimo Serrao, J. Les Portugais a VUniversite de Toulouse, XHle-XVIle siecles,
Memorias e documentos para a historia luso-francesa, 5, Paris, 1970.
Verissimo Serrao, J. Les Portugais a VUniversite de Montpellier, XHe—XVHe siecles,
Memorias e documentos para a historia luso-francesa, 8, Paris, 1971.
Verissimo Serrao, J. Portugueses no Estudo de Salamanca, vol. 1,1250—1550, Lisbon,
Waxin, M. Statut de Vetudiant etranger dans son developpement historique, Amiens,
THE FACULTY OF ARTS
CHAPTER 10.1
THE TRIVIUM AND THE THREE
PHILOSOPHIES
GORDON LEFF
THE LIBERAL ARTS IN MEDIEVAL EDUCATION
Medieval universities gave institutional form to a hierarchical notion of
knowledge which they inherited from antiquity. Both Plato (Republic II, III,
VII) and Aristotle (Politics VII, VIII) described a basic education which comprised a grounding in elementary grammar, literature, music, and arithmetic,
and which prepared the way for the advanced study of mathematics and
finally philosophy, whose object was wisdom, the supreme end of knowledge.
That view of the propaedeutic role of the 'liberal arts', as they were called,
arts for the free, as opposed to the servile, man passed into Roman education,
where they had the directly practical end of preparing for a training in law
and public life. It was in turn inherited by the Middle Ages and adapted,
Gordon Leff
above all by Saint Augustine, to Christian objects of mastering the meaning of
Scripture as the repository of Christian wisdom founded upon faith and the
love of God. By the time of the emergence of universities in the twelfth
century, theology, as the end of profane knowledge, had been joined by the
more practical ends of law and medicine.
The arts were therefore distinguished from the higher subjects in a number
of important ways. In the first place they were a heterogeneous grouping
without any unity other than their common introductory function. From
antiquity they were divided between the three verbal disciplines of grammar,
rhetoric, and logic (the trivium or threefold way to wisdom), and the four
mathematical disciplines, of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music (the
quadrivium or fourfold way). But, although the notion of the liberal arts was
usually retained (as in Oxford), by the middle of the thirteenth century they
no longer corresponded to the content of the arts course and were supplemented or superseded by other classifications, notably the addition of the
three philosophies, natural, moral, and metaphysical, which were not covered
by the older divisions of the trivium and quadrivium.1
In the second place, because of the heterogeneity of the arts, there was an
uneven development both within the subjects of the trivium and the quadrivium and between the two groups. Generally speaking, until the 1230s the
trivium was more studied than the quadrivium^ that remained true especially
of Paris. At the same time, certainly in the two leading northern universities
of Paris and Oxford, within the trivium grammar and logic largely ousted
rhetoric, which became an adjunct of grammar, while grammar itself largely
came to be governed by logical considerations. South of the Alps, at Bologna
especially and at Padua, rhetoric was dominant and was for a time, during the
first part of the thirteenth century, almost autonomous at Bologna.
In the third place different emphases among the arts subjects were due
primarily to the relation between the arts and the higher faculties. Here we
can distinguish between the northern and the southern universities. Until the
middle of the fourteenth century, Paris and to a lesser extent Oxford and
Cambridge were the theological universities; outside the cathedral schools
and the schools of the mendicant orders they had a virtual monopoly of the
teaching of theology, a monopoly which seems to have been jealously
guarded by the papacy, which for a long time refused to grant a faculty of
theology to other universities. Since entry to the theological faculty, as to the
other higher faculties, could until the fourteenth century normally come only
after passing through the arts faculty (except for the mendicants who were
permitted to study arts in their own schools), there was a close connection
between the two faculties. And at all three northern universities, above all
1 For the liberal arts, see the select bibliography. For the history of the three philosophies: J. A.
Weisheipl, 'The Classification of the Sciences in Medieval Thought', Mediaeval Studies, 27
 , 54-60.
The trivium and the three philosophies
Paris, the arts course had a strongly philosophical character, with logic as the
dominant subject in the old trivium and the three philosophies supplementing
the old quadrivium in different proportions; at Paris greater attention was
given to practical and metaphysical philosophy than at Oxford, where the
emphasis was on natural philosophy.
In southern France, Italy, and Spain law ruled supreme, with medicine as
the other main study, to which, at Bologna and Padua, the arts were subordinated and did not necessarily have the same preparatory role. The character
of the arts course was correspondingly more practical, with rhetoric the main
ancillary to the law, and logic and the natural sciences were regarded as
instrumental to the study of medicine with less independent scope for speculation, grammatical, logical, or metaphysical. That did not prevent developments in both the literary and scientific subjects, but it limited the autonomy
of the arts within the university. That was even more true institutionally in
the student universities of Bologna and Padua, where the universities of the
law students preponderated. For much of the thirteenth century and into the
fourteenth century their rectors claimed jurisdiction over the more recent
student universities, and masters' colleges, of arts and medicine. It took a
prolonged struggle before the latter were able to exercise their own jurisdiction in the fourteenth century.
The effect of these different developments within the northern and southern universities was that the arts faculties of the southern universities never
attained a comparable status with those in Paris and Oxford, where they
were the dominant element both numerically and juridically; they also had
the youngest and most volatile membership. On the other hand, the absence
of a theological faculty or professors of theology in such universities as
Bologna, Padua, and Salamanca until the second half of the fourteenth
century meant a corresponding absence of the tensions between the naturalistic disciplines of the arts faculty, especially those connected with the three
philosophies, and the Christian presuppositions involved in the study of
theology and the Bible. As will be seen elsewhere, the tensions were greatest
at Paris, the undisputed centre of theological studies in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries.
The differences between the arts in the northern and southern universities
derived from different educational traditions. North of the Alps education
until the eleventh century had developed within the almost exclusively religious framework of the earlier monastic and cathedral schools and along the
lines prescribed in Saint Augustine's De doctrina christiana: it involved the
acquisition of profane or natural knowledge to serve Christian ends. The
effect was to consider the arts directly subordinate to theology, having as
their raison d'etre the putting of worldly wisdom at the service of the Christian wisdom to be found in the Bible. If in practical terms that often meant
little more than meeting the utilitarian requirements of elementary literacy
Gordon Leff
and numeracy needed in the performance of monastic and priestly duties, it
nevertheless also meant conceiving the arts in a wider context. That can be
seen in the continuation of the Greek and Roman classificatory schemes of
knowledge, transmitted to the Middle Ages by Boethius, Cassiodorus, and
Isidore of Seville, of which the division into the three philosophies in the
thirteenth century was one outcome.2
The connection between the arts and theology was given an institutional
foundation in Charlemagne's educational reforms under Alcuin at the end of
the eighth century and the beginning of the ninth century: these made the
monasteries and the cathedrals responsible for providing instruction for the
purpose of comprehending the Bible, and indirectly for educating a class of
clerks capable of carrying out the administration of the new empire.3 Such
schools remained the main foci of higher education and learning until the
middle of the twelfth century, and they continued to exist until the end of the
Middle Ages. Although intellectually the universities gave their stamp to
higher education, numerically they were only one component in the network
of studia, and, as late as 1400, they numbered only some forty. Both north
and south of the Alps and Pyrenees, therefore, other kinds of institutions
preceded and co-existed with the universities, both providing a preparation
for them, as the grammar schools and individual masters did, and supplementing them, as the cathedral schools and the houses of study of the
different religious orders did.
Where the schools and masters and universities, above all of Italy, differed
from those elsewhere was in their retaining the lay and civic character of
Roman education.4 Rhetoric was the dominant subject in the arts, studied as
a preparation for a career in law and public life; and teaching was in the
hands of the urban schools and masters of rhetoric, who taught the elements
of the other liberal arts, particularly grammar and logic, as a foundation for
it. As the cities began to recover and expand in the tenth and eleventh centuries, so did the range of civic activities, both in connection with the revival
of law and the development of notarial skills, and in the emergence of medicine as a discipline and a career. Concomitantly, theology, as already said,
was the preserve of the religious orders.
Although that lay and civic ambience was peculiar to Italy, to be seen in the
emergence of its distinctive literary culture in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, the same predominantly non-theological orientation of the arts was
shared by the Spanish universities despite their being, as at Salamanca and
Valladolid, under the religious authorities, and also by southern French
2 Weisheipl, 'Classification', (note 1), 55-6.
3 F. L. Ganshof, The Carolingian and Frankish Monarchy , 20,28—9; H. R. Loyn
and J. Percival, The Reign of Charlemagne , 63-4.
4 For the history of classical education: H. I. Marrou, Histoire de VEducation dans VAntiquite
 ; J. Bowen, A History of Western
Education, vol. I, The Ancient World -
The trivium and the three philosophies
universities, such as Montpellier. Even the university originally founded at
Toulouse in 1229 by papal decree, to consolidate the recent victory over the
Cathar heretics, was a century later, in 1335, forbidden by Pope Benedict XII
to allow graduation in theology, while the university at Avignon only received
a theological faculty in 1413, granted papal immunity by John XXIII.5 The
ban upon the teaching of theology outside Paris - and Oxford and Cambridge - until the 1360s was designed to keep the monopoly of it at Paris,
where it was jealously protected by periodic papal interventions against
what were regarded as subversive doctrines arising from the study of pagan
authors in the arts faculty. In consequence of that close association with
theology, the arts at Paris and at Oxford and Cambridge evolved in a
different milieu from that in almost every other university until around the
middle of the fourteenth century. Far from being subservient to theology,
the arts in those universities continued to follow their own autonomous
development, as they had in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, as well as
being the dominant faculty.
All such divergences nevertheless arose from within a common scheme
of knowledge, which, apart from its particular modes of treatment and
organization, provided the universally accepted foundation of education and
learning in the Middle Ages. It emerged in two stages. The first, as already
indicated, was, by more or less direct inheritance from ancient educational
theory and practice, based on the liberal arts, which became divided into the
two groupings of the trivium and quadrivium. The second was through a
series of translations into Latin, extending from the middle of the eleventh
century to well into the thirteenth century, and reaching its height in the
second two-thirds of the twelfth century, of an almost completely new corpus
of philosophical, medical, and scientific works, principally of Greek and
Arabian origin, hitherto unknown to the medieval West. This new body of
knowledge had a transforming effect upon the existing state of knowledge, of
which the emergent universities were the direct recipients. It not only radically changed the content and enlarged the structure of the liberal arts, as it
did of medicine, the two subjects chiefly affected by the new accessions: it
also challenged many Christian conceptions about the nature of the world
and of man, and accordingly involved a redefinition of Christian belief in
relation to philosophy, particularly the three philosophies, which were principally those of Aristotle, accompanied and mediated by Arabic interpretations. Christian thinkers were therefore faced with what at first often
appeared a bewildering task of assimilation, which for the most part was
achieved in the different faculties of the universities, and, in the case of arts
and theology, occupied the greater part of the hundred years between the
1230s and 1330s.
5 Rashdall, Universities, vol. II, 166-7, J76-
Gordon Leff
THE EARLY STAGE
In the first stage the absence of an independent body of Greek and Arabic
sources was the accompaniment of a Latin-based culture, which the Middle
Ages inherited from the Roman Empire in the West. It was confined not only
to one language - that broadly remained true of the whole of the Middle Ages
until the late fourteenth century - but to what was accessible in that language. By the sixth century, after the Roman Empire had politically ceased to
exist in western and central Europe, the cultural base consisted principally of
handbooks and encyclopedias of the liberal arts together with the writings of
the main Latin authors and poets.6 Apart from law, which was Rome's chief
intellectual legacy to medieval and European culture but did not start to take
effect before the eleventh century, it was pre-eminently a literary culture,
with rhetoric the dominant member of the arts, to which grammar and logic
were subordinate. There was no first-hand knowledge of the subjects of the
quadrivium at all, as there had not been any in Roman education; from the
first they had always been studied in popularized versions through handbooks
and digests, a practice taken from the contemporary Hellenistic world and
leading to the progressive adulteration of their contents, as ever more convenient, and superficially intelligible, versions succeeded one another. It was
on this slender and incomplete foundation that the arts were transmitted to
the Middle Ages and were continued, with growing additions, until, in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, they directly encountered for the first time the
previously unknown world of Greek science and philosophy, greatly enriched, and often preceded chronologically, by a further body of Islamic science
and philosophy. Together the old and the new combined to provide the base
for the arts faculties. We must now consider its constituents.
First, there was grammar, which was always regarded as the preliminary
study among the arts, in giving knowledge of the forms of language on which
the other arts of expression depended. In fact, grammar involved elements of
both logic and rhetoric as well as extending to literature.7 It was therefore
interconnected with the rest of the trivium and was not simply a separate
adjunct. Until the twelfth century the main texts were the two primers of
Donatus, the Ars minor and Ars major, and Priscian's Institutiones grammaticae. Composed in the fourth and sixth centuries respectively, they at
once summarized classical grammar and virtually constituted medieval
grammar as the elementary and advanced textbooks; they continued to be
such after the coming of the new verse grammars of Alexander of Villedieu
6 For a brief survey of these developments: D. L. Wagner, 'The Seven Liberal Arts and Classical
Scholarship', in D. L. Wagner (ed.), The Seven Liberal Arts in the Middle Ages , 10-22; R. R. Bolgar, The Classical Heritage and Its Beneficiaries , chs. 1 and 3.
7 For a resume and bibliography: J. F. Huntsman, 'Grammar', in Wagner (ed.), Seven Liberal
Arts (note 6), 59-95; J. J. Murphy, Rhetoric in the Middle Ages .
The trivium and the three philosophies
and Eberhard of Bethune at the end of the twelfth century and the beginning
of the thirteenth century, passing into the curriculum of the arts faculty and,
in the case of Donatus's Ars minor in particular, surviving the Middle Ages.
Both Donatus and Priscian and the later verse grammars, which acquired
great popularity, represented literary or practical grammar concerned with
the parts of speech and syntax. Donatus's two books treated the former,
descriptively in the Ars minor, more elaborately in the Ars major, which in
book III (often called the Barbarismus from its first word) extended to figures
of speech. It came to be taken as a separate text both at Oxford and at Paris.
So did the last two of the eighteen books of Priscian's Institutions, known as
Priscianus minor or De constructionibus, from their subject-matter, which
was syntax; they, too, were specified separately under that title, as the first
sixteen books were under the title of Priscianus major.
Priscian's was a much more substantial work than the two books of
Donatus; it was written at Constantinople, the capital of the surviving eastern
part of the Roman Empire, whose culture was Greek. Priscian therefore had
access to a much richer cultural tradition than his western counterparts,
although he also refers to them, including Donatus. He also included classical
(Latin) texts as illustration, making the Institutiones a repository for classical
sources, especially Virgil (whose standing was doubtless further increased by
Priscian's separate grammatical study of the first twelve lines of the Aeneid).
At Oxford officially, at least in the regulations, Priscian appears to have
remained in use longer than Donatus, well into the sixteenth century. The
reason may well have been his strongly semantic approach to grammar,
treating the parts of speech for their meaning, as a noun denotes a substance
and quality, and a verb action or being acted upon. His approach was based
upon the so-called grammar of Apollonius, in which simple elements
combine into more complex elements, beginning with letters which are joined
to form syllables, which in turn form words, and words sentences, which owe
their meaning to the meaning of the words composing them.
That helped to stimulate a philosophical, or, more strictly in its first phase,
logical, approach to grammar, directed to its general characteristics,
especially the analysis of meaning.8 It had its beginnings in the mid-eleventh
century, emerging as a separate field of enquiry in the second half of the
twelfth century under Peter Helias and Peter of Spain (not to be confused
with the thirteenth-century logician Petrus Hispanus, who became Pope John
XXI in 1276). Although Aristotle's so-called 'old logic', of the Categories and
Interpretation, pointed to the close connection between grammar and logic,
the developments in grammar were indigenous. So, too, was the concurrent
development of terminist logic, also going back to the eleventh century and
having a similar concern with the meaning of words, particularly indefinite,
8 S. Ebbesen, 'Ancient Scholastic Logic', in N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, and J. Pinborg (eds.), The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy , no.
Gordon Leff
or syncategorematic, words like 'any' and 'not' which could not stand alone
in propositions. They each antedated, therefore, the rediscovery of Aristotle's
new logic, or the Prior and Posterior Analytics, Topics, and Sophistical Refutations, in the twelfth century. Apart from the Sophistical Refutations, these
works were only systematically studied, like the rest of Aristotle's newly
translated writings, in the thirteenth century. Their main influence upon
grammar was through the Posterior Analytics, Soul (De anima), and Metaphysics, and they helped to produce a new genre of speculative grammar,
principally in the arts faculty at Paris, between about 1270 and 1300; it consisted in the systematization of the different modes of signification which
words could receive into something like a universal grammar of word forms.9
It had close affinities with terminist logic and was the furthest to which the
logical treatment of grammar was taken in the Middle Ages.
Turning next to logic, Aristotle's logical works were divided into the old
and the new logic because, although Boethius had translated all Aristotle's
main works on logic, apart from the Posterior Analytics, only those of the
so-called 'old logic' had continued to be known before the twelfth century.
The old logic, in addition to Aristotle's Categories and Interpretation, also
included Boethius's translation of the Introduction of Porphyry, the thirdcentury Neoplatonist, to the Categories, accompanied by Boethius's commentaries (two for the Categories and Porphyry) on each of those works,
together with a commentary on Cicero's Topics and his own treatises on
division, categorical and hypothetical syllogisms, and topics (De differentiis
The last-named work was especially important in stimulating a new interest in dialectical reasoning in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and only
came to be displaced by Aristotle's Topics in the thirteenth century, while the
commentaries on Porphyry were responsible for initiating the debate on universals, over the independent existence or non-existence of universal natures,
such as animal or man. Boethius's translations of Aristotle's other logical
writings remained unknown until the 1120s, when they became the foundation of the 'new logic'. They were again translated in the twelfth century,
the Posterior Analytics for the first time by James of Venice, then the foremost translator of Aristotle, who also translated the Sophistical Refutations.
His translations, all from the Greek, were made between about 1125 and
1150.10 Until the middle of the twelfth century, Aristotle was known to the
West only by his logical writings. They therefore stand in a category of their
own, in giving him a purely logical identity, and one which was to have a
far-reaching effect when his more or less complete philosophical works
9 J. Pinborg, 'Speculative Grammar', in Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg (eds.), Cambridge
Medieval Philosophy (note 8), 254-69.
10 B. Dod, 'Aristoteles Latinus', in Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg (eds.), Cambridge Medieval
Philosophy (note 8), 54—5, and table of translations 74—5.
The trivium and the three philosophies
became known by the first quarter of the thirteenth century. Although his
Physics, Metaphysics, and De anima were also translated by James of Venice
before 1150, they only began to have an impact at the beginning of the thirteenth century. For most of the twelfth century Aristotle was regarded as a
logician. Plato, on the strength of the surviving first half of Chalcidius' commentary on the Timaeus, and Boethius, through his Consolation of Philosophy and theological as well as logical and other works, were still the chief
philosophers. As we shall discuss later, the introduction of the main body of
Aristotle's philosophical writings into the arts faculty largely transformed the
arts course in the thirteenth century.
In the case of logic, we can conclude that, like grammar, its progress until
the thirteenth century was largely indigenous, from within the existing stock
of texts, which had come down principally through Boethius. Then, under
the influence of the new logic, as well as important non-Aristotelian Stoic and
Galenic elements, especially those contained in the so-called Alexander's
commentaries on the Sophistical Refutations and Posterior Analytics (mistakenly taken for those of the second-century commentator, Alexander of
Aphrodisias), translated by James of Venice,11 its ramifications, in contrast to
grammar, extended to every aspect of Aristotelian and terminist logic, producing new forms as well as directly bearing upon the three philosophies and
The third element of the trivium, rhetoric, remained the most indigenous
of all; apart from its application to the practical activities of letter-writing, in
the ars dictaminis and ars notaria, and, in the thirteenth century, preaching,
the ars predicandi, it underwent no internal development comparable to that
in speculative grammar or logic. It remained from the beginning governed by
Cicero, directly through his early De inventione, with its stress upon forensic
argument, giving it a legal bias, and indirectly through the pseudo-Ciceronian
Ad Herrenium from the ninth century onwards, with its emphasis upon ornamentation of style.12 Although in the twelfth century the popularity of Ad
Herrenium came to challenge that of De inventione, the latter remained the
undisputed source of rhetorical principles, resisting the attempts of Boncompagno da Signa in the first part of the thirteenth century to displace the Ciceronian five-part letter by a letter in three parts.13 It was at Bologna in the
thirteenth century that the ars dictaminis became for a time a separate faculty
before being supplanted by the ars notaria as a separate skill.
Of all the subjects of the liberal arts, rhetoric never established a separate
identity and had to wait until the fifteenth century in Italy before it fully
gained one. In the Middle Ages it was the most anomalous of the arts because
11 Ebbesen, 'Ancient Scholastic Logic', (note 8), 108—10.
12 M. Carmago, 'Rhetoric', with bibliography, in Wagner (ed.), Seven Liberal Arts (note 6),
97—124; Murphy, Rhetoric (note 7).
13 Murphy, Rhetoric (note 7).
Gordon Leff
the very conditions of public life and the central importance of the lawcourts, which had fostered it in Roman times, ceased to exist, and never
properly returned in their classical or post-medieval forms. Hence rhetoric
became subordinated to a written culture, to grammar in the earlier Middle
Ages and, in Italy, as the ancillary of law from the eleventh century, gradually
broadening its influence to letter-writing and later preaching.
What had doubtless helped to ensure its preservation north of the Alps was
the rhetorical training which the early Christian fathers, including Saint
Augustine, had received, and the need, recognized by him in his De doctrina
christiana, to use persuasion in preaching Christian wisdom. That was given
fullest expression by the new mendicant orders in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. But it is noteworthy that the argument made no difference
to the status of rhetoric north of the Alps, for all the importance of the
mendicants at Paris and Oxford and the other universities. Nor did the comparatively late translation of Aristotle's Rhetoric around the middle of the
thirteenth century. Rhetoric remained subsidiary to the other two members
of the trivium, overlapping with grammar as in the new verse grammars or
subsumed under dialectic as in effect it was in Boethius's treatise on topics. It
was a set text for rhetoric at Oxford, while at Paris study was initially confined to the fourth and last book, and relegated, with the quadrivium, and
philosophy, to public holidays, in the first statutes given by the papal legate,
Robert of Courson, in 1215. Although Cicero had always to be read, and the
dictamen had flourished at Orleans and Tours in the twelfth century and was
in general use in northern Europe, as well as in Italy, to serve the needs of law
and administration, it was in Italy that the ars dictaminis was most advanced,
and even there the creative period of the ars dictaminis was over by the
middle of the thirteenth century and rhetoric took an increasingly civic
course. Allowing for the far-reaching developments to come in logic in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and the more restricted development in
grammar and rhetoric, it can be said that the main components of the subject
of the trivium were in place by the middle of the twelfth century with little
further outside addition and that they entered the curriculum of the arts
faculty at the beginning of the thirteenth century largely in that form. That
can also be said of music as an academic subject, for which Boethius's treatise
on music (De musica) and the passage on music in Martianus Capella were
the main sources.14
THE IMPACT OF THE TRANSLATIONS
The translations, which were to transform the arts course in the thirteenth
century, began in the tenth century in Spain, from where Gerbert of Aurillac,
the future Pope Sylvester II (999-1003), who had studied earlier in Catalonia,
14 T. C. Karp, 'Music', with bibliography, in Wagner (ed.), Seven Liberal Arts (note 6), 169-217.
The trivium and the three philosophies
almost certainly gained his knowledge of Arabic numerals and astronomy,
which he was among the first to employ in the medieval West.15 Spain,
however, only became the main source for Arabic texts after the reconquest
from the Muslims in the twelfth century. The other main areas were southern
Italy, especially Monte Cassino and Salerno, the meeting point of Arabic,
Greek, and Latin culture, where the first translations of Arabic and Greek
medical texts, including those of Galen, were made; Sicily; and Constantinople. Broadly speaking, Spain was the main source of the translations from
the Arabic, Constantinople and Italy of the Greek texts, and Sicily of both
Arabic and Greek. Contrary to earlier long-held belief, the chronological
sequence of the translations was not from Arabic to Greek; they proceeded
concurrently; and, in the case of those of Aristotle's works,16 the earliest
translations were by James of Venice, between c. 1125 and 1150, direct from
the Greek. They included the new logic, the Physics, the Soul, part of the
Metaphysics (to book IV, chapter 4), and a number of the smaller biological
treatises. Other works of Aristotle taken from the Greek, in the twelfth
century, included an almost complete translation of the Metaphysics (except
for book XI), which remained unknown until the middle of the thirteenth
century, the Generation and Corruption, books II and III of the Nicomachean
Ethics (the only one of Aristotle's two works on ethics known, apart from a
single chapter from the Eudemian Ethics in a compilation called De bona
fortuna, translated in the thirteenth century), and new translations of some of
the works translated by James. In Spain, somewhat later during the twelfth
century, Gerard of Cremona, the century's most prolific translator from the
Arabic, before 1187 also translated the Posterior Analytics, Physics, and
Generation and Corruption, the only translations of new texts of Aristotle
being his Meteors and The Heavens, which were also the only ones to circulate widely.
By the later twelfth century, then, the main body of Aristotle's works had
been translated into Latin, the majority of them from Greek. Of the
remainder still untranslated, the Ethics was translated in full by Robert
Grosseteste around 1246 and 1247, and re-done, in a revised version of
Grosseteste, between 1250 and 1260, perhaps by William of Moerbeke, who
was responsible for revised translations of virtually all Aristotle's works from
the Greek in the middle decades of the thirteenth century. He also translated
for the first time the Politics in about 1260 and the Poetics in 1278. The
former was of the first importance for subsequent political theory; the latter
15 The pioneering studies are by C. H. Haskins, Studies in Mediaeval Science ; C. H. Haskins, The Renaissance of the
Twelfth Century , 278-302. The most
recent authoritative revision is by M.T. d'Alverny, 'Translations and Translators', in Renaissance and Renewal, 421—62. For the Arabian contribution: G. Beaujouan, 'The Transformation of the Quadrivium', in Renaissance and Renewal, 463—8.
16 For a comprehensive survey: Dod, 'Aristoteles Latinus' (note 10), 45-79.
Gordon Leff
had to wait until the fifteenth century to take effect. Hardly less significant
were his translations of some of Aristotle's early Greek commentators, Simplicius of Cilicia on the Categories, John Philoponus and Themistius, both on
the Soul, but perhaps most important of all, Proclus' Elements of Theology, a
reworked epitome of which had been taken by Gerard of Cremona from the
Arabic in the twelfth century, becoming generally known in the thirteenth
century as the Book of Causes. In the first half of the century this work was
generally attributed to Aristotle and entered the prescribed books for the arts
faculty at Paris. Numerous commentaries were made on it during the thirteenth century, including that of Thomas Aquinas, who identified its true
derivation from William of Moerbeke's translation, and that of Siger of
Brabant, the main protagonist of philosophical autonomy in the arts faculty
at Paris, and for a time Aquinas's opponent. The full ramifications of the
influence of the Book of Causes, including its influence upon Aquinas, and its
role in associating Aristotle's thought with a quite alien Neoplatonism,
remain to be investigated.
The Book of Causes is only the most egregious example of the early association of Aristotle with non-Aristotelian works, many of them of Arabic origin
and of a different intellectual cast. It must also be recognized that Aristotle's
works were only one element, even if in due course a decisive element, in a
much wider, heterogeneous collection of texts. They included not only a
great body of non-Aristotelian science, Hippocratic and Galenic medicine,
Ptolemaic and Arabic astronomy, and Arabic mathematics; they also presented the Christian West with independent philosophical systems in the
writings of al-Farabi, Avicenna (Ibn Sina), Ibn Gabirol, and Maimonides, to
mention only some of the most prominent, which were in varying degrees
syncretisms of Platonism and Aristotelianism and thereby affected the interpretation of Aristotle's own system. The combination no doubt helps to
account for the slow reception of Aristotle's ideas, particularly at Paris.17
Although his philosophical works, as opposed simply to his logical works,
were being read in the arts faculty during the 1230s, the influence of Avicenna's metaphysics, cosmology, and psychology is far more apparent, especially
upon those who had graduated in arts and included philosophical issues in
their theological commentaries, an inclusion which became the universal
practice in the thirteenth century.
The influence of Averroes (Ibn Rushd), Aristotle's commentator par
excellence, is even more apparent, especially in relation to the arts faculty at
Paris in the 1260s and 1270s. Many of his series of commentaries on Aristotle's works were translated, probably by Michael Scot, in Sicily in the 1220s
and 1230s, often, as in the case of Aristotle's Metaphysics, with an accompanying translation of the text which was being commented on. Averroes'
17 For the main stages: F. van Steenberghen, Aristotle in the West .
The trivium and the three philosophies
determination to restore the true Aristotle from what he castigated as the
misrepresentations of his predecessors, especially Avicenna, merely presented
those at the receiving end in the West with one more Arabic version of Aristotle, interpreted in terms of Arabic philosophy. It could be accepted as
authoritative, as it was for the greater part of Aristotle's philosophy in the
later thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, because of the mastery and completeness of Averroes' treatment, which had no parallel among Latin commentators, certainly not before the second half of the thirteenth century. Or it
could be rejected for its non-Christian implications, which is what happened
in the condemnations at Paris, in the 1270s, of purported doctrines being
taught in the arts faculty, and applied to Greek and Arabic philosophy generally as it had come through the translations. But that was only one extreme
- and theologically directed - response to them; and, for all the importance
attached to it at the time, it involved only a minority. The greater part of the
new complex of knowledge and philosophical concepts was gradually assimilated into the arts; and that occurred principally in the arts faculties at Paris
and Oxford, to which we must now turn.
THE PERIOD OF ASSIMILATION (THIRTEENTH CENTURY)
The history of the arts faculty in the thirteenth century is largely that of the
gradual broadening of the curriculum and the range of studies and writings to
accommodate the new knowledge.18 The gradual absorption of Aristotle's
philosophy and its differentiation from that of his Arabian accompaniments,
including some of the pseudo-Aristotelian writings, like the Book of Causes,
was only one part of that process, which extended to the whole range of
non-Aristotelian science. What Aristotle did was to provide a common theoretical framework in a common vocabulary, the notion of a science as an
organized body of knowledge with its own defining principles and conclusions, and a comprehensive natural philosophy and cosmology based upon a
metaphysics of form and matter, producing a qualitative non-mathematical
conception of being, which, to the detriment of the subsequent development
of the natural sciences, displaced the predominantly Platonist Timaean cosmology of the twelfth century based upon quantity. At the same time Aristotle supplied the substantive knowledge to go with that framework for each
of the recognized branches of knowledge. One individual could hardly do
more; and, once encountered, his influence upon the intellectual life of the
high and later Middle Ages became as pervasive as it had been in Islam. Even
so, much remained effectively outside it, including the very subjects of the
quadrivium, to say nothing of medicine, while, as we have seen, of the
trivium, grammar and rhetoric derived from other sources, and logic in its
18 E. Gilson, History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages , especially
Gordon Leff
most formative aspects followed an independent development that owed
much to Stoic and other non-Aristotelian influences, such as that of Porphyry
transmitted through Boethius.19
In approaching the arts faculty we must accordingly distinguish between
official responses to the new knowledge, in the reactions of the ecclesiastical
authorities and in the prescribed subjects of the curriculum, on the one hand,
and what was actually being studied and written, on the other hand. The
distinction applies particularly to Paris as the main confluence of arts and
theology. The first of a series of official reactions there to the new knowledge
was at the Council of Sens in 1210, which, among other things, banned the
public and private lecturing on Aristotle's works of natural philosophy and,
probably with Avicenna in mind, the commentaries on them.20 The ban was
repeated in 1215 by the papal legate, Robert of Courson, in his regulations for
the arts faculty, which will be considered presently.21 It was again renewed in
122822 and in 123123 by Pope Gregory IX, but on the latter occasion pending
the examination and purging of all the errors from the books so that they
could be studied without delay. Whether or not that was taken as the signal
for studying them, the first evidence of their study in the arts course at Paris
comes from around that time in an anonymous student guide to the examination questions and books to be read in logic, grammar, and ethics in
descending order of importance, with logic by far the most important.24 But it
also briefly included, as non-examination subjects, metaphysics and natural
philosophy; and there the books mentioned were Aristotle's Metaphysics,
with the Book of Causes as its third part, Physics and other works on natural
philosophy, the first three books of his Ethics, Euclid's Elements, and Ptolemy's Almagest, all part of the new accessions to the arts, together with
Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy and the Timaeus representing the older
practical and natural philosophies. It also contained a general introduction to
philosophy classified according to Boethius's divisions into rational, natural,
and moral, which, although not new, may have indicated an awareness of the
need for a broader scheme to accommodate the new developments.
Whether one chooses to interpret this brief excursus into natural philosophy as a sign of its insignificance at Paris in the 1230s or as denoting that it
had gained a foothold there, the guide undeniably shows that it was being
read and studied. Corroboration is to be found in the writings of the masters
19 Examples in Ebbesen, 'Ancient Scholastic Logic' (note 8), 124-7.
20 CUP, vol. I, 70, no. 11.
21 CUP, vol. I, 78, no. 20.
22 CUP, vol. I, 114-15, no. 59.
23 CUP, vol. I, 136-9, no. 79.
24 Described in M. Grabmann, Mittelalterliches
Geistesleben,
vol. II , 183—99. A
parallel case for Oxford a century later is to be found in the early fourteenth-century catalogue
of philosophical texts in Merton College library, which has eighty-five entries, going far
beyond the number of books prescribed by the arts faculty. J. Fletcher, 'The Faculty of Arts',
in History of Oxford, 376; P. Kibre, 'The "Quadrivium" in the Thirteenth Century Universities', in P. Kibre, Studies in Medieval Science , 175-91.
The trivium and the three philosophies
in the faculty of theology, William of Auxerre, Philip the Chancellor, and
William of Auvergne, at the same period; they all refer to some of Aristotle's
works of natural philosophy as well as, and in the case of William of Auvergne's extensively, to Avicenna. That inclusion of philosophy in works of theology is a feature of both Oxford and Paris. The secular masters of theology,
who were not members of a religious order, learned their philosophy in the
arts faculty. The theological commentaries on the Sentences, as one of the
two main components of the theological course, became the main repository
of metaphysics and moral philosophy; hence the very close involvement of the
theological faculty in arts, above all at Paris.
That involvement is apparent in the patterns of bans and proscriptions set
by the Council at Sens in 1210, which was presided over by Peter of Corbeil,
who had been a master at Paris in the faculties of theology and canon law in
the last decade of the twelfth century. Successive former masters in theology
continued in that role, notably Stephen Tempier, who, as bishop of Paris, was
responsible for the later condemnations of heterodox propositions in 1270
and 1277, an action repeated on a smaller scale at Oxford, in 1277 by Robert
Kilwardby and John Pecham, in 1284, previous members of the theological
faculty there and at Paris, in their capacity as archbishops at Canterbury. Yet
it has to be recognized that the bans of 1210, 1215, 1228, and 1231 applied
only to Paris; the public study of Aristotle and the other new texts was uninterrupted at Oxford; and at Toulouse, founded in 1229 by Gregory IX, such
study was actively canvassed as one of its attractions.25
The beginnings of the study of these texts at Paris and Oxford and of the
arts generally before the middle of the thirteenth century are obscure. In the
first regulations of Robert of Courson for Paris in 1215 the prescribed texts
were confined to the old and new logic and all of Priscian for grammar, with
Donatus's third book deemed optional; the unspecified quadrivial subjects
(the only time that the term was used at Paris) were, as already said, reserved
for holidays, when there was no other teaching or disputing, together with
the fourth book of Boethius's Topics and the known part of the Ethics of
Aristotle. Taken in conjunction with the renewal of the ban on the study of
natural philosophy, the narrow range and conservative nature of the first
formal curriculum probably reflects the still inchoate state of the new knowledge at Paris, as at Oxford, in the early years of the thirteenth century.
Officially that remained true of the next extant syllabus, that of the
English-German nation at Paris in 1252;26 the only addition was that of Aristotle's treatise on the Soul {De anima). Too much weight should not be put
on its appearance, since by then the more or less full complement of the
works of natural philosophy was known and being read. Nevertheless, De
anima was probably the single most important source of the disputes between
25 CUP, vol. I, 129-31, no. 72.
26 CUP, vol. I, 227-8, no. 201.
Gordon Leff
the theologians and the philosophers in the arts faculty during the 1260s and
1270s, culminating in the condemnations of 1270 and 1277, because it was
from Averroes' 'Great [i.e. line by line] Commentary' on its text that the issue
of one intellect for all mankind, perhaps the most burning issue of all, arose.
The official change at Paris came three years later in 1255 with the new
curriculum promulgated for the whole arts faculty by the masters of arts, as
part of a general reform of the syllabus designed to remedy overhasty reading
of the texts leading to inadequate preparation.27 Virtually all Aristotle's main
works on natural philosophy, together with his metaphysics and a number of
pseudo-Aristotelian writings, among them the Book of Causes, were now
included among the set books, and their study was now integrated into a
strict timetable, which, even if it only permitted a few weeks' acquaintance,
marked the final acceptance of the new knowledge at Paris. In contrast, rhetoric was confined, as it had been in the first statutes of Courson, to
Boethius's Topics, but now the first three books instead of only the fourth
book. From the second half of the thirteenth century the study of Aristotle
emerged from obscurity and the number of texts multiplied.
That is also true of Oxford, where there was none of the inhibiting effect
of the bans on natural philosophy at Paris. The earliest surviving syllabus of
texts, from 1268, displays a comparable position, with a corresponding
paucity of identifiable works on Aristotelian philosophy or references to them
in the first part of the thirteenth century. The best known are a commentary
on De anima by John Blund, who was a master of arts, first at Paris in about
1205 and then at Oxford between 1207 and 1209, which also draws upon the
Arabic writings of Algazel (al Ghazali) and Avicenna, and above all Robert
Grosseteste's commentary on the Posterior Analytics, containing Grosseteste's theory of scientific demonstration.28 Together with his other works on
light and optics, it helped to inaugurate a mathematically inspired scientific
tradition at Oxford which reached its fullest development in the fourteenth
century. Among Grosseteste's polymathic activities, which, as already mentioned, included the first complete translation of Aristotle's Nicomachean
Ethics, he also wrote biblical and theological works which were closer to the
exegetical spirit of the twelfth century than to the emerging speculative attitude of the thirteenth century.29 That spirit extended to the liberal arts, which
Grosseteste still saw as the attendants to natural and moral philosophy. It
was maintained by Grosseteste's pupils, especially Roger Bacon, who went
further than Grosseteste, and almost all of his contemporaries, in giving
mathematics primacy over logic as the condition of all knowledge as well as
theological understanding.30
27 CUP, vol. I, 277-8, no. 246.
28 A. C. Crombie, Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental
Science .
29 J. McEvoy, The Philosophy
Grosseteste
 .
30 Kibre, ' "Quadrivium" ' (note 24), 177-9.
The trivium and the three philosophies
The unbroken line running through the thirteenth century from
Grosseteste, as first teacher to the Franciscans at Oxford as well as probably
the first chancellor of the university in 1214, to Bacon, who lived into its last
decade, helped to imbue Oxford with its distinctive approach to the natural
sciences, extending to all the subjects of the old quadrivium as well as to
physics and cosmology. Correspondingly the emphasis in logic was more
upon the contextual meaning of terms, for what they signified, than upon
their purely formal features, which were the focus of concentration at Paris,
in keeping with the more abstract, speculative character of the arts there.31
While logic was always the dominant pursuit in the arts faculty generally, at
Oxford its main accompaniment was natural philosophy, in its wider associations with mathematics and astronomy, rather than moral philosophy, psychology, and metaphysics, which were more strongly represented at Paris.
Those differences are hinted at in the official curricula of the two universities. At Paris, the only existing reference to mathematics and astronomy
before 1350 is contained in the regulations on the oaths to be taken in the
Anglo-German nation. Neither the set books on mathematics, nor the
mathematics to be studied is specified; and the book on astronomy, John of
Sacrobosco's Sphere, which is named, can be dispensed with if a hundred
hours of lectures on mathematics have been heard.32 They were therefore
treated as alternatives. At Oxford there is no mention of Aristotle's Metaphysics before 1407.33 On the other hand, there is very much more on
mathematics and astronomy before 1350. John of Sacrobosco's three
treatises, Euclid's Elements for geometry, and Boethius's Arithmetic, in addition to Aristotle's works, which now included the Politics, and the other
standard authorities, like Donatus and Priscian, are specified in the regulations of 1340.34 By 1431, almost a century later, Ptolemy's work, now usually
known as the Almagest, and the anonymous thirteenth-century exposition of
planetary theory, the Theorica planetarum,35 as well as the treatises on optics
by Alhazen (Ibn al-Haitham), whose work was translated from the Arabic in
the twelfth century, and Witelo, the thirteenth-century Polish scientist, had
been added.36 Witelo's name is especially instructive in pointing to a distinctive Oxford scientific tradition, since he was a direct continuator of the
investigations of Grosseteste and Bacon into the properties and effects of
31 See the respective chapters on science and logic at Oxford in the thirteenth century by J. A.
Weisheipl and O. Lewry in History of
32 CUP, vol. II, 678, no. 1185.
33 S. Gibson (ed.), Statuta Antiqua
Universitatis
Oxoniensis
 , 193.
34 Gibson (ed.), Statuta
(note 33), 33—4.
35 For an account of the development of astronomy during the Middle Ages: O. Pedersen, 'The
Corpus Astronomicum and the Traditions of Medieval Latin Astronomy', Colloquia
Copernicana, 3 , 57~96.
36 Gibson (ed.), Statuta
(note 33), 234-5.
Gordon Leff
The statutes do not, however, reveal anything of that tradition, as they do
not of the different emphases at Paris or of the developments in the different
branches of the arts, for they were directed to the official requirements of the
course; they were therefore concerned only with the teaching and study of
those texts needed to qualify for admission to the degrees of bachelor and
master. They accordingly represented the official minimum, which, as we
have seen from the anonymous guide to the subjects of the arts faculty at
Paris, was far from being the full range.37 To mention only the examples of
Euclid's Elements and Ptolemy's Almagest, among the works named there,
they had still not officially appeared at Paris in the century and two centuries
respectively which it took for them to appear officially at Oxford. None the
less, the regulations themselves do sometimes indicate the existence of
additional texts, either as optional, like Boethius's Consolation ofPhilosophy
in those same statutes of the English-German nation at Paris, or as alternatives, like a hundred hours of lectures on mathematics and Sacrobosco's
Sphere. At Oxford provision was made for those who had not participated in
the requisite disputations to spend extra time hearing further lectures.38
Above all, however, there were the indigenous products of the arts faculty,
the great mass of textbooks, treatises, commentaries, and disputed questions
which arose from the arts course itself at every level and mostly remain unedited in thousands of manuscripts. They turned from a trickle in the earlier
part of the thirteenth century into an unbroken stream by the end of it, continuing into the fifteenth century. They were at once the means of assimilating the new Graeco-Arabic corpus which came with translations and the
means of providing the diverse responses to it. They thereby largely shaped
the subsequent development of the arts, as their counterparts in the higher
faculties shaped their subjects, in being the vehicle for studying and interpreting them. Since the arts faculty was predominantly the faculty of the
absolute beginners, a high proportion of its output was of the most elementary nature, particularly in logic, in the quadrivial subjects, and in natural
philosophy, its main foci, in which the great majority of entrants would have
had no previous grounding. But they were also the point of departure for the
most advanced works, which became increasingly formative as well as numerous in the second part of the thirteenth century and reached their fullest
development in the fourteenth century. An outstanding illustration of that
progression is to be seen in the role played in astronomy and mathematics by
the works of Sacrobosco and similar elementary texts with which they were
usually associated in the curriculum.
There was a comparable evolution in the other disciplines, even if not so
clear-cut as it was in astronomy, which, unlike logic, was a minority subject;
and its newly acquired mathematical character demarcated it from cosmo-
37 A. C. Crombie, Medieval
and Early Modern
Science, vol. I, , 99—111.
38 Gibson, (ed.), Statuta
(note 33), 26, 34.
The trivium and the three philosophies
logy, governed by Aristotle's physics, on which everyone could have an
opinion without having a knowledge of mathematics. What the main disciplines all had in common was the gradual formation of an established body of
texts and authorities, and the growth of a repertory of topics and doctrines
with their divergent interpretations and schools, not only within universities
but between them, as we have already noticed in the case of Paris and
Oxford. Among the two universities' divergences were significantly different
attitudes towards non-Aristotelian knowledge, which can be seen from their
contrasting responses to Sacrobosco and Grosseteste. At Paris, Sacrobosco's
name is not to be found officially among the prevailing Aristotelian texts
which were promulgated in the arts faculty by 1250, and his influence
belonged as much outside Paris as within it; at Oxford Grosseteste's name
and influence were pre-eminent both in his own lifetime and especially
beyond it through the distinctive scientific tradition which he inaugurated. It
was from such diverse responses, individual and collective, that the arts, as
the other branches of knowledge, evolved.
THE COURSE OF STUDIES
This evolution was connected with the very structure of the course of studies
within the faculty. Its two main components were the degrees of bachelor and
master, each with its own separate requirements. There is no evidence of any
formal requirement for entry into an arts faculty, beyond presumably evidence of elementary proficiency in Latin and some grasp of numeracy in
order to be able to cope with the course. At Paris the minimum age for
graduation as a master was fixed at twenty years by Robert of Courson's
statutes of 1215, a provision repeated in the 1252 regulations of the Anglo-
German nation; and the prescribed length of the course was six years with a
minimum age of fourteen or fifteen for admission. That probably remained
fairly constant, but the length of the course could vary according to individual
circumstances, leading to the subtraction or addition of a year. At Oxford the
standard length seems normally to have been seven years, and remained so
throughout the Middle Ages, while almost everywhere else the tendency was
for the length of the course to decrease.
At Paris the first official provisions for the bachelor's degree are contained
in the English—German nation's regulations for 1252.39 Those of Oxford date
from not long afterwards,40 although the distinction between master and
bachelor antedates them and can already be identified in Robert of Courson's
Paris statutes of 1215.41 At both universities the status of bachelor was
reached after four years of study, the first two spent listening to lectures
39 CUP, vol. I, 227—32, nos. 201, 202.
4° Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 33), 25.
41 G. Leff, Paris and Oxford Universities in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries , 147.
Gordon Leff
and attending disputations and the next two also participating in disputations
under the supervision of a master, with whom the student had to enrol for the
arts course and in whose house he might live, in contrast to the student
universities of Italy where the masters had their own separate existence as
members of their own college or guild.
Lectures and disputations were the two official modes of instruction and
training, although there were also unofficial ones, such as revision classes and
private tuition, and probably increasingly formal ones in the halls and
colleges during the later Middle Ages.42
Lectures in the arts faculty, as in the other faculties, were all on prescribed
texts. They were divided into masters' lectures (ordinary lectures) and bachelors' lectures (cursory lectures). Ordinary lectures were more detailed and
analytical. They involved the master first reading the text to be lectured on
and explaining it, then considering any noteworthy points, and finally, if
necessary, raising any questions which arose from it without digressing from
the text.43 Cursory lectures were closer to paraphrases to supplement the
ordinary lectures (which were always given at set times in the morning) and
were part of the bachelors' own training as apprentice masters; they might
also be given by masters, as extraordinary lectures, as a means of extending
the range of texts.
There were correspondingly masters' and bachelors' disputations, in which
set questions were debated, and objections and replies presented by successive opponents and respondents, ending with a final resolution or determination, which always seems to have been the prerogative of masters, except
during the bachelors' period of determining or disputing during Lent. The
disputations themselves were of two kinds, on logic and on mathematical
subjects or those taken from the three philosophies, the branches of real
knowledge as opposed to knowledge of signs; but in practice, especially at
Oxford, they tended to be on natural philosophy.
At Paris and Oxford, students for the bachelor's degree, in addition to
having to hear the ordinary lectures of their own masters daily, had also to
attend his weekly disputations, and after about two years to engage in disputations themselves. At both universities that included the obligation to
respond to objections in logical disputations and to what was called the question. In the statutes of the English-German nation the first was to be for two
years and the second for one year; at Oxford a full year had to be taken over
logical disputations before 'responding to the question' - responsion - could
begin; hence they could not run concurrently, as it seems they could at Paris,
where there was no such stipulation. But at Oxford, on the other hand, the
42 Fletcher, 'Faculty of Arts' (note 24), 378.
43 Gibson, (ed.)> Statuta (note 33), 236, gives a later description dating from 1431, and, more
briefly, 192, dating from 1407 or before.
The trivium and the three philosophies
need to respond in logical disputations could also be obviated by spending
longer time listening to lectures, including those on the Posterior Analytics.44
There could, however, be no dispensation from responding to the question,
which had to be reached by a certain time (which varied at different periods)
in order to qualify for admission to determine. The precise nature and status
of responding to the question remain a matter of dispute. At Oxford responding to the question carried with it the title of questionist, as that of sophister
was given to those responding in logic in their third year, and so would
normally describe undergraduate students in their fourth and final year.45 It
may have involved disputing with bachelors during their determination exercises at Oxford; and at Paris it ran from Lent to Lent, when determination
occurred; it also, a little later, entailed responding publicly there in a master's
disputation before Christmas in order to be admitted to determine in the
following Lent.46 At the same time responsion had its own ceremony of
admission at Oxford, with the swearing of oaths and payment of fees which
accompanied the conferment of all degrees. But whether that constituted a
separate status47 or represented the granting of bachelor status48 is less clear.
What is apparent is that responding to the question acted as a preliminary
examination for admission to determine, and that those admitted were
regarded as bachelors when they determined, having thereby been granted
their application to lecture on some book of the arts faculty, one of the main
functions of a bachelor. Moreover, at Oxford they appear to have exercised
that function during determination.49
Admission at Oxford to determine was decided by four regent masters,
appointed by the faculty of arts, immediately before the beginning of Lent; it
marked the point of entry into the second and higher part of the course, of
preparation for the master's degree. The candidates had to swear that they
had attended all the prescribed lectures and disputations and engaged in the
necessary exercises, including responsion, supported by the testimonies of
masters and bachelors, with any extenuating circumstances taken into
account. Those accepted then had to dispute daily in logic during the afternoons of Lent, except on Fridays, which were reserved for grammar. The
disputations formed a preparation for the mastership and were only taken by
a minority who stayed on in the arts faculty after the completion of the first
part of the course; for, as their name indicates, the determiners were exercising the masters' role of determining or resolving the questions being disputed,
which also involved putting the initial objections to the question, to which the
respondent - another bachelor or student - replied.
After completing determination in his fifth year the bachelor spent the
44 Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 33), 26.
45 Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 33), lxxxix.
46 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, no. 4, 452, citing CUP, vol. I, 530-2, no. 461.
47 Gibson (ed.), Statuta (note 33), lxxxix.
48 Fletcher, 'Faculty of Arts' (note 24), 380-1.
49 Gibson (ed.), Statuta Antiqua
(note 33), 28.
Gordon Leff
remainder of that year and the next two years taking part in masters' and
bachelors' disputations as well as lecturing cursorily in the afternoons on set
texts assigned by his master, two of logic and one of natural philosophy
selected from Aristotle's books on nature. The disputations were correspondingly on logic and natural philosophy, and, although there is also a reference
in the Oxford statutes to free - quodlibetal - questions,50 no traces of any
have yet been found, in contrast to the faculty of theology, where they form a
separate literature. At the end of seven years - or eight for those who had not
determined - the bachelor could be presented by his master to the chancellor
for a licence to incept for the mastership. That initiated a much more elaborate series of depositions by a much greater number of regent masters concerning the candidate's fitness in morals and learning, as well as requiring the
performance of tests by him; in addition to the statutory payments and oaths
that he had completed all the necessary parts of the course, which included
having lectured cursorily, he had also to undertake that he would give ordinary lectures in the faculty of arts and hold disputations for the following two
years (necessary regency), a provision peculiar to the arts faculty because of
its far greater numbers and the transience of its membership.
The successful candidate then received the licence to incept and had formally to be admitted as a master at the ceremony of inception, to which he
personally invited all the regent masters. It was in two stages. The first was at
vespers on a day when lectures could be held and consisted of a solemn
disputation at which the candidate master had the usual part of respondent to
the presiding master. The second stage was on the following day, when the
candidate was invested with the insignia of his office and exercised his new
status, first by delivering a short inaugural lecture (principium) and then by
presiding at a disputation, when two questions were debated, putting the
questions and raising the objections in each, and finally determining them.51
He had thereby performed his first magisterial acts of lecturing and disputing.
He then entered into his role as a full member of the arts faculty.
LATE MEDIEVAL DEVELOPMENTS
The products of the arts faculty reflected its logical and physical emphases as
the principal sources of its commentaries, questions, and treatises. Logic was
always predominant, but in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries natural
philosophy became increasingly prominent. For both subjects the first twothirds of the fourteenth century were the culmination of their medieval devel-
50 Gibson (ed.), Statuta, 32.
51 J. A. Weisheipl, 'The Curriculum of the Faculty of Arts at Oxford in the Early Fourteenth
Century', Mediaeval
Studies, 26 , 164-5; s e e ^so J- A. Weisheipl, 'Developments in the
Arts Curriculum at Oxford in the Early Fourteenth Century', Mediaeval
Studies, 28 ,
The trivium and the three philosophies
opment; and in each case the direction was from Oxford to Paris, in contrast
to the other main activity of speculative grammar, in which progress largely
ceased after 1300, although its influence remained strong at Paris for another
fifty years. In logic the range of topics extended from the earlier indigenous
ones of paradoxes, properties of terms, and syncategorematic terms, often
combined, to the more recent ones of obligations and consequences (conditional propositions), together with the assimilation of Aristotle's new logic,
of syllogisms, demonstrations, and fallacies, the last of which, with modal
propositions and future contingents (principally in connection with the
theological problem of God's knowledge), received growing attention in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. These different areas were both treated
separately and incorporated into more general works on logic, usually to
serve as introductions and textbooks, such as those by William of Sherwood
and Petrus Hispanus (Pope John XXI), the author of the most popular textbook on logic in the Middle Ages, in the thirteenth century, and very differently nearly a century later by William of Ockham and Walter of Burley. The
contrast between them indicates how far the earlier indigenous logic of terms,
as the main non-Aristotelian component in the thirteenth-century compendia,
had been taken beyond Aristotle and expanded to include propositions by the
first part of the fourteenth century.52
There was a comparable indigenous evolution in natural philosophy, initially at Oxford, in the first half of the fourteenth century, which was a continuation of the mathematical and scientific tradition of Grosseteste and his
pupils. It was associated with the so-called Oxford calculators, mainly at
Merton College, in the second and third quarters of the fourteenth century.
They had their beginning in the Treatise on Proportions, by Thomas Bradwardine, who attempted to develop Aristotle's idea of the velocity of a
moving body as proportional to the moving force, and inversely proportional
to the resistance of the median, by means of a new mathematical technique.
Bradwardine's example inspired the Mertonians to formulate mathematical
rules for the different kinds of motion and changes in the speeds of moving
bodies,53 and also to measure the alterations in the degrees of intensity of
physical qualities, such as heat or cold in bodies, and the first and last
instances in which they occurred. As with developments in logic, they took
their point of departure from Aristotle's definitions, here principally contained in his Physics, and for the first time gave his qualitative explanations a
quantitative formulation. For this purpose a graphical method was invented
by Nicholas of Oresme at Paris in the 1350s, as the outstanding member of a
comparable group of logicians and natural scientists in the arts faculty there,
between the 1340s and the 1360s, who utilized most of the concepts of the
52 For those developments: Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg (eds.), Cambridge
Philosophy (note 8), parts IV and V.
53 M . Clagett, The Science of Mechanics
in the Middle
Ages .
Gordon Leff
Oxford calculators. Their founder, John Buridan, a leading figure in the arts
faculty for over thirty years, from the 1320s to at least the end of 1350s, was
among the first to employ the terminist logic of the Oxford logicians, to
which he made important contributions; he also, in his theory of impetus,
gave a lasting definition to the recently revived explanation of violent or projectile motion as due to an impressed force, and not, as Aristotle held, to the
air through which it passed - a notion adopted with modifications by Nicholas of Oresme and his contemporaries at Paris.
The Mertonians and Parisians together created a set of mathematical tools
and mechanical terms, some of which were later employed by Galileo and his
contemporaries in the sixteenth century. Although still bound by Aristotle's
qualitative classifications, their medieval predecessors took the first steps
towards a physics founded on measurement and calculation, even if they
lacked empirical application. During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
their influence both as logicians and as natural philosophers spread through
the arts faculties of Italy and Spain and also the new foundations of northern
Europe, to which some of the most prominent members of the arts faculty
went, among them Albert of Saxony and Marsilius of Inghen, as the first
rectors of Vienna and Heidelberg.
In addition to their separate treatises, questions, and commentaries on
logic and natural philosophy, one of the most common forms which their
logical and calculatory activities took was as sophismata, independent logical
questions on some problematic statement or paradox, usually containing a
syncategorematic term such as 'besides' or 'begin' or 'end', which could be
treated both logically and mathematically.54 As the subject of logical disputations in which all undergraduates had to engage, their freedom from any set
texts made sophismata the most universal means of debating physical problems, such as the first and last instants of change in physical qualities, like
heat or cold or colour. The vast output of sophismata literature provides
probably the fullest record of the main intellectual and academic trends in the
arts faculties of the last two centuries of the Middle Ages, a source which had
only begun to be investigated. But they remained predominantly logical questions.55 As often the work of mature scholars - such as The Rules for solving
sophismata by William of Heytesbury, one of the Mertonians, written in
about 1335 for first-year students in logic - they point to another feature of
the arts faculty in the later Middle Ages: the tendency to make a career in
arts, even though those who did so, as for example William of Heytesbury
and Nicholas of Oresme, had frequently graduated in theology. The ability to
continue to pursue the arts - although in no way unprecedented in the earlier
54 N . Kretzmann, 'Syncategoremata, exponibilia, sophismata', in Kretzmann, Kenny, and
Pinborg (eds.), Cambridge
Philosophy
(note 8), 211-53.
55 E. D. Sylla, 'The Oxford Calculators', in Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg (eds.),
Medieval Philosophy (note 8), 540-63.
The trivium and the three philosophies
centuries — probably owed something to the establishment of autonomous
colleges at Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge; at the two English universities
certain colleges, such as Merton, New College, and King's, made provision
for the study of arts. In Italy in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the arts
became incorporated into the educational programme of the humanists,
extending northwards to Paris and Cambridge and other universities at the
end of the fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth century.
Beyond the particular developments in logic and natural philosophy, there
were the wider doctrinal and philosophical issues with which they were connected. Here, too, there was a discernible change in the first third of the
fourteenth century, again coming initially from Oxford or from individuals
associated with it, and reaching Paris during the 1330s. Although, however,
the main areas-metaphysics, moral philosophy, cosmology, psychology, epistemology - belonged to the arts, their treatment was not confined to the arts
faculty in virtue of their close connection with theology. Not only were they
the inseparable constituents of any theological outlook, included in the commentaries on the Sentences, the standard theological textbook in the theological faculty (see chapter 13, 'The faculty of theology'), as well as in numerous other kinds of works; theologians, especially members of the religious
orders who studied arts in their own religious houses, were in the forefront of
their evolution throughout the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries.
Hence it is artificial to separate philosophical from theological issues; and
many of the most formative ones, such as the nature of being, the eternity of
the world, the powers of the heavenly bodies, free-will, knowledge through
inner illumination versus abstraction through the senses, and the relation of
the body to the soul, were at the centre of the controversies which led to and
succeeded the condemnations of suspect doctrines in the arts faculties at Paris
and Oxford in the 1270s (see chapter 13), because of their theological implications.
The shift that came in the fourteenth century was away from those broader
philosophical concerns to a more restricted view of epistemology, bounded
by more strictly defined notions of evidence and demonstration, and closely
connected with terminism and natural philosophy in substituting a logical
and physical for a metaphysical approach to both knowledge and reality. It
was accompanied by a new emphasis upon contingency, both in nature and in
the economy of grace and salvation, leading to a comparable overlapping of
philosophy and theology over such issues as merit and free-will and the relation of human actions to God's omnipotence, foreknowledge and predestination, and the scope of natural knowledge in matters of faith. Although
many of these questions received their currency from Duns Scotus (d. 1308)
and William of Ockham (d. 1349), both Franciscans who studied at Oxford,
it was not until the early fifteenth century, contrary to what used to be
thought, that their divergent outlooks became associated with the old and
Gordon Leff
new ways (via antiqua and via moderna), and then as part of a wider spectrum of schools.56 The fourteenth century was marked by an absence of
schools; instead there was a complex of doctrines on which different individuals drew in different combinations: nominalism in the rejection of
common natures, such as humanity; logical terminism in the different
meanings which terms can have according to what they stand for; opposing
interpretations of the status of Aristotle's ten categories as either independent
realities or merely describing individual states of existence; epistemological
questions of whether objects are known directly or by means of species or
images in the senses or intellect. None of these was answered consistently in
the same manner by defined groups of thinkers; that applies particularly to
the distinction between nominalism and terminism. By the 1340s the majority
of thinkers at Oxford and increasingly at Paris - though not without opposition from the older conservative adherents to speculative grammar,
expressed in a series of decrees against the new logical doctrines in the arts
faculty between 1339 and 134157 - were terminists but not necessarily nominalists, as Ockham was but Buridan and Walter of Burley were not.
Correspondingly there was no need to be a nominalist or terminist to be a
calculator, as the example of Bradwardine, a conservative theologian, shows,
and no basis at all for the belief that Ockham was the cause of the new
developments in natural science. His own position of reducing concepts to a
minimum was directly at variance with their multiplication by the calculators
in their imaginary experiments, as well as with Buridan's theory of impetus,
which involved the introduction of an additional concept of an impressed
force, beyond that of a moving body to which Ockham reduced movement,
in keeping with his denial of real status to any of Aristotle's ten categories
other than substance and quality. There was a similar diversity over theological questions concerning free-will, grace, merit, and predestination, as
well as God's power to dispense with intermediaries (see chapter 13).
It was only in the later fourteenth century that the followers of Ockham, or
nominalists, came to be identified with the moderns and by the beginning of
the fifteenth century opposed to the ancients, or realists, variously identified
with the revived schools of Thomism, Scotism, and Albertism, as the most
important. The division between the old and the new ways was therefore
theological as well as philosophical and logical, involving not only different
approaches to questions of logic and natural philosophy with their own
authorities, but different outlooks. In certain universities, such as Heidelberg
and Ingolstadt, the division led to separate arts faculties,58 and at most
56 W. J. Courtenay, 'Antiqui and Moderni in Late Medieval Thought', Journal of the History of
Ideas, 48 , 3-10.
57 W. J. Courtenay and K. H. Tachau, 'Ockham, Ockhamists and the English-German Nation
at Paris, 1339-1341', History of Universities, 2 , 53-96.
58 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. II, 253-4, Z77-
The trivium and the three philosophies
universities both north and south of the Alps to separate chairs for the different ways, a process which continued into the sixteenth century. Only in
England, at Oxford and Cambridge, was there no such division, and realism,
principally that of Scotism, reigned unchallenged.59
THE FACULTY OF ARTS AND THE UNIVERSITY
The organization and role of the arts faculty varied with the different kinds of
universities. In the older, northern foundations of Paris and Oxford, and also
Cambridge, the arts faculty was preponderant. It was, like the rest of their
institutions and faculties, a masters' organization. But only at Paris was there
a defined faculty structure, where each of the faculties was in effect a corporation within the greater corporation of the university, having its own
assembly, elected head, officers, statutes, seal, chest, schools, meeting place,
and patron saints. Those features were reproduced in the four nations into
which the arts faculty, as by far the largest and most heterogeneous faculty,
was divided. They were the French, the Normans, the Picards, and the
English, later English-German. None of them strictly corresponded to their
names; the French nation extended to Italy and Spain, and the English-
German nation included the rest of the British Isles, the German empire,
eastern Europe, and Scandinavia. The nations were the basic units of the arts
faculty; it was in them that the teaching, disputing, and examining, leading to
the licence, were conducted under the recognized regent masters, who administered the nation and in whose schools the students enrolled. The nation was
responsible for overseeing the schools, appointing the masters annually, and
fixing their stipends, paid from the fees which were the main source of its
income; and the nations collectively decided on the curriculum and organization of the course after deliberating separately. At the head of each nation
was a proctor, elected in rotation from among the regent masters, usually for
one month, and assisted by other officers, to conduct its affairs, including its
finances, to maintain its statutes, and to enforce discipline. The four proctors
from the four nations in turn elected the rector as head of the arts faculty,
who held office for a period of six weeks, later becoming three months, and
presided over its assembly. Together with the proctors he governed it
between assemblies and formed the tribunal of the faculty. In the middle of
the thirteenth century the rector became head of the whole university, not
without opposition from the higher faculties.60
That combination of headship of the arts faculty with headship of the
university was peculiar to Paris; it arose from the earlier rejection by the
masters at the beginning of the thirteenth century of the claims of the
59 D. R. Leader, 'Philosophy at Oxford and Cambridge in the Fifteenth Century', History of
Universities,
4 , 25-46.
60 Leff, Paris and Oxford
Universities
(note 41), 51-67.
Gordon Leff
chancellor to be head of the university. Henceforth the chancellor's power
was reduced to the formality of granting the licence to candidates approved
by the examining masters in the faculty concerned. At Oxford and Cambridge, on the other hand, where there had been no such struggle, the chancellor was accepted as head of the university, drawn from the regent masters
as one of themselves. Although at most other universities, both those in Italy,
southern France, and Spain, and the new universities founded in northern
Europe in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the rector was head, he did
not represent the arts faculty. Nor did the nations have the same constitutional place elsewhere as at Paris. At Oxford the university persistently
refused to recognize the earlier groupings of northerners and southerners,
although it did unofficially recognize a north—south division as the basis of
appointing the two proctors, one from each region, and the other main
officers, except the chancellor.61 Correspondingly the two proctors were
representatives of the whole university, as they were at Cambridge. The two
English universities therefore lacked the federal elements of Paris, as they
lacked its size and international character. Nevertheless in all three universities constitutional power - as well as numbers - was heavily weighted in
favour of the arts faculty. At Paris it was maintained in the general congregation of the university by a permanent majority of four votes, one for each of
the nations, to three votes by the higher faculties; at Oxford it lay in the
provision that any majority must include the arts faculty as a whole, which
also alone of the faculties had its own separate congregation, enabling it to
meet and decide policy before the university congregation met. In addition
members of the higher faculties, who had graduated from the arts faculty,
continued to be bound by their oath of obedience to its statutes. In Paris that
obligation came to extend to whatever future state its graduates might
reach,62 while at Oxford the claim of the arts faculty to be the fount and
origin of the other faculties was never challenged.63
The dominance of the arts faculties at Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge was
not paralleled elsewhere, even though the arts faculty was by far the most
numerous element in the new northern universities of the later Middle Ages,
often, as in the Scottish and some of the smaller German universities, to the
virtual exclusion of the higher faculties. For, as the creation of secular rulers,
they were much more directly under the control of the local powers than the
three older universities, which originated more or less independently and,
Paris especially, owed more to papal recognition, which was no longer of the
same account in the fifteenth century, after the Great Schism.
That control went together with a second development in the later Middle
Ages, the emergence of a system of salaried teachers, which began in the
61 M . B. Hackett, 'The University as a Corporate Body', in History of Oxford,
62 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, 328-9; in CUP, vol. I, 586-8, no. 501.
63 Hackett, 'University as Corporate Body' (note 61), 66.
The trivium and the three philosophies
Italian universities in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries and was adopted
by the newer universities in northern Europe. Such payment obviated the
need for a period of necessary regency, which also ceased to be obligatory at
Paris after 1452.64 Hence both externally and internally there was no longer
the same scope for autonomy by the members of any faculty.
The role of the faculties was further diminished in two other directions.
One was the almost universal reduction of the length of the arts course from
six or seven years to four and sometimes three years by the later fourteenth
century. The other was the growing importance of colleges as places of teaching at the expense of university teaching in the faculties and, at Paris, the
nations.65 That was equally true of the three older northern universities.
Before the end of the fifteenth century, while only at Oxford and Cambridge
were there still unsalaried regent masters and the arts course alone still
took seven years, the colleges there were providing a full range of instruction. In Paris college lecturers were recognized by the university and were
appointed by the faculty. At Oxford and Cambridge, where the colleges had
much greater autonomy as independent foundations, college teaching was
being extended to undergraduates. During the sixteenth century colleges at all
three universities virtually replaced the older faculties as the centres of teaching; and they were an integral part of the newer northern universities,
although they never had the same importance in southern European universities.
64 Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, 447; in CUP, vol. IV, 733, no. 2690.
65 For a general account: Cobban, Medieval
Universities,
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
See also the select bibliography of chapter 10.2.
Benson, R. B. and Constable, G. (eds.) Renaissance and Renewal in the Twelfth
Century, Cambridge, Mass., 1982, and Oxford, 1985.
Clagett, M. The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, Madison, 1961.
Courtenay, W. J. 'Antiqui and Moderni in Late Medieval Thought', Journal of the
History of Ideas, 48 , 3-10.
Courtenay, W. J. and Tachau, K. H. 'Ockham, Ockhamists, and the English-German
Nation at Paris, 1339-1341', History of Universities, 2 , 53-96.
Crombie, A. C. Medieval and Early Modern Science, 2 vols., New York, 1959.
Crombie, A. C. Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science 1100—
1700, 2nd edn, Oxford, 1961.
Emden, A. B. 'Northerners and Southerners in the Organisation of the University', in
Oxford Studies Presented to Daniel Callus, Oxford, 1963, 1-30.
Gibson, M. (ed.) Boethius: his Life, Thought and Influence, Oxford, 1981.
Gibson, S. (ed.) Statuta Antiqua Universitatis Oxoniensis, Oxford, 1931.
Gilson, E. History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages, London, 1955.
Gordon Leff
Haskins, C. H. Studies in the History of Medieval Science, ist edn, Cambridge, Mass.,
1924; 2nd edn, Cambridge, Mass., 1927; reprint, New York, i960.
Hudson, A. and Wilks, M. (eds.) From Ockham to Wyclif, Oxford, 1987.
Kibre, P. Studies in Medieval Science, London, 1984.
Koch, J. (ed.) Artes Liberates vom den Antiken Bildung zur Wissenschaft des Mittelalters, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, 5, Leiden/Cologne,
Koch, J. (ed.) Arts liberaux et philosophie au Moyen Age. Actes du We Congres
internationale de philosophie medievale 196"/, Montreal/Paris, 1969.
Kretzmann, N., Kenny, A., and Pinborg, J. (eds.) The Cambridge History of Later
Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge, 1982.
Leader, D. L. 'Philosophy at Oxford and Cambridge in the Fifteenth Century', History
of Universities, 4 , 25-46.
Leff, G. Paris and Oxford Universities in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries
New York, 1968.
Murphy, J. J. Rhetoric in the Middle Ages, Berkeley, 1974.
van Steenberghen, F. Aristotle in the West, Louvain, 1955.
Verger, J. 'Remarques sur Penseignement des arts dans les universites du Midi a la fin
du Moyen Age', Annales du Midi, 91 , 355-81.
Wagner, D. L. (ed.) The Seven Liberal Arts in the Middle Ages, Bloomington, Ind.,
Weisheipl, J. A. 'The Classification of the Sciences in Medieval Thought', Mediaeval
Studies, 27 , 54-90.
Weisheipl, J. A. The Place of the Liberal Arts in the University "Curriculum" during
the XlVth and XVth Centuries', in J. Koch (ed.), Arts liberaux et philosophie au
Moyen Age. Actes du IVe Congres internationale de philosophie medievale,
Montreal/Paris, 1969, 209-13.
Weisheipl, J. A. 'The Structure of the Arts Faculty in the Mediaeval University',
British Journal of Educational Studies, 19 , 263-71.
Weisheipl, J. A. 'Developments in the Arts Curriculum at Oxford in the Early Fourteenth Century', Mediaeval Studies, 28 , 151-75.
CHAPTER 10.2
THE QUADRIVIUM
JOHN NORTH
SOURCES OF UNIVERSITY LEARNING
One of the most conspicuous purposes of the medieval university was that of
providing an elite with the knowledge and skill needed to serve society,
whether in an ecclesiastical or a secular role. When we examine the careers of
university masters of theology, we are left in no doubt that this purpose was
well fulfilled, and theological attitudes no doubt coloured attitudes to knowledge generally. The general medieval paradigm of knowledge was an inheritance, to be jealously purified of alien accretions and misunderstandings, and
then commented on and passed on. This paradigm, however, fits the sciences
of the quadrivium less well than it fits the 'arts of expression' (artes sermonicales) of the trivium. Even at the elementary level of the arts curriculum, there
are signs of somewhat less rigidity in the teaching of arithmetic, music,
geometry, and astronomy. Perhaps this was a consequence of the fact that,
being more advanced, the quadrivium was in the hands of more experienced
masters in the schools. Certainly it seems to have often depended on the
initiative of individuals - in Paris, as we shall mention later, teaching in
mathematics was mainly on feast-days - and we know from the writings of
many of those individuals that they were often infected with the excitement
of discovery, discovery not only of new texts, but of new ways of elaborating
on the contents of those texts. There was, in other words, an element of
'research', as distinct from teaching. Sometimes it was pursued in the pure
spirit of the original text. More often, it was heavily constrained by the intellectual protocols of the time - those stemming from logic and rhetoric - that
governed commentary and debate throughout the university. At the same
time it took some benefit from them.
The curriculum of the quadrivium, like that of the trivium, was in direct
descent from Greek philosophy, which Pliny and Varro followed.
John North
With the elimination of architecture and medicine, what had been nine arts
in Varro became the seven liberal arts of the Middle Ages. It was Martianus
Capella (fl. 410-39) who finally canonized the sevenfold division, in his The
Marriage of Mercury and Philology. The first three of the twenty books of
Etymologies of Isidore of Seville (d. 636) dealt with those seven liberal arts,
and both Hrabanus Maurus and Bede made compilations with comparable
structures.
Medieval Greek and Hebrew encyclopedias are of less relevance than the
Latin to the European university tradition. Encyclopedias produced in the
Islamic world, on the other hand, with their roots in the scientific traditions
of Hellenistic Alexandria, were to become central to that tradition. In organization, the sciences were arranged by the lights of Aristotelian philosophy,
with some Neoplatonic rearrangement. Among the greatest of writers in the
Islamic encyclopedic tradition we have al-Kindi, who in the ninth century
surveyed almost all of ancient Greek science, Avicenna (Ibn Sina), in the
eleventh century, with his great medical Canon, and Averroes (Ibn Rushd)
('Commentator'), in the twelfth, with his numerous commentaries on Aristotle. When such works as these were eventually absorbed in the West, they
tended to be crammed into the categories of the Latin encyclopedias around
which the schools were already organized.
For the later Middle Ages, we know more or less what textbooks were in
use, primarily from university statutes. Unfortunately, however, these statutes arrived on the scene only after a number of important changes in the
curriculum had taken place, notably in connection with the influx of translations from the Arabic. C. H. Haskins has given us an older list, from the
end of the twelfth century, that seems to presuppose something like the university organization of four faculties. The list is arranged in the order of the
seven liberal arts, and the professional studies of medicine, civil and canon
law, and theology. The list is perhaps due to Alexander Neckam.1
Neckam (1157-1217) was one of those who had promoted natural science
in its older, popular, and rather uncritical, encyclopedic form, through his De
naturis rerum. Even in that work we find references to Arabic and Hebrew
writers. When we read such authors now, we tend to seize upon such references, and upon such textual discoveries as the 'first European reference to a
magnetic compass for navigational use', and overlook the sad truth of the
matter: we cannot honestly claim to find in them the seeds of a self-sufficient
scientific discipline. What is true of Neckam is true of other writers in this
genre. We have, for instance, the De natura rerum of Thomas of Cantimpre
{c. 1186 - c. 1294), the extremely popular and much-translated De proprietatibus rerum of Bartholomeus Anglicus {fl. 1220-50), the Speculum maius of
1 For this book list, and reference to several sets of statutes (Paris 1255,12.70, etc., Oxford 1267,
and later Naples, Salerno, Bologna, and Montpellier): C. H. Haskins, Studies in the History of
Medieval Science , ch. 18.
The quadrivium
Vincent of Beauvais {c. 1190-1264), a work that acquired a supplement in the
first quarter of the fourteenth century, and Brunetto Latini's French encyclopedia, Li Livres dou tresor (1260-7). Their continuing popularity - which
lasted well beyond the Middle Ages - is not in question, but they ceased to
reflect university practice in anything but their outward forms and occasional
bibliographical lists. They were outwardly systematic, but they simply failed
to lend themselves to the truly systematic development of any of the sciences
of the quadrivium. For the works that did so, we must look elsewhere.
Alexander Neckam himself helps us out for the early Parisian period. (After
an education at St Albans, he had studied in Paris.) Boethius was to be used,
he said, for arithmetic and music, and Euclid for geometry.2 Euclid's Elements
had been translated by Adelard of Bath early in the twelfth century. It was
also translated by Hermann of Carinthia, and later by Gerard of Cremona. As
for astronomy, Alexander Neckam mentions the canones of Ptolemy, and the
compendious introduction to Ptolemy by Alfraganus (d. after 861). Whether
by 'canons' he meant Ptolemy's Almagest, or canons (explanatory principles)
for Ptolemaic astronomical tables, is hard to say.3 The magisterial Almagest
became widely known in western Europe through Gerard of Cremona's Latin
translation from the Arabic, dated 1175, although a little-known Latin version
had been made from the Greek in Sicily perhaps even more than twenty years
earlier.4 The work of Alfraganus (it is known by various titles,5 but we shall
refer to it as the Elementa) had been twice translated in the same century,
once by John of Spain in 1135 and again by Gerard of Cremona before 1175.
Apart from the opening chapter, which dealt with the various calendars of the
world, it was based on Ptolemy's Almagest. The Elementa of Alfraganus was
even so of far greater direct medieval influence than its prototype, for it was
the sort of digest with which students could - with difficulty - cope. It was to
be largely but not entirely replaced in the thirteenth century by John of
Sacrobosco's De sphera, and yet that later work still owed much to it.6
Here we have the makings of the curriculum of the arts student of the
quadrivium for the whole of the Middle Ages, as seen through northern European eyes. How much and how little its ingredients were later supplemented
and modified we shall explain in due course. From the perspective of the
Iberian peninsula, however, the picture so far given must seem a distorted
2 P. Glorieux, La Faculte des Arts et ses maitres au Xllle siecle , 33.
3 There is a third possibility: a work known as the 'canon of Ptolemy and Pythagoras' survives in
a manuscript from a later period (incipit 'Inventum Ptolotnei...'; see MS Budapest 59, 14c,
fols. 19 v-20).
4 The precise circumstances of the Sicilian translation have recently become a subject of keen
controversy. R. Lemay, in La Diffusione delle scienze islatniche nel medio evo Europe (Convegno Internazionale) , 399—535, argues against Haskins, Studies (note 1), 53—4,
that Hermann of Carinthia was responsible (c. n 50).
5 Typical are De scientia astrorum (John of Seville) and De aggregationibus scientie stellarum
(Gerard of Cremona).
« See p. 348.
John North
one, for there the technicalities of Aristotelian natural philosophy and Greek
and Arabic mathematics and astronomy were well established, and this at a
time when the monastic teaching of the quadrivium elsewhere meant little
more than the abacus, the ecclesiastical calendar, the practice of plainsong,
and a little practical geometry.
The first translations from Arabic into Latin in Spain were done in the
Catalonian marches, in about the middle of the tenth century, as a consequence of the immigration of Mozarabs from Muslim Spain into Catalonia.
There were, of course, scholars from other parts of Europe who were aware
of the relative deficiencies of their own scientific culture: witness such notable
visitors to Spain as Gerbert of Aurillac (later Pope Sylvester II, c. 945-1003),
Plato of Tivoli (active in Barcelona, 1134-45), Adelard of Bath (/?. 1116-42),
Hermann of Carinthia (fl. 1140-50), Robert of Ketton (friend and literary
collaborator of Hermann), and Rudolf of Bruges (a disciple of Hermann).
It will suffice to take two of these men to illustrate changing styles. It is not
easy to ascertain how much Muslim science was available to Gerbert in his
Catalonian centre (Vich): he appears to have learned how to use an abacus
different from the old Roman version, and how to construct an armillary
sphere and a sundial, and conceivably an astrolabe. Any eastern influence on
his work is unremarkable, but, after his return, he kept up a correspondence
with the translator Llobet. Adelard, on the other hand, made his own translations from the Arabic, particularly noteworthy being that of the astronomical
table of al-Khwarizmi from the revision done by the Cordoban astronomer
al-Majriti (d. c. 1007). Evidence for his visit to Spain is admittedly only indirect, but he speaks of visits to Syria and southern Italy, and a Spanish interlude is not improbable, in view of his acceptance of the tables for Cordoba.7
His translation of the Elements of Euclid, the first significant version into
Latin, was based on the Arabic of al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar (ninth
century).8 Adelard produced a polished treatise on the astrolabe (c. 1149) for
the future Henry II, but this was done in England.
The reputation of the Peninsula as a centre of learning continued to draw
others thither, and Iberian learning was even exported far and wide in person,
for example through the travels of the Jewish scholar Abraham ibn Ezra (c.
1090 - c. 1164), who journeyed as far as London. This twelfth-century
activity preceded the establishment of any studium generate in Spain. (That in
Salamanca was founded by Alfonso IX of Leon in 1218, and that in Seville by
his son in 1254.) The translations of the twelfth century were done in many
places - Barcelona, Tarazona, Segovia, Leon, Pamplona, and beyond the Pyrenees at Toulouse, Beziers, Narbonne, Montpellier, Marseille, and so on.
7 J. D. North, Horoscopes and History , 96—107.
8 For a general account of Spanish activity: J. Vernet, Ce que la culture doit aux Arabes d'Espagne . On the complex interrelations of the various translations of the supremely
important text of Euclid, see the scheme in ibid., 133, for example.
The quadrivium
Later, Toledo achieved some sort of pre-eminence, and it was to Toledo that
Gerard of Cremona, the most assiduous of all translators, was drawn,
expressly by the lure of Ptolemy's work.9
Jewish scholars played an important part in all this work. To take one
example: the Jew Abraham bar Hiyya (Savasorda, fl. 1136) acted as intermediary in the translating activities of Plato of Tivoli. Besides translations into
Hebrew, and Hebrew works based on Arabic models, there are manuscripts
in Arabic written in Hebrew characters. Most of the works that were in
common use in Spain became available in Hebrew, notably in southern
France, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and there was a modest
two-way traffic in ideas between Jewish scholars and Christian universities in
the rest of Europe throughout the Middle Ages.10
The scientific curricula of the universities of Europe owed to Spain much
more than translations from the Arabic, however. Averroes (Ibn Rushd), the
great Cordoban natural philosopher, stands over the late European Middle
Ages almost as a proxy for Aristotle, but does not have much immediate
bearing on the introductory courses in the arts faculty. Many other Iberian
writers, however, were of great importance to the coming educational explosion: from Spanish translations of the key text of al-Khwarizmi on arithmetic
(with sections on what was effectively algebra), and Arabic reworkings of it,
a series of texts emerged that were to serve the universities for three centuries
and more, in the teaching, among other things, of vulgar fractions, the system
of Hindu-Arabic numerals, and the sexagesimal arithmetic used in astronomy. This is the tradition in which Sacrobosco's Algorismus stands - to name
but one key text of the thirteenth century and after.
Another vital text for European scientific learning contained the collection
of astronomical tables usually associated with the name of Arzachel (Ibn
az-Zarqellu, d. 1100). These, the Toledan tables, translated and supplemented with some Christian material by Gerard of Cremona, took Europe by
storm. They were issued from various European centres (Marseille, Paris,
London, and so on) in appropriate redactions, and were even translated into
Greek, around the year 1340.11 The canons written for the tables by Arzachel
were an important source of trigonometrical and astronomical theory for the
better student, although they would not have been enough for the best - for
the canons taught the subject only by rote, rather than from first principles.
Arzachel, like so many others around him, gave much time to the study of
9 For a short but detailed account of the great wave of translations in Spain: J. Millas, 'Translations of Oriental Scientific Works (to the End of the Thirteenth Century)', in G. S. Metraux
and F. Crouzet (eds.), The Evolution of Science . For a wide cultural survey:
Vernet, Ce que la culture (note 8), especially ch. 3-9.
10 For recent surveys of the Jewish contribution: B. R. Goldstein, Theory and Observation in
Ancient and Medieval Astronomy , especially chs. 20-24.
11 G. J. Toomer, 'A Survey of the Toledan Tables', Osiris, 15 , 1-174; J. M. Millas, Estudios sobre Azarquiel .
John North
astronomical instruments, and in particular to new astrolabe projections, and
to the instrument known as an equatorium, for evaluating planetary
positions.
In the last quarter of the thirteenth century, under the patronage of
Alfonso X the Wise of Leon and Castile, a new and even more important set
of tables was prepared, with the help of Muslim and Jewish scholars. The
canons written for them were now in the Castilian vernacular, which might
explain in part the fact that several decades passed before the work was
accepted into the Latin tradition. When this finally happened, the version that
obtained most currency - it was printed in 1483 - was that of John of Saxony
(c. 1327). His was not the first Latin version, however: his fellow Parisians
Johannes de Muris and John of Ligneres had produced others in 1321 and
1322, and they were to follow with yet further alternatives. The tables also
reached England at much the same time, via Paris. We find them early associated with Glasgow, Northampton, and London, and they were developed in
important ways in Oxford, as we shall see later. There remains the mystery of
the fact that they evidently lay dormant in the Latin world outside Spain for
half a century after their first composition.12
Spain was not, of course, the only port of entry of ancient Greek and
Arabic learning into the schools of Europe. We have already mentioned Sicily
as a source of translations. By the time Leonardo of Pisa (Fibonacci, c. 1170post 1240), the greatest European mathematician of his age, became imperial
mathematician to Frederick II, he had travelled extensively in north Africa
and the Mediterranean, and had absorbed Muslim learning in a very direct
way. Even he, however, had important Spanish contacts - for example, with
the Toledan Jewish scholar Judas ben Salomon Cohen, and through translations by Adelard of Bath, Robert of Ketton, and Gerard of Cremona. Fibonacci is in a historical sense a lonely figure, too great for his contemporaries
to appreciate properly.13 They sensed his genius, but one suspects that they
put a greater value on Michael Scot, the imperial astrologer whom Dante
thought it proper to place in hell. It should not be overlooked, however, that
the motivation of so many of those who studied the arts of the quadrivium
was undoubtedly astrological. Astrology was a system of belief that was at
the same time in a very real sense 'rational', and that required a thorough
mathematical training for its mastery. The rules whereby scholars predicted
12 For a general survey of their history, and the English treatment of them: J. D. North, 'The
Alfonsine Tables in England', in Y. Maeyama and W. G. Saltzer (eds.), Prismata , 269-301. For the John of Saxony version: E. Poulle, Les Tables alphonsines, avec les
canons de Jean de Saxe . Later printed versions - the last of which was as late as
1641 (Madrid) — have the canons of Santritter or Gaurico. For much useful material on Alfonsine astronomy as a whole: J. Samso (ed.) De astronomia Alphonsi regis .
13 K. Vogel, 'Fibonacci', in C. C. Gillispie (ed.), Dictionary of Scientific Biography, vol. IV , 604-13.
The quadrivium
the fortunes of individuals, of princes, of nations, of the weather, and so
forth, on the basis of the configurations of the heavens, have a markedly
arbitrary element in them. They were nevertheless accepted and acted upon,
and for this purpose very precise astronomical calculation was required, to
determine the exact state of the heavens. It was undoubtedly the feeling that
Spain was a centre of excellence in astrological education, and in the ancillary
mathematics it demanded, that caused so many scholars to cross the
In the period before the rise of the universities, of the four branches of the
quadrivium, music - by virtue of its importance in Christian worship - took
pride of place. It was, said Brunetto Latini later, the second mathematical
science, 'which serves for our delight and for the service of the Lord'. It
offered - shades of Pythagoras - a means to the perfection of the spirit, a
point that Boethius made strongly. It had, of course, its practical side - vocal
and instrumental - but in the context of the schools a strongly theoretical
element predominated, based largely on the theory of the monochord, with
which almost all important works on music began. (Even practical music
seems to have been taught in a strictly analytical fashion, although by the
nature of things much less is known about practice than about bookish
theory.) There are well over a hundred medieval texts on this one theme, but
the most important of all remained Boethius's synthesis of ancient traditions,
De institutione
The Pythagorean theory of music purveyed by Boethius in this work,
which is really a continuation of his Arithmetical rested on the arithmetical,
geometrical, and harmonic ratios of the numbers, 6, 8, 9, and 12. He catalogued, at what one might consider unnecessary length, the numerical relations that seemed to him most important, with a technical terminology that
seems now more designed to mystify than to enlighten. By the use of letters in
place of numerical ratios, a musical notation was gradually evolved and
improved, by such scholars as Philippe de Vitry and Guillaume de Machaut.
Greatest musical progress was made where the subject was taught in association with some great church or cathedral, such as the chapel of Notre-Dame
de Paris, or the monasteries of Saint-Victor or Sainte-Genevieve. Leonin and
Perotin were both chapel-masters.15 There was perhaps no comparable university city in Europe offering the same sort of opportunities as Paris -
14 Patrologia Latina, vol. LXIII . For further bibliography:
Glorieux Faculte des Arts, (note 2), 35.
15 J. Smits van Waesberghe, Musikerziehung: Lehre und Theorie der Musik itn Mittelalter
 . On Boethius: M. Gibson (ed.), Boethius: his Life, Thought and Influence
 .
John North
although Salamanca offered degrees in music - and one suspects that elsewhere the teaching of Boethius was a relatively dry and theoretical affair,
concentrating on memorizing the ratios, and drawing consolation from the
fact that music was not only instrumental but (following Boethius) universal
and human. The concept of musica humana concerned the supposed
harmony of psychical and bodily function. That of musica mundana, with
each of the heavens having its own chord, would have reminded the student
of astronomical pleasures in store.
Boethius seems to have been at the core of teaching in every university
where music was a part of the arts curriculum, and to have remained there
throughout the Middle Ages, wherever music survived as a part of the course.
The place of music is somewhat obscure in early Oxford history, but
Boethius is stipulated in 1431, and still finds a place in the Elizabethan statutes
of 1564-5. He survived in the Oxford statutes, indeed, until the nineteenth
century.16 In view of the arithmetical component in the subject it is hardly
surprising that figures famous in astronomy or mathematics should have
contributed to music, and conversely. The Parisian Johannes de Muris wrote
extremely important works on both astronomy and music, for example,
while Walter of Evesham (Walter of Odington), who was probably at
Oxford, and who is certainly more famous for his music, made not insignificant contributions to astronomy.
ARITHMETIC
For arithmetic, most statutes - and, where they are not available, the testimony of biographies and numbers of surviving manuscripts - make it clear
that Boethius {De institutione arithmetica) was again the staple diet of the
young arts student. Euclid was often a supplement: we recall that the
Elements contains much arithmetic. Other works in use were Alexander of
Villedieu's Massa compoti (on the principles underlying calendar computation) and Sacrobosco's Algorismus, which we mentioned earlier. This was
Parisian practice, and in the earliest known Oxford requirements (of the early
fourteenth century), in stipulating simply 'Compotus' and
lAlgorismus\
Oxford was probably following suit.17 There were other texts, to be sure: a
summary of Boethius by Oxford's Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1290-1349: or
was it Simon Bredon's?) was probably used there, and, judging by its availability in manuscripts in Munich, Erfurt, Berne, and Vienna, was also found a
16 J. Caldwell, 'Music in the Faculty of Arts', in J. McConica (ed.), The History of the University
of Oxford, vol. Ill , 201-12.
17 See Glorieux, Faculte des Arts (note 2). For Oxford: J. A. Weisheipl, 'Curriculum of the
Faculty of Arts at Oxford in the early Fourteenth Century', Medieval Studies, 2.6 , 161,
The quadrivium
use in some central European universities.18 One may indeed take almost any
text from a typical arts curriculum and, by searching manuscript catalogues,
unearth a handful of different summaries or commentaries on it. Such commentaries testify to a style of teaching, but also to the intrinsic difficulty that
some students had with material that to us looks painfully simple, for
example the rules of simple addition, subtraction, multiplication, and long
In order to sweeten the pill of arithmetic, and provide practice, a curious
arithmetical game called rithmomachia was devised. It is a sort of draughts,
with pieces numbered with selected odd and even integers. The numbers in
question are simple quadratic functions of numbers less than io, and may be
as large as 289 and 361 (the squares of in + 1, for n = 8 or 9). The rules of the
game, which had a long history, are complicated enough to make one wonder
whether the unadorned Boethius was not preferable.19 There were other
games and pedagogical aids for the arts student, in astronomy and in the
computus. The 'manual computus\
representing calendar letters and
numbers by the joints of the fingers, was a technique no doubt familiar to
almost every student. There were similar manual systems in music, and some
survive to this day; but the calendar, in the life of the cleric, was especially
important, in particular because it was organized around Easter, the celebration of the most important event in Christian history.
The rules of the calendar are simple, to the extent that, once the astronomy
behind them is agreed, they depend on cycles of counting. Unfortunately, the
astronomical element gave the more perspicacious scholars cause for
concern, and there were recurrent attempts at reform. These were not to
meet with success until the Gregorian reform of 1582. It is doubtful whether
many ordinary students in arts were aware of the problem or concerned by it,
yet Robert Grosseteste (c. 1170-1253) and Roger Bacon (c. 1219 - c. 1292),
both of them significant names in the history of western science, considered
the problem a serious one. When Bacon sang the praises of the mathematical
sciences, and spoke of them as a potential weapon for the defence of
Christendom, he was thinking of their geographical use - of the missionary
value of latitudes and longitudes of place, and the whereabouts of the ten
tribes and the Antichrist - but also of the calendar. Among other things, he
feared the derision of the Jews, who seemed to have the Passover calculation
under better control than his co-religionists.20
18 L. Thorndike and P. A. Kibre, Catalogue oflncipits
of Mediaeval
Scientific Writings in Latin,
The Mediaeval Academy of America , cols. 641, 783, 1175, 1401.
19 G. Beaujouan, 'L'enseignement du quadrivium*, in Settimane di studio del Centro italiano di
studi sulValto medioevo,
vol. XIX , 679—723.
20 M. A. Hoskin, and O. Pedersen (eds.), Gregorian Reform of the Calendar. Proceedings
Vatican Conference to Commemorate
its 400th Anniversary,
 .
An especially useful work on calendars in the present context is C. Wordsworth, The Ancient
Kalendar of the University of Oxford .
John North
Such practical considerations were never far from view in any part of the arts
curriculum. Consider Brunetto Latini on geometry:
par qui nous savons les mesures et les proportions des choses, par lone et par le
et par hautece; e'est la science par quoi li anchien sage s'effochierent par soutillite de geometrie de trover la grandeur dou ciel et de la tiere, et de la hautece
entre Tun et Pautre, et maintes autres proportions ki a mervillier font.
[by which we know the sizes and proportions of things in length, breadth, and
height; it is the science by which the wise ancients - through their geometrical
expertise - were able to find the size of the heavens and of the earth, and the
distance separating them, not to mention other proportions that are a source of
wonder.]21
The same reservations about geometry apply as those made about the
canons to astronomical tables: more attention was given to the rehearsal of
rules than to the logical structure of the science by which those rules had been
obtained in the first place. Euclid's Elements was the universally accepted
prime text. How far the student went depended to some extent on the length
of the arts course, which varied between wide limits; but even at Oxford,
with its long course, only the first six books were required pro forma.22
Translations available were, as already mentioned, by Adelard of Bath,
Hermann of Carinthia, and Gerard of Cremona. Other works of 'speculative'
geometry were a pseudo-Boethian commentary on the Elements, Euclid's De
quantitatibus datis (as Bacon informs us), and Jordanus Nemorarius' De triangulis.
On the side of 'practical' geometry, we find a variety of styles. The distinction between speculative and practical goes back to Plato and Aristotle, but in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries it was no mere classificatory rhetoric.
There is abundant evidence that Euclid was studied by many in order to
prepare the way for a study of Almagest — 'which is the principal goal of our
study', as Robert of Ketton said.23 The quotation from Brunetto Latini
sounds as though it might echo Hugh of Saint Victor's Didascalion (Hugh
died in 1141), with its subdivisions planimetria, altimetria, and cosmimetria.
A treatise on one of the various sorts of quadrant could have been expounded
under any of these headings. The most famous early treatise was perhaps the
Tractatus quadrantis (twelfth century?), ascribable either to Robertus Anglicus or Johannes Anglicus of Montpellier.24 It describes a small, hand-held,
21 Glorieux, Faculte des Arts (note 2), 36, from which I also take the following information
about the curriculum.
22 Weisheipl, 'Curriculum' (note 17), 171.
23 Burnett, in Diffusione
delle scienze (note 4), z$n. 45.
24 S. K. Victor, Practical Geometry in the High Middle Ages: 'Artis cuiuslibet consutnmatio' and
'Pratike de geometrie' , 2.2.-3; F* Maddison, 'Early Astronomical and
The quadrivium
quadrant, usually made of brass and engraved with scales, over which a
cursor could be moved. Sighting vanes on the quadrant itself allowed the
altitudes of celestial bodies and buildings to be taken, and made time calculations possible.
Other texts of practical geometry commonly expounded were those on
statics (for example, the De ponderibus of Jordanus) and those on optics.
Optics is especially interesting, for it is a subject not only in which progress
was made in the Middle Ages - this is true of every branch of the quadrivium
- but in which that progress was taken into account in teaching, which was
seldom true elsewhere, so far as one can tell. Studies by Euclid, Ptolemy, and
Alhazen (Ibn al-Haitham) of the reflection and refraction of light were
unknown in the West before the thirteenth century, and the encyclopedic
tradition (Alexander Neckam, Bartholomeus Anglicus, and so on) was a poor
substitute, drawing as it did on impressionistic materials from such writers as
Plato, Pliny, Saint Augustine, and Chalcidius. The entire subject was revivified, however, by Robert Grosseteste, who had available to him Euclid's
Optica and Catoptrica, Aristotle's Meteorologica, al-Kindi's De aspectibus,
and possibly Ptolemy's Optica.25
Optics was concerned with general metaphysical and physical problems,
such as modes of transmission, the 'multiplication of species' and so forth,
and with such geometrical problems as those of refraction and reflections,
colour, the eye, and the rainbow. Grosseteste considered all of these. He was
in some respects obsessed with light, which was important to his entire philosophy. His short On Light or the Beginning of Forms {De luce seu de
inchoatione formarum), a product of his later years, and memorable for its
style of scientific argument, explains the creation of the entire material universe as due to the activity of light. While not of direct concern to those who
studied the quadrivium, the overall metaphysical views of Oxford's first
chancellor could not have been entirely absent from the minds of those who
taught the more mundane aspects of optics to their charges. Grosseteste had a
very great influence on subsequent generations, especially through his connection with the Oxford Franciscans, to whom he was first lector. His most
influential follower was Roger Bacon, but through the Franciscans generally
he had a very strong European influence, and this makes his work of more
than common interest. And he was driven by his theology, especially his
theology of creation.
Grosseteste was unfortunate not to have had access to the masterly Optica
of Alhazen (Ibn al-Haitham), which was translated in the early thirteenth
Mathematical Instruments. A Brief Summary of Sources and Modern Studies', History of
Science, 2 , 17-50.
25 A. C. Crombie, Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science, 1100-1700
 ; R. W. Southern, Robert Grosseteste: the Growth of an English Mind in Medieval Europe . Excerpts from many of the fundamental writings on optics are to
be found in E. Grant, A Source Book in Medieval Science .
John North
century or late twelfth century. Roger Bacon and the two writers of the most
widely used university texts, John Pecham (c. 1230-92) and the Silesian
scholar Witelo (c. 1235 - post 1274), did have access to this, as well as to
several useful works of Avicenna and the Optica of Ptolemy. The writings of
all three were very much the products of thirteenth-century university learning: all were at various times in Paris; and Bacon and Pecham were also at
Oxford, both as Franciscans, and almost inevitably, therefore, coloured with
Grosseteste's Augustinianism. Bacon was about forty when he entered the
order (c. 1257), while Pecham, a far more career-conscious individual,
became eleventh lector to the Franciscans in Oxford in 1271-2, moving from
there to become provincial of the order, then to the papal curia as master in
theology, and finally to the archbishopric of Canterbury.
Sources continued to accumulate. We can say, for example, that Witelo's
principal text in optics, the Perspectiva, must have been written after 1270,
since it makes use of William of Moerbeke's translation of Hero of Alexandria's Catoptrica, dated the last day of 1269. Grosseteste, Bacon, Pecham, and
Witelo all advanced the science of optics in the thirteenth century, but more
than that: they virtually exhausted medieval capabilities. It is an odd fact,
hard to explain, that the fourteenth century, for all its growing mathematical
expertise, could add very little to what they had done; and the texts written
by Pecham and Witelo continued in university use until well into the seventeenth century. The influence of their texts throughout the whole of Europe
was enormous, and copious references to them will be found in such authors
as Nicholas of Oresme, Regiomontanus, Leonardo da Vinci, Francesco Maurolico, Thomas Harriot, Johannes Kepler, and Rene Descartes - to name
seven men who played a significant part in the later history of optics.
A grossly oversimplified Aristotelian scheme - with concentric spheres carrying the planets, and a sublunar set of spheres of the elements at its centre - lay
at the heart of medieval cosmological teaching. Although Ptolemy's Almagest
lay behind the curriculum, it was rarely used, but was replaced by digests
such as that by Alfraganus already mentioned, or by one of several derivative
works with the generic title De sphera. Of these, Sacrobosco's was by far the
most famous, although another by Grosseteste and a more ambitious anonymous Almagestum abbreviatum were among the alternatives.
Sacrobosco's
work, in use until at least the seventeenth century, was one of the most widely
used of all textbooks in the Middle Ages, and it is hard to see why, unless its
slow pace and abundant classical literary ornament were considered virtues.
It deals with spherical astronomy and some corresponding geography. For all
its simplicity, it was the object of commentary, almost as though it were a
sacred text. The best-known medieval example was perhaps that of Robertus
The quadrivium
Anglicus (1271); even the highly intelligent Christopher Clavius (1537-1612)
wrote a commentary on it, running to some 800 pages in the later editions.26
There are some hundreds of surviving manuscripts, and they are found in
libraries throughout all of Europe. There were thirty-five Venice printings,
and others from Bologna, Milan, Avignon, Dijon, Louvain, Frankfurt-on-
Main, Cracow, Vienna, Augsburg, and Antwerp. If one may speak of a European experience, Sacrobosco was certainly a part of it.
Sacrobosco's much longer Computus was in some universities (Oxford, for
instance) set under astronomy, rather than under arithmetic. It was widely
diffused, although less so than De sphera, and unlike that work does not seem
to have been put into the vernacular. Both of his works - despite their antiquated character - were promoted by Philip Melanchthon, in an effort to
provide the reformed University of Wittenberg with textbooks.27 (Many
other Lutheran universities were strongly influenced by Melanchthon.)
Grosseteste's Computus had been an alternative to Sacrobosco's in the thirteenth century, but had soon yielded place to Sacrobosco's thereafter.
The De sphera scarcely touched on planetary motions, and it is probable
that few arts graduates before the late thirteenth century knew much about
that subject, which was nevertheless of the very essence of medieval astronomy. We have already seen how canons to the Toledan and Alfonsine tables
could convey a modicum of information on this theme, albeit information
implicit in computing routines. To fill the obvious gap, a type of work was
produced under the generic name Theorica planetarum. John of Seville's
version of Alfraganus falls under this heading, as does another twelfthcentury work by Roger of Hereford, but, without doubt, the most widely
diffused text with this name was one that opened with the words 'Circulus
eccentricus vel egresse cuspidis'.28
The first five chapters of the anonymous Theorica are concerned with the
motions in longitude of the sun, moon, lunar nodes, and superior and inferior
planets. They give a competent account of the Ptolemaic eccentrics and
equants, complete with interpolation methods for the so-called equations.
Ptolemaic - in some respects pre-Ptolemaic - though the doctrine is, no
mention is made of Almagest. In a sense, the Theorica did something for
western astronomy that the translations of Ptolemy's magnum opus could not
easily do: it provided a fairly stable, unambiguous, astronomical vocabulary.
In some of its later chapters, the writer's touch is unsure. There are technical
misunderstandings, later to be criticized by Peurbach and Regiomontanus. It
was singularly uninformative when it came to giving numerical parameters,
26 L. Thorndike, The Sphere of Sacrobosco and its Commentators
 . On
Sacrobosco and his oeuvre, see the comprehensive O. Pedersen, 'In Quest of Sacrobosco',
Journal of the History of Astronomy',
12 , 113-23.
27 Pedersen, 'Sacrobosco' (note 26), 184.
28 For further details of literature of the Theorica planetarum
type: O. Pedersen, 'The origins of
the Theorica Planetarum', Journal of the History of Astronomyp,
16 , 175-221.
John North
whether geometrical or kinematic, but these were implicit in (and could in
principle have been deduced from) whatever astronomical tables the reader
used. The real value of the Theorica was that it gave an understanding of
what the student was about, when computing planetary positions, the movement of the eighth sphere (the precession of the equinoxes, in our language),
or whatever.29 It gave no real understanding of the ways in which planetary
theories had been, or could be, developed. It long outlived in the universities
the Copernican system that replaced the Ptolemaic implicit in it. It is a sad
measure of European university conservatism that many university handbooks of the seventeenth century simply set these and other systems side by
side, as though they were of equal value. Astronomy was probably never
handled in a truly practical way in the quadrivium, in the sense of requiring
that observations be made, recorded, and reduced. The quadrants that must
have been used by many students in one form or another, and examples of
that ubiquitous instrument the astrolabe - which a few dedicated scholars
would have made for their own use - were no doubt used primarily for
time-telling, where at a lower place on the socio-intellectual scale a man
might have used a simple portable cylinder dial, or a monumental dial; but
one suspects that such instruments were more often used for pedagogical
purposes, like the armillary sphere that encapsulated the image of the
Aristotelian universe, and that we so often find used as a symbol of university
Another astronomical instrument, this time for purely computational
use, was the equatorium. In its simplest form, this was a series of graduated
scales on circular discs that could simulate the movements of the circles of
Ptolemaic astronomy, and so shorten the otherwise lengthy and tedious Ptolemaic calculations. Other equatoria were constructed on less intuitively
obvious principles, and the most sophisticated of all, the albion (1327) of
Richard of Wallingford (c. 1292-13 36), would have been well beyond the
understanding of the average arts student. It travelled Europe, nevertheless,
and we find references to it in manuscript sources connected with such
universities as Paris, Vienna, Erfurt, and Ingolstadt.30
THE TRANSMISSION OF TEXTS
To take the albion as a typical case of a new idea: it spread over Europe, but
how exactly it was transmitted is an important question that cannot be
answered with confidence. Were albion manuscripts simply copied by itinerant university scholars, or was Richard's Benedictine connection of more
29 An outline of the essentials of the methods used for calculating longitudes is given in J. D.
North, Richard of Wallingford,
vol. Ill , appendix 29.
30 North, Richard of Wallingford
(note 29), vol. II 127—287 passim.
The quadrivium
significance? (He became abbot of St Albans after determining as B.Th. at
Oxford in 1327.) The symbiosis of monastic Europe and university Europe is
a subject about which we have much to learn.
Among the many scientific works appearing in the lists of lectures given at
Vienna in 1399 was the Proportiones of Bradwardine - presumably the Tractatus de proportionibus velocitatum in motibus. There are today at least three
copies of the same work in the Jagiellonian Library in Cracow, one of them
copied by a certain Sandivogius de Czechel, but none giving any clue as to
how precisely the text travelled from Oxford. One can only guess that it was
first taken there by a master who had been nurtured on it in Oxford or Paris:
but the movement of texts and ideas was certainly not always as simple as
This can be seen from one example, Cracow, where the studium generale
had been founded on the Bologna model in 1364. There are strong associations with the Universities of Paris and Oxford for several manuscripts now
in Cracow.31 They seem never to have been studied from the point of view of
university migration. One of them (R. 82) is an astrological compilation
explicitly signed by 'frater Augustinus de Tridente, lector Parisii'. One dated
1436 (R. 1383) lists star coordinates obtained by observation with the 'Paris
armillary'. While in the studium at Perugia, Johannes Zmora of Leznicz in
1453 made a copy of the equatorium treatise of John of Ligneres, the fourteenth-century Parisian master; three years later he made a second copy
whilst in Cracow. Some manuscripts with astronomical tables would not
strictly have been useful outside Paris or Oxford, their towns of origin (tables
of houses; solar altitudes; eclipses), while others have had their tables recalculated, for Cracow, Prague, or wherever (e.g. R. 1306, with a note by Nicolaus
of Grabostow). One gets a strong sense of intellectual community when
coming across a volume giving distances between cities - mainly universities,
that is - for astronomical purposes, these being needed so that astronomers in
one may make use of the calculations or observations of those in another.
One Cracow manuscript (R. 1562), with a note by Henry of Munsterberg, so
relates Paris with Vienna, Torun, and Malbork.
Just how much remains to be uncovered of such intellectual movements as
are evident here it is impossible to judge accurately: that is the nature of
uncharted territory. Much surely remains to be discovered. In the case of the
Alfonsine astronomical tables, for example, it used to be assumed that the
various Oxford versions produced in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
were all relatively trivial variants of what had gone before, modified for
That is, in the Jagiellonian Library. I use G. Rosinska, Scientific Writing and Astronomical
Tables in Cracow , here denoted by *R\
John North
geographical place, but in few other very significant ways. This is now known
to be mistaken.32
THE QUADRIVIUM IN CONTEXT
The information we can glean from official documents about the curriculum
clearly leaves much to be said about subjects such as astrology, geomancy,
even magic. Even if they were not immediately catered for, these must have
figured in the ambitions of many students in arts. Some universities - Orleans
in the fourteenth century was a case in point, perhaps without justification acquired a reputation for doctrinally dangerous forms of divination, and yet
there were large tracts of astrology that did not properly fall under that
heading, and that were more or less universally studied as an extension of
astronomy.33 The evidence is in the form of texts written and manuscripts
copied. Among extant manuscripts, the numbers of copies of treatises by such
astrological authors as Albumazar and Alchabitius are numerous, even
though they fall short of those of Theorica planetarum literature. (Geomancy
and magic are relatively much scarcer than astrology.) One or two crucial
and difficult astrological ideas would in any case have been transmitted as a
matter of course in books on the astrolabe, which must have played a part in
the arts curriculum, but which are only occasionally explicitly mentioned in
that connection. (The first treatise on the astrolabe in the English vernacular
32 Ten years ago, or so, I showed that there were two extremely important revisions done in
Oxford, one in 1348 by an unknown astronomer, possibly one Batecombe, and the other by
John Killingworth, fellow of Merton College, around 1442. Within a few years Professor J.
Dobrzycki had found the 1348 tables, described simply as 'tabulae Anglicanae\
in Cracow once in a Silesian manuscript (fifteenth century), and once in a manuscript from Prague (fourteenth century). I then recalled how Henry Arnaut of Zwolle, a fifteenth-century Parisian
master, had referred to 'tabulae Anglicanae';
presumably again these were the 1348 tables.
Professor B. R. Goldstein (see his Theory and Observation
(note 10)), working on Hebrew
astronomical texts, then found a Hebrew version of the 1348 Oxford tables, done by Mordecai Finzi of Mantua, a fifteenth-century scholar. Finzi refers to a 1360 glossator of the Latin
manuscript, and to an anonymous Christian who helped him in Mantua. Finzi was also
known as 'Angelo'. In Pico della Mirandola's Disputationes
adversus astrologiam
references to Angelus Mantuanus as well as to the 'Oxonienses
tabulae'. Those tables are as
severely intellectual as one could wish to find - beyond the reach of the ordinary arts studentand yet we find that their surprisingly wide diffusion was in part a university phenomenon,
and in part not. Ten years ago no one had paid any attention to them, and now they are seen
to have been esteemed throughout Europe. One cannot help wondering how many similar
cases there are.
33 For textual traditions of magic, see D. Pingree, 'The Diffusion of Arabic Magical Texts in
Western Europe', in Diffusione delle scienze (note 4), 57-102. The reputation of Orleans
seems to rest on Chaucer's reference to it in the 'Franklin's Tale', and is evidently unsupported
in the records of the university there. See D. Mackay Quynn, 'The medieval extracurriculum:
the Orleans example', Mississippi Quarterly, 10:3 , cols. 120-34; cols. 129—34 relate to
The quadrivium
was written by the poet Geoffrey Chaucer for his ten-year-old son, around
the year 1393.34)
Wherever music was used by the educated clergy as a part of the liturgy,
wherever in large churches astrological imagery was visible in glass and in the
astrolabe dials of clocks, wherever - with his blend of Dionysian and Aristotelian cosmology - Dante was read, wherever princes coupled with their
wives to the sound of music under selected stellar configurations, in all those
cases the influences of the quadrivium were in evidence. There is in Geoffrey
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales - in The Miller's Tale', in fact - a young
Oxford scholar Nicholas, at the head of whose bed there was a shelf containing a copy of Ptolemy's Almagest, an astrolabe, a set of augrim stones for
arithmetical calculation, and a musical instrument, a psaltery. That shelf
symbolizes well the quadrivium, with its geometry, astronomy, arithmetic,
and music (we can stretch a point, and find geometry in the Almagest). The
augrim stones (for the abacus table) and psaltery remind us of the practical
side to the quadrivium. They remind us, too, of the question of the relative
cost of different sorts of study. The neurotic Roger Bacon complained bitterly
about the vast sums of his own money that he had been obliged to spend on
his experiments. At a more mundane level, though, how many students of
astronomy could afford an astrolabe, or an armillary sphere, or even the
metal from which to make such things? Augrim stones were cheap enough,
and a psaltery was probably easy to come by, but what about books? We may
be certain that not one in a hundred ever owned a copy of the Almagest, and
that Nicholas of 'The Miller's Tale' was a very unusual student.
Reference to chapter 11 on medical education will underline the pragmatic
value of astronomy, showing as it does that in Padua and Bologna astrology
teaching was encouraged by the need to instruct medical students in the
subject. (The medieval presumption was that the heavens influenced the progression of disease, and could be made an ally in its cure only by those who
could calculate their motions.) Those medical students of course became the
elite of their profession. Mention is made in chapter 11 of Cecco d'Ascoli's
justification of the value of astrology to medical studies, and of the classic
examples of a man truly expert in both subjects, Giovanni de Dondi; but we
are reminded, too, that medical astrology was not confined to a university
milieu. The universities, one imagines, set standards for the world outside
their walls, but one should not be too complacent about university standards,
or condescending about the outsiders. To take Chaucer, again: he had no
university education, and yet there were in England in his day probably fewer
than a dozen university men who could match his expertise in astronomical
calculation. We do not know enough about his biography to call him an
autodidact, and yet there are very few scholars about whom we know a tenth
34 There was a vernacular version in French, by Pelerin de Prusse, before Chaucer's, but less
complete: J. D. North, Chaucer's Universe .
John North
as much as we know of him. We still know far too little of the alternatives to
university education to be able to set a true value on the arts curriculum.
The case of Leonardo da Vinci offers another example of the sort of interactions worth exploring. Paul of Venice and Thomas de Vio (Cardinal Cajetanus) argued Aristotelian physics and chopped logic far into the night within
the traditions introduced by the Ockhamists, Parisians, and Oxonians, but
science has roots, too, in craft traditions. Leonardo was above all a practical
man, but he focused attention on numerous rich veins of importance to
theory — to take a single example, he threw a spotlight on the sorts of practical geometry that Tartaglia later made academically respectable.
In view of the astrological determinism that was so often thought to
threaten the souls of those who practised astronomy, one imagines that the
absence of the theological faculty or of professors of theology in such universities as Bologna, Padua and Salamanca (until the second half of the fourteenth century) must have meant a corresponding absence of at least some of
the tensions implicit in an arts faculty. Those tensions seem a priori likely to
have been greatest in Paris, and after that in Oxford and Cambridge, all great
theological universities. Did such tensions affect in any way the development
of the mathematical sciences? Did they, for example, deter scholars from
pursuing these subjects, replete with so much pagan literature? Thomas Bradwardine, doyen of natural philosophy at Merton College, but also writer on
the freedom of the will, turned away from the natural sciences and towards
theology; and Richard of Wallingford, the best English astronomer and
mathematician of his century, said that he regretted having wasted his time
on those subjects and having ignored theology. Perhaps such feelings of guilt
were typical, but were they rarer in Bologna and Padua? Perhaps they acted as
a kind of hurdle that only the dedicated few would cross.
Much remains to be learned of the relation of the religious orders to quadrivial studies. We know, for example, that Bologna (1364), Salamanca (1411),
and Toulouse (1360), in setting up theology faculties, drew graduates almost
entirely from the religious orders. One might suppose as a corollary that,
since friars and monks had their preliminary training in arts within the walls
of their own houses, not necessarily in university centres, encouraging theology would have weakened the arts faculties. What sorts of expertise - for
example in the practical arts - did such monks, coming into the universities
from outside, whether in southern or northern Europe, bring with them and
with what did they return? Richard of Wallingford is one example of a Benedictine who managed to combine the speculative astronomy of the university
with the real estate of his abbey, and he produced an astronomical clock of a
cost and complexity never before seen and rarely matched at any subsequent
date before the sixteenth century.
One should not overlook the fact that scientific writings of a good, even
original, quality continued to originate in non-university centres, throughout
The quadrivium
the entire Middle Ages. Even in university towns, the different orders often
tried to insulate their students from the temptations of the world of the scholars, and presumably therefore developed ideas of a characteristically private
colour. From an analysis of scientific texts produced by members of the
various Oxford colleges and other houses, it appears that Merton College as was to be expected - reaches much the highest score; those of unknown
affiliation come next; but after that it is the Franciscans, the Carmelites, and
the Benedictines, before any other college.35 This is as judged by scientific
writing - just about the only reasonable gauge. (Judging by casual scientific
reference — ownership of a lens, use of an astrolabe, loan of a book, and so
forth - the results are virtually the same.) Is a similar phenomenon to be
detected in other universities, and what are the strengths and weaknesses of
the different religious orders in different subjects at different periods? Why,
for example, do the Oxford Dominicans produce so little in the exact
sciences, when they were in Oxford in larger numbers than the Franciscans
and Carmelites, at least in the most vital period of Oxford science, the early
fourteenth century? (Their numbers were in the ratio of, say, ioo to 75 to 45,
at any one time.) A part - but only a part - of the Oxford answer must be the
influence of Grosseteste, lector to the Franciscans, and the heritage of Bacon.
The scientific bias of Oxford is in contrast with Paris, 'the seat of theology
and dialectic', where mathematics seems not to have been the subject of
regular compulsory teaching. In Paris, this led to lessons being given by young
masters in their homes, with the result that the practice had to be officially
controlled, for there was a fear of furtive Averroism.36 In 1276, therefore,
rules were drawn up to control private meetings, partly to stem Averroism.
The tradition of teaching on feast-days in private went back at least to the
1215 statutes, in which rhetoric, the quadrivium, and ethics received the same
treatment.37 Later the tradition strengthened the hand of the colleges, with
their private libraries and bursaries. Two scholarships founded in 1378 by
Charles V of France, at the College of Master Gervaise in Paris, were
specifically to encourage the study of astrology. This is a symptom of what
was happening elsewhere: in many centres - Bologna, Salamanca, and
Cracow are important examples - mathematics was gradually becoming an
auxiliary to the study of astrology, and the quadrivium was beginning to look
decidedly unbalanced.38
Cracow had a strong tradition of astronomy - a separate chair in the
subject was inaugurated as early as 1394 - but the relative weakness of theol-
35 J. D. North, '1348 and All That: Science in Late Medieval Oxford', in J. L. Berggren and B. R.
Goldstein (eds.), From Ancient
Omens to Statistical
 , 155-65.
36 G. Beaujouan, 'Motives and Opportunities for Science in the Medieval Universities', in A. C.
Crombie (ed.), Scientific
Change , 219—36.
37 S. C. Ferruolo, 'The Parish Statutes of 1215 Reconsidered', History of Universities,
38 Beaujouan, 'Motives and Opportunities' (note 36), 223.
John North
ogy and the higher faculties there and in Vienna undoubtedly goes some way
towards explaining why they earned reputations for the fostering of scientific
work. At Vienna there is an element of illusion created by the presence there
of four famous masters: Henry of Langenstein (1325-97), John of Gmunden
(c. i38o-i442),GeorgeofPeurbach (1423-61), andRegiomontanus (1436-76).
It has been shown that, with the exception of John of Gmunden, none of
these men had anything to do with teaching in the arts faculty, and that the
number of lectures on astronomy by Vienna regents over the period investigated (1390-1460) was always small, and at an advanced level positively
meagre. The old texts continued in use, despite the occasional set of lectiones
on new themes (such as the albion, newly edited by John of Gmunden).39 The
conservatism of lecturers and the dependence of scientific reputation on the
researches of a few individuals are of course phenomena not unknown today.
From the proven tenacity of such works as those of Boethius and Sacrobosco, one might be inclined to suppose that textbook writing in the quadrivium
stagnated. This is not entirely true, even overlooking the many commentaries
produced. There was a whole genre of Theorica planetarum texts, of which
one of the most famous examples was by George of Peurbach. The circumstances of its production are these: Cardinal Bessarion asked Peurbach to
write an abridgement of the Almagest, which was about half-finished when
he died, aged not yet thirty-eight. His assistant in Vienna, Regiomontanus,
completed the work in Italy. The work, Theoricae novae planetarum, was
exactly what the universities of Europe needed, an authoritative text by
someone who knew the Almagest backwards, and one that was illustrated
with very good figures that the printing-press could reproduce so much more
accurately than the average professional scribe or limner. Between its first
printing (1473) and the middle of the seventeenth century, at least fifty-six
editions of this 'new theory of the planets' appeared, many printings containing also Sacrobosco on the sphere. It is safe to say that virtually every important astronomer in the period was indebted to it. It was the product of a
humanist initiative and the astronomical knowledge of a man trained entirely
in the medieval university tradition, but one with a strong feeling for getting
back to the original text. Peurbach knew no Greek, although of course
Regiomontanus did. According to Regiomontanus, Peurbach held the
Almagest in his memory 'quasi ad litter am'. To emphasize once more the
point that the Almagest was not widely read: there were seven printed editions of Ptolemy's Geography before 1500, but no single edition of the
Almagest before 1515.
We do not know of Peurbach's itinerary, but when he was in his twenties
he travelled through Germany, France and Italy, lectured in Padua, and was
39 C. Kren, 'Astronomical Teaching at the Late Medieval University of Vienna', History of
Universities, 3 , 15-30. For the John of Gmunden edition of Albion: North, Richard of
Wallingford (note 29) vol. II, 130-248.
The quadrivium
offered university positions there and in Bologna. He was rather like those
academics who today manage to work in the university but have lucrative
civil contracts outside. Having returned to Vienna and become court astrologer to the Emperor Frederick III, he continued to perform some duties
within the University of Vienna: surprisingly, they seem to have been mostly
in the humanities (he lectured on Virgil, Juvenal, and Horace, in different
years, for example).40
The case of Vienna illustrates the point made in the section on the trivium
(chapter IO.I) that in approaching the arts faculty we must distinguish carefully between official attitudes and what was actually being studied and
written. It might be worth considering alternative sorts of 'official' attitudes
and responses. Astrology, for example, was under pressure from three or
more distinct directions. There were those - especially ecclesiastics - who
mistrusted its pagan associations. Then there were scholars who launched a
scientific attack on basic astrological premises. Although their motives were
in most cases moral or theological, they did not really depend on any
specifically theological point of view. One finds both sorts of attack in the
ancient world as well as the medieval. The third prong of the attack,
however, is more or less peculiar to the context of the medieval university,
and was a blend of arguments concerning free-will and future contingents.
This sort of argument often came from an 'official' group of theologians and
philosophers, but they were, after all, merely trying to preserve what most of
mankind thinks it necessary to preserve, that is, a feeling of personal responsibility for one's actions. Although attacked in some or all of these ways
throughout most of its history, judicial astrology seems to have steadily
increased in popularity throughout the Middle Ages, and to have continued in
the same direction well into the seventeenth century. It is dangerous to make
rough generalizations, but for the sake of brevity let it be said that Italian
scholars seem to have pursued the more dangerous, personal varieties of
astrology with abandon, especially before the counter-Reformation: the Parisians were much more hesitant; and the English before the fifteenth century
spent most of their time in prognostication on meteorological problems, but
made up for lost time at a later date. In the German universities, astrology
seems to have gone from strength to strength, especially from the midfourteenth century onwards.
One brand of astrology that seems to have been everywhere practised, and
to have been virtually above reproach, was that which associates great conjunctions with historical events, in particular the rise and fall of religious
sects. This, like meteorology, was respectable university material. University
men did not have a monopoly of astrology - to imagine so would be to
commit a fallacy. They certainly provided its back-bone, but texts that were
40 C. D. Hellman and N. M. Swerdlow, 'Peurbach, Georg', in C. C. Gillispie (ed.), Dictionary of
Scientific Biography, vol. XV , 473-9.
John North
being copied and doctrines that were being learned do not bring us down to
grass-roots level. What was really being practised in astrology can only be
accurately judged by analysing as many materials as possible, especially of the
horoscopic type - whether nativities, elections, or whatever. As an example,
we have the horoscopes of twenty-nine Wittenberg students of the midsixteenth century, used in a recent study to determine ages at matriculation,
and certainly not unusual for the period in question. Such horoscopes were in
some ways the student photographs of the time.41 The burgeoning numbers
of personal horoscopes over the period from the twelfth to the seventeenth
centuries tell us a great deal about seriousness of purpose. Indeed, they tell us
far more than any university statutes or any theological polemic can do.
41 M. Gingerich and O. Gingerich, 'Matriculation Ages in Sixteenth Century Wittenberg',
History of Universities, 6 , 135-7.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
See also the select bibliography of chapter 10.1.
Beaujouan, G. 'L'enseignement du quadrivium', in Settimane di studio del Centro
italiano di studi sulValto medioevo, vol. XIX, Spoleto, 1972, 639-723.
Coyne, G. V., Hoskin, M. A., and Pedersen, O. (eds.) Gregorian Reform of the Calendar. Proceedings of the Vatican Conference to Commemorate its 400th Anniversary, 1582-1982, Vatican City, 1983.
Crombie, A. C. Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science, 1100—
1700, 2nd edn, Oxford, 1961.
La Diffusione delle scienze islamiche nel medio evo Europeo, Convegno Internazionale, Rome 1984, Academia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rome, 1987.
Gibson, M. (ed.) Boethius: his Life, Thought, and Influence, Oxford, 1981.
Glorieux, P. La Faculte des arts et ses maitres au Xllle siecle, Paris, 1971.
Goldstein, B. R. Theory and Observation in Ancient and Medieval Astronomy,
London, 1985.
Grant, E. A Source Book in Medieval Science, Cambridge, Mass., 1974.
Haskins, C. H. Studies in the History of Medieval Science, 1st edn, Cambridge, Mass.,
1924; 2nd edn, Cambridge, Mass., 1927; reprint, New York, i960.
Kretzmann, N., Kenny, A. and Pinborg, J. (eds.) The Cambridge History of Later
Medieval Philosophy: From the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of
Scholasticism, 1100—1600, Cambridge, 1982.
Lindberg, D. C. (ed.) Science in the Middle Ages, Chicago/London, 1978.
Maddison, F. 'Early Astronomical and Mathematical Instruments. A Brief Summary
of Sources and Modern Studies', History of Science, 2 , 17-50.
Millas, J. M. Estudios sobre Azarquiel, Madrid/Granada, 1943-50.
Millas, J. M. Translations of Oriental Scientific works (to the End of the Thirteenth
Century)', in G. S. Metraux and F. Crouzet (eds.), The Evolution of Science,
London, 1963.
North, J. D. '1348 and All That: Science in Late Medieval Oxford', in J. L. Berggren
and B. R. Goldstein (eds.), From Ancient Omens to Statistical Mechanics. Essays in
The quadrivium
the Exact Sciences Presented to Asger Aaboe, Copenhagen, 1987,155—65; reprinted
in J. D. North, Stars, Minds and Fate, London, 1989, 361-71.
North, J. D. Chaucer's Universe, Oxford, 1988.
North, J. D. Horoscopes and History, London, 1986.
Poulle, E. Les Tables alphonsines, avec les canons de ]ean de Saxe, Paris, 1984.
Samso, J. (ed.) De astronomia Alphonsi regis. Proceedings of a Berkeley Symposium
on Alfonsine Astronomy, 1985, Barcelona, 1987.
Smits van Waesberghe, J. Musikerziehung: Lehre und Theorie der Musik im Mittelalter, Leipzig, 1969.
Southern, E. W. Robert Grosseteste: the Growth of an English Mind in Medieval
Europe, Oxford, 1986.
Thorndike, L. and Kibre, P. A. Catalogue oflncipits of Mediaeval Scientific Writings
in Latin, London, 1963.
Vernet, J. Ce que la culture doit aux Arabes d'Espagne, Paris, 1985 .
Victor, S. K. Practical Geometry in the High Middle Ages. 'Artis cuiuslibet consummatio' and 'Pratike de geometrie', Philadelphia, 1979.
Weisheipl, J. A. 'Curriculum of the Faculty of Arts at Oxford in the early Fourteenth
Century', Mediaeval Studies, 26 , 143-85.
Weisheipl, J. A. 'Development in the Arts Curriculum at Oxford in the Early Fourteenth Century', Mediaeval Studies, 28 , 151-75.
Wordsworth, C. The Ancient Kalendar of the University of Oxford, Oxford, 1903-4.
CHAPTER 11
THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE
NANCY SIRAISI
THE CONTEXT OF MEDIEVAL UNIVERSITY
The establishment of university faculties of medicine provided a distinct type
of professional and intellectual formation that shaped a new medical elite.
Yet the content of the medicine studied and practised by those trained in the
medieval universities of western Europe was neither the creation nor the
exclusive property of the university milieu. The medicine of learned university physicians was at once an intellectual enterprise grounded in the medicine of classical antiquity and the Islamic world and an activity that had much
in common with that of the numerous contemporary medical and surgical
practitioners who received their formation outside the universities.
The intellectual preparation for the rise of university medicine, as for other
aspects of the learning of the high and later Middle Ages, was provided by the
translations of Greek and Arabic texts which began to proliferate in the late
eleventh century. For medicine, the results included not only the availability
of more of the medical heritage of antiquity, but also an enlargement of the
theoretical component in contemporary medical writing, along with an
increased stress on the connections between medicine and natural philosophy
and the expansion of the role of dialectic in medical discourse. And the
general intellectual revival that accompanied the reception of the new translations produced a great expansion in quantity and increase in diversity of all
kinds of Latin medical writing, whether commentaries, works containing recommendations for practice, books on surgery, or consilia (that is, advice for
individual cases or conditions).
Also fundamental to the successful establishment of medicine as a university discipline, as to the university movement in general, was the economic,
demographic, and urban growth of western Europe in the twelfth and thir-
The faculty of medicine
teenth centuries. More specifically, academic medicine grew up and
flourished in a context of the multiplication of schools providing Latin
literacy, the proliferation of healers of all kinds who practised their art for
pay, and the spread through many levels of society of willingness and ability
to purchase medical intervention - a willingness exemplified not only by the
patronage of famous surgeons or learned physicians by monarchs, nobles,
and prelates, but also by the retention of medical or surgical practitioners by
civic authorities, and the livelihoods (or partial livelihoods) gained by barbersurgeons, pharmacists, herbalists, midwives, and wise men and women. Yet
the religious and cultural context of academic medicine throughout the
Middle Ages always included powerful traditions linking healing with religious charity and/or miraculous intervention, and the imperative that gave at
least lip-service to the priority of the healing of the soul over the healing of
the body.1
Throughout the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries, and thereafter, the university-trained physicians who are the subject of this chapter were a minority
of those who practised healing. Of a total of more than 4,000 medical practitioners - excluding surgeons and barber-surgeons - known to have been
active in France between the twelfth and the fifteenth century, fewer than
2,000 appear to have studied medicine at (not necessarily obtained a doctorate in medicine from) a university. The situation was similar in Florence,
where the proximity of Bologna presumably ensured a large regional supply
of university-educated practitioners.2 In the century following the black
death, between a third and a little over a half, depending on the decade, of
those who practised medicine or surgery in Florence probably had some university education. And, among university-trained physicians, those who made
teaching in the milieu of the faculties of medicine their main activity were yet
a further minority. For example, of the almost 2,000 practitioners in medieval
France known to have attended a university, 417 are known to have been
regent masters or professors.3
Thus, the physician who had studied medicine at a university faced constant competition both from non-university-trained practitioners of medicine
and surgery and from those who offered various types of spiritual or supernatural remedy for physical afflictions - the latter category of healers including deceased saints.4 Moreover, in the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries those
medical and surgical practitioners who were not educated in the universities
1 Regarding religious attitudes to the body and medicine: J. Agrimi and C. Crisciani, Medicina
del corpo e medicina dell'anima: Note sur sapere dal medico fino all'inizio del secolo XIII
 .
2 K. Park, Doctors and Medicine in Early Renaissance Florence ;
D. Jacquart, he Milieu medical en France du XHe au XVe siecle .
3 Jacquart, Milieu medical, 363, table 1:1; 364, table 2; Park, Doctors and Medicine, 75.
4 Examples in E. C. Gordon, 'Child Health in the Middle Ages as Seen in the Miracles of Five
English Saints, AD 1150-1220', Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 60 , 502-22.
Nancy Siraisi
were by no means all unlearned empirics or illiterate village healers. No
doubt there were many who could be so described; many, too, for whom the
boundaries between medical or surgical practice to gain a living (or a partial
living) and the provision of informal and occasional assistance to neighbours,
family, and friends were by no means clearly defined; and many others who
combined the practice of medicine or minor surgery with one or more of a
variety of other petty trades or crafts.5 Some of these lesser practitioners of
medicine probably did not so much compete with the possessors of medical
degrees as serve a different clientele (one for whom both the fees and the
social and intellectual pretensions of university-educated physicians would
have constituted an insurmountable barrier).
But between the modest forms of medical or surgical activity just outlined
and the learned medicine of the universities was a broad range of intermediate categories. The latter included practitioners of surgery as a skilled and
organized art or craft, and literate (and in some cases literate in Latin) surgeons and medici. In the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries,
important attributes of university students and professors of medicine were
shared by some medici and surgeons outside university circles - notably
knowledge of both ancient and recent medical books (either in Latin or via
the vernacular translations that multiplied in the late Middle Ages) and traditions, and the ability to form or participate in professional associations (in the
shape of guilds and urban medical colleges). And the medical learning cultivated by numerous practitioners among the Jewish communities of Spain,
Provence, and Italy in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries also drew upon
many of the same classical and Islamic sources as the medicine of the universities.6 Thus, although, in terms of both wealth and social status, universityeducated physicians always stood at the top of the medical profession as a
whole,7 medical and surgical practitioners formed outside the universities
included some who had access to considerable educational, economic, and
social resources. Such practitioners were in many respects well equipped to
compete with university-educated physicians for prosperous, and even noble
or royal, patients.
One contemporary comment illustrates both the overlap between some
aspects of the training provided in some of the faculties of medicine and the
kind of knowledge possessed by literate medici and surgeons without university training, and the wide social range of those who involved themselves in
5 M. Pelling, 'Occupational Diversity: Barbersurgeons and the Trades of Norwich', Bulletin of
the History of Medicine, 56 , 484-511 (referring to the sixteenth century).
6 J. Shatzmiller, 'Livres medicaux et education medicale: a propos d'un contrat de Marseille en
1316', Mediaeval Studies, 42 , 463—70; B. Richler, 'Manuscripts of Avicenna's Kanon in
Hebrew Translation; a Revised and Up-to-date List', Koroth, 8 , i45*-68*, lists 106
manuscripts of medieval Hebrew translations of a major Arabic medical work; Jacquart,
Milieu medical (note 2), 380, has identified 331 Jewish medici and 57 Jewish surgeons.
7 For example, Park, Doctors and Medicine (note 2), 152—8.
The faculty of medicine
healing activity broadly considered. Writing in 1363, and recalling the ancient
medical sects described by Galen, the 'surgeon and master of medicine' Guy
de Chauliac expressed the opinion that the people willing to undertake the
care of surgical cases in his own day could be divided into no fewer than five
sects. The first three Guy divided simply on the basis of differences of opinion
on a technical issue: they were the followers of different surgical authors of
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries (all of whom wrote in Latin), and were
divided over the proper treatment of wounds. As the reader will see (p. 381)
some of those among his contemporaries whom Guy placed in these three
categories could have received their training in southern European universities; but other members of these same categories would have been found
among literate, but not university-trained, surgeons. These divisions of surgical opinion are indeed something like sects in the Galenic sense of the term
(although the differences Galen had in mind had philosophical foundations).
However, Guy's fourth and fifth categories invoke social and occupational
differences, as well as differences of opinion: the fourth consisted of German
military men, who placed their confidence in the idea that God had imparted
powers to words, herbs, and stones, and accordingly used incantations as
well as physical care for battle wounds; and in the fifth Guy placed women
and the unlettered, who, according to him, simply invoked God and the
Moreover, it is, of course, unlikely that in the period under consideration
the possessors of medical degrees could ever have been consistently more
successful than any of their various competitors in effecting cures (although it
is equally unlikely that the contrary was the case). It seems probable, too, that
a good many remedies were more or less common to several categories of
practitioner. And, as a practical matter, a measure of mutual accommodation
or cooperation was often unavoidable; for example, in some cities different
categories of practitioners were united in a common medical guild.9 Furthermore, the university-educated physician was not exempt from, indeed
perhaps was especially likely to be the object of, criticisms or judgemental
evaluations of medicine from outside the medical profession. Such criticisms
were sometimes made on the grounds of ineptitude but more usually for such
moral failings as concern for the body rather than the soul, intellectual pretentiousness, and greed.10
8 I cite Guy's remarks from G. de Chauliac, La Grande Chirurgie, ed. E. Nicaise (Paris, 1890),
9 Such was the case in Florence: Park, Doctors and Medicine (note 2), ch. 1.
10 For example, F. Petrarca, Invectiva contra medicum: Testo latino e volgarizzamento di Ser
Domenico Silvestri, ed. P. G. Ricci . There is, however, a long antecedent tradition. Furthermore, moral issues relating to medicine were frequently discussed by theologians
and the authors of swnmae for confessors. These issues included, for example, the maintenance of adequate standards of professional competence considered as a moral responsibility,
the sinfulness of fee-gouging (once agreement as to the legitimacy of charging any fee had been
established, itself a matter of much debate), and the responsibility to treat the poor gratis. For
Nancy Siraisi
The foregoing considerations may explain if they do not excuse the emphasis laid by university-educated physicians on the distinctiveness and superiority of their own learning, and their frequent expressions of hostility and
contempt for other categories of practitioner.
In this context, and under these pressures, the medical faculties of European universities acquired between the thirteenth and the fifteenth centuries
institutional and intellectual characteristics that would continue to influence
medical education well into the early modern period. Not all of those characteristics were positive. The university faculties contributed to the creation
of a medical elite that was on occasion arrogant and self-serving, and to the
devaluation of other healers, especially Jews and women.11 Some historians
of medicine would add to the debits needless elaboration of fundamentally
simple and largely untestable physiological theories and the proliferation of
confused and ill-understood pharmacological terminology.
But the positive accomplishments of medieval academic medicine were
substantial. They included the establishment of durable institutions for providing formal medical education; an insistence upon the validity and status of
human physiology, health, and disease as objects of intellectual enquiry; the
production of a rich, variegated, and complex medical literature; the refinement of a technical vocabulary; the identification of topics of physiological
debate (usually discrepancies among ancient authors), which continued to be
the focus of attention until the time of Harvey; and the creation of an
environment in which the bold innovation of the public dissection of human
cadavers could be legitimized.
ORIGINS, DISTRIBUTION, AND ORGANIZATION OF THE MEDICAL
A faculty of medicine was provided in most of the studia generalia established
before 1500, but major centres of academic medical education were always
few in number. In terms of the chronological and geographical distribution of
such centres the salient facts are the early emergence and early decline of
Salerno (late eleventh to early thirteenth century), and the subsequent predetails and citations: D. W. Amundsen, 'Casuistry and Professional Obligations: the Regulation of Physicians by the Court of Conscience in the Late Middle Ages', Parts I and II, Transactions and Studies of the College of Physicians ofPhiladelphia, 3 , 2.2—39, 93~112- ^n
addition, certain obligations were laid directly on secular physicians by canon law. These were
contained in canon 22 of the fourth Lateran Council of 1215, which was subsequently incorporated in the Decretales: it required practitioners, before providing physical treatment, to urge
their patients to call a priest, and forbade them to recommend any means of recovering
physical health that involved sin - for example, eating meat on a fast-day or illicit sexual
intercourse (for citations and discussion, ibid., 96—7).
11 J. Agrimi and C. Crisciani, 'Medici e "vetulae" dal Duecento al Quattrocento: Problemi di
una ricerca', in Cultura popolare e cultura dotta nel seicento. Atti del Convegno di Studio di
Genova, 2.3—2.5 novembre 1982 , 144—59.
The faculty of medicine
dominance of just three studia: Bologna, Montpellier, and Paris. A fourth,
Padua, the home of medical studies from the thirteenth century, increased in
size and importance in the course of the fifteenth.12 The leading position of
these medical schools (as measured by reputation among contemporaries,
ability to attract students from far away, output of medical writings, presence
of numerous or famous teachers, and, where known, numbers of graduates
with medical degrees) was not challenged in the period before 1500.
Additional studia of medieval foundation attained more than local renown
for medical teaching in the course of the sixteenth century, but they were not
major centres for the study of medicine at an earlier date. This applies as
much to Salamanca, an important university since the thirteenth century, as
to the regional educational centre of Tubingen, still small, struggling, and
recently founded when the fifteenth century ended.13
The difference between the various faculties of medicine lay more in
numbers, reputation, and institutional position than in curriculum. In the
latter, the common heritage of Greek and Islamic medical learning and Aristotelian natural philosophy ensured a good deal of uniformity throughout
Europe. But the intellectual as well as the professional and collegial ambiance
of the various medical faculties varied widely. In all these respects, the experience of the four otherwise obscure doctors of medicine who taught at Poitiers
in the fifteenth century must have been very different from that of the more
than 125 professors (including a number of well-known medical authors) and
promoters of candidates for medical degrees at Padua during the same
period.14 Moreover, the sources of information are richer for the larger and
more celebrated medical faculties and have been combed with more diligence
by historians. Hence, despite the existence of some valuable studies of
medical faculties that were chiefly of local importance,15 medieval university
medicine outside the major centres of medical learning remains relatively
little known. But, although future research on the smaller faculties will round
12 N. G. Siraisi, Arts and Sciences at Padua , ch. 5; T. Pesenti, Professori e
promotori di medicina nello studio di Padova dal 1405 al 1509: Repertorio bio-bibliografico
 .
13 Regarding Salamanca: G. Beaujouan, Manuscrits scientifiques medievaux de Vuniversite de
Salamanque et de ses 'Colegios Mayores\ Bibliotheque de PEcole des Hautes Etudes Hispaniques, 32 , 3, 59-60. Regarding Tubingen: W. Kuhn, Die Studenten der
Universitat Tubingen zwischen 1477 und 1534,2 vols. ; G. Fichtner, 'Padova
e Tubingen: La formazione medica nei secoli XVI e XVII', Ada medicae historiae patavina, 19
 , 43-62.
14 R. Favreau, 'L'universite de Poitiers et la societe poitevine a la fin du Moyen Age', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, 578, no. 71; 580, no. 102; 582, nos. 120 and 121; Pesenti,
Professori (note 12). passim.
15 Examples are F. M. Getz, 'Medicine at Medieval Oxford', in J. I. Catto (ed.), The History of
the University of Oxford, vol. II, Late Medieval Oxford (Oxford, in press); M. Fuiano,
Maestri di medicina e filosofia a Napoli nel Quattrocento ; faculty of Turin: I.
Naso, Medici e strutture sanitarie nella societd tardo-medievale: 11 Piemonte dei secoli XIV e
XV , 111-22.
Nancy Siraisi
out the picture of academic medicine and of the careers of universityeducated physicians, understanding of the goals, methodology, and limitations of medical teaching is best gained from consideration of the most successful schools. These will be the main, though not the exclusive, focus of the
following account.
In one sense, Salerno does not belong in a discussion of the principal medieval university faculties of medicine: formal university organization was not
introduced at Salerno until after the end of the period of its predominance as
a centre of medical education. Yet important features of medieval university
medical teaching took shape at Salerno between the later eleventh and the
early thirteenth century.16
By the eleventh century Salerno was already a place where medical
practitioners (apparently both male and female) gathered and no doubt
taught their successors, informally, orally, and by practical demonstration.
The introduction of an academic and book-oriented emphasis in Salernitan
medicine was the result of a confluence of factors. Access to some of the
medical writings in Latin available in the early Middle Ages no doubt
played a part. This body of material was not negligible, and it should be
stressed that early medieval medicine in western Europe retained, in
however truncated and simplified a form, some textual and pedagogical
elements inherited from classical antiquity.17 Secondly, the geographical
situation and early medieval history of the southern part of the Italian
peninsula provided opportunities for intellectual contact with both the
Greek- and Arabic-speaking worlds. Among the Salernitan clergy, Archbishop Alfanus (d. 1095) actively participated in the adaptation of Greek
medical learning. And the medical translations of Constantinus Africanus
(d. 1087), a monk at nearby Monte Cassino, provided early access to
medical texts by Muslim authors.
In addition to writing various guides to medical practice, twelfth- and early
thirteenth-century Salernitan authors brought together a collection (subsequently known as the articella) of short treatises conveying the rudiments
of Hippocratic and Galenic medicine to serve as a basic curriculum, and
established the practice of teaching by commentary on these texts. The collection as put together in the twelfth century (later other texts were added)
consisted of two Hippocratic treatises, the Aphorisms and the Prognostics, a
brief Galenic treatise known under various titles - Ars medica, Ars parva,
Tegni, or Microtechne - an Arabic introduction to Galenic medicine known
in the Latin West as the Isagoge of Johannitius and short tracts on the main
diagnostic tools of the medieval physician, namely pulse and urine.
16 P. O. Kristeller, Studi sulla Scuola medica salernitana .
17 A. Beccaria, / codici di medicina del periodo presalernitana ; A. Beccaria, 'Sulle
trace di un antico canone latino di Ippocrate e Galeno', Part I, Italia medioevale e utnanistica,
1 , 1-56; Part II, ibid., 4 , 1-75; Part III, ibid., 14 , 1-23.
The faculty of medicine
The association of medicine with natural philosophy was also emphasized
at Salerno; Salernitan masters were among the earliest Latin writers to reflect
Aristotelian influence; and the well-known 'Salernitan questions' mingled
medical and general scientific topics.18
Salernitan, Arab, and Jewish influences have at various times each been
posited by historians as sources of the early development of medicine at
Montpellier.19 Giles of Corbeil (c. 1140-c. 1224), who was born in northern
France, studied in Salerno, spent some time in Montpellier (where he became
involved in acrimonious controversy with the Montpellier masters), and at
the end of his life taught medicine and served as a royal physician in Paris, provides one example of personal, if infelicitous, contact between Salernitan
academic medicine and the schools of Montpellier.20 In general, however,
evidence of knowledge of Salernitan and Arab medicine among Montpellier
masters is to be ascribed to their study of written works. And, although, as
already noted, Jewish practitioners played a significant role in medieval European medicine, at Montpellier as elsewhere members of the Jewish medical
community were excluded from teaching in the faculty of medicine, once this
took institutional shape.
Montpellier seems to have become known as a centre of medical activity
by about the middle of the twelfth century. Medical teaching was being
carried on there before the century's end. Medical masters and students at
Montpellier were already organized into a university in 1220, when they were
the recipients of a set of statutes granted by the papal legate. The earliest
surviving written exposition of a medical textbook by a Montpellier master
appears to be the commentary on the medical Isagoge of Johannitius (one of
the works included in the articella) by Henry of Winchester, who flourished
in 1239—40. A papal bull of 1289 recognized Montpellier as a studium generale, where a licence conveying the ius ubique docendi might be obtained in
canon and civil law, in arts, and in medicine.21
Medicine emerged as a major discipline at Paris in approximately the same
period as at Montpellier. A list of medical books read at Paris has been
18 R. M. Thomson,' "Liber Marii de dementis": The Work of a Hitherto Unknown Salernitan
Master?' Viator, 3 , 179-89; Marius, On the Elements, ed. and trans. R. C. Dales ; A. Birkenmajer, 'Le role joue par les medicins et les naturalistes dans la
reception d'Aristote au XHe et XHIe siecles', in A. Birkenmajer, Etudes d'histoire des sciences
et de la philosophie du Moyen Age. Studie Copernicana 1 ,
73-87; B. Lawn (ed.) The Prose Salernitan Questions .
19 L. Dulieu, La Medicine a Montpellier, vol. I, Le Moyen Age (n.p., n.d. ) provides a
narrative history; there are numerous documents pertaining to the faculty of medicine in
Cartulaire de VJJniversite de Montpellier
..., vol. I, 1181-1400
(Montpellier, 1890).
20 For a summary of his career, and bibliography: E. Wickersheimer, Dictionnaire
hiographique
des medicins en France au moyen age, vol. I , 196-7, and its Supplement, ed.
D. Jacquart , 90-1
21 Cartulaire (note 19), 180-223, doc. 2; 210-13, doc. 20. M. R. McVaugh, 'An Early Discussion
of Medicinal Degrees at Montpellier by Henry of Winchester', Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 49 , 57-71-
Nancy Siraisi
ascribed to Alexander Neckam, who studied there from about 1175 until
about 1182.22 The oldest traces of medical teaching in an organized faculty
date from 1213; statutes listing books to be studied by candidates for a Parisian licence in medicine were issued between 1270 and 1274.23
The presence of physicians, surgeons, and medical students at Bologna is
attested during the first two decades of the thirteenth century. In the second
half of the thirteenth century, several notable Latin treatises on surgery were
written by surgeons who practised at Bologna, but who were not, as far as is
known, part of an organized medical faculty engaged in public teaching. The
organization of medical masters and students into academic corporations had
probably taken place by the 1260s. The first recorded public laurea (degree) in
medicine, following examination by a group of masters, was awarded in
1268. Tax and other privileges were extended to medical masters and
students by the city government between 1274 and 1288.24 Among Bologna,
Padua, and other less celebrated centres of medical learning that multiplied in
northern Italy from about the mid-thirteenth century, there developed a fairly
constant circulation of medical faculty, so that it is probably unwise to attribute ideas exclusively to any one of these schools. However, there appear to
have been real differences of opinion between the medical teachers of Salerno
and those of Bologna (for example, as regards the proper treatment of
The development of philosophical and Aristotelian aspects (already
present, as we have seen, in the medicine of Salerno to some extent) in north
Italian academic medicine was of course stimulated by the general growth of
philosophical studies in Italian schools; however, in the context of the nascent
faculties of medicine such interests may to some extent have been fostered by
influences from Paris as well as by local factors. It is at any rate worth noting
that Petrus Hispanus (Pope John XXI, d. 1277), a major logical as well as
medical author, studied at Paris and subsequently taught medicine in Siena
from 1245 to 1250. The almost equally celebrated Peter of Abano (d. 1316)
returned to teach medicine, philosophy, and astrology at Padua after some
years at Paris. Perhaps more importantly Peter of Abano incorporated the
fruits of his Parisian study and, apparently, teaching of those subjects into a
work that retained an influence in the Italian schools for centuries, namely his
22 C. H. Haskins, 'A List of Text-books from the Close of the Twelfth Century', in C. H.
Haskins, Studies in the History of Mediaeval
Science, 2nd edn ,
356—76, with medical books listed on 374-5- The dates given for Neckam's stay in Paris are,
however, those suggested in R. W. Hunt, The Schools and the Cloister: the life and Writings of
(1156—1217), ed. and rev. M.Gibson .
23 Jacquart, Milieu medical (note 2), 68; CUP, vol. I, 517, no. 416; D. Jacquart, 'La reception du
Canon d'Avicenne: Comparaison entre Montpellier et Paris au XHIe et XlVe siecles', in
Histoire de Vecole me'dicale de Montpellier.
Actes du noe Congres National
des Societes
Savantes , vol. II , 69—77.
24 N. G. Siraisi, Taddeo
and His Pupils , 13-24.
The faculty of medicine
Conciliator of the Differences of the Philosophers and, Especially, the Physicians.25
As with other aspects of academic institutionalization, the organization of
the faculty of medicine differed at Paris, Montpellier, and Bologna. At Paris,
the faculty of medicine consisted of a group of teaching masters. At Montpellier, the separate university of medicine seems in the thirteenth century to
have included both professors and students.26 The arrangements at Bologna,
and similarly at Padua and other southern European studia, consisted of a
doctoral college and a student university, each of which conjoined arts and
medicine. The doctoral college was an association, restricted in number and
limited to Bolognese citizens, which included both senior professors of medicine in the studium and physicians practising in the town. By contrast, the
university of arts and medicine was an association of students who were not
of Bolognese origin.
SOCIAL AND
ECONOMIC ASPECTS
Regardless of the differences in their internal organization, the medical professoriates of Paris, Bologna, and Montpellier all represented the summit of
the medical profession. Although the social origins of this medical elite were
as a rule more modest than those of lawyers of equivalent achievement or
professors of theology, senior professors of medicine in the great centres of
medical education were citizens of substance. Frequently, they either came
from or established families whose members included other successful practitioners and/or medical professors. Their incomes came primarily from practice (particularly the patronage of wealthy individuals) and to a lesser extent
from student fees, but also from public sources, including in some cases
ecclesiastical benefices.27
In Italy, where medical teaching in the universities was an occupation in
which married laymen predominated, a few publicly salaried medical professorships were provided at an early date. At Bologna a professor oiphysica
(medicine) was on the public pay-roll in 1305; and a professor of medical
25 For the development of Aristotelian philosophy in Italy: P. Marangon, Alle origini
dell'Aristotelismo padovano (sec. XII-XIII)
 . On Petrus Hispanus (John XXI) as a medical
author and influence: Jacquart (ed.) (note 20), 2.32.-6; E. Paschetto, Pietro d'Abano,
filosofo , for Peter's biography, and bibliography of manuscripts and editions
of the Conciliator
differentiarum
philosophorum
et precipue
medicorum.
26 *... de communi consensu et consilio . . . Universitatis medicorum,
tarn doctorum quam discipulorum,
Montispessulani...,'
In Cartulaire
(note 19), 181, doc. 2, medical statutes (1220).
27 For example, a good many of the documents pertaining to medical masters in A. Moreira de
Sa (ed.), Chartularium universitatisportugalensis (1288-1537), vols. I—VIII ,
either request or confer benefices: see vol. I, 151, doc. 134 (1345); vol. II, 80-2, docs. 663-4
(1415): vol. II, 125-6, doc. 689 (1418); vol. II, 154-6, docs. 713-15 (1418); and many others
Nancy Siraisi
practica was receiving a municipal salary in 1324. At Cologne and the other
newer universities of northern Europe, salaries for medical as for other professors were provided at the time of or very soon after foundation.28 In medicine as in other faculties, the provision of salaried professorial chairs by local
municipalities or territorial rulers tended to strengthen both the ties of the
professors to authorities outside the studium and the control of those
authorities over the academic community. At Bologna the medical professoriate was an integral part of the same citizen class which, at different times,
either controlled a communal government, or retained much influence at the
lower levels of signorial administration. The senior teaching position in
medicine were reserved for Bolognese citizens, a privilege jealously guarded
by the college of medical doctors (who also legislated favourable terms of
admission to the college for relatives of members). Non-Bolognese graduates
in medicine at Bologna were obliged to swear not to attempt to lecture in the
morning hours when the principal or 'ordinary' lectures were given.29 In
studia in regions under the rule of territorial princes or signori, ties between
an academic faculty of medicine and a princely court sometimes developed, in
that a physician who was in personal attendance on a ruler might also occupy
a professorial chair. Princely patronage, was, for example, probably a major
factor in the development of the studium of Ferrara as a centre of medical
humanism in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth century. And the provision
of a medical teacher for the University of Aberdeen in the early sixteenth
century was possible only when the position was combined with that of royal
physician.30
The principal medical faculties occupied positions of importance in the
public sphere, as well as within the academic community. They were used by
public authorities (royal, noble, ecclesiastical, or municipal) as guarantors of
medical standards, sources of medical information, and a reservoir of reliable
practitioners. Thus, at Paris, Montpellier, and elsewhere, the faculty of medicine acquired the right and responsibility of examining and licensing all
medical practitioners in the city.31 At Bologna, where a surgeon was already
maintained on the municipal pay-roll in 1214, the public provision of medical
or surgical treatment for the citizens antedated the appearance of academic
medical corporations. But, shortly after a formally organized faculty of medi-
28 Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 21, and bibliography there cited; Rashdall, Universities,
255-6, 282.
29 C. Malagola (ed.), Statutidelle
Vniversitdedei
Collegidello
Studio bolognese (Bologna, 1880),
430-2, 466 (doctoral college statutes of 1378).
30 G. Pardi, Lo studio di Ferrara nei secoli XVe e XVIe , 85, referring to the 1530s
to 15 50s, notes the close association between the principal medical professors and the ducal
court. R. French, 'Medical Teaching in Aberdeen: From the Foundation of the University to
the Middle of the Seventeenth Century', History of Universities,
3 , 127-8.
31 P. Kibre, 'The Faculty of Medicine at Paris, Charlatanism and Unlicensed Medical Practice in
the Later Middle Ages', Bulletin of the History of Medicine, zj , 1—2.0 Cartulaire (note
19), 185-6, doc. 4 (1239); 234-5, doc. 33 (1316).
The faculty of medicine
cine appeared, professors of medicine from the studium were being called
upon to provide expert medico-legal opinions for the civic authorities; by
the first decade of the fourteenth century the public service asked of these
professors on occasion included the performance of autopsies.32 The
most famous example of a request by a governmental authority for the
expert opinion of a medical faculty is doubtless the solicitation of a report
on the causes of the Black Death from the Paris faculty by King Philip VI in
Medical students at each of the major centres of medical education came
primarily from the surrounding region, but also from all over Europe. For
example, of the university men active in the diocese of Liege before 1350,
those known to have studied medicine and whose place of study is known all
went to Paris, Bologna, or Montpellier.34 Moreover, the establishment of
universities in the German lands in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries did
not diminish the ability of Bologna and Padua to attract German medical
students in significant numbers. If anything, the foundation of German and
eastern European universities may have widened the pool from which the
Italian medical schools drew. Ambitious medical students could now complete the necessary preliminaries in arts and the first part of their medical
studies locally (and inexpensively), and then cross the Alps to a more prestigious institution for the final stages of medical education and graduation.35
Some medical students (like some masters) were at least partially supported by ecclesiastical benefices, since a significant proportion of universityeducated medical practitioners were members of the secular clergy, especially
in northern Europe.36 It is perhaps necessary to state that the existence of
clerical medical practitioners, professors, and students did not contravene
ecclesiastical law. A canon promulgated in 1163 merely prohibited monks
and canons regular from leaving their religious communities in order to travel
to study in secular medical schools , 257—71; L. Munster, 'Alcuni episodi sconsosciuti o poco noti sulla vita e sulP attivita
di Bartolomeo da Varignana', Castalia: Kivista di storia delta medicina,
10 , 207—15.
33 Described in A. M. Campbell, The Black Death and Men of Learning
 , 14-17.
34 C. Renardy, Le Monde des Mattres universitaires
du diocese de Liege 1140—1350 ,
35 Ultramontane scholars earned 30-40 per cent of all the degrees awarded at Padua for much of
the fifteenth century: R. Ohl, T h e University of Padua 1405-1509: an International Community of Students and Professors', Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania, 1980, 59—61.
36 For France: Jacquart, Milieu medical
(note 2), 380, table 15, shows that, of 342 medical
students or masters whose status can be identified, 128 were married, 13 were regular clergy,
and 201 were secular clergy. These figures include Montpellier, which had many married laity
in the medical community.
Nancy Siraisi
categories of clergy). Medical knowledge and practice as such were never
forbidden to the clergy, and expertise in these areas was no bar to a highly
successful clerical career (Petrus Hispanus being a notable case in point). In
any case, in 1298 the canons in question were in part rescinded and in part
modified into the reasonable requirement that members of religious orders
seek permission before leaving their communities to study medicine.37
Practitioners trained at the most prestigious studia for medicine found
positions all over Europe. One example is provided by Master Pancius of
Lucca. In his homeland, Master Pancius was modestly successful. Probably
educated in medicine at Bologna, as a young man he became personal physician there to his compatriot the bishop and surgical writer Theodoric of
Lucca, a Dominican. He also took some part in academic medical debate,
since one of his opinions was subsequently quoted by the well-known medical
commentator Gentile da Foligno (d. 1348). In England, however, Pancius was
able to translate this respectable but hardly distinguished record into a richly
rewarded position as household physician, general factotum, and moneylender to King Edward II and King Edward III, which he held from 1317 until
his death in 1340.38 In the later fourteenth and the fifteenth centuries faculties
of medicine in the new universities provided teaching opportunities in their
homelands for northern European graduates of Paris, Montpellier, and the
Italian studia.
The total number of those who taught and studied medicine at Paris,
Bologna, Montpellier, and Padua between the thirteenth and the fifteenth
century cannot be recovered. Moreover, although it is clear that levels of
population in the medical faculties were from time to time affected by general
demographic trends, by local or regional political crises, and by the attraction
of a famous teacher, the effect of these factors and their interaction on either
numbers or quality was seldom simple or obvious.
One can, however, arrive at some idea of the relative size of the student
body in these medical faculties at different times, as compared with one
another, with other faculties in the same stadium, and with other studia.
Thus of 1,681 practitioners in France before 1500 whose university affiliation
is known, 1,008 went to Paris, 376 to Montpellier, and 297 to other studia. In
France, the number of university medical students seems to have peaked in
the second half of the fourteenth and first half of the fifteenth century, a fact
which suggests that generalizations about the effect of the Black Death on the
medical profession should be approached with caution. At Bologna, between
1419 and 1434, sixty-five degrees in medicine and one in surgery were
37 For citations and discussion: D. W. Amundsen, 'Medieval Canon Law on Medical and Surgical Practice by the Clergy', Bulletin
of the History of Medicine,
52 , 22-44.
38 Sarti and Fattorini, De professoribus
(note 32), 235 (will of Theodoric of Lucca); Gentile da
Foligno, Questions
et tractatus
extravagantes
... (Venice, 1520), question 46, fol. 6^r; C. H.
Talbot and E. A. Hammond, The Medical Practitioners in Medieval England: a Biographical
Register , 234-7.
The faculty of medicine
awarded (figures that cannot necessarily be extrapolated to other periods of
that studium's medieval history). By contrast, Turin (founded 1404) granted
only thirteen medical degrees between 1426 and 1462, while in the entire
period from its foundation in 1477 until 1534 the University of Tubingen
granted thirty-five doctorates in medicine.39
These figures clearly imply that even in schools such as Montpellier and
Bologna, which were famous for their medical teaching the number of
medical students present at any one time was not very large. None the less, it
deserves to be emphasized that the ratio of medical students to medical
degrees awarded was probably always high. A full medical course took four
or five years; but it is also necessary to allow for those - and they were
apparently numerous - who abandoned their medical studies before graduation or completed them at another studium. And the population attending
medical lectures may have been swelled by students or teachers in other
faculties who had a secondary interest in medicine.
Similar uncertainties prevail with regard to the numbers of teaching
masters and distribution of courses. For example, the names of numerous
medical masters who taught at Bologna during the thirteenth and first half of
the fourteenth century are, of course, known from their writings, and from
scattered university documents and other records. But systematic records of
teaching positions held and courses offered started to appear only with the
introduction of the practice of issuing an official rotulus, or list of professors
and courses, for each academic year; this practice began in the latter part of
the fourteenth century, but only scattered examples survive from before the
fifteenth century.40 And, even for the period after the practice of issuing rotuli
became customary, it seems likely that, in addition to the professors recorded
in the rotuli who lectured publicly on the books in the official medical curriculum, some others may from time to time have taught medicine or surgery
briefly, informally, or privately.
The largest community (and probably one unprecedented in size) of
medical students and professors in Europe before 1500 may have been that in
mid-fifteenth-century Padua. At Padua, the number of medical degrees
awarded rose from four in 1407 to eight in 1434, to nine (two of these being in
surgery) in 1450. The award of eight or nine degrees in medicine in a given
year may imply a medical student body of around one hundred. This estimate
is roughly confirmed by the facts that in 1457 the total number of students in
all faculties at Padua is known to have been 800, and that in 1450, when nine
39 Jacquart, Milieu medical (note 2), 364, table 3; 365, table 4. C. Piana, 'Lauree in arti e medicina conferite a Bologna negli anni 1419—1434', in C. Piana, Nuove ricerche sulle Uniuersitd di
Bologna e di Parma , 110-74; Kuhn, Studenten der Universitat
(note 13), 35; Naso, Medici e strutture sanitarie (note 15), 114.
40 The Bologna rotuli are edited in U. Dallari (ed.), / rotuli dei lettori e artisti dello
Bolognese dal 1384 al 1799, 3 vols. (Bologna, 1889).
Nancy Siraisi
medical and surgical degrees were awarded, the total number of degrees was
ninety-three.41
Light of a different kind is thrown on the relative position of the major
centres of university medical education if one attempts to compare not
numbers of degrees or of students but contributions to medical learning. Collectively, the faculties of medicine contributed a large proportion of the
written output of late medieval medicine since university-educated physicians, and, in particular, professors of medicine, were naturally far more
likely than other medical or surgical practitioners to write books. Montpellier, which apparently trained many fewer practitioners than Paris, was the
affiliation of a larger number of medical authors.42 Medical writers associated
with the north Italian studia, collectively considered, probably outnumbered
authors from Montpellier. At any rate, this is the case if one uses as a measure
commentaries on the Hippocratic works most widely studied in the universities, namely the Aphorisms, Prognostics, and De regimine acutorum.
Moreover, Montpellier authors were most productive of these commentaries
in about the half-century turning on the year 1300, whereas the output by Italian
medical writers continued in the later fourteenth and the fifteenth century.43
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE MEDICAL FACULTY AND OTHER
Yet another difference among studia lay in relations between the medical
faculty and other faculties. The relations with the faculty of law chiefly
involved institutional organization and rivalries in the southern European
studia (see chapter 12). In Paris and other northern studia, the presence of
faculties of theology facilitated the combination of studies in medicine and in
theology by some scholars,44 but otherwise seems to have affected medicine
only indirectly, via the influence of the faculty of theology on the faculty of
arts. It is also sometimes suggested that the absence of theological faculties in
the north Italian studia during the formative years of the faculties of medicine
had the effect of leaving arts and philosophy free to develop in particularly
close association with medicine, and that this state of affairs may have
fostered the development of particular attitudes and interests within those
disciplines.
Unquestionably, the most important relation of the faculty of medicine was
41 Ohl, University of Padua (note 35), 46; G. Zonta and G. Bronto (eds.), Ada graduum academicorum gymnasii patavini ab anno 1406 ad annum 1450, 2nd edn , vol. I, 3—4,
312—28; vol. II, 312—34.
42 Jacquart, Milieu medical (note 2), 390, table 28.
43 Based on a survey of the commentaries on these works by known authors of the thirteenth to
the fifteenth centuries in P. Kibre, Hippocrates
latinus: Repertorium
of Hippocratic
in the Latin Middle Ages .
44 Jacquart, Milieu medical (note 2), 393, table 32.
The faculty of medicine
with the faculty of arts. This relation, unlike those with the other higher
faculties, had to do with the content as well as the institutional context of
medical learning. And the contrary may also have sometimes been the case, in
the sense that concepts or information from medical sources were from time
to time adopted in philosophical arguments.
Venerable truisms, repeated by university medical writers, asserted that all
the liberal arts and natural philosophy were necessary for medicine.45 This
belief, as well as institutional history and convenience, underlay the arrangements linking arts and medicine in a single university and a single doctoral
college at Bologna, Padua, and elsewhere. At Montpellier, the expectation
that a medical student should be competent in arts was made explicit by a
provision in the statutes of 1240, and the papal bull of 1309 to the effect that
students already proficient in arts could complete their medical studies in a
shorter period than those lacking such preparation.46
Moreover, competence in Latin and some command of logic, astrology,
and natural philosophy were a practical preparation for the kind of medical
education provided in the universities. The study of medical authorities
demanded Latin literacy. The substantiation of the frequently reiterated
claims that medicine was rational and could offer some certain knowledge
required, in the context of contemporary notions of reasoning and of scientific certitude, the ability to handle logical demonstrations. The stars were
universally believed to influence human health and sickness. And a knowledge of natural philosophy was pertinent to medicine considered as descriptive of a natural entity, namely the human body.47 Furthermore, among the
principal medical studia, not only Paris, but also Bologna and Padua
flourished as centres of advanced teaching in arts and philosophy.
There can be no question that the leading medical writers, particularly
those who produced commentaries, had extensive training in logic, astrology,
and natural philosophy. A few of them - Peter of Abano (d. c. 1316) is a
celebrated example - had a command of these subjects equal to that of any of
their colleagues in other faculties, along with a pronounced interest in philosophical questions. Many others whose treatment of philosophical issues was
abbreviated or routine none the less displayed in their writings extensive
familiarity with the libri naturales of Aristotle and competence in handling
syllogistic reasoning.48
45 For example, Peter of Abano, Conciliator
 , fols. 3v~4r; C. B. Schmitt, 'Aristotle Among the Physicians', in A. Wear, R. K.
French, and I. M. Lonie (ed.) The Medical Renaissance of the Sixteenth Century , 1-15.
46 Cartulaire (note 19), 187, doc. 5: 357, doc. 68, section 51.
47 P. Kibre, 'Arts and Medicine in the Universities of the Later Middle Ages', in Universities in
the Late Middle Ages, 213—27.
48 N. G. Siraisi, 'Pietro d'Abano and Taddeo Alderotti: Two Models of Medical Culture',
2 , 139-62.
Nancy Siraisi
When one turns to look at the teaching careers of medical masters in the
major studia, a similar picture emerges. Of fourteen doctors involved in
drawing up a set of statutes for the medical branch of the Bologna College of
Doctors of Arts and Medicine in 1378, seven are recorded as having degrees
in philosophy as well as medicine, and five are known to have taught logic
and natural philosophy as well as medicine. Indeed, a common career pattern
in the Italian schools was to teach arts while studying medicine. Furthermore,
it is evident that a substantial proportion of the graduates in medicine from
Italian studia also obtained degrees in arts. Thus of the sixty-five medical
graduates at Bologna between 1419 and 1434, thirty-one already had degrees
in arts at the time of their graduation in medicine, and two more took arts
and medical degrees simultaneously.49
It by no means follows either that individuals always or even customarily
obtained their arts and medical degrees from the same institution, or that, in
studia organized with a university and doctoral college of arts and medicine,
arts and medical studies were integrated. On the contrary, students often
moved from one studium to another, and the importance in their own right of
the philosophy schools of early fourteenth-century Bologna and fifteenthcentury Padua is well known.50 But the medical and the arts faculties in these
centres evidently supported one another in terms of attracting and providing
for students and teachers. In particular, the provision of astrology teaching
was probably encouraged by the need to instruct medical students in this
subject. Thus, the lectures on the Sphere of Sacrobosco, an elementary textbook of cosmology, given at Bologna in the early 1320s by the famous (and
unfortunate) astrologer Cecco d'Ascoli were prefaced by a justification of the
value of astrology for medical studies.51
Further evidence for the arts studies of university-educated physicians is
provided by the facts that a number of them wrote on subjects other than
medicine, served as general (not exclusively medical) advisers to rulers or
nobles, or associated with literary or humanistic authors. Some famous
examples are the Montpellier medical master Arnald of Villanova (d. 1311),
who wrote extensively on spiritual and ecclesiastical reform and served the
crown of Aragon in a political as well as a medical capacity; Giovanni de
Dondi, professor of medicine at Padua, designer and builder of a celebrated
astronomical clock, and friend and correspondent of Petrarch; and Michele
Savonarola (d. after 1466), one time professor of medicine at Padua, author
of a humanistic work in praise of that city and its outstanding citizens, and
49 Malagola (ed.), Statuti (note 29), 425, 448; Piana, 'Lauree in arti e medicina' (note 39). A
similar pattern is suggested by the writings of some northern authors, for example, Bartholomaeus of Bruges (on whom see Jacquart (ed.), Supplement
(note 20), 38).
50 A. Poppi (ed.), Scienza e filosofia all'universitd di Padova nel Quattrocento , 344-6 •
The faculty of medicine
subsequently physician and education adviser to Leonello and thereafter to
Borso d'Este, rulers of Ferrara.52
In sum, membership of the elite among university-trained physicians
implied substantial preparation in arts. Nevertheless, a modest grounding in
arts disciplines and a minimal interest in them probably characterized other
university-trained medical practitioners. For example, those who received
their entire education at one of the small German universities presumably
took only an arts course taught at an elementary level to very young students.
Doubtless, too, many university-trained practitioners studied arts or philosophy only to the minimum extent necessary for medical professional purposes, and retained no interest in those subjects once their education was
MEDICAL CURRICULA AND THE CONTENT OF MEDICAL LEARNING
By the time medical faculties were established in studia generalia, the corpus
of medical texts of Greek and Islamic origin available for study in Latin was
substantial. To the various early medieval translations and the output of Constantinus Africanus already referred to had been added in the twelfth century
the translations of medical books from Arabic produced by Gerard of
Cremona and his circle and from Greek by Burgundio of Pisa. Hence, Latin
versions existed of more than forty treatises circulating under the name of
Hippocrates and of a considerably large body of material attributed to Galen,
as well as of Dioscorides' Materia medica.53 Major works of Islamic origin
(to a considerable extent Galenic in their content) included, in addition to the
Canon of Avicenna (al-Husain b. Abdallah Ibn Sina), other encyclopedic
treatments of medicine by Haly Abbas (Ali b. al-Abbas al-Magusi), and Rasis
(ar-Razi), as well as a work on surgery by Albucasis (Abu al-Qasim Halaf b.
Abbas az-Zahrawi).54
The Hippocratic and Galenic material in circulation included treatises attri-
52 Arnald's career is summarized in M. R. McVaugh (ed.), Arnaldi de Villanova
omnia, vol. II, Aphorismi
de gradibus , 76-7. F. Petrarca, Seniles,
book XII: Pesenti, Professori e promotori
(note 12), 186-96, provides a bio-bibliography of
Michele Savonarola.
53 Kibre, Hippocrates
latinus (note 43), which, however, includes but does not usually distinguish medieval spuria. No comprehensive list of medieval Latin Galenic manuscripts has yet
been published, but much information is found in R. J. Durling, 'Corrigenda and Addenda to
Diels' Galenica', parts 1 and 2, Traditio, 23 , 463—76, and 37 , 461-76, and in index
entries s.v. Galen in L. Thorndike and P. Kibre, A Catalogue oflncipits
of Medieval
Scientific
Writings in Latin, 2nd edn. . J . M . Riddle, 'Dioscorides', in P . O .
Kristeller and F.E. Cranz (eds.), in Catalogus translationum et commentariorum: Medieval
and Renaissance Latin Translations and Commentaries, vol. IV ,
54 H. Schipperges, 'Die Assimilation der arabischen Medizin durch das lateinische Mittelalter',
Sudhoffs Archiv fur Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschaften, 3 (special issue)
Nancy Siraisi
buted to Hippocrates in antiquity and a number of authentic works of Galen.
Access to an additional important treatise of Galen was provided by the
translation into Latin of De usu partium directly from Greek in the early
fourteenth century; and, at the very end of the period with which we are
concerned, the endeavours of medical humanists opened a new phase of
translation of ancient medical works. But the medieval Latin Hippocrates and
Galen were incomplete, especially as regards Galen's major anatomical
treatises (for example, De anatomicis administrationibus was first translated
into Latin in the sixteenth century), and were contaminated by late spuria,
such as the allegedly Hippocratic work on medical astrology. Furthermore,
students of medicine learned ancient medical ideas only partially through
direct consultation of the longer treatises of ancient authors; a large role was
also played by highly abbreviated or aphoristic treatises, by compendia, and
by the mediation of the Arabic medical encyclopedias. Arabic medical works
were valued not only for their synthesis of ancient medicine, but also for their
independent contributions to treatment and to herbal pharmacology.
However, the Arabo-Latin translations both of works of Greek origin from
Arabic versions, and of works originally written in Arabic, sometimes presented problems as regards the comprehension of pharmacological vocabulary, problems only partially solved by the compilation of volumes of medical
synonima.55
Although learned medical writers were familiar with material in all the
categories mentioned above, and with much else besides, not all of it was the
subject of regular lectures in the studia. Lists of books officially prescribed for
medical lectures at Montpellier and Bologna show a curriculum of courses on
works in the articella collection, which continued to supply the pedagogical
need for brief statements of fundamental concepts; on up to a dozen or more
longer works of Galen; and on selections from Arabic writers, notably
Avicenna.56 The cycle of lectures does not appear to have been arranged in
order of ascending difficulty, but certain books none the less functioned as
basic texts. These were the brief Galenic compendium known as the Tegni,
Microtechne, or Ars parva, the Hippocratic Aphorisms, and sections of the
Canon. The parts of the Canon regularly used as textbooks for university
lectures contained a synopsis of physiology (book I, part i), a treatise on
fevers (book IV, part i), principles of disease and treatment (book I, part 4),
55 G. Beaujouan, 'Fautes et obscurites dans les traductions medicales du Moyen Age', Revue de
3rd series, 89 , 145—52; D. Goltz, 'Studien zur Geschichte der Mineralnamen in
Pharmazie, Chemie und Medizin von den Anfangen bis Paracelsus', Sudhoffs
Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschaften,
14 (special issue) , 32.3—33.
56 Cartulaire
(note 29), 220, doc. 25 (1309); 347—8, doc. 68, sections 20 and 21 (1340); Malagola
(ed.), Statuti (note 29), 274—7 (1405). Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 96—106, shows that most of
the works listed in the 1405 statutes were already being studied at Bologna in the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century.
The faculty of medicine
and diseases from head to toe (book III). The writings of Rasis on diseases
also frequently served as the basis of lectures.57
The exposition of the Ars, the Aphorisms, and the Canon was hence a
major task of late medieval medical masters; its central role explains the
prevalence of written commentaries on these works, although it is difficult to
determine how closely such commentaries resemble the original lectures. The
commentary tradition also suggests that university lectures on the longer and
more specialized works of Galen assigned by statute were given most frequently during the half-century divided by 1300, and less often thereafter. Yet
patterns of citation in other works leave no doubt that these books continued
to be studied.
As the last example shows, statutory lists of books and lectures tell only
part of the story of academic medical education. The prescribed public
lectures and other exercises were supplemented by 'extraordinary' lectures on
works chosen by the master, and by private teaching and study. Moreover,
antedating and surviving the information of relatively impersonal and sometimes mutually adversarial academic corporations of medical teachers and
students was another kind of relationship: that of an individual practitioner
and a younger socius who was his master's pupil, assistant, apprentice, and
potential successor. At Bologna, the surgeon Ugo of Lucca (/?. 1214) passed
on his skill to a select, closed circle of younger relatives or apprentices; at
Montpellier, the oldest regulations referring to a medical university (1220)
required each student to choose a master, and penalized attempts to lure a
scholar away from his master.58
The length of the medical course varied: at Montpellier the statutes of 1240
provided that the status of bachelor of medicine should be attained by a
student not already proficient in arts after three and a half years of study and
six months of practice outside Montpellier; the papal bull of 1309 fixed the
entire course of study at six years for students not previously proficient in arts
(five years for those who were), and extended the practice to eight months or
two summers. At Bologna, the statutes of the university of arts and medicine,
issued in 1405, provided for three years each of philosophy and astrologia and
four years each of medicina and (medical) practica, that is, lectures on books
about particulars of disease and treatment.59 All these subjects are treated
under a single rubric of the statutes, all presumably being regarded as pertaining to medical students. No doubt at least some of the courses in the different
subjects could be taken concurrently. In medicine as in other disciplines, the
57 This and following remarks about the distribution of commentaries on different medical
works are based on the manuscript listings in Thorndike and Kibre, Catalogue
(note 53).
58 Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 14—15; Cartulaire
(note 19), 181—2, doc. 2.
59 Cartulaire
(note 19), 187, doc. 5 (1240); 220, doc. 25 (1309); Malagola (ed.), Statuti
(note 29),
Nancy Siraisi
requirements for graduation were hearing lectures on prescribed books, participation in disputation, and success in oral examination.
The curriculum was geared toward training practitioners, for practice was
the acknowledged goal of university medical education. All university teachers of medicine trained students who would practise, and most professors
were also practitioners themselves - often successful and highly rewarded
ones. It is doubtless true, however, that the practice of some leading professors of medicine was largely consultative, and that those university-trained
physicians who could afford to do so tended to delegate some forms of
physical intervention to assistants. But for lay physicians, including university
professors, practice of some kind was an economic necessity, since it was
their most lucrative source of legitimate income. The frank admission of
Taddeo Alderotti (d. 1295), one of the most celebrated medical professors of
Bologna, that he had temporarily suspended writing commentaries in favour
of lucrative operatio merely made explicit the main source of the substantial
wealth revealed by his will. The term operatio is especially revealing, as
Taddeo distinguished carefully between practica, or knowledge about practice, and operatio, actual treatment.60 The topics most frequently treated in
the medical writings produced in the ambience of the studia were regimen,
symptoms, disease, and remedies (chiefly medication and phlebotomy).
Moreover, university education in practical medicine involved not merely
the study of texts about diseases, remedies, and so on, but also such requirements and opportunities as a period spent in actual practice before graduation (as already noted, obligatory at Montpellier from 1240), the study of
collections of consilia describing individual cases, and attendance upon a
senior professor and practitioner when he visited patients. As is well known,
medieval university medical students also attended anatomical demonstrations on the human cadaver. At Bologna, dissections were openly held by
1316; at Montpellier annual or biennial dissections were provided for by
statute in 1340. Infrequent official dissections were on occasion supplemented
by clandestine private dissection.61 In university medical education, the object
of dissection was to familiarize the student with the gross anatomy of the
internal organs, rather than to teach him either how to dissect (although in at
least one fourteenth-century private dissection the students actually participated) or how to perform surgical operations.
The position of surgery differed in different studia. As is well known,
surgeons were excluded from the faculty of medicine at Paris, where relations
between physicians and surgeons were marked by mutual rivalry and denigration. Henry de Mondeville (d. after 1316), a learned surgeon who served
the French royal court, taught in Paris, but not in the faculty of medicine of
60 Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 27-39, 121-2, and bibliography there cited.
61 Cartulaire (note 19), 334, doc. 68, section 13. Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 110-13, summarizes
the early history of anatomical dissection at Bologna and indicates bibliography.
The faculty of medicine
the studium. Henry was the author of a Latin book on surgery, which,
although it owed much to his own studies of school medical authors, was as
dismissive of learned physicians as of ignorant surgeons. His attitude to the
former is summed up in his remark that God himself had frequently acted as
a surgeon (when he made Eve from Adam's rib, and when Jesus made clay to
anoint the eyes of a blind man), but that the Scripture nowhere recorded that
the Lord engaged in the characteristic medical activities of feeling the pulse
and inspecting urine.62 Yet Henry himself had studied and given lectures (not
necessarily publicly in the studium) at Montpellier, with medical students
among his audience.
As Guy de Chauliac, the author of the most celebrated Latin surgical work
of the Middle Ages, explained, surgery fell within Galen's definition of
therapy and was one of the three instruments of medicine (the other two
being medication and diet). The formulation was in no way peculiar to Guy
or to surgeons, since the same list of the three instruments of medicine was
also presented by numerous school medical authors. Guy called himself
magister in medicina and had presumably graduated in medicine as well as
studying surgical books at Montpellier. He dedicated his own work on
surgery to the physicians of Montpellier, Bologna and Paris - the three chief
centres of medical learning - and of the papal court of Avignon, where he
made his own career. His book is distinguished both by a Galenic learning
that resembles but goes beyond that of many contemporary university
medical authors (he was one of the first to make extensive use of Galen's
lengthy and detailed anatomical physiology entitled On the Uses of the
Parts) and by its claim that surgery itself is a science - 'as if one were to say a
science of manual operation'. That claim was bold, given the usual reservation of the term scientia for disciplines that proceeded by syllogistic demonstration.63
At Bologna and other Italian studia, a few degrees were granted in surgery.
A curriculum of books to be read in surgery was, moreover, included in the
statutes of the Bologna University of Arts and Medicine of 1405; it consisted
of one of the Latin surgical compendia produced in Italy during the thirteenth
century and appropriate sections of school authors - a work attributed to
Galen, a portion of the Canon of Avicenna, and a work of Rasis.64 Furthermore, academic authors commented on surgical works; for example, Dino
del Garbo (d. 1327, professor of medicine at Bologna and elsewhere) wrote
on a section of the Canon dealing with skull fractures.65 As far as books were
62 J. L. Pagel (ed.), Die Chirurgie des Heinrich von Mondeville
(Hermondaville)
(Berlin, 1892),
63 de Chauliac, La Grande Chirurgie
(note 8), 4—8; M. S. Ogden, 'The Galenic Works Cited in
Guy de Chauliac's "chirurgia magna'", Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences, 29 . 24-33-
64 Malagola (ed.), Statuti (note 29), 247-8.
65 Expositio
super III, IV et parte V Fen Avicenne
(Ferrara, 1489); there are other early editions.
Nancy Siraisi
concerned, the reading of surgeons who obtained a university degree was
probably not very different from that of their literate colleagues outside the
schools; how much practical training in surgery was provided in the university setting is unknown. Surgeons treated fractures, wounds, ulcers, and skin
problems, using medication as well as actual surgery.
Nevertheless, in the studia medicine was primarily a body of knowledge
about the natural world grasped through the study and exposition of authoritative texts. Hence, lectio and disputatio were central to medical instruction,
as to other academic disciplines, notably natural philosophy, and were used
to teach both the courses in theoria and the courses in practica into which
university curricula in medicine came to be divided. And, although academic
medical writings of the thirteenth to fifteenth century show that the introduction of content drawn from speculative natural philosophy was a rule
restricted to a few topics, scholastic Aristotelianism influenced the organization of discourse in a great deal of academic medical exposition. In university lectures, books on essentially practical topics were treated to full
scholastic analysis by means of quaestiones, objections, and so on, as may be
seen, for example, from the commentary by Dino del Garbo on the surgical
portions of Avicenna's Canon.66 The resultant medical scholasticism
belonged to the same intellectual universe as medieval natural philosophy, in
which analysis, comparison, and reconciliation of texts was the normal task,
and syllogistic reasoning the normal way of arriving at conclusions.
Moreover, there were powerful pragmatic incentives for medical teachers
and students in the university milieu to emphasize those aspects of medical
learning that could be linked to or paralleled with natural philosophy. The
intellectual priorities of the age ensured that such an emphasis provided the
strongest support for the claim of medicine to a place among the higher
branches of learning, and hence to a respected position in the hierarchy of
academic faculties. And university physicians could hope for social and
economic advantages in their practice by calling attention to the way in which
their book-learning and consequent possession of explanatory theory distinguished them from other medical practitioners.
No brief summary of the actual teachings of academic medicine can easily
be given. In essence, what was conveyed to students was usually a Galenism
that was at once simplified, in the sense that it was shorn of Galen's polemical
context, breadth of knowledge of ancient medicine, and attention to anatomical and clinical detail, and greatly elaborated by the pharmacological additions, efforts at systematization, and theoretical complications introduced by
later authors.
A central concept was complexio (krasis or temperament), the balance of
the elementary qualities of hot, wet, cold, and dry both in the human body,
66 See note 65.
The faculty of medicine
especially its humours (blood, two biles, and phlegm), and in substances used
for therapeutic purposes. As a physiological theory, complexio lent itself to
elaboration since not only each species, and among human beings each individual, was considered to have its own complexio, but also each body parts.
Furthermore, complexio was simultaneously conceived of as an essential
characteristic of human individuals (medical men discussed whether it was to
be equated with the substantial form of the philosophers), and as varying
with sex, age, climate, and regimen. Illness was normally attributed either
to solutio continuitatis, meaning, essentially, trauma, or to complexional
imbalance. 'Rational' therapy involved determining the proper balance of
qualities between medicine and patient. The complexio assigned to various
medicinal substances (mostly herbal) was determined, either by manifest
characteristics (the hotness of pepper) or by tradition; the intensity of the
qualities was supposed to differ in different substances. Arnald of Villanova
grasped the difficulties for compound medicines posed by this last idea, and
devised a quasi-mathematical system for compounding medicines of a determined degree of complexional intensity from ingredients each of which had
its own degree of complexional intensity.67 Other learned physicians seem to
have relied on intuition and tradition in identifying the complexion or complexional intensity of patients and medicines. In addition, the notion that
certain substances owed their medicinal action to 'specific form', that is to an
otherwise unidentifiable characteristic peculiar to the species, provided a convenient explanation in cases where it appeared difficult to apply the theory of
complexion. Moreover, a number of the substances used as medicines had
properties (for example, as opiates or laxatives) with which physicians were
fully familiar from experience, whatever theoretical explanation was adopted
A second fundamental concept was that of the influence of the heavenly
bodies on terrestrial events, including health and disease. Medical astrology
permeated all of late medieval medicine, and was not confined to the university milieu. But in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the faculties of
medicine were closely associated with the cultivation and development of
astrology.68 Yet, among university professors of medicine, interest in the stars
varied widely in both degree and kind. Some paid minimal attention to the
whole subject; others drew on astrological material when composing theoretical explanations or practical prescriptions, but made no contribution to
the development of the subject; yet others produced works of their own on
medical astrology, such as the two commentaries on the pseudo-Hippocratic
67 This is the subject-matter of the Aphorismi
degradibus:
see McVaugh (ed.), Arnaldi de Villanova (note 52).
68 G. Zanier, 'Ricerche sulPoccultismo a Padova nel secolo X V , in Poppi (ed.), Scienzae
(note 50), 345—72; see also M. Markowski, 'Astronomie an der Krakauer Universitat im XV.
Jahrhundert', in Universities in the Late Middle Ages, z66.
Nancy Siraisi
treatise; and a few - and those the most learned - wrote on or otherwise
contributed to astrology in a more general context or to astronomy. The last
group includes Peter of Abano whose astronomical and astrological works
include a treatise on the motion of the eighth sphere, and Giovanni de Dondi
(d. 1370), whose astronomical clock has already been mentioned.69
The intellectual enterprise of academic medicine was thus complex and
demanding. In the context of medieval science, the endeavour to assimilate
ancient and Islamic medical and biological ideas and texts was a worthy
contribution. Furthermore, the introduction of scholastic methods of disputation and reconciliation into medicine led to the useful result that learned
physicians isolated clearly the discrepancies among ancient authors (most
notably, between Galen and Aristotle). But scholastic medicine like scholastic
natural philosophy, is criticized not only for the premium it set on honing
disputational skills, but also for providing only tenuous connections between
theory and the data of experience. Yet it is hard to see how learned physicians
could have developed any system of relating theory and experience different
from that of the contemporary Aristotelian natural philosophers whose ideas
about the nature of, and means of arriving at, scientific knowledge they
shared. Moreover, it seems likely that their experience of medical practice
familiarized professors of medicine to a greater extent than their colleagues in
philosophy with the need to take account of the empirical and the particular.
Certainly, learned physicians were very conscious of the dual nature of medicine as craft and learning and devoted considerable discussion to the ambiguous relations between its two aspects.70 And, to the extent that their actual
therapeutic activities can be known (the large medieval prescriptive literature
about medical practice is not necessarily always an accurate guide to what
was acually done), their practice was at least in part governed by their theory.
Furthermore, a few instances can be cited in which theoretical conclusions
were criticized or modified on the grounds of practical experience.71
The characteristics indicated above probably did not vary much from one
of the principal centres of medical education to the other. For example, a
recent examination of the use of and attitudes toward sections of the Canon
of Avicenna as medical textbooks at Paris and Montpellier in the thirteenth
and early fourteenth centuries has shown that there appears to be little basis
for the idea that the teaching of Montpellier was more 'practical' or more
'Hippocratic' than that of Paris.72 Moreover, some important developments
in medical teaching were not confined to any one studium, but affected major
69 Details are provided in Paschetto, Pietro d'Abano
(note 25); S. A. Bedini and F. R. Maddison,
Mechanical
Universe: the Astrarium
of Giovanni
Dondi .
70 Usually under the rubric of the question 'whether medicine is an art or a science', frequently
discussed at the beginning of general treatises or commentaries. The usual solution of scholastic medical authors was that medicine is in some sense both art and science.
71 This issue is dealt with by M. R. McVaugh (see select bibliography).
72 Jacquart, 'Reception du Canon1 (note 2.3).
The faculty of medicine
centres at about the same time. Thus, for example, the Canon of Avicenna
(d. 1037), one of the most influential of medieval medical textbooks, was
translated into Latin from Arabic before 1187. But its introduction into
medical studies at Paris took place probably around 1230, and at Montpellier
around 1240.73 Similarly, in the decade round 1300, an expansion of interest
in direct study of works of Galen seems to have occurred at both Bologna and
Montpellier.74
As the foregoing examples suggest, the formative period for the faculty of
medicine extends from the mid-thirteenth to the early fourteenth century.
Soon afterwards the outbreak of the Black Death killed learned physicians,
among them Gentile da Foligno, as it killed many others; produced a new
genre of medical writing, the plague tractate; and perhaps made members of
established Florentine families somewhat reluctant to go into medicine,
thereby opening up opportunities for 'new men' of more modest background.75 But, by the mid-fourteenth century, academic medical faculties
were so securely established that even this medical calamity of unprecedented
magnitude did not undermine their institutional position or invalidate their
teaching. On the contrary, some of the most celebrated scholastic medical
commentators - Giacomo da Forli (d. 1414), Ugo Benzi (d. 1439), Jacques
Despars (d. 1458)76 - belong to the late fourteenth and the early fifteenth
century. Moreover, recent studies of late medieval vernacular medical writing
and of the books owned by practitioners suggest a growing influence of Latinate academic medicine on practitioners not trained in the studia.77 Thus
school medicine played a major part in shaping the scientific understanding,
the approach to ancient scientific texts, and the healing practices of the
73 Jacquart, 'Reception du Canon'
(note 23), 69, 73. L. G. Ballester, 'Arnau de Vilanova (c.
1240-1311) y la reforma de los estudios medicos en Montpellier (1309): El Hipocrates latino y
la introduction del nuevo Galeno', Dynamis,
2 , 101-4.
74 Ballester, 'Arnau de Vilanova' (note 73), 97-158; Siraisi, Alderotti
(note 24), 100-5.
75 Campbell, Black Death (note 33), 6-33, lists plague tractates written 1348-50; Park,
and Medicine
(note 2), 150-1 (and elsewhere).
76 On Giacomo and Ugo: Pesenti, Professori e promotori
(note 12), 53-8,103-12, and bibliography there cited; D. Jacquart, 'Le regard d'un medicin sur son temps: J. Despars (i38o?-i458)',
Bibliotheque
de I'Ecole des Chartes,
138 , 35-86.
77 For example, F. M. Getz, 'Gilbertus Anglicus Anglicized', Medical History, 26 , 436-42;
L. E. Voigts, 'Editing Middle English Medical Texts: Needs and Issues', in T. H. Levere (ed.),
Editing Texts in the History of Science and Medicine
 , 39-66; and,
although the author stresses the absence of participation in practical obstetrics by academic
physicians, A. Delva, Vrouwengeneeskunde
in Vlaanderen
tijdens de late
middeleeuwen
 , 203—6, notes the relation of the Flemish Trotula to a Latin text presumably
produced in academic circles.
Nancy Siraisi
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agrimi, J. and Crisciani, C. Medicina del corpo e medicina delVanima. Note sul
sapere del medico fino alVinizio del secolo XIII. Episteme, Milan, 1976.
Amundsen, D. W. 'Casuistry and Professional Obligations: the Regulation of Physicians by the Court of Conscience in the Late Middle Ages', Parts I, II, Transactions
and Studies of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, 3 , 22-39, 93—112.
Bullough, V. L. The Development of Medicine as a Profession: the Contribution of the
Medieval University to Modern Medicine, Basle/New York, 1966.
Campbell, A. M. The Black Death and Men of Learning, New York, 1931; reprint,
Dulieu, L. La Medecine a Montpellier, vol. I, Le Moyen Age, Avignon, 1975.
Fuiano, M. Maestri di medicina e filosofia a Napoli nel Quattrocento, Naples, 1973.
Garcio Ballester, L. 'Arnau de Vilanova (c. 1240-1311) y la reforma de los estudios
medicos en Montpellier (1309): El Hipocrates latino y la introduction del nuevo
Galeno', Dynamis, 2 , 97—158.
Getz, F. M. 'Medicine at Medieval Oxford', in J. I. Catto (ed.), The History of the
University of Oxford, vol. II, Late Medieval Oxford, Oxford, in press.
Jacquart, D. Le Milieu medical en France du Xlle au XVe siecle, Paris, 1981.
Jacquart, D. 'La question disputee dans les facultes de medecine', in B. C. Bazan, J. F.
Wippel, G. Fransen, and D. Jacquart, Les Questions disputees et les questions
quodlibetiques dans les facultes de theologie, de droit et de medecine, Typologie des
sources du Moyen Age occidental, ed. L. Genicot, fasc. 44—45, Turnhout, 1985.
Jacquart, D. 'La reception du Canon d'Avicenne: Comparaison entre Montpellier et
Paris au XHIe et XIVe siecles', in Histoire de Vecole medicale de Montpellier. Actes
du noe Congres National des Societes Savantes tenu a Montpellier en 1985, vol. II
Paris, 1985, 69-77.
Kibre, P. 'The Faculty of Medicine at Paris, Charlatanism and Unlicensed Medical
Practices in the Later Middle Ages', Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 27 ,
Kibre, P. Hippocrates latinus: Repertorium of Hippocratic Writings in the Latin
Middle Ages, New York, 1985.
Kristeller, P. O. Studi sulla Scuola medica salernitana, Naples, 1986.
McVaugh, M. R. 'The Development of Medieval Pharmaceutical Theory', in
R. McVaugh (ed.), Arnaldide Villanova Opera medica omnia, vol. II, Aphorismide
gradibus, Granada/Barcelona, 1975.
McVaugh, M. R. 'The Two Faces of a Medical Career: Jordanus de Turre of Montpellier', in E. Grant and J. E. Murdoch (eds.), Mathematics and Its Applications to
Science and Natural Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Cambridge, 1987.
Ottosson, P.-G. Scholastic Medicine and Philosophy, Naples, 1984.
Park, K. Doctors and Medicine in Early Renaissance Florence, Princeton, N. J., 1985.
Paschetto, E. Pietro d'Abano, medico e filosofo, Florence, 1984.
Pesenti, T. Professori e promotori di medicina nello Studio di Padova dal 1405 al 1509:
Repertorio bio-bibliografico, Padua/Trieste, 1984.
Premuda, L. 'Le conquiste metodologiche e tecno-operative della medicina nella
scuola padovana del sec. XV, in A. Poppi (ed.), Scienza e filosofia alVUniversitd di
Padova nel Quattrocento, Padua/Trieste, 1983.
The faculty of medicine
Schipperges, H. 'Die Assimilation der arabischen Medizin durch das lateinische
Mittelalter', Sudhoffs Archiv fiir Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschaften, (special issue) .
Siraisi, N. G. Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine: An Introduction to Knowledge and Practice, Chicago, 1990.
Siraisi, N. G. Taddeo Alderotti and His Pupils: Two Generations of Italian Medical
Learning, Princeton, N. J., 1981.
CHAPTER 12
THE FACULTIES OF LAW
ANTONIO GARCIA Y GARCIA
THE ORIGINS AND EARLY HISTORY OF LAW FACULTIES
The University of Bologna is first heard of at the end of the eleventh century,
when it was probably a private secular institution. Its faculty of law, the first
in Europe, was to be the prototype and model of all others until the end of the
old regime. Bologna, a city of perhaps no more than 10,000 souls in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, did not absorb the studium there but took on a
distinctive character from its presence. And the stadium, wooed by the
spiritual and temporal powers alike, sided with neither and received the
favours of both.
The privileges known as the Authentica Habita conferred on the studium
by the Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa are evidence of the lively imperial
interest in Bologna. Although referring explicitly to the students coming to
Italy (most of them to study civil and canon law), they implicitly grant the
Bologna studium a measure of independence and support against the comune
or municipal authorities.1 The papacy, on the other hand, supported the
students as a means of exerting indirect influence on the comune, and
implicitly on the German emperors' policy towards Italy, in the feud between
Guelphs and Ghibellines. That was the purpose of the bull of 1217 in which
Pope Honorius III took the students' part against the comune. The teaching of
ecclesiastical subjects in Bologna, such as canon law from the time of Gratian
onwards, gave the popes a doctrinal interest, so to speak, in the masters and
students there. In 1219 Honorius III granted the archdeacon of Bologna
cathedral the power to confer the right of teaching everywhere {licentia
ubique docendi), so making the university a dependency of the Holy See.2
1 Cf. chapter 3 (P. Nardi).
2 G. Cencetti, 'Sulle origini dello Studio di Bologna', Rivista storica italiana, series 3, 5 ,
248-58; G. Cencetti, 'Studium fuit Bononiae', Studi medievali, 7 , 781-833; G. Cencetti,
The faculties of law
Among the most distinguished of the many Italian faculties founded in the
image of Bologna were those of Padua, Pavia, Perugia, and Siena. Whatever
the quality of their teaching at any particular time, the Italian faculties always
attracted large numbers of foreign students. These scholars were responsible
for the spread of the Bolognese model in and outside Italy. Indeed, in general
the law schools followed the Bologna model, but adapted it sometimes drastically to suit local conditions.3 Only in this sense can it be said that there were
different schools of medieval law.
The principal faculties in France were those of Montpellier (which came
into being largely because Piacentino the Bologna jurist taught there), Orleans,
Toulouse, and Avignon. Paris had a high reputation, but only for canon law
since Honorius III prohibited the teaching of civil law in Paris in 1219 (bull
Super specula).4 After the Italian faculties, the French faculties attracted
many scholars from all over Europe from the eleventh century onwards. The
leading faculties in the Iberian peninsula were those of Salamanca, Lerida,
and Coimbra-Lisbon, none of which attracted students from outside the peninsula. The foundation in 1367 of the Spanish College of Saint Clement in
Bologna was a signal event for Spain and Portugal, about 600 of whose scholars, most of them law students, attended it between then and the year 1500.
The fact that another legal system was still firmly entrenched in England had
repercussions on the attitude to Roman law and on law teaching in England.
Thus in the London law schools (the Inns of Court), which did not rank as
full-fledged law faculties, it was forbidden to teach Roman law because the
law in force was common law. The law faculties were founded in Oxford,
one for civil law and one for canon law, but civil law was never regarded
there as more than a necessary addition to canon law, and Oxford's avowed
aim was to train good and effective canonists. No restrictions were placed on
the teaching of Roman law in Scotland, or elsewhere in Europe except in
Paris. The Scottish faculties of St Andrews, Glasgow, and Aberdeen were
'L'Universita di Bologna ai tempi di Accursio', in G. Rossi (ed.), Atti del Convegno internazionale di studi accursiani, vol. I , 55-70.
3 On the spread of the Bologna model in Europe: M. Fournier, Histoire de la science du droit en
France, vol. Ill, Les Universite's francaises et I'enseignetnent du droit en France au moyen age
 ; Ius romanum medii aevi, ed. under the supervision of the
Societe d'Histoire des Droits de l'Antiquite, part I , in which there are one or
more fascicles for each country; R. Feenstra, 'Influence de l'enseignement du droit romain sur
les nations etrangeres', in Actes du congres sur Vancienne universite d'Orleans (XHIe-XVHIe
siecles) , 45-62; A. Gouron, La Science du droit dans le midi de la France au
moyen age ; H. Coing, 'Die juristische Fakultat und ihr Lehrprogramm', in H.
Coing (ed.), Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren europdischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, vol. I, Mittelalter (1100-1500) , 39—128; S. Kuttner, 'The Revival of
Jurisprudence', in Renaissance and Renewal, 299—323.
4 A. Potthast, Bibliotheca historica medii aevi. Wegweiser durch die Geschichtswerke des europaischen Mittelalters bis 1500 , 539—40, no. 6165 (Decretals of
Gregory IX 5.5.5). Cf. S. Kuttner, 'Papst Honorius III. und das Studium des Zivilrechts', in
Festschrift fur Martin Wolf , 79—101.
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
founded in the fifteenth century, but languished for two centuries, as the
Scots continued to go to the continent for their law studies. Finally, canon
law was also the main subject of law teaching in the Holy Roman Empire in
the Middle Ages. The leading faculties were in Prague, Vienna, Heidelberg,
Cologne, Erfurt, Leipzig, Wiirzburg, Rostock, Greifswald, Freiburg, Ingolstadt, Trier, Tubingen, Mainz, Louvain, and Basle; all but the first two are
foundations of the late fourteenth or the fifteenth century. They attracted
scholars from Scandinavia (which had no effective law faculties in the Middle
Ages), the Low Countries, and eastern Europe (e.g. Poland and Hungary).
The Padua school paid more attention than Bologna to Lombard law and
other local statutes of Italian cities. The north of France was governed by
customary law, the south of France by written law, and French jurists consequently showed a preference for the study of one or the other; thus in
Orleans there was some lack of appreciation of the glossa ordinaria written
by Accursius of Bologna in the thirteenth century, but lively interest in local
customary law. In Spain, with the adoption of Castilian as the normal vehicle
for cultured thinking, a galaxy of legal works in the vernacular - the Setenario, Partidas, Fuero real, and Especulo - appeared in the reign (1254-84) of
Alfonso X (Alfonso the Wise).
Bologna's teaching of canon law quickly spread to other countries. Its offshoot was the Anglo-Norman and Rhineland school, whose more rhetorical
style derives mainly from the two flourishing Paris faculties of arts and theology; its masters of canon law were slow to use the papal decretals that so
powerfully stimulated the school of Bologna. Texts of canon law of this
school appeared in northern France and the Rhineland in the 1260s. There
were hardly any other schools of canon law worth mentioning in the rest of
There are three schools of modes of comment on legal texts: the glossators'
school, the post-glossators' school or mos italicus, and the mos gallicus.
The characteristic methods of the glossators were their use of the complete
Justinian collections, not anthologies or fragments of them as in the high
Middle Ages, and concentration on the letter of the law-books, on word-byword exegesis. Not that they were uninterested in the sense of the law; contrary to the criticism sometimes made, understanding the letter of the text, or
its exegesis, was not their goal but merely a starting-point. Their goal was the
sense of the text and the legislator's intention, and as time goes on the litera-
5 On the legal schools: H. Kantorowicz, Rechtshistorische Schriften, ed. H. Coing, and G. Immel
 ; D. Maffei, 'Qualche postilla alle ricerche di E. M. Meijers sulle scuole di
Orleans, Tolosa e Montpellier', Tijdschrift voor Rechtsgeschiedenis, 36 , 387-400; A.
Garcia y Garcia, 'Aspectos de la universidad portuguesa medieval', in Universities in the Late
Middle Ages, 133-47; E. Cortese, 'Scienza di giudici e scienza di professori tra XII e XIII
secolo', in Legge, giudici, giuristi. Atti del Convegno tenuto a Cagliari nei giorni 18-21 Maggio
1981 , 93-148; H. Schlosser, 'Rechtsgewalt und Rechtsbildung im ausgehenden
Mittelalter', Zeitschrift der Savigny Stiftung fiir Rechtsgeschichte, Germ. Abt., 100 , 53-74.
The faculties of law
ture of glosses becomes increasingly concerned with the sense of the law. As
indicated below, this literature began with mere interlinear or marginal
glosses elucidating the meaning of words, and in its final stage produced great
critical apparatuses or commentaries, consisting of extensive and continuous
glosses on an entire collection of laws, which strive to capture not only the
meaning of each word but the sense of the text and the legislator's intention.
Among the innumerable glosses on the various collections of civil and
canon law, the glossa ordinaria or glossa magna on each one of these collections is outstanding by its mass and by the very extensive use made of it for
centuries. The principal glossae ordinariae were those of Accursius (d. c.
1263), on the entire Corpus iuris civilis, consisting of more than 96,000
glosses; Johannes Teutonicus (c. 1216) on the Decretum of Gratian (with
minor alterations by Bartholomeus Brixiensis between 1238 and 1245),
Bernard (Parmensis) of Botone (d. 1263) on the Decretals of Gregory IX, and
Johannes Andreae and other authors on the remaining collections of the
Corpus iuris canonici. There are also glossae ordinariae on various collections of law, which although not forming part of a Corpus iuris were usually
edited with it or were closely connected with it: thus Jacobus Colombi on the
Lombard laws of 1227-40, Carlo de Tocco on the Libri feudorum, and Odofredus on the Peace of Constance of 1183.
The post-glossators or commentators of both the Corpus iuris civilis and
the Corpus iuris canonici used the new methods introduced in other branches
of knowledge by the discovery of the works of Aristotle, all of which reached
Europe through Spain and Italy in the form of translations from the Arabic,
and through direct contacts with Greece made in the crusades. Those
methods, as used by jurists, consisted in investigating the sense of the law by a
dialectic process. For the glossators the touchstone was authority, for the
post-glossators reason - which meant greater freedom in the study of law.
This dialectic or scholastic method was also applied to philosophy and
The most important members of this school were the Italians Cino da
Pistoia, Bartolus de Saxoferrato, and Baldus de Ubaldis, and among their
ultramontane colleagues the French masters Jacques de Revigny and Pierre de
Belleperche. For these and innumerable other authors the chosen genre of
legal writing was not the gloss but the treatise, an exhaustive monograph that
could deal with a particular subject or be a commentary on an entire collection of laws and even on the whole of the Corpus iuris canonici or Corpus
iuris civilis. Collectively, their work founded a legal system that in the work
of the glossators was much more scattered. The greatest of the many postglossators or commentators on canon law were Henry of Susa (Cardinal Hostiense), Goffredo of Trani, Guillaume Durand, Johannes Andreae and
Niccolo dei Tudeschi (Abbas Panormitanus).
Glossators and post-glossators alike knew nothing of history or philology,
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
a lacuna they attempted to fill by stretching the sense of old legal texts to fit
medieval conditions.
The post-glossators' method is known as mos italicus because it was
widely followed in Italy in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Mos gallicus
is the name given to a school of legal humanists who adopted a philological
and historical approach in their study of books of law. This school began in
Italy with Petrarch, Ambrose of Camaldoli, Filelfo, Maffeo Vegio, Lorenzo
Valla, Angelo Poliziano, Ludovico Bolognini, and others, but was raised to its
greatest splendour by French authors like Andreas Alciatus and Jacques
Cujas. These authors did not regard Roman law as still current, but as matter
for historical and philological research. Antonio Agustin, archbishop of Tarragona, is the most illustrious of the commentators on canon law. The mos
gallicus was most influential in the Netherlands; in the Holy Roman Empire
the mos italicus was the usual one until the rationalist movement of the end
of the seventeenth century and the eighteenth century. In Spain the Salamanca
school used both the mos gallicus and the mos italicus, but mainly the latter,
in the revival of interest in medieval philosophical and theological thinking,
especially in its Thomist version. Nineteenth-century historians, however,
overestimated the importance of legal humanism in the development of legal
knowledge at the end of the Middle Ages and in early modern times, and
thereby unduly belittled the mos italicus.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
In university law schools the language of instruction was Latin; but from the
thirteenth century onwards important legal works were written in the vernacular. Legal teaching and writing in Latin and in the vernacular were not
mutually exclusive; they stimulated each other to such an extent that they
became interdependent, as jurists writing in the vernacular had studied at
university and perhaps taught there. Thus, for example, the Siete partidas of
Alfonso X the Wise were written in Castilian, and commentaries on them in
Latin or Castilian.
Clerical as well as lay ignorance of Latin was often given as a reason for
translating legal source-books and commentaries into vernacular languages.
Such translations circulated freely; so did works written directly in the vernacular, such as those that appeared in Castile in the time of King Alfonso X
the Wise. The translations include much of the Corpus iuris (canonici and
civilis), commentaries by the fourteenth-century Italian jurist Bartolus de
Saxoferrato, the French thirteenth-century jurist Neveu de Montauban
(Nepos de Montealbano), and a host of canon law texts and comments.
Medieval teaching, and most medieval writing, used a few legal texts (the
same in all universities), basically those contained in the Corpus iuris canonici
or the Corpus iuris civilis. To these were added the commentary on the
The faculties of law
constitutions of the German emperors {Libri or Consuetudines feudorum),
which appear in old editions of the Corpus iuris civilis as the Collatio decima
(Tenth Collation), and other isolated texts finally incorporated in the Corpus
iuris (canonici and civilis), such as the Old Compilations, the collections of
Pope Innocent IV and a number of isolated papal decrees or papal letters.
These legal texts and their commentaries are known as Roman-canon law
(ius commune), a name signifying that this code of laws was in principle
considered to be valid throughout the whole of medieval Christendom,
although co-existing with many statutes and other local regulations forming
exceptions from it. With rare exceptions, the only law taught in European
universities until the seventeenth century was Roman-canon law. This, it was
considered, also equipped jurists to interpret adequately any other legal
system peculiar to a given kingdom, local church, or other community.
Roman-canon law being current everywhere in the Christendom of that
day, there was what we should now call European ordinary law. Masters,
students, and books circulated freely throughout the length and breadth of
Christendom, from Poland to Portugal and from Scandinavia to Sicily, attracted or repelled only by the reputation of each text, master, or faculty, and the
law of supply and demand. Professors and students from all the kingdoms of
Europe went from one centre of learning to another, drawn only by its reputation or prevented only by lack of money.
LEGAL SOURCE-BOOKS
It has just been said that the basic legal texts studied at medieval universities
were the Corpus iuris canonici and the Corpus iuris civilis. The former comprised Gratian's Decretum of the mid-twelfth century, summarizing the legislation of the first millennium of the church; the Decretals of Gregory IX, or
Liber extra, of 1234; the Liber sextus of Pope Boniface VIII (1298); the
Clementine Decretals (with legislation by Clement V from 1305 onwards and
of the Council of Vienna of 1311-12), approved as a collection of canon law
by Pope John XXII in 1317; the Extravagantes loannis XXII (1325); and the
Extravagantes comunes (1501,1503) with legislation by other medieval popes
collected in the Paris edition of 1500 and 1503 of the Corpus iuris canonici.
Thus the canonists concerned themselves partly with laws several centuries
old but still in force, and partly with laws of the twelfth to the fifteenth
centuries.
The civil law schools taught Roman law from Justinian's collections of the
first third of the sixth century, which incorporated a great volume of much
older law. Medieval jurists divided the collections into the Digest, the Code,
the Institutes, and the Novels. In the Digest they distinguished three parts: the
Old Digest (Digestum vetus from book 1 to book 24.2), the Infor datum (from
book 25 up to and including book 38), and the New Digest (the remainder up
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
to and including book 50). They divided the Code of Justinian into the Code
[Codex) itself (books 1-9), and the Little Volume (Volumen parvum or Tres
libri - books 10-12), at times using the title Volumen parvum to mean the
Tres libri, the Institutes, and the Novellae. The Novellae (Novels) are a collection of 134 imperial constitutions done into Latin in the sixth century, with
later small alterations, and were widely known in the west from the eleventh
century onwards under the name of Authenticum or Authenticae or Liber
authenticorum. The medieval glossators gave the collection a 'new look' by
grouping ninety-seven of the Novels into nine collations. A number of summaries or recapitulations of the Novels were inserted in the Code of Justinian
in the Middle Ages where there was held to be some similarity in the subjectmatter. As just mentioned, the Middle Ages enlarged the Corpus iuris civilis
by adding to the Justinian collections various constitutions of the German
emperors (the Libri feudorum or Consuetudines feudorum) known in old
editions of the Corpus iuris civilis as the Collatio decima.
LITERARY GENRES IN LEGAL WRITING AND QUESTIONS OF
NOMENCLATURE
It is useful to know the terminology used in legal literary genres, as it gives
some indication of content.6 Here are some introductory headings: prooemium (proem), materia (subject), accessus (approach or entry), principium
(beginning), praefatio (preface), praeludium (prelude), introitus (entry),
exordium (exordium), praeparatoria (preparations). The modern equivalents
are unknown because the words no longer have the technical meaning they
had in the Middle Ages. All these terms were explanations placed before legal
or other works to tell the reader, in conformity with the rules of rhetoric,
who wrote the text and why, the method followed, and the aim in view. All
this is signified by the Latin words nomen (name), materia (subject), intentio
(intention), utilitas or finis (use or purpose). It was customary also to specify
the division of philosophy (quaenam pars philosophiae) to which the work
belonged, philosophy then being regarded as comprising logic, physics, and
ethics, and law as part of ethics.
Whereas the terms just explained refer to a work as a whole, intro-
6 M. Ascheri and E. Brizio, Index repelitionum iuris canonici et civilis, Quaderni di informatica
e bene culturali, 8 ; F. Martino, Richerche sull'opera di Guido de Suzzara. he
Supleciones ; L. Fowler-Magerl, Ordo iudiciorum vel ordo iudiciarius, Begriff
undLiteraturgattung, Ius commune, 19 ; G. Fransen, 'Les questions
disputees dans les facultes de droit' in B. C. Bazan, J. F. Wippel, G. Fransen, and D. Jacquart,
Les Questions disputees et les questions quodlibetiques dans les facultes de theologie, de droit
et de medecine. Typologie des sources du moyen age occidental, 44-5 ,
225-77; G. Fransen, 'Les gloses des canonistes et des civilistes', in Les Genres litte'raires dans
les sources the'ologiques et philosophiques me'die'vales , 133-49; A.
Bernal Palacios, La Concordia utriusque iuris de Pascipoverus , 39-53, which
gives a description of the bibliographical information on this literary genre.
The faculties of law
ductiones or declarationes titulorum relate to each one of the titles into which
legal texts were divided, and attempt to explain the significance of the text, its
relations with other titles {continuationes titulorum), and the divisions or
partitions of the subject within each title. They may give a synopsis of the
subject-matter of several titles or of an entire legal collection, and are then
called summulae (summaries or little summaries). Such texts either are inserted in a legal text or commentary, or exist separately and independently of it.
So much for introductory terms; the following are the names of the principal remaining genres.
Casus is an introduction to each law, canon or chapter, and paragraph,
summarizing its text.
Glossae (glosses) are commentaries, usually short, on words in a legal text.
The earliest in date are the 'isolated glosses', short glosses explaining the
significance of a difficult word, giving cross-references to other legal texts, or
pointing out the most important parts of the text, in which case they are
called notabilia (noteworthy), from their opening words Nota quod. Alternatively, they may be allegationes pro et contra (arguments for or against) a
question raised in a legal text. The name apparatus glossarum is given to the
most numerous, extensive, and continuous compositions of glosses, which
attempt an exegesis - a word-for-word commentary - of an entire legal text.
Lectura is the name given to an apparatus glossarum composed by a professor.
In the course of time one of the various apparatus glossarum in each legal
collection comes to be recognized as the most authoritative, and is then styled
the glossa ordinaria. All other versions are then glossae extraordinariae.
Summae are concise but systematic commentaries on a legal text, without
the word-for-word exegesis of the apparatus glossarum', commentum or
commentarium (commentary) is sometimes used to mean such a summa.
Dictinctiones or divisiones, a genre derived from logic, are basically definitions of all the meanings contained in the idea, fact, words, or concepts
used by the legal text.
Argumenta, brocarda (brocardica), generalia, singularia, and solutiones
contrarietatum are similar but not identical variants of a literary genre consisting in enunciating general principles of law, quoting the passages in the
legal text said to be for and against each principle enunciated. Comparison of
possible decisions for or against is typical of scholastic reasoning and medieval law-courts. From the end of the twelfth century onwards brocarda are
also called solutiones contrarietatum. They were usually resolved by means
of distinctiones (distinctions). A certain kind of quaestiones legales (quaestiones legitimae, described below) was used to demonstrate contradictions
between legal sources.
Insolubilia (unsolvables) are the fallacies of Aristotelian derivation which
occupied the attention of logicians of the late twelfth and early thirteenth
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
centuries, when jurists began to use them, as a new genre on its own, for
exegesis or dialectic. This may have something to do with the reform of
dialectic methods that took place at this time.
The general principles of law are called argumenta or generalia. When
applied to a category of cases they are known as specialia, and when applied
to an individual case as singularia.
Notabilia, mentioned on p. 395, when used to indicate where the argumenta relating to particular subjects are to be found in a legal text, generally
begin with the word Argumentum followed by the name of the subject.
Quaestiones legitimae, which explore or consider contradictions in a legal
text and try to reconcile them, are usually in the form of a question beginning
with the Latin word Quare (Why). Questions of this kind are therefore called
quaestiones legitimae 'Quare', and appear independently of the legal text to
which they refer. There were also the quaestiones legitimae implicit in the
solutiones contrarietatum just mentioned.
Quaestiones de facto, known to some scholars as quaestiones disputatae
are those arising not from the law but from a fact or species facti (component
elements of a fact determining what law is applicable). The fact could be
taken from real life, or be imagined without necessarily referring to real life.
One way of treating these quaestiones for didactic purposes was a disputatio
- a debate between two students under the guidance of a master, who gave
judgement as if in a court of law. This practice was called quaestiones scholasticae or quaternales, which were named after the day of the week on which
they were held - mercuriales after Wednesday, veneriales after Friday, sabbatinae after Saturday, and so on.
Consilia or consilia sapientum (expert opinion) are terms taken from the
conduct of legal proceedings, when the judge called for expert opinion on the
case. The purpose of allegationes was to clear up doubts raised by the judge
regarding the conduct of the lawsuit; in this context, they were a reply to the
adverse party's resolutiones. They were also called allegationes or responsa
pro parte. Consilia were also given by private jurists, that is, jurists consulted
not by the judge but by a party to a lawsuit anxious to know what case could
be made out for him at law.
Rules for the conduct of lawsuits were scattered throughout Justinian's
corpus of laws. Twelfth-century jurists therefore compiled handbooks called
ordines iudiciarii or ordines iudiciorum, giving an orderly and systematic
description of each part of lawsuit from beginning to end. The canonists,
learning from the jurists, brought out even better ordines iudiciarii of their
own, based on Gratian's Decretum. There are numerous adaptations and
translations into vernacular languages of some of the ordines iudiciarii.
Abbreviationes are texts selected from a collection of laws and transcribed
literally or with few changes, eliminating the rest as irrelevant to the abbreviator's purposes. Selected texts whose order is changed are trans-
The faculties of law
formationes. Excerpta, exceptiones, breviariam, or flores are texts selected
from a collection of laws but not transcribed verbatim, the abbreviator redrafting them to include his own ideas as well as those of the text.
Alphabetum, tabula, repertorium, vocabularium, dictionarium, lexicon,
margarita, summarium, registrum, etc. are aids to the study of legal sources
and occasionally of legal literature. They vary in form and style with the
author's purpose, but are usually in alphabetical order of concepts. Their
subject may be a legal text or a work by a famous author.
Concordia, concordantia, concordantiae, contrarietates, and diversitates
iuris compare civil and canon law, pointing out similarities and trying to
reconcile differences between them; or they compare canon law and the Bible
in a similar spirit; or they try to find agreement or concordance between
Gratian's Decretum and the Decretals of Gregory IX. Occasionally they
assemble disagreements between different apparatus glossarum.
Recollectiones, recollecta, reportata, reportationes, additiones, and suppletiones are names given to the copies or notes taken by students at lectures
or disputationes. The reportator quotes the words of the text, additiones
contain other people's additions to the original, and when a professor takes
another author's text in class and adds to it whatever he sees fit the result is
suppletiones.
In the arts faculties at Bologna, Padua, Perugia, and some other universities
there was a chair for the teaching of the notary's art. The ars notaria was a
development - given a legal slant - of the ars dictandi or ars dictaminis (a
manual on letter-writing) of the cathedral schools or other non-university
centres. The most famous works of this genre were written in Italy.
Summae confessorum, Summae casuum, Summae casuum conscientiae,
Tractatus de matrimonio, Arbores consanguinitatis et affinitatis, Arbores
actionum, etc. are titles that designate collections, arranged in alphabetical
or systematic order, of canonic rules and moral standards for administration
of the sacrament of penance. This kind of literature comes to the fore particularly from the time of the fourth Lateran Council of 1215, chapter 21 of
which requires the faithful to confess themselves, and receive communion,
annually. Some works of this kind are in the vernacular and some in Latin.
The most important vernacular work is the Libro de las confesiones by
Martin Perez (c. 1316). Chapter 51 of the Lateran Council of 1215 revived
interest in the Arbores consanguinitatis et affinitatis, which contain rules and
diagrams for reckoning consanguinity and affinity. The Arbores actionum
dealt with legal procedure in lawsuits; they classified and gave legal rules for
every possible kind of legal action.7
A. Garcia y Garcia, 'Glosas de Juan Teutonico, Vicente Hispano y Damaso Hungaro a los
"arbores consanguinitatis et affinitatis"
\ZeitschriftderSavignyStiftungfiirRechtsgeschichte,
Kan. Abt., 58 , 153-85.
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
METHODS OF TEACHING LAW
Until the humanists came along, law was taught by dialectical methods, with
virtually no reference to history or philosophy.8 Teachers of civil law, and to
some extent teachers of canon law, worked on legal texts whose origins went
back many centuries, yet these texts were still considered to be in force in the
Middle Ages, in spite of all the difficulties of applying them to medieval
society; and civil law was regarded as subsidiary to canon law, in spite of the
differences or contrarietates which certainly existed between them.
In order that no part of a legal text should be unexplained in class, the
system was introduced of puncta (points) - divisions of a book of law into a
number of parts, stating the days on which each part was to be explained,
which parts belonged to the lectio ordinaria - a lesson read out and explained
by a master - and which to the lectio extraordinaria (or lectio cursatoria) - a
lesson read out and explained by a bachelor. The earliest puncta are those of
Bologna dating from 1252.9 Other important ones are those of Bologna
(1317-47), Toulouse (prior to the fifteenth century), and Bologna (midfourteenth century).10
According to Henry of Susa (Cardinal Hostiensis) (c. 1253),n the lectura oi
a legal text in class comprised: (1) a summary of the text (the casus); (2)
reading out the text (littera) and explaining difficulties; (3) showing parallels
(similia) with other legal texts; (4) quoting arguments against it (contraria)
and disposing of them generally by means of distinctiones (defined on p. 395);
(5) stating and answering the questions arising from the text read out; (6)
pointing out notabilia - the most noteworthy topics or associated ideas to be
inferred from the text read out.
In disputationes or quaestiones disputatae, the practice of the University of
Bologna was followed, with local variations, in all other universities. In
Bologna disputations were held in spring and summer. They were, basically,
8 M. Fournier, 'Methodes de l'enseignement du droit du moyen age a nos jours', Annales d'histoire des facultes de droit et de science juridique, 2 , 11-152; G. Le Bras, * "Velut splendor flrmamenti"; le docteur dans le droit de l'Eglise medievale', Melanges offerts a Etienne
Gilson , 373-88; A. Garcia y Garcia, Estudios sobrela canonistica portuguesa medieval, Publicacions de la Fundacion Universitaria Espanola Monografias, 29
 , 17-65; G. Fransen and D. Maffei, 'Harangues universitaires du XIV siecle',
Studi senesi, 83 , 7-22.
9 D. Maffei, 'Un trattato di Bonacurso degli Elisei e i piu antichi statuti dello Studio di Bologna
nel manoscritto 22 della Robbins Collection', Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law, new series, 5
 , 73-111 (especially 91, n. 80).
10 B. Kurtscheid, 'De utriusque iuris studio saec. XIII', in Acta Congressus luridici Internationalis, vol. II , 309—42; A. Garcia y Garcia, 'El decretista Fernando Alvarez
de Albornoz y la fundacion del Colegio de Espana', in El Cardenal Albornoz y el Colegio de
Espana, vol. II, Studia Albornotiana, 12 , 13iff., 145-50, 154-7; G. Rabotti,
'Elenco descrittivo di codici del Decretum in archivi et biblioteche italiane e straniere', Studia
Gratiana, 7 , -jStt.
11 Henricus de Segusia (Card. Hostiensis), Summa aurea lib. 5, tit. (Augustae Taurinorum,
1579), 291.
The faculties of law
public discussion of a legal subject chosen at random or taken from real life
or the courts. In Bologna the only persons allowed to make these disputations
were the doctors of the university, but it was open to any member of the
audience to raise objections (oppositiones); objectors appointed for the
purpose were called concurrentes.
In Bologna repetitiones (dissertations) were held from the beginning of the
course until Christmas. All salaried professors, starting with the youngest,
were obliged to perform them. Elsewhere, as in Salamanca, doctors who were
professors of the university were obliged to hold repetitiones only for twenty
consecutive years. There was also in Bologna another kind of repetitiones
consisting of daily revision or summary of the matters taught.12
As for examinations and academic degrees, the University of Bologna did
not hold a separate examination for each academic course. The only title it
conferred was that of doctor or master, later called the laurea, and all studies
and examinations were in preparation for that title. The statutes of the University of Bologna prescribed five courses to 'read', that is, explain, a 'title'
(part of a book of law) and six courses to 'read' an entire legal work. In canon
law four years were required to 'read' a 'title' and five to 'read' a complete
work. There was no examination for the title of bachelor, but students who
had taught a complete book for one year as bachelors were considered qualified to take the examination for the licentiate. At first there may possibly have
been only one examination, that for the doctorate, but before long there were
two, the first by a committee of professors and the second by the College of
Doctors. From the end of the thirteenth century onwards both examinations
were by the College of Doctors. The first led to the grant of the licentia
docendi, and was the more substantial one, which really showed how much
the candidate knew. The second examination, the conventus or conventatio,
was little more than a formality - in effect the ceremony of the award of a
doctorate - but the title of doctor could not be granted without it. At the
licentiate examination candidates had to explain two subjects, taken from the
Decretum and the Decretals for students of canon law, and from the Old
Digest and the Code of Justinian for students of civil law, and reply to objections on them. The ceremonial award of the doctorate usually followed in the
same year, sometimes only a few days after the licentiate examination.
The College of Doctors just mentioned was a dual one in Bologna - there
was one college for canon law and another for civil law - but some of its
members formed part of both. It was not essential for each member to teach
in the university, but in practice they were usually professors on the active
list. The origin of these colleges is not precisely known, but they are first
mentioned in the latter half of the thirteenth century. There was a numerus
clausus: the college of doctors of civil law had sixteen members and the
12 Juan Alfonso de Benavente, Ars et doctrina studendi et docendi, ed. B. Alonso Rodriguez,
Bibliotheca Salmanticensis, vol. II , 93.
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
college of doctors of canon law twelve. There were also three supernumerary
members. Famous men were admitted to the colleges as extraordinary
members, supernumerary or otherwise. They were presided over by a prior,
who recorded their meetings in the Liber secretus, a register now of extraordinary historic value. Besides examining candidates for the licentiate and
doctorate, the colleges gave opinions to all kinds of applicants. Conservative,
nepotist, and formalist though they were, their prestige remained intact over
the centuries; indeed, their clientele included the kings of Portugal and
England and other notables able to pay their high fees.13
STUDENTS AND SCHOLARS
Statistics giving a complete idea of the total number of the scholars for whose
training law faculties existed, their distribution over faculties, their geographical and social origins, their average age, their previous studies, the
percentage studying in their own country or abroad, the proportion of scholars attaining a degree, and the career prospects open to graduates in law are
usually lacking. None the less, it is believed that between 6,000 and 7,000
scholars studied at German universities in the second half of the fifteenth
century, most of them in the arts faculty. Next in numerical importance, it
seems, came students of civil and canon law, of whom there were about 1,000
(15.3 per cent of the total number of scholars) in the second half of the
fifteenth century. Between 1386 and 1540 there were 504 students in Leipzig,
427 in Erfurt, 388 in Cologne, 219 in Heidelberg, 161 in Tubingen, and 147 in
Freiburg. In 1389 the number of students matriculated at the University of
Cologne was 759, of whom 156 (20.5 per cent) were jurists. Leipzig had on
average 100 law students during the fifteenth century; at Erfurt their number
varied from 80 to 350.14 Bologna is believed to have had between 500 and
1,000 scholars in the thirteenth century; in 1269 it had as many as 1,464. In
1339 Perugia had 119 law students.15
The number of scholars in each faculty is somewhat better known. In the
colegios mayores of Salamanca there were j6 statutory places in the fifteenth
century; 27 of them (36 per cent) were reserved for students of canon law, 22
(29 per cent) for theologians, 12 (16 per cent) for law students, whether of
canon or civil law was immaterial, 2 (2.6 per cent) for students of civil law,
and 2 (2.6 per cent) for medical students. This dominant tendency is confirmed by lists of students at Salamanca during the Great Schism and by the
registers of other universities: a list of 331 students at Salamanca in 1381
13 A. Perez Martin, 'Los colegios de doctores de Bolonia y su relacion con Espana', Anuario de
Historia del Derecho Espanol, 48 , 5—90; C. Piana, // 'Liber Secretus iuris caesarei
dell'Universitd de Bologna, 1 , I*-IO9*; 2 , 3*-33*.
14 Schwinges, Universitatsbesucher.
15 S. Stelling-Michaud, UUniversite de Bologne et la penetration des droits romain et canonique
en Suisse aux XHIe et XlVe siecles .
The faculties of law
shows 166 students of canon law (50.1 per cent), 63 students of unspecified
disciplines (19 per cent), 66 students of grammar (19.9 per cent), 20 of civil
law (6 per cent), 12 of logic (3.6 per cent), 2 of arts (0.6 per cent), 1 of
theology (0.3 per cent), and 1 of music (0.3 per cent).16 Of some 15,000
students recorded in England in the last three centuries of the Middle Ages,
4,614 studied in the superior faculties - those of law (2,359 or 51.1 per cent),
theology (2,104 o r 45-6 P e r cent), and medicine (the remaining 151 or 3.2 per
cent).17 Of the 598 scholars of the Spanish College in Bologna between 1368
and 1500,120 studied canon law (20 per cent), 61 theology (10.2 per cent), 35
medicine (5.8 per cent), and 2 civil law (0.3 per cent).18 It was usual to obtain
dispensation to assign to one faculty places statutorily reserved for another,
and in this way many places for the study of theology were made over to the
study of civil law. The large number of places reserved for canon law is not
surprising, as most of the scholars were clerics.
The student's geographical or national origins varied with political,
economic, and cultural conditions: since Roman law was more acceptable in
Scotland than in England, there were more Scots than English scholars in
certain foreign universities of civil law. Available records for the Iberian peninsula show that there were more scholars in Bologna from the eastern
Iberian peninsula (the territories subject to the crown of Aragon) than from
the western part (Portugal and Castile).19 Throughout the Middle Ages the
most numerous and the largest faculties in Italian universities, and in the
principal Iberian ones, were the law faculties, partly because these were the
most Romanized countries but mainly because the faculties of theology and
arts were founded there, and flourished, later than in, say, Paris or Oxford. In
France the leading law faculties were at Angers and Montpellier, and at
Orleans, which had no other faculty. At Paris, Oxford, and the universities of
the Holy Roman Empire theology attracted more students than law.
Canon law faculties usually had more students than civil law faculties,
primarily because more clerics than laymen studied law at university (the
papal bull forbidding clerics to study civil law affected some clerics, but only
very slightly). Also, clerics generally had more (but not always better) opportunities of finding employment in church service than under a secular authority; and, so that they could study abroad without forfeiting the emoluments
of their benefice, they were granted dispensation from the requirement to live
in its area. Laymen too could obtain minor ecclesiastical benefices by taking
16 A. M. Carabias Torres, Colegios Mayores: Centros depoder, vols. I—III, Acta Salmanticensia,
Historia de la Universidad, 46 , vol. II, 247-85, 490.
17 T. H. Aston, 'Oxford's Medieval Alumni', Past and Present, 74 , 6-10, 22-3; T. H.
Aston, G. D. Duncan, and T. A. R. Evans, 'The Medieval Alumni of the University of Cambridge', Past and Present, 86 , 35, 74—5.
18 A. Perez Martin, 'Collegiales de S. Clemente de los Espanoles en Bolonia (1368-1500)', Salmanticensis, 20 , 69—84.
19 Cf. chapter 9 (H. de Ridder-Symoens).
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
the tonsure, even though they might give up a clerical career later; but clerics,
particularly those in major orders, always had more and better opportunities
than laymen of ecclesiastical benefices.
Nevertheless, at some universities the civil law faculty was more important
than that of canon law; thus at the University of Bologna in its first few
decades the teaching of canon law was modelled on that of civil law. By the
end of the Middle Ages the gap between the number of students of civil and
canon law had narrowed in some universities, but in others students of canon
law were still in the majority. None the less, in the Middle Ages it was
inconceivable that anyone versed in canon law should not know civil law, and
vice versa. Each faculty gave some training in both, and in addition many
students studied civil law as well as canon law - utrumque ius - in separate
faculties. In this event they followed a somewhat shorter course of study, in
consideration of their having already learned in one faculty something of the
subject taught in the other.
The social origins of law students are mainly, in descending numerical
order, chapters of canons, clerics with cure of souls, bourgeoisie, and gentry.
Of the 220 scholars of the German 'nation' in Bologna between 1265 and
1300, 151 were ecclesiastics, 32 laymen, 34 of unknown status, and 3 secularized ecclesiastics. Their numbers of course vary according to time and place,
but university cartularies show this to be the general trend.20
The average age of scholars in Bologna is thought by Stelling-Michaud to
have been twenty-three to thirty. There were of course one or two scholars
outside this age bracket; for instance one Portuguese scholar in the Spanish
College was aged only fifteen, and another was aged forty.
University statutes are not usually very explicit about the previous studies
required. In Bologna they are not specified. At the University of Salamanca
and other universities candidates had already to be 'in grammaticalibus competenter instructus' (proficient in grammar).21 The University of Lisbon-
Coimbra required candidates to be 'ad minus grammaticus vel logicus' (at
least a grammarian or logician).22 The biographies of a number of jurists and
the foregoing statistics mention law students who had previously studied in
the arts faculty, but they are always fewer than those who previously trained
in institutions not of university rank.
University students, except the minority with means of their own, usually
financed their studies by obtaining an ecclesiastical benefice of some kind.
Scholars of all faculties were eligible for these, but the many known records
of applications show that most, and the best, benefices went to jurists. Clerics
20 Cf. chapter 8 (P. Moraw).
21 V. Beltran deHeredia, Bulario dela Universidad de Salamanca,
1219-1549,
vol. II , 187, N.647.15.
22 A. Moreira de Sa (ed.), Chartularium
Vniversitatis
Portugalensis,
1288-153-7, vol. IV, 1288-
1377 , 15-19, no. 949.
The faculties of law
holding residential benefices could always get a dispensation from residence
for seven years to study at university; this was confirmed by the decretal Cum
ex eo of Boniface VIII.23
Such records as survive of the numbers of law students graduating show
that, then as now, their proportion was low. Even in as rigorously selected a
group as the 598 scholars of the Spanish College of Bologna, there were only 3
licentiates in civil law, 25 in canon law, and 1 in theology; 47 masters of arts
and medicine, and 25 masters of theology; 7 doctors in civil law, and 51
doctors in canon law - in all 159 graduates, or 26.5 per cent of the 598
scholars appearing in the records consulted. Like all statistics, especially historical ones, these figures should not be accepted without reserve, for the
information available is not exhaustive, and some scholars graduated not in
the university but by special papal concession (per bullam) or in other universities;24 many others came to grief because they neglected their studies.
Considerable opportunities were open to law graduates. A small but significant and influential elite went on to teach at the university at which they
had studied, or at other universities - the number of foreign professors in
Bologna in the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries is impressive. But
most law graduates filled important administrative posts in church or state. In
the church they included popes, bishops, officials of the papal or diocesan
curia or members of chapters, and to a lesser extent members of monastic or
other religious orders (most of the surviving legal manuscripts of the Middle
Ages belong, or used to belong, to chapters of canons). Something similar
happened in secular administration; law graduates, both clerics and laymen,
held official posts with various authorities, from the imperial and royal chanceries downwards. Both in the church and in civilian employment men of law
held economic as well as administrative posts. Their legal training gave jurists
a chance to rise in the world by occupying important positions where they
rubbed elbows with the nobility, or if they were laymen by marrying above
their station.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries all but a few university professors
were clerics. Fourteenth-century records mention rather more lay professors,
and in general laicization proceeded in the fifteenth century. There were no
women students or practitioners of law in the Middle Ages. For the sake of
completeness it should be added that legal disciplines were also taught at
centres of lesser standing, such as monastic, cathedral, or municipal schools
or schools of the mendicant orders. At all such centres law was taught by a
single professor. Studia — some of them even ranking as studia generalia sprang up all over Europe without attaining university status, either because
they laid no claim to it or claimed it in vain. Law was also taught at schools of
notaries not forming part of university faculties, and sometimes a king com-
23 Liber Sextus, 1.6.34.
24 Garcia y Garcia, Estudios (note 8), 54.
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
missioned great legal works, such as those sponsored by Alfonso X of Castile
(Alfonso the Wise) or by the French court; most of these teachers of law or
writers of legal works were trained at university.25
LAW, THE CHURCH, AND SOCIETY
The extent to which law affected Western political theory and practice is an
important and interesting topic. In the early Middle Ages the Western nations
were on the verge of relapsing into barbarism. It was the task, first of the
church and later of the empire and the kingdoms, to make right prevail over
might. In this they were helped by the rediscovery and study of Roman law in
the twelfth century and by the birth of canon law at almost the same time.
Especially in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the constitution and
government of the medieval church and state followed a model fashioned
largely by jurists, who were helped by the rediscovery of Aristotle's political
works. That model is predominantly authoritarian, being drawn mainly from
the law of the Roman Empire, but it is only fair to add that medieval law
contains the seeds of modern democracy. Corporations - chapters of canons,
and religious orders, especially the mendicant orders - which ascertained the
will of the maior et sanior pars (the greater and sounder part) by voting
functioned in a collegial, democratic way within the macrocosm of the
church. The Middle Ages took over some Romanic institutions or principles,
giving them a more democratic content: in Roman law, for instance, the
formula Quod omnibus tangit ab omnibus approbari debet (What affects
everybody must be approved by everybody) belonged to private law; in medieval (especially canon) law it applies even in political and constitutional law.
The conciliarism of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, following the Great Schism, was deeply rooted in twelfth-century canonistic
thought and precedent. It established for the church, and implicitly for the
state, principles (such as that of limited monarchy) which were adopted by
seventeenth-century thinkers, and in later versions still influence modern
thought. Sixteenth-century Protestant and Catholic reform (grounded on
medieval theory of a theocratic bent) became the firm supporter of absolute
monarchy. The legal tradition inherited from Rome, the Aristotelian tradition from Greece, and Christian thought together produced a model for
25 C. Lefevbre, 'Juges et savants en Europe (i}e-i6e siecle)', Ephemerides iuris canonici, 22
 , 76-202; 23 , 9—61; M. Bellomo (ed.), Scuola, diritto e societd nel mezzogiorno
medievale d'ltalia, especially the articles by D. Maffei (9-29), E. Cortese (31-134), and A.
Romano (237-58); G. Santini, ' "Legis doctores et sapientes civitatis" di eta preirneraria',
Archivio giuridico, 169, 6th series, 38 , 114-71; E. Cortese, 'Intorno agli antichi indices
toscani e ai caratteri di un ceto medievale', in Scritti in memoria di Domenico Barillaro
 ; J. Sanchez Herrero, 'Centros de ensenanza y estudiantes de Sevilla durante los
siglos XIII al XV, in En la Espana medieval: Estudios dedicados al Prof. D. Angel Ferrari
Nunez, vol. IV , 875-98.
The faculties of law
Western society that is different from, and irreconcilable with, that of any
other culture of the past, whether Islamic, Inca, Aztec, Chinese, or Japanese.
On the other hand, and at a different level, imperial claims, which had their
supporters throughout the Middle Ages, urged that kingdoms were in some
ways subordinate to the empire. Not only kings but most jurists never
accepted this, and in practice the church supported the anti-imperial view. To
some extent, therefore, law was a restraint on absolute power whether civil
or ecclesiastic, and made for more relaxed relations between church and
empire, between the spiritual power and the temporal power.26
Twelfth- and thirteenth-century changes in the government of church and
state also profoundly influenced ecclesiology, that is, theological thinking on
the church. Canonistic thought strongly influenced ecclesiology and the attitude of the church to the sacraments and to its pastoral duties. The sacraments received at least as much attention from canonists as from theologians.
Medieval canon law is more zealous than theology itself in regulating the
pastoral duties of the church, that is, its spiritual guidance of believers.27 In
ecclesiology, medieval canonists from the twelfth century onwards refused in
particular to admit the pope's claim to absolute power and tried to reconcile
his divine right with the rights of the Christian community, holding that these
were no less divine, having been, like his, instituted by Christ. At the time of
the conciliarism of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries these ideas
were given new life. They were so much amplified that some people came to
regard the ecumenic council as a higher authority than the pope. Such canonistic theories, upheld by some theologians and rejected by others, have continued deeply to influence even modern ecclesiology.28
Notoriously, throughout the history of Christianity there have been two
schools of thought, one accepting and the other rejecting the humanities as
part of clerical training. Acceptance is personified by Saint Augustine and
rejection by Saint Jerome. These are doubtless oversimplifications, but the
epigones in both camps have quoted these two fathers of the church. It is all
too easy, and unnecessary, to enlarge on this well-known controversy. It is
mentioned here only to explain why in the mid-twelfth century Gratian's
Decretum brings together the most authoritative texts of the first millennium
of Christianity, some of which inevitably contradict each other on this
subject. Gratian juxtaposes them to reconcile their underlying contradictions,
in the spirit of the original title of his work, Concordia discordantium
26 B.Tierney, Religion,
Law and the Growth of Constitutional
 with the bibliography quoted therein.
27 P. Anciaux, La the'ologie du Sacrement de Penitence au XII siecle ; J. M. Soto
Rabanos, 'Derecho canonico y praxis pastoral en la Espana bajomedieval', in Proceedings of
the Sixth International Congress of Medieval Canon Law, Berkeley, California, 28 July - 2
August 1980, Monumenta iuris canonici, Series C, Subsidia 7 , 595—617.
28 K. Pennington, Pope and Bishops. The Papal Monarchy in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries with the bibliography quoted therein.
Antonio Garcia y Garcia
canonum. The fathers of the church and other writers of the first millennium
furnished him with texts that accept or reject, praise or revile the humanities
of their time. Gratian's use of dialectics to reconcile the contradictions in
these texts enabled his successors to consider them in a comparatively
thoughtful and responsible spirit. Medieval canonists regarded the humanities with less disfavour than some of their contemporaries, who rather than
consider whether it was fitting for clerics to study the humanities went witchhunting among the philosophers. Gautier de Saint Victor, for example, calls
Peter Abelard, Peter Lombard, Peter of Poitiers, and Gilbert de la Porree, 'the
four labyrinths, or Minotaurs of France', and Saint Peter Damian affirms that
the first professor of grammar was the Devil, when he taught Adam to decline
the noun 'God' in the plural. Lanfranc, Saint Anselm, and Saint Bernard are
similarly critical of human reason. The canonists, however, did not generally
bother with other humanities; nor did the legists, except some who practised
them, such as Cino da Pistoia, no less eminent as poet than as legist, who
enjoyed the friendship and admiration of Dante Alighieri, and Clemente
Sanchez, a prolific writer on canon law and author of the Libro de los exemplos,29 one of the great literary works of fifteenth-century Spain. Canonist
ambivalence towards the humanities is, however, well shown in a thirteenthcentury introduction to Gratian's Decretum, of French origin, known by its
opening words as Vidit lacob.
As for the relation of law to literature, in primitive societies law, religion,
and literature were one. Only later did they become separate entities, and
even in the late Middle Ages the Sachsenspiegel still affirms that God is law.30
No wonder, then, that even in the Middle Ages poetry still exalted obedience
to God, emperor, or king. Law in its entirety was not only positive law but
also natural; law, divine law, ratio, ordo, lex aeterna; and naturally enough
all these were of interest to theologians, as is clear from Saint Augustine's De
civitate Dei and Saint Thomas Aquinas's Summa theologica. The people too
regarded law as expressing God's will in human affairs. Among the lawyers
and men of letters there were many clerics, some of them expert both in
literature and law, like the Archpriest of Hita (Juan Ruiz), author of the
Libro del buen amor}1 Another and doubtless better-known example of this
dual expertise is Dante Alighieri.32 It is therefore not surprising that in the
Middle Ages, and even later, some law faculties followed just behind or even
took precedence over the faculty of theology.
29 A. Garcia y Garcia, Iglesia, Sociedad y Derecho, vol. I, Bibliotheca Salmanticensis Estudios, 74
 , 143-67.
30 G. Kirsch, 'Biblical Spirit in Medieval German Law', Speculum,
14 , 38-55.
31 H. A. Kelly, Canon Law and the Archpriest
of Hita, Medieval and Renaissance Texts and
Studies, 27 .
32 G. Zanetti, 'Le dottrine giuspubblicistiche delle Questiones
de iuris subtilitatibus
e il pensiero
politico di Dante', Proceedings
of the Fourth International
Congress of Medieval
Canon Law,
The faculties of law
Parallel to this view of literature as the handmaid of law is the complementary one of law as the handmaid of literature; men of letters drew inspiration
from codes of law, borrowing some of their terms and imitating legal construction; and methods of investigating and studying literary texts inspired
methods of studying and investigating legal texts, and vice versa, whether the
texts were in Latin or almost any of the vernacular - Old and Middle English,
German, Icelandic, French and Provencal, the Hispanic languages (Castilian,
Catalan, Portuguese, and Galician), Italian, and so on.
Such, in brief, were the organization and intellectual horizons of the medieval law faculties, and their potent influence on the society of their times.
Toronto, 21-25 August 1972, Monumenta iuris canonici, Series C, Subsidia 5 , 351-82, with the bibliography quoted therein.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alford, J. A. and Seniff, D. P. Literature and Law in the Middle Ages, A Bibliography
of Scholarships New York/London, 1984.
Burmeister, K. Das Studium der Rechte im Zeitalter des Humanismus im deutschen
Reichsbereich, Wiesbaden, 1974.
Calasso, F. Medio Evo del Diritto, vol. I, Le fonti, Milan, 1954.
Coing, H. (ed.) Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren europaischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, vol. I, Mittelalter, 1100-1500, Munich, 1973.
Cortese, E. 'Scienza di giudici e scienze di professori tra XII e XIII secolo', in Legge,
giudici, giuristi. Atti del Convegno tenuto a Cagliari nei giorni 18-21 Maggio 1981,
Milan, 1982, 93-148.
Feenstra, R. 'L'enseignement du droit a Orleans. Etat des recherches menees depuis
Meijers', Bulletin de la Societe archeologique et historique de I'Orleannais, new
series, 9 , 13-29.
Fournier, M., Histoire de la science du droit en F' ranee; vol. Ill (only volume
published), Les Universites francaises et l'enseignement du droit en France au
moyen age, Paris, 1892; reprint, Aalen, 1970.
Garcia y Garcia, A. 'Los estudios juridicos en la Universidad medieval', in Lex Ecclesiae. Estudios en honor del profesor Dr. Marcelino Cabreros de Anta, Bibliotheca
Salmanticensis, vol. I, Salamanca, 1972,143-69; republished in A. Garcia y Garcia,
Estudios sobre la canonistica portuguesa medieval, Publicaciones de la Fundacion
Universitaria Espanola, Monografias 29, Madrid, 1976, 17-65.
Garcia y Garcia, A. Iglesia, Sociedad y Derecho, vol. I, Bibliotheca Salmanticensis,
Estudios 74, Salamanca, 1985.
Gouron, A. La Science du droit dans le Midi de la France au Moyen Age, Variorum
Reprints, London, 1984.
Grundmann, H. 'Sacerdotium, Regnum, Studium', Archiv fur Kulturgeschichte, 34
 , 3-21.
van Hove, A. Prolegomena ad Codicem iuris canonici, 2nd edn, Malines/Rome, 1945.
lus Romanum Medii Aevi, 5 vols., Milan, 1961-8.
Koschaker, P. Europa und das romische Recht, 4th edn, Berlin, 1966.
Garcia y Garcia
Kuttner, S. The History of Ideas and Doctrines of Canon Law in the Middle Ages,
London, 1980.
Kuttner, S. Medieval Councils, Decretals, and Collections of Canon Law, London,
Kuttner, S. Kepertorium der Kanonistik. Prodromus Corporis glossarum, Studi e
Testi, 71, Vatican City, 1937; reprint, 1983.
Le Bras, G., Lefebvre, H., and Rambaud, J. L'Age classique, 1140-1378. Sources et
theorie du droit, Histoire du droit et des institutions de l'Eglise en Occident, 7,
Paris, 1965.
Maffei, D. 'Dottori e e studenti nel pensiero di Simone da Borsano', Studia Gratiana,
15 , 229-49.
Maffei, D. Gli inizi delV umanesimo giuridico, Milan, 1956-60.
Meijers, E. M. Etudes d'histoire du droit, ed. R. Feenstra and H. F. W. Fischer, vols. I,
III, IV, Leiden, 1956-66.
Ourliac, P. and Giles, H. La Periode postclassique, 1378-1500, vol. I, La Proble'matique de I'epoque. Les sources, Histoire du droit et des institutions de l'Eglise en
Occident, 13, Paris, 1971.
Perez Martin, A. 'Los colegios de doctores de Bolonia y su relacion con Espana',
Anuario de Historia del Derecho Espanol, 48 , 5-90.
Perez Martin, A. (ed.) Espana y Europa, un pasado juridico comun. Adas del I simposio Internacional del Instituto de Derecho Comun. Murcia 26—28 Marzo 1985,
Murcia, 1986.
Savigny, F. C. Geschichte der romischen Rechts im Mittelalter, 7 vols., 2nd edn,
Heidelberg, 1834-51; reprint, Bad Homburg, 1961.
von Schulte, J. F. Die Geschichte der Quellen und Literatur des canonischen Rechtes
von Gratian bis auf die Gegenwart, vols. I—II, Stuttgart, 1875-77; reprint, Graz,
Stelling-Michaud, S. Les Juristes suisses a Bologne, 1255-1330. Notices biographiques
et regestes des actes bolonais. Travaux d'Humanisme et Renaissance, 38, Geneva,
Stelling-Michaud, S. L'Universite de Bologne et la penetration des droits romain et
canonique en Suisse aux Xllle et XlVe siecles, Travaux d'Humanisme et Renaissance, 17, Geneva, 1955.
Troje, H. E. 'Die Literatur des gemeinen Rechts unter den Einfluss des Humanismus',
in H. Coing (ed.), Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren europdischen
Privatrechtsgeschichte, vol. II, Munich, 1977, 615-795.
CHAPTER 13
THE FACULTY OF THEOLOGY
MONIKA ASZTALOS
FROM BIBLICAL EXEGESIS TOWARDS SCHOLASTIC THEOLOGY
One of the main characteristics of medieval university teaching was the stability of a set of doctrinal textbooks such as those of Aristotle in the faculty of
arts, of Justinian in the faculty of law, and of Galen in the faculty of medicine. For theology the authority was the Bible, but its lack of doctrinal coherence made it insufficient as a textbook alone. It needed interpretation, and
from the beginning of the Christian era theology was essentially the exegesis
of sacred Scripture, hence its name sacra pagina.1
This hermeneutic activity had been carried on since antiquity by the fathers
of the church and by monks in the monasteries, the centres of learning before
the rise of the universities. A most important patristic contribution which
influenced all later medieval exegesis was Saint Augustine's (d. 430) De doctrina christiana. The first three books contain rules for interpreting Scripture,
while book four is a treatise on how to preach the doctrine built up by the
methods established in the previous books. Saint Augustine vindicates the
pagan liberal arts and moral precepts on the grounds that they rightly belong
to those who preach the gospel. The insistence on the usefulness of secular
learning for Christian speculation, at least on a moderate scale, is only to be
expected in one who, like Saint Augustine, was well trained in Roman rhetoric and spent his youth reading Virgil and Cicero.
In the sixth century, when barbaric invasions had reduced ancient culture
in western Europe to a few scattered remnants, Boethius (d. c. 524) not only
preserved some of what was left of the Greek and Roman heritage, but also
composed works that later became influential on theology. Through his
1 The following account of the development of theology in the schools before the rise of the
universities is mainly based on G. Pare, A. Brunet, and P. Tremblay, La Renaissance du XIV
siecle. Les ecoles et Venseignement ; J. De Ghellinck, Le Mouvement the'ologique du XIIe siecle .
Monika Asztalos
translations of and commentaries on Aristotle's works on logic, Boethius
developed an interest that is documented not only in his own philosophical
writings, but also in his Theological Tractates. The entry of logic into matters
of faith did not, however, have any real following until the eleventh and,
especially, the twelfth centuries. The initiator of this movement is usually
held to be Gerbert of Aurillac (d. 1003), later Pope Sylvester II, who in the De
rationali et de ratione uti stressed the importance of definition and classification.
The use of logic in theology found its adversaries, an often quoted instance
of whom is Peter Damian (d. 1072) who, in his treatise De Dei omnipotentia,
criticized those who applied philosophical notions of necessity and impossibility to God's power, thereby restricting God's omnipotence. Problems of
this nature, which concern the reconcilability of the articles of faith, such as
God's omnipotence, with reason, would later become central issues in the
theological faculties of the medieval universities.
The first person to attempt a synthesis of reason and faith was Anselm of
Canterbury (d. 1109). With his Monologion and Proslogion - the original title
of which was Fides quaerens intellectum (Faith in search of understanding) he established himself as the 'father of scholasticism'. In demonstrating the
truths of faith Anselm relied more on reason than on authority.
By this time the cathedral schools had become more important than their
monastic counterparts. The secular students and masters were not bound by
any stabilitas loci, but could move from town to town according to their
intellectual tastes. Teachers like Anselm of Laon (d. 1117) could even attract
students from Italy, Germany, and England. This increased the prestige of
individual masters, a tendency which is evident in the development of teaching methods.2 The most important product of the Laon school was the
Glossa ordinaria, a commentary on the Bible in the form of interlinear and
marginal annotations. In addition to traditional patristic sources the Glossa
ordinaria quoted more recent masters, thereby raising the latter to the status
of auctoritates. The recognition of their teachings as authoritative has been
described as the most characteristic feature of early scholasticism.3
This new role of the masters is apparent in the introduction of quaestiones
into the biblical commentaries, a method practised already by Anselm of
Laon.4 The intensified use of quaestiones in the twelfth century reflects a
changed attitude towards biblical studies: the traditional exegesis had been
2 For an account of this development: B. Smalley, The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages
 , 49-77.
3 A. M. Landgraf, Introduction a Vhistoire de la litterature theologique de la scolastique naissante , 2.4—5.
4 For the origins of this teaching method and literary genre: B.C. Bazan, 'Les questions disputees,
principalement dans les facultes de theologie', in B. C. Bazan, J. F. Wippel, G. Fransen, and
D. Jacquart, Les Questions disputees et les questions quodlibetiques dans les facultes de theologie, de droit et de medecine, Typologie des sources du Moyen Age occidental, ed. L. Genicot,
fasc. 44—5 , 25-40.
The faculty of theology
the unfolding of the different senses hidden in the sacred text - the literal or
historical, allegorical, tropological or moral, and anagogical or eschatological senses - and the commentary was confined to the margins of the text
expounded; by introducing quaestiones into the commentary, the masters
merely used the text as a starting-point for theological discussions set out in
dialectical form.
The work that has been singled out as a manifesto of this shift in theology
is the Sic et non of Peter Abelard (d. 1142), Anselm of Laon's contemptuous
pupil. In the prologue of this work Abelard acknowledges the fact that biblical and patristic sources sometimes contradict each other, and suggests
methods for explaining these contradictions on the assumption that the
authors in question never lie. In fact, the absolute truth of the biblical and
patristic sources makes the investigation into the causes of apparent contradiction so much the more challenging. The truth of the Bible, which cannot
be called into question, provides an excellent starting-point for rational questioning, which is according to Abelard the key to wisdom.
The use of quaestiones in biblical commentaries was a decisive step
towards scholastic theology. Another important innovation was the collecting of sententiae, the origin of theological summae, in which different topics
were presented in a systematic order.5 The school of Laon proved itself pioneering once more through the compilation of sententiae from modern
masters as well as church fathers, collections that also included quaestiones.
One of the earliest theological summae was the Theologia scholarium by
Peter Abelard, who is also said to have established the use of the word theologia instead of the traditional sacra pagina or sacra doctrina. Another influential work of doctrinal systematization from the same period was Hugh of
Saint Victor's (d. 1142) De sacramentis christianae fidei. Gilbert of Poitiers
(d. 1154), another pupil of Anselm of Laon, learned the importance of the
liberal arts, both in and of themselves and as a preparation for theology, in
the school of Chartres. He also became familiar with Boethius, whose
writings were highly esteemed in Chartres, and, like other theologians of that
school, applied grammar and logic to theological topics. Gilbert was one of
the first who attempted to give a scientific structure to theology, and in his
commentary on Boethius's De Trinitate he introduced the word facultas,
'faculty', in the sense of scientific discipline. In theology, he held, faith comes
before reason, whereas in the other 'faculties' faith follows upon reason.6
Such rationalization of theology met with fervent opposition from traditional
theologians such as Bernard of Clairvaux (d. 1153), but the efforts to bring
scholastic theology back to its monastic fold were vain.
About the middle of the twelfth century there arose a tendency toward
5 Landgraf, Introduction (note 3), 44-7, 50-4.
6 N. M. Haring (ed.), Expositio in Boecii Librum secundum De Trinitate, vol. I: 7-9, Studies
and Texts, 13 , 164.
Monika Asztalos
codification of knowledge both in canon law (Decretum Gratiani) and theology (the Glossa ordinaria and the theological summae of Hugh of Saint
Victor and Abelard). In theology this movement culminated in the Sentences
of Peter Lombard (d. 1160), which consist of questions systematically
arranged around central doctrinal topics: God and the Trinity (book 1), creation (book 2), the incarnation and the virtues (book 3), the sacraments and
the Last Judgment (book 4). It almost immediately became an object of commentary in the schools, and was recognized as a school-book by the Lateran
Council of 1215. The lasting success of this work of compilation has been
ascribed to its lack of originality, its relative orthodoxy, its complete coverage
of the debated issues of the day, and the author's unwillingness to give final
solutions to difficult questions. By the middle of the twelfth century theology
was thus being taught in the schools as a separate science related to other
sciences. New teaching methods were being used by masters, who formulated
problems in a dialectical way and solved them with rational arguments. The
Bible was still the indisputable written authority, but to compensate for its
unsystematic character it was now accompanied by a standard textbook,
Peter Lombard's Sentences.
Towards the end of the twelfth century, Paris had more renowned masters
of theology than any other school. Among the most productive and influential
theologians were Peter of Poitiers (d. 1161), Praepositinus of Cremona
(d. 1210), Alan of Lille (d. 1202-3), Peter the Chanter (d. 1197), and, above all,
Stephen Langton (d. 1228). A corporation of masters and students grew out
of the cathedral school of Notre-Dame, and a struggle for autonomy against
the bishop and chancellor led to a confirmation of the masters' privileges and
rights through the first official statutes given to the University of Paris by the
papal legate, Robert of Courson (d. 1219), in 1215.7 In their struggle the
masters had received support from the pope, Innocent III (1160-1216), but
they had to pay for the protection by giving up some of their academic
freedom. Henceforth, the masters could not pursue their theological studies
in complete intellectual independence, but had to take part in the pope's and
the universal church's struggle against heresies.
In this power struggle the masters and ecclesiastical authorities did not,
however, represent completely separate parties. In fact, teaching as a master
in theology in Paris often led to a high position within the church.8 Out of the
five theologians mentioned above, only Alan of Lille did not follow an ecclesiastical career. Peter the Chanter became bishop elect of Tournai, Peter of
Poitiers and Praepositinus were both chancellors of Paris, and Stephen
Langton ended his days as archbishop of Canterbury after having been a
7 CUP, vol. 1,78-80, no. 20; G. Post, 'Parisian Masters as a Corporation 1200-1246', Speculum, 9
 , 421-5; S. C. Ferruolo, 'The Paris Statutes of 1215 Reconsidered', History of Universities, 5 , 1-14.
8 J. W. Baldwin, 'Masters at Paris from 1179 to 1215: a Social Perspective', in Renaissance and
Renewal, 151.
The faculty of theology
cardinal. Innocent III and his legate Robert of Courson had studied together
at Paris, and they had both been masters in theology. By giving Paris its first
statutes they thus acted not merely as leaders of Christianity but also as
ex-students of the university.
Robert of Courson renewed earlier prohibitions against the clergy studying
law and medicine, and encouraged them to study theology. Honorius III
(1216-27), the successor of Innocent III, weakened the study of law further by
banning the teaching of Roman law in Paris (1219). The motives for this
decision have been debated, but the obvious result was that Bologna
remained the centre for legal studies, while Paris dominated theology.9
Another way in which the pope exercised control over Parisian theology was
in limiting the number of chairs. In 1207 Innocent set the maximum at eight,
but in 1218 Honorius III made an exception to the rule, and already by 1230
the number was increased to twelve.10
The safeguarding of doctrinal purity was often entrusted to ex-masters: the
condemnations of the teaching of Aristotle's natural philosophy at Paris in
1210 and 1215 were promulgated by Peter of Corbeil (d. 1222) and Robert of
Courson, both former masters of theology, and Stephen Tempier (d. 1279),
the man behind the condemnations of 1270 and 1277, had been not only a
master in Paris but also chancellor.
Not until 1228, however, did a master of theology become bishop of Paris.
In that year William of Auvergne (d. 1249), then a deacon, was appointed
bishop by Gregory IX (1227-41). The time of the appointment coincides with
the prohibition against teaching natural philosophy in Paris, and it is possible
that the pope felt it to be an advantage during a time of doctrinal instability to
appoint as bishop a theologian who could appreciate and judge the compatibility of Aristotle's physics and Christian faith.
In Paris the theological faculty had had close ties with the bishop and
chancellor from its very beginnings. Oxford on the other hand had no cathedral school, and the diocesan in Lincoln was not close enough to be able to
exert the same power over the scholars as his colleague in Paris. The pope did
not intervene in the affairs of the University of Oxford until 1254, when
Innocent IV (1243-54) confirmed the privileges of the masters in his Quaerentes in agro.11 The Parisian masters had been placed under papal protection
much earlier through the confirmation of their privileges in 1215. Thereby the
theological faculty at Paris had become responsible for the official doctrine of
the church, and the teaching of the masters was closely supervised and, if
necessary, corrected through condemnations from 1210 on. Oxford on the
9 J. W. Baldwin, Masters, Princes and Merchants. The Social Views of Peter the Chanter and
his Circle, vol. I , 86ff.
10 CUP, vol. I, 65, no. 5; 85, no. 2.7.
11 For the relation between the papacy and Oxford University: C. H. Lawrence, 'The University
in State and Church', in History of Oxford, 102—3.
Monika Asztalos
other hand had more freedom in doctrinal matters, and there is no evidence
of any intervention in the teachings of the masters from the church authorities before 1277. Nor did the popes ever make an attempt to limit the number
of chairs in theology at Oxford.
Throughout the fourteenth century Paris and Oxford had the most important theological faculties. Paris retained its lead except for a few decades at
the beginning of the century. There was a constant interaction between the
two teaching centres until about 1350, mostly through English students going
to Paris. Typically, the first known English theologian, Robert Pullen
(d. 1146), taught in Paris for five years, and the next known lecturer in theology, Alexander Neckam (d. 1217), had studied there.12 When war between
the French and English kings in 1193-1204 prevented English students from
going to Paris, theological studies prospered in Oxford. This tendency,
however, was broken during the dispersion of the Oxonian masters in
1209-14. Many of the masters then went to Paris with its strong theological
traditions, but the centre of education that mostly benefited from the migration of scholars was Cambridge, where a university was first opened in 1209
as a result of the secession.
THE MENDICANTS AND THE THEOLOGICAL FACULTIES: SYMBIOSIS
AND CONFLICT
Until the fourteenth century, Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge were the only
universities with the right to confer degrees in theology, but theology was by
no means exclusively taught in these universities. The most important alternative to the universities was provided by the studia of the mendicant orders,
which played the role of international faculties of theology in Germany,
France, and, above all, Italy.
The Dominicans (or Preachers), the Franciscans (or Minors) and, from the
middle of the thirteenth century, the Carmelites and the Austin friars were all
mendicants. They were not bound to a monastery, but could settle in towns
where they could devote themselves to studies. They all organized their
studies in a similar way, the Preachers to some extent providing a model for
this organization.13
The Dominican order had been founded in 1216 to combat heresies and
preach orthodox doctrine, and study became the most important means to
attain this goal. Already the earliest constitutions stated that every convent
should have its own lector or teacher who had studied theology for four
years, a rule that turned every convent into a school.14 Besides the convent
12 R. W. Southern, 'From Schools to University', in History of Oxford, 6—7.
13 For the Dominican system of education: W. A. Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican
Order, vol. II .
14 M. W. Sheehan, 'The Religious Orders 12.2.0-1370', in History of Oxford, 198.
The faculty of theology
schools there were provincial schools, and the most advanced teaching was
given in the studia generalia, Dominican institutions open to students from all
provinces.
The friars established schools in Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge, where
they could not only benefit from the theological faculties at the universities,
but also recruit students and teachers for the orders. Each mendicant order,
except the English Carmelites, had a studium generale in these university
towns. It would be wrong, however, to conceive of the religious schools as
separate from the theological faculties of the universities. The first two
masters who taught theology at Saint Jacques, the Dominican studium at
Paris,15 were in fact seculars: John of St Albans assumed his teaching around
1220 at the request of Honorius HI, a supporter of the friars, and he was
succeeded around 1225 by John of St Giles (fl. 1230-5).
The teachers of Saint Jacques obviously felt that their position differed
from that of the university masters, for, when the latter left Paris to go on
strike in March 1229, John of St Giles refused to join them. The Dominican
Roland of Cremona (d. c. 1259) even 'incepted' as a master two months after
the dispersion, thereby becoming the first Dominican master in theology in
Saint Jacques. Possibly John of St Giles felt his position to be somewhat
ambiguous, for in 1230 he joined the order in a spectacular way while
delivering a sermon. On the other hand, all Dominican masters automatically
belonged to the corporation of university masters. In 1230, two of the twelve
chairs in theology were occupied by Preachers. The symbiosis extended to the
students, for even non-Dominican students could attend lectures in Saint
The Dominican and Franciscan schools in Paris benefited from the dispersion of the secular masters and gained influence in the university. The school
of the Minors16 acquired fame with the conversion of Alexander of Hales
(d. 1245), a renowned university master, who was succeeded in the Franciscan chair by his students John of La Rochelle, Odo Rigaud (d. 1275),
William of Meliton (d. 1257-60), and Saint Bonaventure (John of Fidanza,
d. 1274), all distinguished scholars. At Oxford,17 the Preachers acquired their
first master in 1229-30, when Robert Bacon (d. 1248), a secular master,
entered the order, thereby incorporating the Dominican school in the university. The Franciscans followed in kind with Robert Grosseteste (d. 1253),
perhaps the most important of all secular masters who lectured (1230-5) to a
15 For the Dominican school in Paris: Hinnebusch, History (note 13), 37-9; J. A. Weisheipl, Friar
Thomas d'Aquino, His Life, Thought and Works , 54-67-
16 On the Franciscan studium in Paris: J. Moorman, A History of the Franciscan Order , 131-3-
17 On the mendicant schools in Oxford: Sheehan, 'Religious orders' (note 14), 193-2.24; J. I.
Catto, 'Theology and Theologians 1220-1320', in History of Oxford, 471-517; W. J. Courtenay, Schools and Scholars in Fourteenth-Century England , 56-77.
Monika Asztalos
mendicant order.18 Furthermore, Grosseteste was succeeded by three other
secular masters, and it was not until 1247 that the school acquired a Franciscan master. At Paris and Oxford the universities thus provided the Mendicant schools with their first teachers. But soon the friars recruited teachers
from among themselves. Not only were they on a par with the secular
masters, but they produced eminent theologians who attracted young
students to the orders.
In the middle of the thirteenth century the secular masters both at Paris
and Oxford reacted against the privileged position of the mendicants. In Paris
the friars gained a temporary victory in 1255, thanks to the papal support in
the bull Quasi lignum vitae. Between 1269 and 1271 the controversial questions were debated in the university classrooms in Paris by the Dominican
Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) and the secular Gerard of Abbeville (d. 1272). One
of the issues was the acceptance of boys into religious orders: the seculars
worried about the recruiting of novices from the young students in the arts
faculty. Other matters of dispute, such as the role of evangelical poverty and
spiritual perfection, had no direct bearing upon university life.19
At Oxford a conflict started about the same time as in Paris, but over a
different matter.20 The friars were not allowed by their order to study in the
arts faculty, and in 1253 a decision was taken by the university that no one
could become a master in theology unless he was first a master in arts. This
would have been an effective way of stopping the friars from graduating in
theology, had it not been for the dispensatory graces granted to candidates
without the required degree in arts. Significantly enough, the decision was
made when the Franciscans were no longer taught by secular masters, as they
had been until 1247, but had built up a school of their own that could rival the
teaching of the seculars. It is not surprising, therefore, that this decision was
provoked by a Franciscan candidate for the degree in theology, Thomas of
York (d. c. 1260). The Franciscans on their side widened the gap between
themselves and the university by deciding during the general chapters of 1279
and 1292 that secular students were not allowed to attend lectures in philosophy in their schools.21
The conflict deepened between 1311 and 1314, when the Preachers
18 For Robert Grosseteste and the Minors at Oxford: A. G. Little, 'The Franciscan School at
Oxford in the Thirteenth Century', Archivum
Franciscanum
Historicum,
19 , 803-74;
D. Knowles, The Religious
Orders in England, vol. I , 205-16; Sheehan,
'Religious Orders' (note 14), 197-8; R. W. Southern, Robert
Grosseteste:
the Growth
English Mind in Medieval
 .
19 For the conflicts in Paris: Rashdall, Universities,
vol. I, 370-97; Weisheipl, Friar
(note 15), 80—92,263-72; M . M . Dufeil, Guillaume
de Saint-Amour
universitaire
Parisienne
1250—1259 .
20 For the controversies at Oxford: Rashdall, Universities,
vol. Ill, 70-4; Sheehan, 'Religious
Orders' (note 14), 204-8.
21 M . Biehl, 'Documenta-Statuta generalia ordinis edita in capitulis generalibus celebratis Narbonae ...', Archivum
Franciscanum
Historicum,
34 , 76.
The faculty of theology
appealed to the pope, complaining that the secular masters threatened their
theological teaching in different ways. As in Paris, the university masters
opposed the friars' fishing for novices among the young students, and in 1365
they tried in vain to forbid the friars from accepting any candidate under the
age of eighteen.
At some universities, such as Montpellier and Bologna, the friars' studia
generalia functioned as theological faculties for a long period of time before
they were formally recognized as such. In Erfurt and Cologne there were
important mendicant studia generalia more than a hundred years before
universities were founded there. In Italy the friars practically monopolized
the theological teaching in Naples, Florence, Pisa, Perugia, Bologna, Padua,
and other towns. Through their great mobility the friars played an important
role in keeping the channels of communication open between different studia
and universities.
THE CURRICULUM
There is but scant material left to elucidate the organization of studies in the
theological faculty at Paris.22 The only extant thirteenth-century statutes
(1215) dedicate a single paragraph to the theologians. The next surviving
collections of statutes, issued between 1335 and 1387, reflect an already established practice, and shortly after 1389 a more comprehensive collection was
formulated, repeating part of the old statutes in addition to new ones not to
be found in any earlier extant document.23 However, the meagre information
concerning the theological faculty at Paris can be supplemented by reference
to the statutes of Bologna (1364),24 Toulouse (1366),25 Heidelberg (1386),26
Vienna (1389),27 and Cologne (1393).28 The theological faculties of these
universities all followed the model of Paris, and their statutes - which are
sometimes more systematically elaborated than those of their 'mother university' - contain detailed descriptions of certain practices that are only briefly
mentioned or alluded to in the Parisian documents.
It was mentioned above (p. 416) that the decision taken at Oxford in 1253,
to the effect that no one could become a master in theology unless he had
22 The most comprehensive survey is still P. Glorieux, 'L'enseignement au Moyen Age. Techniques et methodes en usage a la Faculte de theologie de Paris au XHIe siecle', Archives
d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du Moyen Age, 43 , 65-186.
23 CUP, vol. I, 78-80, no. 20; vol. II, 691-3, no. 1188; vol. II, 697-703, no. 1189; vol. Ill, 143-4,
no. 1319; vol. Ill, 441-2., no. 1534.
24 F. Ehrle, / piu antichi statuti della facoltd teologica delVuniversitd
di Bologna .
25 Fournier (ed.), Statuts, vol. I, 611-17, no. 670.
26 E. Winkelmann, Urkundenbuch der Universitdt Heidelberg, vol. I (Heidelberg, 1886), 20-3,
27 R. Kink, Geschichte
der Universitdt
Wien, vol. II (Vienna, 1854), 93-127.
28 F. I. von Bianco, Die alte Universitdt Koln und die spd'teren Gelehrten-Schulen dieser Stadt
(Cologne, 1855), 34-50.
Monika Asztalos
served as master in the arts, gave rise to a conflict - or rather was the
symptom of a conflict - between the seculars and mendicants. In the Paris
statutes there is no mention of such a rule, possibly due to the papal support
given to the religious orders in Paris.29
The textbooks of theology were merely the Bible and the Sentences of Peter
Lombard. On the other hand, the 1228 constitution of the Dominican order
stipulates that every student who was sent to a studium generate should bring
with him at least three books in theology: the Historia scholastica of Peter
Comestor, the Sentences, and a glossed Bible.30 Students had to audit courses
on the Bible and the Sentences for a certain number of years (varying between
five and seven in Paris) before giving courses themselves. After the period of
passive audition, the student could start lecturing as a cursor on two books of
the Bible, one from the Old and another from the New Testament. The
student then gave a series of more advanced lectures on the Bible as a baccalarius biblicus or ordinarius for two years. Before lecturing on the Sentences,
the baccalarii had to act as respondents in a disputation.31 The Paris statutes
of 1387 and 1389 declare that the baccalarius may substitute acting as a
respondent for his otherwise required two courses on the Bible. This shows
that the study of the Bible was by this time overshadowed by the more speculative theology which came out of the aforesaid disputations.32
Those permitted to lecture on the Sentences were called baccalarii Sententiarii. They were required to introduce their lectures with a ceremony described in the Bologna statutes - attended by the whole academic community. The incepting baccalarius began with a short sermon followed by an act
of commitment to orthodoxy in which he stated that he would not assert
anything against the teaching of the church. As a Sententiarius the student not
only had doctrinal responsibility but was also entrusted with a certain degree
of doctrinal independence. The Bologna statutes explain that those lecturing
on the Sentences may sometimes attack the statements of the other bachelors,
but in such a way that they do not in the heat of the dispute assert anything
unorthodox that they would have to retract later. However, the bachelors
were not allowed to question the teaching of the masters.
When the bachelor had finished his lectures on the Sentences, he was a
baccalarius formatus, and remained so for four years, a period later (1389)
reduced to three. During these years the bachelor was required to participate
in the activities of the theological faculty and respond in an aula, a vesperies
29 According to W J . Courtenay, 'The Bible in the Fourteenth Century: Some Observations',
Church History, 54 , 181, the stronger position of the members of religious orders at
Paris can be explained by the influence of the papacy - which favoured the religious orders on the University of Paris.
30 CUP, vol. I, 112, no. 57.
31 Bazan, 'Questions disputees' (note 4), 54.
32 Cf. John Gerson's pleading in the 1390s for a return to the study of the Scripture: B. Smalley,
'The Bible in the Medieval Schools', in G. W. Lampe (ed.), The Cambridge
History of the
Bible, vol. II , 208.
The faculty of theology
(inaugural disputations of the masters), a Sorbonica (a disputation held in the
college of Sorbonne), and a quodlibetum (a disputation on a question raised
by anyone about any topic and held during Advent and Lent).33 The teaching
methods of the theological faculty included not only lectures and disputations
but also sermons. The sermon crowned the formation of the student, and not
until he was a baccalarius formatus was he allowed to preach to the academic
community.
After the period of training (sixteen years for seculars, thirteen for regulars
in Paris in 1335, fourteen and twelve years, respectively, in 1389) the bachelor
was finally ready for the licence and the master's degree. The minimum age
for graduating as a master was thirty-five, in Vienna and Cologne only thirty.
Anyone holding the licence had to be in holy orders. The Bologna statutes
include oaths that the new master had to take before starting to teach: first of
all he swore fidelity and obedience to the pope, secondly he promised to
safeguard orthodoxy in the faculty. Masters had to lecture, preside over disputations, and preach, but the Parisian statutes are silent about the content of
their lectures and the frequence of their disputations and sermons. Again, the
Bologna statutes are more helpful in making it clear that the number of disputations presided over by a master depended on the number of students who
needed to participate in disputations in order to fulfil the requirements for a
degree in theology.
In the case of the University of Oxford, the statutes, written in 1313, are
rather summary.34 When secular students, who were masters of arts, had
completed seven years of audition in theology, they were ready to start
lecturing on the Sentences. Those lacking the degree in arts (the mendicants) had to study philosophy in the arts faculty for eight years and
complete nine years of audition in theology before lecturing on the
Sentences.
On the whole, Oxford followed the same curriculum as Paris, an important divergence being that at Oxford the students lectured on the Sentences
before lecturing on the Bible.35 It is possible, however, that Oxford followed
Paris to begin with by placing the lectures on the Bible before those on the
Sentences, until a conflict between 1311 and 1314 between the chancellor and
secular masters on the one hand and the Preachers on the other changed the
order of study. There was by that time a strong anti-Dominican party at
Oxford claiming that only those who had lectured on the Sentences were
33 For the different kinds of disputation: Bazan, 'Questions disputees' (note 4).
34 H. S. Gibson (ed.), Statuta antiqua
universitatis
Oxoniensis
 , 48—53. For the
date of the statutes: G. Pollard, 'The Oxford Statute Book of the University', Bodleian
Record, 8 , 69—91.
35 A. G. Little and F. Pelster, Oxford
and Theologians
c. AD 1282-1302,
Publications
of Oxford Historical Society, 96 , 26, n. 3; Smalley, Study (note 2), 276 n. 2;
Courtenay, Schools and Scholars
(note 17), 43.
Monika Asztalos
worthy of lecturing on the Bible.36 The Dominicans answered that this was
irrational, since the normal order of study would be to go from the interpretation of Scripture to the more advanced treatment of difficult questions in
lectures on the Sentences. They also claimed that this change of order would
stop those who were capable of lecturing on the Bible, but not on the Sentences, from pursuing their studies, and that Oxford ought to follow the Paris
practice of giving two sets of lectures on the Bible before reading the Sentences.37
It seems that the Dominicans, who had to study the Bible in order to fulfil
their goal of preaching, were less motivated to spend a year on purely speculative theology. The secular theologians on the other hand were not primarily
moved by such pastoral considerations. In this conflict of interests (which
was but one of many at this time), the chancellor and masters were victorious, thus proving once more that the friars at Oxford did not enjoy the
same unchallenged position as their brothers at Paris.
Finally, one should note that the different teaching methods in the theological faculty - lectures, disputations, and sermons - gave rise to different
genres of theological works: biblical commentaries, commentaries on the
Sentences, disputed and quodlibetal questions, and sermons.38
THEOLOGY AND PHILOSOPHY IN PARIS AND OXFORD
In the thirteenth century, theologians in Paris could not ignore the works of
Aristotle and his Arabic commentators, which, beginning in the second
quarter of the twelfth century, were being translated into Latin. Aristotle's
natural philosophy challenged the Christian theology of creation, and his
definition of science could, at least to some extent, be applied to theology.
When in 1210 the ecclesiastical authorities banned Aristotle's libri naturales in Paris, it was the first official clash between the two world views, but
the condemnation was primarily directed against the pantheistic heresies of
Amalric of Bene (d.c. 1207) and his followers, and against the teaching of
David of Dinant (/?. 1200), who was familiar with Aristotle's natural phil-
36 H . Rashdall, 'The Friar Preachers versus the University', in M. Burrows (ed.),
Collectanea,
2nd series, vol. XVI (Oxford, 1890), 223.
37 Rashdall, 'Friar preachers' (note 36), 218.
38 For a list of masters and biblical commentaries from the thirteenth century: C. Spicq, Esquisse
d'une histoire de I'exegese latine au Moyen Age . F ° r a repertory of biblical
commentaries: F. Stegmiiller, Repertorium
biblicum mediiaevi,
vols. I—VII .
For a repertory of Sentences commentaries: F. Stegmiiller, Repertorium
Commentariorum
Sententias
Petri Lombardi
 ; supplements to this fundamental work by V.
Doucet in Archivum
Franciscanum
Historicum
47 , 88—170, and J. Van Dyk in Franciscan Studies, 39 , 255-315. For disputed and quodlibetal questions: Bazan, 'Questions
disputees' (note 4). For university sermons: J. B. Schneyer, Repertorium
der lateinischen
Sermones des Mittelalters
fur die Zeit von 1150—1350, Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic
und Theologie des Mittelalters, 43:6 .
The faculty of theology
osophy. Only after a command to burn the works of David of Dinant does
there follow in the document a prohibition against lecturing, publicly or privately, on Aristotle's books on natural philosophy and their commentaries.39
From the same period is a document condemning nine heretics, apparently
followers of Amalric, to the flames, ending: 'We know that, because of these
persons, some books were prohibited even to the learned.'40 In the statutes of
1215, the prohibition of Aristotle's books on metaphysics and natural philosophy is still connected with the teaching of David of Dinant and Amalric of
Only in 1228 do we come to a document whose sole purpose is to restrict
the study of natural philosophy. This occurs in a letter from Pope Gregory
IX, the eloquence of which reveals a carefully premeditated official statement
written to provide guidelines for the future. The fact that it is directed to the
regent masters of theology shows that the earlier prohibitions had not been
very effective and that Aristotle's natural philosophy had penetrated even the
faculty of theology. Gregory accuses theology of being dominated by philosophy, which should be its obedient servant, and of committing adultery
with philosophical doctrines. The theologians, he says, have moved the limits
set by the church fathers on the utilization of philosophy for the study of
sacred Scripture. While trying to support faith with natural reason, they
weaken faith, for nature believes what it has understood, whereas faith
understands what it has believed. The pope finally commands the masters to
teach pure theology without any leavening of worldly science.42 This forceful
admonition proves, if nothing else, that natural philosophy was used by theologians even after 1210 and 1215. The impression that the pope's letter made
on the theologians is perhaps shown in a remark by the first Dominican
master in Paris, Roland of Cremona (1229-30), that subtle disputations about
the exterior senses belong to the philosophers and must be avoided by theologians, lest the latter be called physicians {physici).43
The pope's worries were shared by many theologians. Thus, William of
Auxerre (d. 1231), the first theologian who made use of Aristotle's libri naturales in Paris, claimed in his Summa aurea of before 1220 that the articles of
faith cannot be proved by appeal to human reason.44 This shows that it was
not the libri naturales in and of themselves that were controversial, but rather
the use, or abuse, made of them in theology.
During the conflict of 1229, the masters who had gone on strike and left
39 CUP, vol. I, 70, no. 11
4° CUP, vol. I, 71-2, no. 12.
41 CUP, vol. I, 78-80, no. 20.
42 CUP, vol. I, 114-16, no. 59.
43 D.A. Callus, 'The Function of the Philosopher in Thirteenth-century Oxford', in P. Wilpert
(ed.), Beitrage zur Berufsbewusstsein des mittelalterlichen Menschen, Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 3 , 157—8.
44 J. Ribaillier (ed.), Magistri Guillelmi Altissiodorensis Summa Aurea, Liber Primus, Spicilegium Bonaventurianum, 16 , 15.
Monika Asztalos
Paris were invited by Henry III to teach anywhere in England,45 where there
was no ban on the libri naturales of Aristotle, and in a letter of invitation
from Toulouse it is openly stated that those who wish to look deep into
nature's bosom may listen to lectures on the libri naturales that had been
prohibited in Paris.46 Whatever his expectations of William of Auvergne may
have been, Gregory IX was obviously disappointed, and in a letter of 1229 he
accused the bishop of having caused the dissent that made the masters leave
Paris.47 In his far ens scientiarum of 1231, in which he confirmed the privileges granted to the masters in 1215, he repeats his ban on the libri naturales^
but with the mitigating remark: 'until they have been examined and purged
from every suspicion of error'. He also repeats his exhortation of 1228 to the
theologians not to show off as philosophers but only to dispute such questions as can be determined by appeal to theological books and the works of
the church fathers.48 A week later Gregory absolved those masters and scholars who had been condemned on account of their use of the libri naturales*9
and about the same time he appointed a theological commission, of which
William of Auxerre was a member, for the purpose of examining the books in
question and excising their errors.50 This examination never came to pass,
possibly due to the death of William of Auxerre later that year.
The debate over the use of Aristotelian natural philosophy in theology is
reflected in a collection of Parisian university sermons.51 In a sermon
preached in January 1231 the Dominican master John of St Giles criticizes
those who prefer lengthy careers at the university to more fruitful work:
'When they come to theology they can hardly part from their science [scientia
sua, i.e. philosophy], as is clear in certain persons, who cannot part from
Aristotle in theology, bringing with them brass instead of gold, that is to say
philosophical questions and opinions.'52 Another Dominican, in a sermon
belonging to the same collection, complains about those who use the language of philosophy in theology, 'for he who has studied metaphysics always
talks about points and lines in theology'.53
During the 1230s, theologians like Philip the Chancellor (d.1236), William
of Auvergne, and Roland of Cremona used Aristotle in their works, but
within an Augustinian framework. Not until the 1240s did Aristotelian and,
through the commentaries of Avicenna (Ibn Sina, d. 1037) and Averroes (Ibn
Rushd, d. 1198), Arabic metaphysics pervade theology. In 1247, the papal
legate Odo of Chateauroux (d. 1273) exiled the arts master John of Brescain,
who had taught errors while mixing theology with logic. The legate expressed
45 CUP, vol. I, 119, no. 64.
46 CUP, vol. I, 129, no. 72.
47 See p. 413 and CUP, vol. I, 125-7, no. 69.
48 CUP, vol. I, 136-9, no. 79
49 CUP, vol. I, 143, no. 86
50 CUP, vol. I, 143-4, no. 87.
51 M . - M . Davy, Les Sermons
universitaires
de 12.30-1231.
Contribution
a I'histoire
la predication
me'dievale
 .
52 Davy, Sermons
(note 51), 292.
53 Davy, Sermons
(note 51), 341
The faculty of theology
his discontent at a situation in which logicians proceeded in a theological
manner and theologians in a philosophical manner in their disputations. The
masters, he concluded, should be content with the old limits set by the church
fathers between sciences and faculties.54
One of the Dominican chairs was held that year by Albertus Magnus
(d. 1280). While organizing the studium generale in the following year, 1248,
in Cologne, he launched the project of writing expositions of all Aristotle's
known works, in order to make them accessible to the Latin reader. In Albertus's view, while the fathers of the church were authorities in theology, Aristotle was the authority in natural philosophy, even if it would be wrong to
regard him as infallible even in that area. By distinguishing the different areas
of competence of theology and philosophy, Albertus contributed to the
autonomy of the secular sciences, which were no longer seen merely as handmaidens of the queen, theology. On the other hand Albertus opposed the
extreme reaction (such as the letter of Odo of Chateauroux) against the use
of philosophy in theology, as coming from men who, like brute animals,
blaspheme things of which they are ignorant.55
Another attempt to clarify the relations between philosophy and theology
was made by Thomas Aquinas, who defined theology in a new way so that it
should cohere with the Aristotelian notion of science. Ever since Alexander of
Hales wrote his commentary on Peter Lombard's Sentences, the prologue of
which was concerned with the epistemic status of theology, one was obliged
to consider, at the opening of one's own commentary on the Sentences,
whether theology is a science. By defining theology as a science, a scientia in
the Aristotelian sense (even if it could not fulfil all requirements of a science),
Aquinas broke with the tradition since Saint Augustine of defining sacra
pagina or theology as wisdom, sapientia. As the other sciences have their
principles known perse, theology, Aquinas claimed, has its articles of faith.56
By regarding theology and the different branches of philosophy as different
sciences, philosophy gained complete autonomy.57 On the one hand, the
definition of theology as a science strengthened its authority: if everything in a
theological summa was deduced from the articles of faith, or at least consistent with them, its doctrines were not only orthodox but also scientifically
correct. On the other hand, the liberation of philosophy from theology made
54 CUP, vol. I, 206-8, no. 176.
55 Albertus Magnus, De somno et vigilia, ed. S. C. A. Borgnet, Opera Omnia, 9 (Paris, 1890);
E. A. Synan, 'Albertus Magnus and the Sciences', in J. A. Weisheipl (ed.), Albertus
and the Sciences.
Commemorative
Essays 1980 , 10-11; M.-D. Chenu, La
comme science au XIII siecle , 29 n. 4.
56 Chenu, Theologie
comme science (note 55), 64-71.
57 J. Pinborg, 'Diskussionen um die Wissenschaftstheorie an der Artistenfakultat', in P. Wilpert
(ed.), Die Auseinandersetzungen
an der Pariser Universitdt itn XIII. Jahrhundert,
Miscellanea
Mediaevalia, 10 , 240.
Monika Asztalos
it possible in the arts faculty to reason merely from scientific principles, even
if the conclusions reached were unorthodox.
This is exactly what happened in the late 1260s, when masters such as Siger
of Brabant (d. c. 1284) and Boethius of Dacia (d. c. 1284), influenced by an
Averroistic reading of Aristotle, reached conclusions that were philosophically acceptable but contrary to Christian belief: namely, that the world is
eternal, that terrestrial events are subject to the movement of the heavenly
bodies, that there is only one human intellect, that there is no free will or
choice, and that the soul is destroyed with the body and is unable to suffer
punishment. These theses were condemned in thirteen articles by Stephen
Tempier, bishop of Paris, in 1270.58
The members of the arts faculty thus realized that scientific autonomy was
not tantamount to religious freedom, and in 1272 the masters of 'logical and
natural science' issued a document stating that no member of their faculty
could dispute questions on purely theological matters, such as the Trinity or
incarnation. If a question touched both faith and philosophy it should be
determined according to faith. If anyone lectured on a difficult passage or
disputed a question with arguments that seemed to contradict faith, he should
declare them totally erroneous or abstain from reading the text or adducing
the arguments in question.59 The masters incepting in the arts had to swear
obedience to this statute until the fifteenth century, and in the fourteenth
century the Parisian master of arts John Buridan (d. 1358), accused by some
theologians of treating theological matters, complained that he could not
possibly resolve the arguments contrary to faith in a question unless he was
allowed to produce them.60
The atmosphere seems to have become increasingly suspicious at Paris, for
in a statute of 1276 the masters decided that, because condemned doctrines
had been taught at secret meetings, nobody could henceforth be allowed to
give lectures privately, except in grammar and logic, where no subversive
teaching could arise. All other lectures must be held in public places, where
everybody could give a faithful report of the matters being taught.61 In spite
of this precaution, only four months later Pope John XXI (1276-7) (also
known as Petrus Hispanus; he had studied arts at Paris and was the author of
the Summulae logicales, a work that was later to become a standard text in its
field) wrote to Bishop Stephen Tempier about certain errors that had been
reported once again to be growing, asking him to make enquiries about them
and to find out who taught them and where.62 The bishop did more than that,
58 CUP, vol. I, 486-7, no. 432.
59 CUP, vol. 1,499—500, no. 441; P. Wilpert, 'Boethius von Dacien - die Autonomie der Philosophen', in Wilpert (ed.), Beitrage (note 43), 136-7.
60 E. Grant, A Source Book in Medieval
Science, , 50-1.
61 CUP, vol. I, 538-9, no. 468.
62 CUP, vol. I, 541-2, no. 471.
The faculty of theology
and on 7 March 1277 issued a list of 219 condemned articles.63 These errors,
he claimed, had been set forth by members of the arts faculty who had
exceeded the limits of that faculty. He accused them of holding that the
articles in question were true according to philosophy but not according to
faith, as if there were two contrary truths. However, both Siger and Boethius,
whom historians have come to regard as at least two of Tempier's targets,
have been cleared by recent scholarship of the bishop's accusation of adhering to a double-truth theory.64
The list of 219 articles was drawn up by a commission of sixteen theologians (among them the Neo-Augustinian Henry of Ghent, d. 1293), who
within the short compass of one month handed in the results of their enquiries on schedulae, or pieces of parchment. The articles were then lumped
together, apparently without systematization, and condemned by the bishop.
Even contemporary theologians, such as Godfrey of Fontaines (d. c. 1306)
and Giles of Rome (d. 1316), thought that the condemnations were sometimes inconsistent, and that some of the condemned theses were indeed perfectly orthodox.65
The articles condemned repeat those of 1270, and many of them reflect an
Aristotelian interpretation of nature that restricts God's power and human
free will.66 Some of the articles were directed against theology as such,67
whereas some rejected theology as a science, on the grounds that certitude
only follows from principles known per se, not from authority.68 Those who
held this view in the arts faculty clearly opposed the attempts made by
Thomas Aquinas to give a scientific status to theology. On the other hand,
some of Aquinas's doctrines were the target of the condemnations, which
shows that the bishop's action was not exclusively aimed at members of the
arts faculty, but was rather a reaction of conservative, Neo-Augustinian theologians against radical Aristotelians, whether in the arts faculty or among the
theologians themselves.69
The line of demarcation thus did not run between the faculties of arts and
theology, but between conservatives and radicals in both faculties. It has been
suggested that the arts faculty's statute of 1272 was the work of a conserva-
63 CUP, vol. I, 543-58, no. 473; R. Hissette, Enquete sur les 219 articles condamnes
a Paris le 7
mars 1277 .
64 F. Van Steenberghen, Introduction
a I'etude de la philosophie
medievale,
Philosophes medievaux, 18 , 557-63; Wilpert, 'Boethius von Dacien' (note 59), 149-52.
65 J. F. Wippel, 'The Condemnations of 1270 and 1277 at Paris', Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 7 , 195-6.
66 P. Duhem, Le Systeme du monde.
Histoire des doctrines
cosmologiques
de Platon a
vol. VI , 20-69; v°l- VIII , 7-120; E. Grant, 'The Condemnation of
1277, God's Absolute Power, and Physical Thought in the Late Middle Ages', Viator, 10
 , 211-44.
67 CUP, vol. I, 543-58, no. 473, arts. 152, 153, 175.
68 CUP, vol. I, 543-58, no. 473, arts. 37, 150, 151.
69 Wippel, 'Condemnations' (note 65), 184.
Monika Asztalos
tive majority, opponents of the radical group to which Siger belonged. The
controversy that led to the condemnations of 1277 was most fundamentally
concerned with the area common to philosophy and theology, in which the
objects of reason (scibilia) were also the objects of faith (credibilia). The
radicals in both faculties claimed for philosophy the right to investigate all
matters attainable by reason - scibilia - independently of the tenets of faith.
The conservatives held that, when the truths revealed by faith - credibilia —
could also be objects of philosophical investigation, the philosophers should
determine their questions in accordance with faith or abstain from raising
During the decades between the entry of Aristotle into theology and the
condemnations (1240-70), much theological activity focused on the relations
between faith and reason. This fostered an interest in metaphysics as a bridge
between Aristotle's philosophy and Christian revelation.71 One result was the
theological syntheses of Albertus Magnus, Bonaventure, and Thomas
The first English theologian to use natural philosophy in theology was
Alexander Neckam, who taught theology at Oxford shortly before 1200.72
This was the beginning of a long tradition in Oxford of combining biblical
and scientific studies. In the late 1220s, Robert Grosseteste made a synthesis
of Genesis, Aristotle's De caelo, and Arabic Neoplatonism in his metaphysical treatise De luce (On light), in which the foundations of reality were
described as mathematical, with God as a creative mathematician.73 Other
examples of a harmonious relationship between theology and philosophy can
be found in the works of the Dominican Simon of Hinton (fl. 1250-60) and
the Franciscan Thomas Docking (fl. 1260-5), w n o made use of optics and
other natural sciences in order to elucidate the literal sense of the Bible.74
At Oxford, the use of logic and philosophy in theology never provoked
negative reactions from the authorities, and there are no prohibitions against
philosophy in the Oxford statutes. On the other hand, there were tensions
between the biblical and speculative aspects of theology. In Paris, lectures on
Scripture focused on moral instruction, whereas theological questions were
kept for lectures on the Sentences; in Oxford, theologians like Grosseteste,
Simon of Hinton, and Thomas Docking made theological questions part of
their lectures on the Bible, and Grosseteste equated theology with biblical
study. The Dominicans Richard Fishacre (d. 1248) and Robert Kilwardby
70 Wilpert, 'Boethius von Dacien' (note 59), 139.
71 E. A. Moody, 'Empiricism and Metaphysics in Medieval Philosophy', in E. A. Moody, Studies
in Medieval
Philosophy,
Science, and Logic 
 ,
72 R. W. Hunt, The Schools and the Cloister.
The Life and Writings
of Alexander
(1157-1216),
ed. M . Gibson .
73 J. McEvoy, The Philosophy
Grosseteste
 , 149-80.
74 Catto, 'Theology and Theologians' (note 17), 493—4.
The faculty of theology
(d. 1279), as well as the Franciscan Richard Rufus (fl. 1250-5), all of whom
belong to the generation of theologians who wrote the earliest commentaries
on the Sentences in Oxford, adhered to the Parisian practice, and advocated
separation of speculative theology from Bible study. But it has been pointed
out that the two areas of theology were not kept strictly apart, and that
establishing the Sentences as a textbook for speculative theology did not
prevent theologians from continuing to insert quaestiones into their biblical
commentaries.75
The introduction of the Sentences as a textbook in the theological programme of study at Oxford was deplored in the 1260s by the Franciscan
Roger Bacon (d. c. 1292). The theologians of this day, he complains, put all
their pride in lectures on the Sentences, and in many places, such as Bologna,
quaestiones are only allowed in that context. If Bacon is right, and quaestiones were in fact not allowed in biblical courses, lectures on the Sentences
must have been more prestigious, since they provided the teachers with an
opportunity to show their acuity in theological discussions and disputations.76 A later Oxford statute shows that Bacon may have been exaggerating, but that there was some truth to his statement: it asserts that those who
lecture on the Bible, either biblice or cursorie, must not introduce quaestiones
other than literates, that is to say questions arising from the text itself, the
litera, and consequently directly relevant to the biblical passage lectured on.77
For the decades after Tempier's condemnations in 1277, it is impossible to
treat the theological faculties of Paris and Oxford separately.
The leading theologians at Paris, Giles of Rome, Henry of Ghent, and
Godfrey of Fontaines, were concerned with philosophical questions such as
the unity or plurality of forms, the relationship between essence and existence, and that between matter and form.78 The shadow of the condemnations
of 1277 is apparent in the biblical lectures of Henry of Ghent, the reading of
which has been compared to 'walking through an exhibition of errors'.79
For the period between 1265 and 1280, in sharp contrast to Paris, there is
little evidence of theological activities at Oxford, but after 1277 the controversies concerning metaphysical issues were brought from Paris to Oxford
by scholars such as Robert Kilwardby, John Pecham (d. 1292), and Roger
Marston (d. c. 1303). Since the discussion at Oxford was carried out by men
with a past at Paris, it was more often aimed at Paris theologians than at
Oxford colleagues.80
On 18 March 1277, only eleven days after the condemnation in Paris,
75 Smalley, Study (note 2), 275-80; Catto 'Theology and theologians' (note 17), 492.-4.
76 Little, 'Franciscan School' (note 18), 809.
77 See note 34.
78 J. F. Wippel, The Metaphysical
Thought of Godfrey of Fontaines. A Study in Late
Thirteenth-
Century Philosophy
 .
79 Smalley, 'Bible in Medieval Schools' (note 32), 212.
80 Catto, 'Theology and Theologians' (note 17), 496-8.
Monika Asztalos
Robert Kilwardby, archbishop of Canterbury, condemned thirty errors, four
of which concerned grammar, ten logic, and sixteen natural philosophy.81
Some of the 219 articles condemned at Paris had been directed against different doctrines of Thomas Aquinas, but out of the Oxford articles as many as
one-third were related to a doctrine held by Aquinas, that concerning the
unity of form. Kilwardby affirms that the errors in question were condemned
with the approval of all regent and non-regent masters at Oxford, which
shows that the condemnations were not directed against a certain party at
Oxford, but were addressed to a debate whose centre was in Paris. It is
noteworthy that at Paris the doctrine of the unity of form was never officially
condemned, in spite of some steps taken in that direction by Stephen
Tempier.82 At Oxford, the problem had been discussed since the 1240s, but it
was not until after 1277 that the views in question followed confessional lines,
so that Dominicans advocated unity and Franciscans plurality.83
The condemnations of Kilwardby put an end to the doctrinal peace at
Oxford. In 1278 the English Franciscan William of la Mare (fl. 1275) produced a list of errors found in the writings of Aquinas, and in 1280 it was
published under the title of Correctorium. In 1282 the Franciscan general
chapter declared that Aquinas's Summa theologica should not be copied by
any member of the order without the corrections made by William of la
The attacks on Aquinas's doctrines in the condemnations of Paris and
Oxford and in the Correctorium of la Mare naturally provoked a reaction
from the Dominicans, first in a series of Correctoria Correctorii, or, as they
were called, Correctoria Corruptorii, by English and French Dominicans
between 1282 and 1285.84 The second reaction came in 1286, when the
Dominican general chapter decided that Aquinas's doctrine should be promoted and defended, by threat of suspension.85 In December of that year, the
dissent was aggravated when in their quodlibetal questions the secular
masters opposed the privileges of the mendicants.86 The following year, the
Augustinian general chapter reacted by declaring that all present and future
works by one of their own, Giles (Aegidius) of Rome, who had been expelled
from the theological faculty of Paris between 1278 and 1285, but had reconciled himself to the pope, should be defended by the teachers and students of
the order.87
The development of schools of thought within theology - Thomism and
Aegidianism - was an act of defence produced by the climate of censure and
81 CUP, vol. I, 558-60, no. 474.
82 CUP, vol. I, 624-6, no. 517.
83 Catto, 'Theology and theologians' (note 17), 497-8.
84 P. Glorieux, * "Pro et contra Thomam". Un survol de cinquante annees', Studia Anselmiana,
63 , 255-87; M. D. Jordan, 'The Controversy of the "correctoria" and the Limits of
Metaphysics', Seculum, 57 , 292-314.
85 CUP, vol. II, 6, no. 536.
86 Wippel, Metaphysical Thought (note 78), xic.
87 CUP, vol. I, 633—4, no. 522; vol. II, 12, no. 542.
The faculty of theology
opposition that reigned in both Paris and Oxford. As a result of this intellectual climate, theological discussion was no longer presented in broad syntheses, but more fragmentarily in lists of corrections, in which literary works
were criticized point by point, in quaestiones and quodlibets. It is hardly a
coincidence that quodlibetal questions, which had appeared in the theological
faculty of Paris around 1230, became popular at Paris in the 1260s, a period of
doctrinal conflicts, and that they were presumably introduced in Oxford in
the seventies by the Franciscan John Pecham, one of the theologians who
brought the controversies of Paris to England.88
The atmosphere of the 1280s is well captured in a series of letters written
by John Pecham, archbishop of Canterbury, who in 1284 had ratified the
condemnations of his predecessor.89 In the first of these, sent to the chancellor and regent masters of Oxford, he defends himself against an accusation
from the Dominicans of having acted against their order. According to
Pecham, the Dominicans called the opinions of Aquinas 'the opinions of their
order', and some of them had said officially that their teaching was more
truthful than that of any other contemporary order. In another letter of
128590 Pecham writes that the teachings of the two orders (i.e. the Dominicans and the Franciscans) are radically opposed on every point of discussion.
One of them (obviously the Dominican order) has rejected the teaching of the
church fathers and relies almost totally on the philosophers. The Augustinian
outlook of Pecham is also apparent in his letter to the Bishop of Lincoln of
the same year, in which he insists that he does not dislike the study of philosophy as long as it is a servant of the theological mysteries, but that he is
against the worldly novelties that go against philosophical truth (i.e. the truth
of a philosophy that is the servant of theology) and were introduced into
theology twenty years earlier (i.e around 1265).91
But it would be a mistake to think that these - or later - Thomists were
Aristotelians in the same way as their revered doctor had been. Most Thomists, such as Robert of Orford (d. c. 1300) and Herve Nedellec (d. 1323),
were first and foremost zealous defenders of Aquinas's works against such
critics as Henry of Ghent.92 In a study of Oxford University sermons of
1290-3, it has been shown that none of them mentions either the controversial doctrine of Aquinas or the ban on it.93 A possible explanation of this is
that crises and controversies at the university were by this time ventilated in
quodlibets rather than in sermons.
In the 1280s Oxford equalled Paris for the first time as a centre for theo-
88 Catto, 'Theology and Theologians' (note 17), 478.
89 CUP, vol. I, 624-6, 626-7, 634-5, n o s - 5X75 5l8> 5 23-
90 CUP, vol. I, 626-7, no. 518.
91 CUP, vol. I, 634-5, no. 523.
92 Glorieux, ' "Pro et contra Thomam" ' (note 84).
93 B. Smalley, 'Oxford University Sermons 1290-1293', in J. J. G. Alexander and M. T. Gibson
(eds.), Medieval Learning and Literature. Essays presented to Richard W. Hunt , 316-25.
Monika Asztalos
logical discussions and its star continued to rise until its superiority was
established in the first half of the fourteenth century. The main actors on the
Oxford scene at that time were Franciscans, more vital than the Dominicans,
who were tied to the official Thomist doctrine. The first in a row of prominent Oxford Franciscans was Duns Scotus (d. 1308), who used the works of a
Parisian master, Henry of Ghent, as his point of departure. Scotus was the
first Oxford master who strongly influenced Paris, where theology was soon
to be dominated by his pupils.94
From the 1330s onwards the Hundred Years War brought to an end the
interchange of scholars between the Universities of Paris and Oxford. A lack
of creativity among Parisian scholars during this period has been blamed on
the conservatism of John XXII (1316-34).95 On the other hand, the pope in
Avignon does not seem to have been able to bridle the Paris masters; in 1317
he reproached them in a letter for being deceived by philosophy and for
devoting themselves to philosophical questions and subtleties,96 and, during
the dispute that arose in 1331-2 over the pope's controversial views on the
beatific vision, the unanimous opposition of the Paris masters led to his final
retraction.97
At Oxford, intellectual life after 1320 was characterized by the absence of
schools of thought of any kind.98 During the previous decades the Franciscans
had opposed the teaching of the Dominicans, especially that of Aquinas,
without tying themselves to any doctrinal leader of their own. This fostered a
critical and open attitude that made it possible for somebody like William of
Ockham (d. 1349) to make an eclectic use of the writings both of Franciscan
predecessors - above all Duns Scotus - and secular masters. In his works on
logic Ockham often brought up physical problems, and this became a standard procedure in the following generation of Oxford scholars, especially in
the group called the 'Oxford calculators' or, sometimes, the Mertonians."
Whether they belonged to the Merton school or not, when the scholars
became students in the faculty of theology they used the methods they had
previously applied in logic and physics. The theological questions, as formulated once and for all by Peter Lombard, provided these students - who by
this stage of their formation were advanced philosophers - with a new and
94 Catto, 'Theology and Theologians' (note 17), 505; C. Berube, 'La premiere ecole scotiste', in
Z. Kaluza and P. Vignaux (eds.), Preuve et raisons a Vuniversitede
Paris. Logique, ontologie et
theologie au XIV siecle , 9—24.
95 W. J. Courtenay, 'The Role of English Thought in the Transformation of University Education in the Late Middle Ages', in J. M. Kittelson and P. J. Transue (eds.), Rebirth,
Reform and
Resilience.
Universities
in Transition
 , 119.
96 CUP, vol. II, 200-1, no. 741.
97 CUP, vol. II, 414-42, nos. 970-87.
98 Courtenay, Schools and Scholars
(note 17), 190-2.
99 E. D. Sylla, 'The Oxford Calculators', in N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, and J. Pinborg (eds), The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy , 540-63.
The faculty of theology
challenging set of problems. They investigated them by using analytical languages developed in the arts faculty.100
It has been pointed out101 that the major areas in which these analytical
languages - often connected with measurement - were applied were the
central theological issues of the period: will, justification, grace, merit,
reward, sin; that is to say the changeable and measurable components of the
relation between God and man. The degree to which philosophy was pursued
within a theological context is well illustrated by the fact that parts of some
fourteenth-century commentaries on the Sentences circulated separately as
treatises in natural philosophy.102
The development of this characteristic Oxford theology (it later received
the epithet 'English' on the continent) follows chronologically upon the defeat
of the Dominicans at Oxford and the composition of new statutes, under the
anti-Dominican chancellor Henry of Harclay (d. 1317) in 1313, which stipulated that lectures on the Sentences should precede those on the Bible.103 It is
possible that the Oxonian masters' interest in the methods and content of the
arts faculty teaching caused a change in the curriculum (if there was a change
in 1313 and not merely codification of already existing practice), but it is
equally possible that the rule itself, by making possible a continuation of
philosophical investigations within the theological faculty, favoured the
growth of Oxford theology. Whether or not any such connection exists, it is a
fact that the Dominicans, who were gravely affected by the rule, do not seem
to have played any significant part in the development of the new 'logical' and
'physical' theology.
In 1340-5 Paris regained its prominence in theology and entered a creative
period characterized by the absence of schools of thought, as in Oxford
twenty years earlier. The scholarly interchange between Paris and Oxford,
interrupted by the Hundred Years War, was restored indirectly by German,
east European, and Italian mendicant students, who kept Paris and Oxford
informed of each other. English theologians, for example, went to the mendicant studia in Bologna and many Franciscan students were sent from Assisi,
Bologna, and other Italian convents to Oxford. German centres of education
that had close contact with England in the first half of the fourteenth century
were Cologne and Erfurt.104
One example of this indirect contact between Paris and Oxford is the
Austin friar Gregory of Rimini (d. 1358), who had studied in Italy and
England and taught at Bologna and in other Italian cities before reading the
Sentences at Paris in 1343. With him begins a new era in Paris theology, no
100 J. E. Murdoch, 'From Social to Intellectual Factors: an Aspect of the Unitary Character of
Later Medieval Learning', in J. E. Murdoch and E. D. Sylla (eds.), The Cultural
Context of
 , 271-348.
101 Murdoch, 'Social to intellectual factors' (note ioo), 2.91.
102 Murdoch, 'Social to intellectual factors' (note 100), 276.
103 See note 34. See also p. 419—20.
104 Courtenay, Schools and Scholars
(note 17), 163.
Monika Asztalos
longer dominated by Dominicans and Franciscans but by Austin friars and
Cistercians. In 1335 the pope granted them studia generalia in Paris, Oxford,
Toulouse, and Montpellier, with the proviso that Paris should be the most
prominent centre of study.105 The Cistercians and Austin friars were closely
associated intellectually in the fourteenth century.106 Gregory of Rimini
introduced to Paris the kind of theology that had been developed at Oxford in
the second quarter of the fourteenth century.
The invasion of theology by mathematics and logic was accepted at
Oxford, where mathematics and natural philosophy had never been officially
banned from theology, but met with resistance at Paris, where there was a
long tradition of prohibiting philosophizing in theology. Already in 1344 and
1345 there were signs of what was coming, when the Dominican and Augustinian general chapters both condemned the doctrinae peregrinae, 'strange doctrines',107 a quotation from Hebrews 13:9 probably aimed at the English
theology that had found its way to Paris through Gregory of Rimini. The
gravity of the danger felt by the authorities is shown in a letter written by
Clement VI (1342-52) in 1346 to the masters and students in Paris.108 He
complains that the philosophers devote themselves to extraneae doctrinae
sophisticae, foreign sophistical doctrines that are said to be taught in some
other universities,109 and that they adhere to strange opinions. What is even
more deplorable, the pope continues, is that many theologians do not care for
the study of the Bible,110 but entangle themselves in philosophical questions,
trivial disputations, suspect opinions, and divers strange teachings. The forcefulness of the papal document had not been equalled since 1228, when
Gregory IX warned the theologians against letting natural philosophy penetrate theology.111
The letter of 1346 did not have the desired effect and in the following year
fifty articles collected from the works of John of Mirecourt (fl. 1344-7) and
others were condemned by the Austin friar Hugolino of Orvieto (d. 1373).112
Eight of these were concerned with assertions to the effect that Christ as man
was capable of erring and even of lying, the rest with what makes human acts
105 CUP, vol. II, 448-50, no. 992.
106 D. Trapp, 'Augustinian Theology of the 14th Century. Notes on Editions, Marginalia, Opinions and Book-lore', Augustiniana, 6 , 251.
107 CUP, vol. II, 550, no. 1091; A. Zumkeller, 'Die Augustinerschule des Mittelalters: Vertreter
und Philosophisch-Theologische Lehre', Analecta Augustiniana, 27 , 170.
108 CUP, vol. II, 587-9, no. 1125.
109 Sylla has shown in 'Oxford Calculators' (note 99), 545, that the most typical works of the
Oxford calculators were connected with the disputations de sophismatibus in the arts faculty.
110 This is confirmed by the decline of the Biblical commentaries in Paris after 1340: J. Verger,
'L'exegese de Puniversite', in P. Riche and G. Lobrichon (eds.), Le Moyen Age et la Bible
 , 224.
111 CUP, vol. 1,114—16, no. 59. The biblical quotation doctrinis variis etperegrinis, 'diverse and
strange doctrines', is used in Gregory IX's letter as well, but there it refers to natural
philosophy.
112 CUP, vol. II, 610-13, no. 1147.
The faculty of theology
meritorious or non-meritorious and with claims that God is the cause of sin
as well as of just actions. Nothing is said explicitly about philosophizing in
theology, but it may have been the feeling of Hugolino of Orvieto and others
that the use of the subtilitates Anglicanae led to heresies such as the propositions condemned.
The resistance and condemnations of the pope and conservative theologians seem to have been less effective than the censure in 1277. That is at
least the impression given by the Cistercian Peter Ceffons, who had read the
Sentences in 1348-9 together with Hugolino of Orvieto. He defends the use of
subtilitas in theology,113 and claims that criticism of the use of logic in theology is simply due to ignorance, an ignorance that leads to errors.114 The
criticism of Tempier's condemnations in 1277 delivered by Giles of Rome had
led to his expulsion from the theological faculty of Paris, but at this time the
church authorities no longer had the last word in doctrinal matters.
After 1350, there was a decline in Oxford theology, partly due to the black
death. With the exception of John Wyclif (d. 1384), whose unorthodox views
on the Eucharist were condemned at the university in 1382, there were hardly
any well-known theologians at Oxford between 1350 and 1500.115
THE END OF THE PARISIAN-OXONIAN MONOPOLY
The year 1347 was a milestone in the history of theological faculties, not only
because of the doctrinal controversies in Paris but because the highest theological education, until then practically monopolized by Paris and Oxford,
was then decentralized by the foundation in Prague of a university with a
theological faculty. This was the first German university, although the mendicants previously had important schools in Prague.
Many similar cases can be found in Italy, where theology had more or less
been abandoned to the mendicants. A great number of the theological faculties founded towards the middle of the fourteenth century were Italian, and
many of these, for example in Pisa, Perugia, Bologna, and Padua, merely
conferred a new status on already existing schools of theology. The change in
status from studium generale to university seems to have changed little in
reality, since in Bologna only 24 of the 447 masters of theology from the
period between 1364 and 1500 were secular; the rest were mainly mendicants.116
113 For references: Trapp, 'Augustinian Theology' (note 106), 187.
114 For references: J. E. Murdoch,' "Subtilitates Anglicanae" in Fourteenth-century Paris: John
of Mirecourt and Peter Ceffons', in M. P. Cosman and B. Chandler (eds.), Machaut's World.
Science and Art in the Fourteenth Century', Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
314 , 64, 80 n. 78.
115 Courtenay, Schools and Scholars (note 17), 359—65; J. A. Robson, Wyclif and the Oxford
Schools .
116 Rashdall, Universities, vol. I, 252.
Monika Asztalos
The theological faculty of Bologna is especially interesting because its
foundation reflects the controversies that had shaken Paris in the late 1340s.
When the Austin friar Hugolino of Orvieto, who had played an active role in
the condemnations of 1347, drew up the statutes of a theological faculty in
Bologna in 1364 he used the Parisian organization as a model and appended a
list of the articles condemned in Paris.117
The main target of the censure of 1347 had been the excessive use of subtilitates and methods originating in the sophistic disputations in the arts
faculty; Hugolino of Orvieto warned against this kind of abuse not only by
appending the list of propositions condemned, but also in the text of the
statutes. He there prohibits the use of 'divers strange doctrines' proffered in
obscure and non-traditional language by means of sophisms and fruitless
{vanae) questions that lead to aberrations.118 Hugolino also asserts that not
only those who manifestly oppose truth are fighting against orthodoxy, but
also those who chant in chorus words that serve to cover and mask (concinant verborum involucra) strange (peregrinae can also mean 'foreign') novelties, so that less learned men hold them to be brilliant, whereas their subtlety
(subtilitas) is nothing but ignorance.119 Those guilty of such errors must
humbly promise before the masters to correct their teaching.120
When the University of Paris received new statutes in 1366,121 two years
after the statutes of Bologna, there was for the first time in any Parisian
collection of statutes a prohibition against treating logical or philosophical
questions or matters while reading the Sentences. Exceptions could be made
if the text itself required the use of logic or philosophy or if it was necessary
in order to solve a problem. The temptation to treat purely logical problems
in a theological context was obviously greater in lectures on the Sentences
than in those on the Bible. It is noteworthy that philosophical methods were
not banned in and of themselves; what was condemned was philosophizing
for its own sake. The prohibition is repeated in the Toulouse statutes of the
same year and in the Parisian collection of statutes of 1389,122 but both these
collections repeat everything concerning the theological faculty contained in
the Paris statutes of 1366 and therefore do not indicate any new crisis. In the
statutes of Vienna, where reference is constantly made to the customs of
Paris, it is stipulated that those lecturing on the Bible or the Sentences must
not treat philosophical or logical matters, but may use philosophy, logic, and
the other arts when the difficulty of the theological matter to be explained so
requires.123 The same rule is laid down in the statutes of Cologne.124
Although the Parisian-Oxonian monopoly was broken after 1347, the
Bologna statutes testify to the prestige that the older theological faculties still
117 For an edition of the statutes, see note 24.
118 Ehrle, / piu antichi statuti (note 24), 20.
119 Ehrle, / piu antichi statuti (note 24), 48.
120 Ehrle, / piu antichi statuti (note 24), 50-1.
121 CUP, vol. Ill, 143-4. n o- I3I9-
122 See note 25 and C17P, vol. II, 697-703, no. 1189.
123 See note 27.
124 See note 28.
The faculty of theology
enjoyed in 1364, by stipulating that no bachelor who had read the Sentences
in another university would be automatically accepted for further studies in
Bologna, unless he had read them in Paris, Oxford, or Cambridge.125
For the period 1350-65 there are few sources for Paris theology. An important source of information is three theological student notebooks attributed
earlier to John of Falisca but recently ascribed to Stephen Gaudet.126 The
questions and arguments reported are mainly concerned with problems about
future contingents, predestination, and determinism, and they reflect the
growing habit among theologians of the second half of the fourteenth century
to read the Sentences secundum alium, 'according to somebody else'.
From 1365 to the Great Schism the theological faculty at Paris was dominated by German scholars.127 An exception is the Frenchman Peter of Ailly
(d. 1420), a nominalist of reputation, the teacher of John Gerson (d. 1429),
and chancellor of the university. One of the main fields for theological
activity during these years was the application of logic in Trinitarian speculation.128
THE GREAT SCHISM AND THE THEOLOGICAL FACULTIES
With the Great Schism that divided the church between 1378 and 1418, the
Parisian-Oxonian hegemony was definitively broken. In 1379 the majority of
the theological faculty in Paris voted for Clement VII,129 the Avignon pope,
who had the support of the French kings, but two German theologians,
Henry of Langenstein (also of Hesse) (d. 1397) and Conrad of Gelnhausen
(d. 1390), composed treatises in which they recommended that a general
council should be formed as a way of putting an end to the schism.130 The
'conciliar way', via concilii, was officially adopted by the university in
1381,131 but in the same year Paris turned pro-Clementine, and a close friend
of Clement VII, John Blanchard, was appointed chancellor of the university.
The appointment caused scholars from countries that supported Urban VI,
the Roman pope and rival of Clement VII, to leave Paris.132
The exodus of scholars - mostly of German origin - from Paris had more
125 Ehrle, / piu antichi statuti
(note 24), 32-3.
126 P. Glorieux, 'Jean de Falisca: la formation d'un maitre en theologie au XlVe siecle', Archives
d'Histoire
Doctrinale et Litteraire du Moyen Age, 33 , 23-104; Z. Kaluza, Thomas de
Contribution
a Vhistoire du college de Sorbonne
 , 60-108.
127 W. J. Courtenay, Adam Wodeham:
an Introduction
to his Life and Writings
 ,
128 A. Maieru, 'Logique et theologie trinitaire dans le moyen-age tardif: deux solutions en presence', in M. Asztalos (ed.), The Editing of Theological
and Philosophical
Texts from the
Ages , 185—212.
129 CUP, vol. Ill, 565-72, no. 1624.
130 A. E. Bernstein, Pierre d'Ailly and the Blanchard Affair. University and Chancellor
of Paris at
the Beginning of the Great Schism , 36.
131 CUP, vol. Ill, 582, no. 1637.
132 Bernstein, Pierre d'Ailly
(note 130), 45-6.
Monika Asztalos
important consequences for university life than any of the previous academic
dispersions, since the scholars not only went to already existing universities
but also contributed to the foundation and organization of new ones. The
chancellor of Prague University even tried to transfer the Paris University to
Prague,133 just as the Universities of Toulouse and Oxford had invited Parisian masters in 1229, but the universities that really benefited from the exodus
were those of Vienna, where Henry of Langenstein and Henry Totting of
Oyta (d. 1396) drew up the statutes in 1389, Heidelberg, which hosted
Conrad of Gelnhausen and Marsilius of Inghen (d. 1396), an ex-rector of
Paris, and Cologne.134 These three universities were all founded by Urban VI,
who was only too pleased to weaken the position of Clementist Paris by
issuing bulls confirming new universities, whereas Clement VII avoided
establishing new theological faculties. An important exception is Erfurt,
founded in 1379 by the Avignon pope.
All these new universities were modelled on the University of Paris. Vienna
and Cologne also made use of the Bologna statutes of 1364. In their statutes
they both include a paragraph, not to be found in any extant Paris or Bologna
statutes, which has a certain interest, since it obviously refers to a Parisian
practice that the authors did not wish to see in these new universities. The
paragraph says that the theme chosen for the collatio belonging to the principia135 must consist of a whole sentence taken from the Bible, not merely one
word or syllable.136 The Vienna statutes then proceed to a lengthy condemnation of neologisms and other stylistic abuses.
A similar criticism of new and inappropriate terminology in theology is
delivered by the Paris chancellor John Gerson in his Contra curiositatem
studentium, a reform programme for the theological faculty written in
1402.137 Gerson criticizes the new words invented by the ''formalizantes\ the
successors of Duns Scotus, who, like the Franciscan John of Ripa {fl. 1350),
introduced a formal distinction and other unnecessary notions into Trinitarian speculations, thereby complicating matters more than explaining them.
In this context Gerson praises Henry Totting of Oyta, who, as one of the
authors of the Vienna statutes, had reacted against terminological innovations in a similar way.
Gerson defines the relations that should obtain between the different
sciences and ascribes to theology the traditional role of domina, mistress,
133 CUP, vol. Ill, 548-9, no. 1642.
l34 See note 132.
135 The sermon introducing the lectures on the Sentences. See p. 418.
136 p o r editions of the Vienna and Cologne statutes, see notes 27 and 28. Peter Ceffons, the
enfant terrible of Paris in the mid-fourteenth century, had actually chosen the single letter (O)
as a theme (from 'Omega' in Revelation 1) for his collationes of the principia to his lectures
on the Sentences: D. Trapp, 'Peter Ceffons of Clairvaux', Recherches de Theologie Ancienne
et Me'dievale, 24 , 106.
137 J. Gerson, Oeuvres completes, ed. P. Glorieux, vol. HI , 224-49; also C.
Burger, Aedificatio, Fructus, Utilitas. Johannes Gerson als Professor der Theologie und
Kanzler der Universitdt Paris , 45-55.
The faculty of theology
over the other sciences that are but ancillaey handmaidens. He recommends a
return to the old rule that members of arts faculties should not treat purely
theological matters138 and repeats the warning given in the statutes of 1366
against introducing purely logical or philosophical matters into theology. He
also criticizes theologians who fill their books and classes with sophisms and
introduce strange doctrines. This sounds like an echo of the Paris condemnations of 1347.139 An echo of Bishop Tempier's preface to the condemnations of 1277 can be heard in Gerson's claim that the articles of faith can
never be contrary to natural philosophy. In the spirit of Gregory IX's letter of
1228, Gerson asserts that natural philosophy cannot approach the level of
knowledge of the articles of faith and that the philosophers have to accept the
limitations of their science. Transcending these limits would impose limits on
God's freedom in a way that leads to determinism. The theologians on the
other hand must realize that their science is limited to what is revealed in the
holy Scriptures. The two great faults in contemporary theologians, he says,
are curiositas, the wish to know things that are unattainable or harmful to
know, and singularitas, the wish to prove oneself superior by turning to
strange and unusual teachings. Instead of searching for innovations and questioning well-known doctrines, theologians should be content with traditional
knowledge.
In a letter of 1400 to Peter of Ailly140 Gerson had recommended some ways
of returning to a more traditional theology: more emphasis on the study of
the Bible, rejection of sophisms in theology, and a concentration on books
2-4 of the Sentences instead of paying almost exclusive attention to book 1
(the place where Trinitarian speculations belong).141
It seems as if, as a chancellor of the University of Paris, Gerson had studied
the bulls, condemnations, statutes, and other documents from earlier times
and found support in them for a return to a more traditional theology. He
deplored the contemporary habit of defending and attacking doctrines
according to schools or religious orders.142 This was a burning problem in his
days, when the Dominicans were expelled from the university as a result of a
controversy that started in 1387 when the Dominican John of Monzon (d. c.
1412) asserted that the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception was contrary
to faith.143 There was a strong reaction against his opinion at the university,
where the Immaculate Conception had been celebrated officially since
1380.144 To restore order, Gerson allowed the Dominicans to come back in
According to Gerson, to avoid doctrinal confusion theology should be
138 Cf. the statute of 1272, mentioned on p . 424, and note 59.
139 See p. 432.
140 Gerson, Oeuvres completes (note 137), vol. II, 23-8.
141 Cf. a similar statement in the statutes of 1389, CUP, vol. II, 697—703, no. 1189.
142 Gerson, Oeuvres
(note 137), vol. Ill, 239.
143 CUP, vol. Ill, 486-533, nos. 1557-83.
144 CUP, vol. Ill, 297-8, no. 1456.
Monika Asztalos
taught at only one university, or at least there should not be more than one
theological faculty in France. This sole university-obviously Paris—should be
an uncorrupt source from which the other theological faculties could flow like
rivers.145 That very metaphor was in fact used for Paris in the statutes of the
Universities of Vienna and Cologne.146 Already in 1387, in the controversy
concerning the Immaculate Conception, the dean of the theological faculty at
Paris had proclaimed that this faculty was the seat (sedes) of Catholic truth
and enjoyed the highest authority in questions of orthodoxy.147 This was no
less than a challenge to the authority of the Holy See, weakened through the
Schism. During the Council of Pisa in 1409, Gerson presented a theory
according to which the church as Christ's mystical body can convoke a council
with authority to appoint or depose popes and condemn heretical propositions.148 In a council like the one Gerson had in mind, the theologians would
be invested with a special authority, a kind of 'academic infallibility'.149
It has been noted that university institutions influenced the structure of the
Councils of Constance (1414-18) and Basle (1431-49), and during the latter
council a theory was elaborated that gave even more power to the council than
in Gerson's programme: the council itself was now seen as the representative
of Christ's mystical body.150
Gerson brought to an end an epoch in the history of the theological faculty
at Paris. For two hundred years the ecclesiastical and academic authorities had
collaborated to preserve the faculty as a universally recognized guardian of
orthodoxy. When the papacy faltered during the Schism the theological faculty
was ready to assume papal authority. It had secured its position by maintaining tradition and rejecting strange foreign doctrines, whether in the form of
Greek natural philosophy, Arabic metaphysics, or English subtleties.
VIA ANTIQUA AND VIA MODERNA
The fifteenth century witnessed the return of school traditions, with a dividing
line between the realists {reales, antiqui) and the nominalists (nominales,
moderni).151 These two main groups represented two different methods or
145 Gerson, Oeuvres
(note 137), vol. HI, 248.
146 For editions of the Vienna and Cologne statutes, see notes 27 and 28. In the 1389 statutes of
Paris {CUP, vol. II, 697-703, no. 1189), it is stated that, if a student in theology has received
his training elsewhere than at Paris, two years at that other school will count as one year at
147 CUP, vol. Ill, 486, no. 1557.
148 S. E. Ozment, 'The University and the Church. Patterns of Reform in Jean Gerson', Medievalia et Humanistica, new series, 1 , 117.
149 J. B. Morrall, Gerson and the Great Schism
(Manchester, i960), 80.
150 A. Black, 'The Universities and the Council of Basle: Ecclesiology and Tactics',
historiae conciliorum, 6 , 341, 345—6.
151 For a discussion of the use of the term nominalism: W. J. Courtenay, 'Nominalism and Late
Medieval Religion', in C. Trinkaus (ed.) with H. A. Oberman, The Pursuit of Holiness in the
Late Medieval and Renaissance Religion , 26—59.
The faculty of theology
ways of teaching in the faculties of arts and theology, the via antiqua and the
via moderna.152 There were, however, important differences within each
system, depending on whether one followed the realism of Albertus Magnus,
Thomas Aquinas, or Duns Scotus, or the nominalism of William of Ockham
(regarded as the initiator of the nominalist school), John Buridan, or Marsilius of Inghen. By the middle of the fifteenth century the University of Padua
had two chairs in theology, one according to the via sancti Thomae, occupied
by a Dominican, and another following the via Scoti, occupied by a
Franciscan.153
In Paris and in many German universities founded in the fifteenth century,
the different teaching methods gave rise to conflicts between adherents to the
different viae. In Prague, realism became connected with the national Czech
party and an ecclesiastical reform movement, the leader of which was John
Huss (d. 1415), who was influenced by the extreme realism of Wyclif. In 1409
the nominalists had to leave Prague, and many of them went to Leipzig,
where a new university was founded. This accidental connection between
realism and Hussite heresies, fortified at the Council of Constance, where the
nominalist Peter of Ailly played an important part in condemning Huss,
seems to have promoted nominalism in some European universities in the
first half of the fifteenth century.154
When the Universities of Vienna, Heidelberg, and Cologne were founded,
the scholars who had left Paris due to the Schism brought nominalism with
them. In Cologne there was a reaction in 1415, when it was decided that the
arts faculty should return to the teaching methods that had prevailed before
the arrival of the Parisian masters.155 In 1425, Count Louis III cautioned
against realism on the ground that it could lead to heresies, as in Prague.156 In
Heidelberg Wyclifite errors were also invoked to stop realist teaching in
1412, but in 1452 the rector prohibited insult to either of the two viae, and
proclaimed that the students were free to follow either way. From a document issued three years later, it is clear that the two viae had almost the status
of two separate faculties, for it is stated that no student could transfer from
one via to another without fulfilling the requirements of that other via.157
152 See A. Zimmermann (ed.), Antiqui
und Moderni,
Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 9 , especially N . W. Gilbert, 'Ockham, Wyclif, and the "via moderna" ', 85—125,
and A. Gabriel,' "Via antiqua" and "via moderna" and the Migration of Paris Students and
Masters to the German Universities in the Fifteenth Century', 439—83. Also 'Ancients and
Moderns: a Symposium', with papers by W. J. Courtenay, C. Trinkaus, and H. A. Oberman,
and a comment by N. W. Gilbert, Journal
of the History
of Ideas, 48 , 3-50.
153 P. O. Kristeller, Le Thomisme
et la Pensee italienne de la renaissance
 ,
154 Rashdall, Universities, vol. Ill,214-33;P. De Vooght,UheresiedejeanHuss (Louvain, i960).
155 G. Ritter, Via antiqua und via moderna
auf den deutschen
Universitdten
des XV. Jahrhunderts, Studien zur Spatscholastik, 2 , 42.
156 F. Ehrle, 'Der Sentenzkommentar Peters von Candia', Franziskanische
Studien, 9 , 282.
157 Winkelmann, Urkundenbuch
(note 26), 165, i73f., 193.
Monika Asztalos
In 1474 King Louis XI forbade the teaching of nominalism at Paris, and
recommended the teaching of Aristotle and Averroes, Albertus Magnus,
Thomas Aquinas, Giles of Rome, Alexander of Hales, Duns Scotus, Saint
Bonaventure, and other realists, instead of the new doctors: William of
Ockham, John of Mirecourt, Gregory of Rimini, John Buridan, Peter of Ailly,
Marsiliusoflnghen, AdamWodeham(d. 1358), John Dorp, Albert of Saxony
(d. 1390), and other nominalists. The nominalists wrote a document defending
themselves, which is historically interesting, since it gives the main characteristics of realist and nominalist teachings and a survey of the persecutions of
nominalism from the days of Ockham onwards. The ban was lifted in 1481.158
In the second half of the fifteenth century realism, especially its Thomistic
species, became the prevailing way, starting in the Dominican convents in
Germany, where the Summa theologica of Thomas Aquinas replaced Lombard's Sentences as a textbook. This innovation found its way into German
universities and was also introduced somewhat later into Italian universities.
Among the foremost representatives of this Thomist revival were John Capreolus (d. 1444), called princeps Thomistarum, who taught in France in the
first half of the fifteenth century, and Thomas de Vio (Cardinal Cajetanus,
d. 1534), who taught at Padua and Pa via at the turn of the century and wrote
a commentary on the Summa theologica.159 About the same time or a few
decades later the system of two viae was abolished in many universities.
In the middle of the fourteenth century humanism and scholasticism coexisted peacefully in some universities. English Dominicans and Franciscans
had an interest in classical literature, the French Cistercian Peter Ceffons
quoted the classics in his commentary on the Sentences while defending
logical subtleties, and Prague was a centre of humanism and nominalism.160
At Tubingen, one of the latest continental universities to be founded in the
fifteenth century, the humanist Henry Bebel (d. 1518), who taught poetics and
rhetoric, dedicated poems to the ex-rector Gabriel Biel (d. 1495), who had
himself been influenced by the nominalists Ockham, Peter of Ailly, and Gerson;161 but scholastic theology was defeated when humanism became united
with a movement calling for a return to the study of the Bible. When humanists like Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457) applied to the Bible textual criticism that
had been developed for the study of the classics,162 they came close to the
conception of theology as an interpretation of the holy Scriptures with the
help of the secular sciences, the view put forth by Saint Augustine in his De
doctrina christiana.
158 Ehrle, 'Sentenzkommentar' (note 156), 310-16; L. Thorndike, University Records and Life in
the Middle Ages , 355-60.
159 Kristeller, Thomisme
(note 153), 34, 36f., 53.
160 B. Smalley, English Friars and Antiquity in the Early Fourteenth Century (Oxford, i960);
Trapp, 'Peter Ceffons' (note 136); Kaluza, Thomas de Cracovie (note 126), 55—7.
161 H. A. Oberman, The Harvest of Medieval Theology. Gabriel Biel and Late Medieval Nominalism , 17.
162 S. I. Camporeale, Lorenzo
Valla. Umanesimo
e teologia
 .
The faculty of theology
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bazan, B. C, Wippel, J. F., Fransen, G., and Jacquart, D. Les Questions disputees et
les questions quodlibetiques dans les facultes de theologie, de droit et de medecine,
Typologie des sources du Moyen Age occidental, ed. L. Genicot, fasc. 44-5,
Turnhout, 1985.
Catto, J. I. 'Theology and theologians 1220-1320', in J. I. Catto (ed.), The History of
the University of Oxford, Vol. I, The Early Oxford Schools, Oxford, 1984,471-517.
Chenu, M.-D. La Theologie comme science au Xllle siecle, Paris, 1957.
Courtenay, W. J. Schools and Scholars in Fourteenth-century England, Princeton,
Ehrle, F. / piu antichi statuti della facoltd teologica dell'universitd di Bologna,
Bologna, 1932.
de Ghellinck, J. Le Mouvement theologique du Xlle siecle, Bruges/Brussels, 1948;
reprint, 1969.
Glorieux, P. 'L'enseignement au Moyen Age. Techniques et methodes en usage a la
Faculte de theologie de Paris au Xllle siecle', Archives d'histoire doctrinale et litte'raire du Moyen Age, 43 , 65-186.
Landgraf, A. M. Introduction a Vhistoire de la litterature theologique de la scholastique naissante, Montreal/Paris, 1973.
Leff, G. Paris and Oxford Universities in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries,
New York, 1968.
Little, A. G. and Pelster, F. Oxford Theology and Theologians c. AD 1282-1302, Publications of Oxford Historical Society, 96, Oxford, 1934.
Pare, G., Brunet, A., and Tremblay, P. La Renaissance du Xlle siecle. Les ecoles et
Venseignement, Paris/Ottawa, 1933.
Ritter, G. Via antiqua und via moderna auf den deutschen Universitaten des XV.
Jahrhunderts, Studien zur Spatscholastik, 2, Heidelberg, 1922.
Schneyer, J. B. Repertorium der lateinischen Sermones des Mittelalters fur die Zeit
von 1150-1350, Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic und Theologie des Mittelalters, 43:6, Miinster, 1975.
Sheehan, M. W. 'The religious orders 1220-1370', in J. I. Catto (ed.), The History of
the University of Oxford, vol. I, The Early Oxford Schools, Oxford, 1984,193-224.
Smalley, B. 'The Bible in the Medieval Schools', in G. W. Lampe (ed.), The Cambridge
History of the Bible, vol. II, Cambridge, 1969, 197-220.
Smalley, B. The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1983.
Spicq, C. Esquisse d'une histoire de Vexegese latine au Moyen Age, Paris, 1944.
Stegmiiller, F. Repertorium biblicum medii aevi, vols. I—VII, Madrid, 1949—61.
Stegmuller, F. Repertorium commentariorum in Sententias Petri Lombardi, Wiirzburg, 1947.
Verger, J. 'L'exegese de l'universite', in P. Riche and G. Lobrichon (eds.), Le Moyen
Age et la Bible, Paris, 1984, 199-232.
Zimmermann, A. (ed.) Antiqui undModerni, Miscellanea Mediaevalia, 9, Berlin/New
York, 1974.
Zumkeller, A. 'Die Augustinerschule des Mittelalters: Vertreter und Philosophisch-
Theologische Lehre', Analecta Augustiniana, 27 , 167-262.
EPILOGUE: THE RISE OF
WALTER RUEGG
THE EPOCHAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF HUMANISM
In his ground-breaking book, Die Entstehung der Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400, published in 1885, Denifle justified his closing date by saying
that 'the fifteenth century everywhere witnessed the emergence of a new situation'.1 Kaufmann in his 'prehistory' of the Geschichte der deutschen Universitaten,2 which he dedicated to the University of Bologna for its jubilee of
1888, differed from Denifle and included the fifteenth century in the second
volume, which dealt with the 'origin and development of the German universities up to the end of the Middle Ages'. Most historians agree that there is a
dividing line somewhere around 1500. Some of them, particularly social historians and historians of science, see that dividing line as coming much later;
they say that, until the 'scientific revolution' of the seventeenth century or the
'industrial revolution' of the eighteenth century, little change had occurred in
social structure from what it had been in the Middle Ages.3
The introduction to volume II will treat this problem. Here, however, we
are interested in the sense in which the fifteenth century 'witnessed the emergence of a new situation'. As the text, list, and maps of chapter 2 show, the
universities continued, despite the deep economic, religious, and political
crises which shook Europe between 1350 and 1450, to expand during the
fifteenth century. Around 1500, universities also existed at the periphery in
Uppsala, Aberdeen, Palma, and Cracow. Within the central areas from
1 Denifle, Entstehung, xxvi.
2 Kaufmann, Deutsche Universitaten, vol. I, xiff.
3 E. R. Curtius, Europdische Literatur und lateinisches Mittelalter , 2.9—33; N.
Hammerstein, 'Bildungsgeschichtliche Traditionszusammenhange zwischen Mittelalter und
friiher Neuzeit', in Der Ubergang zur Neuzeit und die Wirkung von Traditionen. Vortrdge,
gehalten aufder Tagung der Joachim Jungius Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, Hamburg 13. u.
14. Oktober iyyj , 32—6. On periodization: P. E. Hiibinger, 'Spatantike und
friihes Mittelalter, ein Problem historischer Periodenbildung ', in P. E. Hiibinger (ed.),
Zur Frage der Periodengrenze zwischen Altertum und Mittelalter , 145-64.
The rise of humanism
Louvain and Vienna to Ferrara and Alcala, the map of the universities
became dense. Yet the character of the universities did not change fundamentally during this time. The faculties continued to become diversified,
theology was taken up in most universities. The salaries of the professors
were increasingly paid by secular authorities and the universities were ever
more subjected to the supervision of the municipal or princely authorities.
None of those were new phenomena; they were rather accentuations of tendencies already at work in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The same
was true of the substance and methods of scholastic doctrine. These continued to develop and led to sharp controversies but they remained within the
framework of scholastic philosophy and raised no questions of an epistemological nature or concerning ways of teaching scholastic philosophy.
Nevertheless, there was increasing competition from certain intellectual
and educational tendencies which, since the nineteenth century, have been
referred to as humanism. Like all such designations of 'isms', humanism is a
party label. It was first used in 1808 by Niethammer, a philosopher and educationalist in the Bavarian government, in a polemic against an educational
reform which aspired to establish practical training of the kind already being
offered at the Philanthropinum in Dessau, for which he coined the term 'Philanthropinism',4 claiming that it encouraged the animality of the child while
humanism called forth its humanity. By humanism, Niethammer meant a
curriculum based on liberal education and the teaching of language, which
had dominated secondary education all over Europe since the fifteenth
century and which, in expressions like humaniora (1617) or humanity (1484),
humanities (1703), and humanites (1673),5 could be traced back to the Ciceronian idea of the studia humanitatis.6
The latter term had been taken up in 1369 by Coluccio Salutati (1331-
1406), the Florentine secretary of state and humanist;7 it referred, like terms
such as studia humaniora, to the goals of the new intellectual movement set
in motion by Petrarch (1304-74) and to the content of the new academic disciplines. It is quite understandable, therefore, that historians designated this
movement as humanism and that, after 1869, they referred to the entire epoch
from 1350 to about 1550 by the new concept of 'humanism'.8 In distinction
from the term 'Renaissance', which began to be used at about the same time
4 F. J. Niethammer, Der Streit des Philantropinismus und des Humanismus in der Theorie des
Erziehungs — Unterrichts unserer Zeit (Jena, 1808); W. Riiegg, Cicero und der Humanismus,
formale Untersuchungen u'ber Petrarca und Erasmus , iff.; E. Kessler, Das
Problem des fruhen Humanismus , 9.
5 H. Schulz, Deutsches Fremdworterbuch ; Oxford English Dictionary ; E. Littre, Dictionnaire de la langue franqaise (Paris, 1874), s.v.
6 W. Riiegg, 'Prolegomena zu einer Theorie der humanistischen Bildung', Gymnasium, 92
 , 307-17-
7 References in A. von Martin, Coluccio Salutati und das humanistische Lebensideal, ein Kapitel
aus der Genesis der Renaissance , 106.
8 See select bibliography.
Walter Ru'egg
to designate the epoch of the renewal of all aspects of life, 'humanism' was
confined to educational and literary cultures.
What was new in humanism? According to ideas which are still widely
current, humanism rediscovered the ancient authors, who, as representatives
of pagan antiquity, had fallen into oblivion. According to this view, humanism helped the secular notions of the ancients to make their way against
Christian religious sentiment and against the scholastic philosophy. Today,
however, this view has been shown to be inadequate. Medieval studies have
quite rightly reminded us of the point of shining light in the 'dark' ages and
have shown that Charlemagne had already taken in hand the revival of
classical forms of culture and thought. (This was the basis of the myth, mentioned in the first chapter, of the Carolingian foundation of the University of
Paris.) The importance of the renewal of interest in classical works in the
twelfth century has been established, and the concept of the Renaissance as
well as that of humanism has been applied to works and activities of the early
and high Middle Ages. Secular, and even pagan tendencies, can be seen as
early as the thirteenth century, for example in the study of Aristotle in the
universities. It has also been shown that typical humanists, from Petrarch to
Erasmus, espoused religious views and that many of them were much influenced by scholasticism. We may therefore ask once more, what was new in
First of all, it was the common awareness of persons then living that a new
epoch was opening in the course of which literature and art, which had slumbered in darkness for centuries, had awakened into a new life. Those who
experienced this awareness called the 'dark' interval between the great migration and the fourteenth century the medium aevum or media tempestas, or
the 'middle epoch'.9 This was new. There were already writers in the twelfth
century who thought of themselves as moderns - some superior to, others
inferior to, the ancients. Nevertheless, they did not link the distinction
between past and present with a consciousness of a historically demarcated
epoch, any more than did Joachim of Floris (c. 1132-1202) with his three
eschatologically defined ages of the world.10
THE QUEST FOR NEW SYMBOLS OF SECURITY
Petrarch and his successors did not designate the Middle Ages as dark ages
because they were ignorant of their science and literature but because they
could detect no 'light' there, no insights which would illuminate life, no
9 J. Voss, Das Mittelalter im historischen Denken Frankreichs. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte
des Mittelalterbegriffes und der Mittelalterdeutung von der zweiten Hd'lfte des 16. bis zur
Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts , zzff.
10 A. J. Gurevich, Categories of Medieval Culture , chs. 2 and 4.
The rise of humanism
words which could warm the human heart.11 The rise of humanism occurred
during a period of severe political and economic crises, the Great Schism, the
Hundred Years War in the west, the decline of the imperial house and the conflict for supremacy among the various territorial powers in the Empire itself, in
Burgundy, and in Italy, and the Turkish menace in the east. All these took
place against the background of a cessation of economic growth, financial
crises, famine, and, not least, the Black Death. The result was a deepened sense
of existential menace. These disasters caused the age of humanism to be called
'the most psychically disturbed era in European history', an epoch marked by
'psychological shock', by the fear of death, and by the dance of death.12
The psychological insecurity was evidence of the fact that it was not only
external conditions which were disturbed but that the crisis had penetrated
into the understanding which individuals had of themselves and the world.
The cliche of the dark Middle Ages is an expression of the preoccupation with
crisis on the part of an urban service society, which, with the increasing
importance of rationalized means of communication and exchange, had come
into conflict with its traditional values. The day-to-day experiences of these
urban classes, which became ever more powerful, were deprived of transcendental legitimization and were often contrary to the conceptions and
norms professed by the church, as illustrated by the conflict between the
growing importance of a money economy and the condemnation of usury by
the church.13 The main religious problem for the new urban ruling classes was
to reconcile their mundane activities with the norms of the traditional transcendental order, while finding a form of religion that was no longer bound to
the hierarchical structure of that order but which gave the social dimension an
ethical meaning of its own. The humanists did not aim to emancipate men
from the bonds of medieval religiosity and solidarity. Rather, it was their
intention to overcome the religious and social crises by participating in the
search for 'new symbols of security'.14
11 Concerning the concept of the 'dark ages': T. E. Mommsen, 'Petrarch's Conception of the
"Dark Ages" ' in T. E. Mommsen, Medieval and Renaissance Studies, ed. E. F. Rice
 , 106—29; E. Garin, 'Medio Evo e tempi bui: concetto e polemiche nella
storia del pensiero dal XV al XVIII secolo', in V. Branca (ed.), Concetto, Storia, Mitt e Immagini del medio Evo , 199—224. Concerning the symbolism of light: W. Riiegg,
'Die scholastischeund diehumanistischeBildung im Trecento (i960)', in W. Riiegg, Anstosse,
Aufsdtze und Vortrd'ge zur dialogischen Lebensform , 126.
12 Lynn White Jr, 'Death and the Devil', in R. S. Kinsman (ed.), The Darker Vision of the
Renaissance, UCLA Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies Contributions, 6 , 26; M. Hebert, 'La mort: impact reel et choc psychologique', in
C. Sutto (ed.), Le Sentiment de la mort au Moyen-Age, Etudes presentees au Cinquieme colloque de I'lnstitut d'etudes medievales de VUniversite de Montreal , 10.
13 B. Nelson, The Ideal of Usury: From Tribal Brotherhood to Universal Otherhood , 5, 28.
14 Concerning search for new symbols of security: H. A. Oberman, 'The Shape of Late Medieval
Thought: the Birthpangs of the Modern Era', in C. Trinkaus and H. Oberman (eds.), The
Pursuit of Holiness in Late Medieval and Renaissance Religion , 11.
Walter Ruegg
The specifically humanistic search for such new symbolic configurations
made humanitas itself the symbol of the human security which it sought. It is
true that the questioning of the human condition and especially the discrepancy between the dignity of man made in the image of God and his miserable
vulnerability to his earthly fate has a long tradition. This tradition was
carried forward by the humanists with particular intensity.15 Nevertheless,
the humanity of the human being is a logical triviality and only makes sense if
humanity is so much endangered that not only dignity or some other human
value but humanity itself as a boundary value becomes the object of special
endeavours in moral education.
Human beings are educated in interaction with other human beings in a
given environment and in the intellectual reflection on familiar experiences
transmitted orally. The psychological insecurity which characterized the
epoch of humanism is evidence that traditional institutions could no longer
form the person - whether because those professions which used rational and
particularly written means of communication and exchange could find no
appropriate models for human self-understanding in their own family traditions and their own milieu, or because the procedures of rational criticism,
promoted by the universities, alienated traditional groups like the nobility
from their own orally transmitted models.
The studia humanitatis replaced the missing or alienated family traditions
of political and social experiences with the study of literary testimonies of
alien humanity. They made the analysis of language into the most important
part of the educational formation of a human being. Expressions such as
studia humanitatis^ studia humaniora, and litterae humanitatis conceive of
these efforts as a cybernetic process: through his interaction with textual
testimonies of alien humanitas^ the individual human being gives form in
language and forms his own humanitas. He educates himself thereby into a
morally responsible human being who achieves autonomy through a mastery
of language. The studia humanitatis were from the very beginning identical
with the eruditio moralis. The humanists discovered in the classical Christian
and pagan writers, such as Augustine and Cicero, Aristotle and Jerome,
human models for their own moral education. They found in the dialogue
with ancient authors a new security in the performance of their social roles.
Unlike their medieval predecessors, they did not evaluate their books in relation to the Christian road to salvation, but treated them rather as human
partners in a dialogue over time and space. Humanists of various standing,
including the professor and later diplomat Vergerio (i370-1444), Saint Bernardino of Siena (1380-1444), the teacher Guarino da Verona (1374-1460),
the statesman and political philosopher Machiavelli (1469-1527), and the
cosmopolitan scholar Erasmus of Rotterdam (about 1466-15 36), called books
15 W. Kolmel, Aspekte des Humanismus , 187-8.
The rise of humanism
friends, to whom one could address questions and who could answer them,
and in whose company one felt at ease, whose soul met one's own soul in
reading, and who gave one strength.16
Philosophically, the humanists took the sophistic definition of man, which
had been developed further by Isocrates and Cicero, as an entity distinguished
from animals by the use of language. By the use of language man establishes
social institutions, formulates values, and forms images of reality. Through
language he also experiences the ineffable mystery of transcendence in the
Word of God and he attempts to delineate it in poetry. Scholars in recent
decades have established the affinity between various Italian humanists and
scholastic nominalism, which placed language as a system of signs in this
world and which gave prominence to the human will in comparison with the
intellect.17 For the humanists, language was both a result and a cause of
relations and interactions in the process of the forming of the individual, and
in his conduct in public life, between present and past, between man and
nature, between man and God.
The humanists experienced this dialogic meaning of language in the
ancient authors, Christian as well as pagan, to a greater extent than in scholastic writings. For this reason, they spoke of 'reanimation', of 'new
flowering', not of antiquity but of poetry as the most inclusive term for the
formation of human knowledge by language. In about 1360, Salutati ascribed
to Petrarch the merit of having helped the grey and long-forgotten muses to
regain a new youthfulness and of having caused the dry stream of poetry to
flow once more. At about the same time, Boccaccio praised Dante because it
was by him that the dead art of poetry was revived. It was the state of poetry
which the Florentine historian Filipo Villani in about 1381 used as the criterion to define, for the first time, the temporal dimension of the interval
between antiquity and the present. Villani said that, around 400 AD, poetry,
as a consequence of the niggardliness and feebleness of the emperor and in
part because of the negative attitude of the church, became senile and sank
into a neglected and unrespected condition until Dante 'recalled it into the
light of day from the abyss of darkness, reached out his hand to it and helped
the recumbent figure to stand erect on its own feet'.18 Around 1400, Florence
was praised as the 'florescence' {florentia) because eloquence and culture
were awakened simultaneously and called back from Hell.
16 Evidence in W. Riiegg, 'Das antike Vorbild in Mittelalter und Renaissance ', in Riiegg,
Anstosse (note 11), 91-111, especially 106-8; W. Riiegg, 'ChristlicheBruderlichkeitundhumanistische Freundschaft ', in W. Riiegg, Bedrohte Lebensordnung, Studien zurbumanistischen Soziologie , 107-24.
17 K. O. Apel, 'Die Idee der Sprache in der Tradition des Humanismus von Dante bis Vico',
Archiv fur Begriffsgeschichte, 8 , i2ff.; W. Kolmel, 'Scolasticus literator, Die Humanisten und ihr Verhaltnis zur Scholastik', Historisches Jahrbuch, 93 , 327-35; Oberman,
'Shape of the Late Medieval Thought' (note 14), 14.
18 B. L. Ullman, 'Renaissance, the Word and the Underlying Concept ', in B. L. Ullman,
Studies in the Italian Renaissance, , 11-25.
Walter Ruegg
It is true that, as a result of this attitude, the language of classical prose
authors and, in particular, the Ciceronian style were often slavishly imitated,
but it must also be recognized that many of the great humanists - from Salutati to Valla (1407—57) up to Erasmus — were strongly critical of the aping of
the classical style. What was important was not the classical model of language but the concrete attitude and disposition which were embodied in it.
Since, in it, Cicero said, every word has its meaning in the community in
which it is placed, the moderns must express themselves differently from the
ancients and can even be superior to them.19 Thus, living persons in dialogue
with the authors of antiquity could discover 'new symbols of security', and
develop their own understanding of themselves and the world.
By comparing their own situation with the different historical situation
depicted in the works they read, personalities, epochs, and symbolic forms of
the past could be perceived in their own perspective. Antiques were no
longer used merely as spoils for present use, but rather as elements for the
symbolic reconstruction of past societies and epochs. In this sense, classical
antiquity was 'rediscovered' as a distant historical epoch. At the same time
the humanists tried to replace the mythical foundations of their own city or
country by historical research into their sources. It has often been a cause of
wonderment how the same humanists who promoted the cultivation of
classical Latin could also be the most active champions of national literature
and history. This source of bewilderment is the false identification of humanism with the pure imitation of antiquity. It was the dialogical perspective of
the past that enabled both worlds to be recognized as entities in their own
THE HUMANISTIC MOVEMENT IN EDUCATION
Etienne Gilson, the great student of scholastic philosophy, spoke of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as the aetas Ciceroniana, which replaced the
aetas Aristotelica of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. According to his
argument, the philosophy which was represented by the name of Aristotle
and which dominated scholasticism had to yield place to humanistic writings
and, hence, to Cicero, orator noster. The centre of gravity of the image of the
world and of human beings shifted from the nature of things to the nature of
human beings, who as social beings, were defined by the use of language.
One typically Ciceronian element in humanism was the definition of man as
homo loquens. Accordingly, the orator was granted the highest position in
the hierarchy of human beings and in the classification of types of knowledge. Instead of ranking them in accordance with the greater or lesser
capacity to comprehend the real world, individuals and the various branches
19 Riiegg, 'Scholastische und humanistische Bildung' (note n ) , nzff., 135.
The rise of humanism
of knowledge were classified by their value as instruments for the employment of words as the 'bonds and norms of societies'.20
Humanism first appeared outside the universities, and after a few generations it was assimilated by the main centres of society. For them, words, as
the 'bonds and norms of societies', were parts of their daily experience.
Among the most important humanists were to be found municipal, royal, and
papal officials, notaries and teachers, aristocrats and kings, members of religious orders and princes of the church, bankers and wealthy merchants, and
publishers and free-lance authors. They were, for the most part, university
graduates, who carried on their humanistic studies alongside the practice of
their professional and official duties.21 Their studies found direct application
in the more effective mastery of the spoken and written word in business, in
politics, in the courts, in the chancelleries, and in diplomacy. It was said of
the humanistic pen of the Florentine secretary of state, Salutati, that it did
more damage to the enemy than a thousand cavalrymen.22 More important,
however, was the conviction that the acquisition of a moral education by the
studia humanitatis enabled one to act responsibly as a member of one's
family and one's society.23
No less important was the spiritually liberating effect of the studia humanitatis. They were regarded not as the opposite of Christian piety but as its
complement. This was expressed in symbolic form by the humanistic Duke
Federigo da Montefeltro (1422-82) in the three artistically arranged rooms in
which he spent his leisure hours when he was at his palazzo ducale in Urbino:
two small chapels next to each other and identical in size and shape were the
foci of spiritual and emotional contemplation. One was for divine worship,
the other for approaching the Muses. Directly over these two 'small sanctuaries' - sacella - was the study, the studiolo, of the duke. Still today, the duke
is represented on panelled walls as the embodiment of human virtues in the
midst of the symbols of the service of God and the Muses. On the walls
above, the famous painting by Berruguete shows him with his son, in the
midst of twenty-eight paintings depicting philosophers, poets, and scholars of
antiquity, the Middle Ages, and his own times. They symbolize the intellectual society in which he could acquire the moral and political foundations
of his vita activa.14
20 E. Gilson, 'Le message de l'humanisme', in F. Simone (ed.), Culture et politique
en France a
de I'Humanisme
et de la Renaissance
 , 4.
21 C. Bee, Les Marchands
ecrivains.
Affaires et humanisme
a Florence ;
P. Burke, The Italian Renaissance.
Culture and Society in Italy, 1420—1540 ;
L. Martines, Power and Imagination,
City-states
in Renaissance
Italy ,
191-217 (ch. II, 'Humanism: a Program for Ruling Classes').
22 F. Novati (ed.), Epistolario
di Coluccio
vol. IV , z^jii.,
23 M . B. Becker, 'Aspects of Lay Piety in Early Renaissance Florence', in Trinkaus and
Oberman (eds.), Pursuit of Holiness
(note 14), 177—99.
24 W. Riiegg, 'Die befreiende Kraft der Studia humanitatis ', and 'Der Humanist als Diener
Gottes und der Musen ', in Riiegg, Anstosse
(note 11), 138—67, especially 149, i6zii.; P.
Walter Ruegg
Even the militarily successful condottiere sought and found, in the dialogue
of individuals with individuals of the past and present and of individual
human beings with nature and the Word of God, 'new symbols of security'.
Between the Scylla of traditional systems of concepts and values which were
in contradiction with daily experiences and the Charybdis of the modern
relativity of all values, the humanistic educational experience, of words as
'bonds and norms', led along a path of society culminating in the overcoming
of the identity crises of the age. It did this through the provision of a scheme
for interpreting the self and the world; it was a scheme with a bounded
perspective, but the boundaries could be subjected to conscious reflection and
thereby the scheme could be opened up to other perspectives.
Concepts and values as the forms in which definitions of the interpersonal
situation are expressed became the objects of discursive dialogue. This was
also manifested in the structure of argument. It was not intended primarily to
analyse and evaluate, in a dialectical-logical way, various propositions and
doctrines with a view to establishing their abstract truth. Rather the propositions and doctrines were regarded as assertions of individuals in historical
situations, which were to be understood in the light of those situations and in
confrontation with one's own situation. The effort to discover by textual
comparison and criticism the most authentic form of these statements and to
locate them historically was not a result of the work of academic scholars in
universities. Salutati was the first of the humanists who practised textual
criticism and historical research. His successor as the secretary of state of
Florence, Leonardo Bruni (1370-1444), has been regarded as 'the first modern
historian'.25
The continuous dialogue, whether explicit or implicit, with contemporary
or historical figures influenced not only the type of argumentation. Works
dealing with moral philosophy, pedagogy, politics, theology, and natural
science also took the form of dialogues, letters, and speeches. From the fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries, they appeared alongside and indeed supplanted the genres of sentences, summae, and tractates. There were dialogues
in which various conflicting standpoints or doctrines as well as personal
experiences and reflections were presented by various proponents: letters
recounting personal experiences and evaluative reflections arising from them
were exchanged between individuals and often developed into collections of
correspondence, which the humanists edited themselves. They also favoured
the literary genre of speeches which were addressed to a more diffuse audience of listeners or a group of readers widely dispersed. These genres were
not limited to the cognitive clarification of particular subject-matters or
Rotondi, II Palazzo Ducaledi Urbino, vol. I 357-82; W. Liebenwein, Studiolo.
Die Entstehung eines Raumtypes und seine Entwicklung bis um 1600 , 83-99.
25 B. L. Ullman, 'Leonardo Bruni and Humanistic Historiography ', in Ullman, Studies
(note 18), 322, 344.
The rise of humanism
topics. They introduced the affective, and even the dramatic, elements of
social action as well.26
The humanistic idea of language also influenced the art of the Renaissance;
it did so indirectly through the teaching of the studia humanitatis, which
engendered a humanistic disposition {habitus) in the artist. (Panofsky has
demonstrated something very much akin to this for the relationship between
scholastic philosophy and Gothic architecture.)27 A more direct connection
between humanistic ideas and the art of the Renaissance may be seen in the
application of rhetorical concepts in the theory and practice of art.28
The dialogic structure of the studia humanitatis found its realization in
new, non-university institutions. In Florence, around the turn of the fifteenth
century, citizens, clerics, and university teachers met regularly in private
circles with Salutati in order to carry on learned discussions. In 1454, the first
academy was established in the house of the humanist Rinuccini (1419-99);
there, within a framework of fixed statutes and rules, citizens met for
common readings and the interpretation of classical authors as well as for
lectures and discussions about general scientific or scholarly topics. This form
of regular learned dialogues between educated laymen soon spread. It was
first reproduced in Ficino's 'Platonic academy', in Florence (1462), and subsequently reproduced in Rome, Naples, Venice, Ofen, Cracow, Heidelberg,
Ingolstadt, Augsburg, and Vienna. It provided the stimulus for the learned
societies and academies which, alongside the universities, spread all over
Europe in the second half of the sixteenth century, and became some of the
most important agents of the progress of science and scholarship in modern
This early form of 'continuing education' in scientific and scholarly subjects had its complement in the efforts of the humanists to work out a pattern
of secondary education as a preparation for study at the university as well as
for political leadership and economic enterprise. They were also interested in
physical training, education in mathematics and languages, humanistic
general education, and education for the formation of moral character. From
Salutati and Vergerio to Erasmus, Bude (1468-1540), and Vives (1492-1540),
almost all outstanding humanists made recommendations for the reform of
education, partly along the lines of Cicero, Quintilian, Plutarch, and Basilius,
in letters or in full educational treatises, which they addressed to the political
or ecclesiastical authorities. Vittorino da Feltre (1378-1446) and Guarino da
Verona (1374-1460) created in country-houses successful models of humanistic
26 C. Vasoli, 'The Renaissance Concept of Philosophy', in C. B. Schmitt and G. Steiner (eds.),
The Cambridge
History of Renaissance
Philosophy
 , 57-74.
27 See chapter 1, p. 28.
28 G. Kaufmann, 'Sprache und Kunst in der Renaissance', W olfenbu'tteler
Abhandlungen
Kenaissanceforschungy
1 , 237—65.
29 T. Klaniczay, 'Celtis und die sodalitas litteraria per Germaniam', Chloe, Beihefte zur
6 , 79-108.
Walter Ru'egg
educational communities. Through hostels, colleges, and gymnasia these
models were as influential, if not more so, in the promotion of the spread of
humanism north of the Alps as the humanists who were university teachers.30
Eloquentia together with sapientia constituted the elements of the morally
responsible capacity to persuade by skill in the use of language. The importance of persuasion in the vita activa was expressed in the term orator, the title
which those who cultivated the studia humanitatis in the fifteenth century
gave themselves.31 They often supplemented it with the title oipoeta. Poetry
for them was the broadest category of human knowledge and for that reason
- despite Gilson's view - they regarded the poeta, and not the orator, as the
highest representative of the studia humanitatis.32 The laurel wreath of the
poet, the laurea, was regarded as the highest honour by Italian or German
humanists and it was mostly bound up with the right to teach in a university.33
THE ENTRY OF HUMANISM INTO THE UNIVERSITIES
The rise of the word 'humanist' was an indication that the studia humanitatis
had found their own distinctive and recognized place in the universities. The
word humanista appeared in an Italian letter of the rector of the University of
Pisa in 1490, and as the Latin title for the incumbent of the new chair of
litterae humanitatis at the University of Bologna in 1512. It was used analogously to the more common university designations such as artista, legista,
canonista. From 1515 it was also used for persons who, outside the universities, represented the studia humaniora, like the famous printer and scholar
Aldus Manutius (1450-1515) and Erasmus; it thus entered into common
This does not by any means show that it was only in the sixteenth century
that humanism became established in the universities. The date when this
occurred depends on what one means by humanism. If one understands it to
mean only that classical authors, particularly poets, were taught in universities, then one must go back to the beginnings of the universities. At the
University of Valencia in Spain, the term auctorista was used in 1220
alongside teologus, decretista, and logicus; the same usage appeared a century
30 E. Garin, Ueducazione
umanistica
in Italia, testi scelti e illustrati
 ; E. Garin,
L'educazione
in Europa: Problemi e programmi
 ; A. Grafton and L. Jardine, From
to the Humanities:
and the Liberal
Arts in Fifteenth
 .
31 G. Billanovich, 'Auctorista, humanista, orator', Rivista di cultura
classica e medioevale,
 , i6off.
32 F. d'Episcopo, Civiltd della parola, vol. I, // Rinascimento,
La rivolta della poesia
33 E. H . Wilkins, 'The Coronation of Petrarch', Speculum,
18 , I5^~97«
34 A. Campana, 'The Origins of the Word "Humanist" ', Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld
Institutes, 9 , 60-73.
The rise of humanism
earlier in the monastery at Hirsau to designate the teacher of classical
authors.35
If one understands by humanism the return to antiquity, then its beginnings are to be found at the University of Padua, which, in 1315, awarded to
the poet Mussato the first poet's crown since ancient times; this was the laurel
wreath. Therewith he acquired the right to teach. It was at the University of
Padua that the lawyer Lovato Lovati (1241-1309) wrote poetry and also
analysed the classical metrical forms and 'discovered' the tomb of the legendary founder of the city of Padua, the Trojan hero Antenor.36 But one may also
say that humanism began in the University of Bologna, where in 1321, Giovanni del Virgilio was appointed by the municipality as auctorista, with the
task of lecturing on the 'great authors' of antiquity and on versification as
well. His commentary on Ovid's Metamorphoses shows, however, that there
can be no question of his having dealt with the text in the humanistic way,
i.e. 'dialogically' in the sense understood on p. 447 ff.37 In general - and this
remains to be made more precise in its academic application - these and
other auctoristae have been called 'proto-humanists'.
When and how such 'proto-humanists' became humanistic teachers
belongs to the 'dark ages' of the history of universities. Giuseppe Billanovich,
who is probably the greatest authority on this subject, has said that, 'in order
to understand how Gothic Europe changed into humanistic Europe, it is
necessary to reconstruct the physiognomies and voices of those old teachers,
tracing their influence and their testimony by pursuing the meandering, toilsome but necessary road of research in archives and manuscripts'.38
Various reasons have been adduced to explain why humanism was assimilated or, as some scholars think, was initiated in the Italian universities a
century sooner than it appeared in universities elsewhere. The lack of theological faculties in the Italian universities was considered helpful for the introduction of teaching about classical pagan authors. The emphases placed on
legal studies and their practical significance for lay professions like the notarial one, the high prestige of Roman law, and not least the especially intensive
training of students for written transactions in law and business through the
artes dictandi together could have led to the situation in which the classical
authors were introduced as models for the use of language in written intercourse. Italians could have become better acquainted with the classical
authors who had been rediscovered in the French renaissance of the twelfth
century when, during the exile of the popes in Avignon, they became more
familiar with the achievements of French culture.
35 Billanovich, 'Auctorista' (note 31), 148.
36 R. Weiss, The Renaissance
of Classical
 , i8ff.
37 Text in F. Ghisalberti, 'Giovanni del Virgilio', Giornale
34 , 3-110.
38 G. Billanovich, 'Giovanni del Virgilio, Pietro da Moglio, Francesco da Fiano', Italia
e umanistica, 6 , 203.
Walter Ruegg
Yet these explanations do not elucidate the following facts: as we have
seen, for the humanists, the church fathers and contemporary poetry were at
least equally important with the classical authors. The Divina Commedia was
no epistolary guide, any more than the Confessions of Saint Augustine. If
humanism was caused by the emphasis placed on legal studies at Italian
universities, it would have had to invade first the law faculty, which, in Italy,
did not require a diploma from the arts faculty for admission. But humanism
was able to break out of the faculty of arts only much later and only against
very strong resistance from the faculty of law. It is also interesting to note
that humanistic jurisprudence - as demonstrated in chapter 12 - was called
mos gallicus, as a French phenomenon, which was contrasted with the mos
italicus.39
Positivistic explanations always fall short of giving satisfaction. External
circumstances at best provide conditions which are more favourable to new
developments, as was the case with the weaknesses of the professional
collegia in Italian universities, which enabled individual teachers, and outsiders too, to have greater influence on the formation of the curriculum. Conclusive knowledge can, however, be achieved only by carefully developing the
material to be found in the sources. But, in so far as we can say anything on
the basis of existing research, it was not the university teachers but former
students of the university and the notarial schools at Bologna - Petrarch and
Salutati, respectively - who first brought together classical texts in a systematic form and who interpreted them by the methods of philological and
historical criticism.40 Even though they themselves did not wish to be
university teachers - Petrarch on personal grounds, Salutati because of his
obligations as secretary of state - through their personal and epistolary
connections, they none the less had an important influence in turning the
professors of grammar and rhetoric at the universities of northern Italy to
humanistic studies. Humanistic studies in these universities made such progress that, by 1415, according to Billanovich, 'Gothic Italy very soon became
humanistic Italy'.41
Two examples can indicate, even if they do not explain, this gradual penetration of 'dialogic' humanism into the faculties of arts. Towards the end of
the fourteenth century, a protege of Salutati, Antonio Loschi, who became an
official in Milan, wrote the first humanistic exposition of rhetoric. It had a
direct influence on a former fellow student of Loschi, Gasparino Barzizza.
Barzizza became well known as professor of grammar and rhetoric at Pavia
(1403-7), and of rhetoric and moral philosophy at Padua (1407-21), and
above all through his studies of Cicero. As a teacher, who later opened his
39 Cf. p. 392.
40 On Petrarch: G. Billanovich, Petrarca letterato, I, Lo scrittoio del Vetrarca . On
Salutati: B. L. Ullman. The Humanism of Coluccio Salutati , 95-114.
41 Billanovich, 'Giovanni del Virgilio' (note 38), 322.
The rise of humanism
own private school, as a philologist, and as the author of various textbooks,
as well as through his extensive correspondence, he - like many similar
members of the ever denser network of participants in the humanistic dialogue - contributed to the establishment of humanism at the universities in
his own generation and in the next one.42
The second example of the inclusion of humanism in the universities is the
introduction of the study of Greek. This is often still attributed to the conquest of Constantinople by the Turks in 1453 and to the emigration of Greek
scholars to Italy which immediately followed. Already in 1320, the Council of
Vienna had decided to promote the study of Hebrew, Greek, Arabic, and
Aramaic at the Universities of Paris, Oxford, Bologna, and Salamanca, in
order to make missionary work more effective; but it had only sporadic
effects and did not establish a regular study of Greek. Between 1360 and 1362,
a Calabrian, Leoncino Pilato, taught Greek at the University of Florence, on
Boccaccio's recommendation. But his teaching was so inadequate that no
trace remains of it. It was a merit of Salutati that, after careful preparation flattering letters, the sending of students, generous support by the authorities
- he brought Chrysoloras, a highly educated Byzantine diplomat, to Florence
for three years in 1397. He induced a number of talented students to study
Greek so intensively that they later, like the already mentioned 'first modern
historian', Leonardo Bruni, who translated Greek authors into Italian in the
new humanistic way,43 taught Greek in various universities and purchased, in
the course of their travels, hundreds of Greek manuscripts. In this manner,
Greek authors were already at home in the west before 145 3.44
By the middle of the fifteenth century, the studia humanitatis were already
firmly established in the faculties of arts in the Italian universities.45 This was
essentially a result of indirect and of direct external initiative, as the two
examples cited indicate; they represent a general tendency. In many places,
the leading strata were interested in forms of education which would permit
them to perform their professional and official tasks more adequately and
with enhanced legitimacy. They were also interested in having these new
forms of education introduced into the universities,46 and they were often
willing to meet some of the costs of these innovations. For example, at the
University of Florence in 1432, the humanist Filelfo was paid 224 Florentine
guilders, ad legendam rhetoricam et poesiam, while his philosophical col-
42 W. Riiegg, 'Cicero — Orator noster', in W. Ludwig (ed.), Eloquence
et rhetorique
Ciceron, Entretiens sur l'Antiquite classique, 28 , 283ff.
43 H. Harth, 'Leonardo Brunis Selbstverstandnis als Ubersetzer', Archiv fur Kulturgeschichte,
 , 41-63.
44 R. Weiss, Medieval and Humanist
Greek ; Grafton and Jardine, Humanism
Humanities
(note 30), 99—121.
45 Grafton and Jardine, Humanism
to Humanities
(note 30), 62.
46 Martines, Power and Imagination
(note 21), 2O2ff.; however, the author does not see the
significance of the psychological stabilization for the upper classes.
Walter Ruegg
league received only 160 guilders, the teacher of civil law 130 guilders, and the
teacher of medicine 150 guilders. The remuneration of the professors of
Greek, Chrysoloras and, sixty years later, Argyropoulos, were even more
princely: the former received 250 guilders and the latter 400 guilders.47 Even if
not all cities and rulers were at the same level as Florence, which was both
rich and devoted to humanism, the humanists were not the poor devils which
they were made out to be by many literary caricatures, showing them as
unstable characters who had to flatter the rich in order to keep themselves
alive. They often moved from one university to another or combined their
professorship with a governmental post - arrangements for which we have
more understanding nowadays than did our predecessors in the nineteenth
In the middle of the quattrocento, the studia humanitatis led to farreaching reforms in certain disciplines within the faculties of arts at the
universities, notably in grammar and rhetoric. These reforms required
turning to the sources, although the famous battle-cry Ad fontes was not a
creation of the humanists but of the historians of the nineteenth century. In
certain universities they even penetrated into the third discipline of the
trivium, dialectics, in which they pressed for a humanistic logic.48 Poetics,
history, and moral philosophy were added to the traditional disciplines, as
may be inferred from the sketch drawn in 1444 for a classificatory scheme
made for the library of Cosimo de Medici, by the later Pope Nicholas V.49
THE IMPACT OF HUMANISM ON THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MODERN
UNIVERSITY
As the humanistic outlook acquired social recognition and, with it, establishment in university teaching, so the original humanistic polemic against
scholastic philosophy was turned into a polemic between the faculties and
between the humanists themselves. The issues at stake were primarily
methodological ones, regarding the irrefutability of the ancient authorities as
against the historical criticism of the sources, and ultimately about the epistemological status of linguistic configurations.
Lorenzo Valla was a teacher of rhetoric at Pavia from 1431 to 1436, then
secretary of the humanistic King Alfonso of Aragon in Naples, and, finally,
from 1447 until his death in 1457, in the service of the humanistic^ Pope
Nicholas V and concurrently professor of rhetoric at the University of Rome.
Through his programme to develop the logic of spoken discourse, gram-
47 E. Garin, 'La concezione de PUniversita in Italia nell'eta del Rinascimento', in Les JJniversites
europeennes
du XIVe au XVIIIe siecle. Aspects et problem.es
 , 92.
48 L. Jardine, 'Humanistic Logic', in Schmitt and Steiner (eds.), Cambridge
(note 26),
49 Text in P. O. Kristeller, Renaissance Thought, the Classic, Scholastic and Humanist Strains
 , 162.
The rise of humanism
matice^ by interpreting an author in terms of his understanding of language
and his situation, he had a very far-flung influence. His method of historical
criticism of texts permitted him to show in 1440 that the 'donation of Constantine', which had been used to legitimate the earthly power of the papacy,
was a forgery. His annotations of the New Testament in 1444 were the first
effort at historical exegesis of the Bible, which was then developed further by
Erasmus. His Elegantiae - also produced in 1444 - in which he analysed the
Latin language as a living expression of the changing self-understanding of
human beings, with the purpose of laying the foundations for correct Latin
usage, remained for centuries the most important textbook of Latin style. His
Dialecticae disputationes - much like present work on this subject attempted to erect logic on a foundation of the grammar of normal speech.
This was then carried further by the major works of two followers, the Dutch
humanist Rudolf Agricola, De inventione dialectica, and the French philosopher, Petrus Ramus (1515-72), whose influence spread to Germany, England,
and then America.50 It was already clear in the writings of Valla that the
humanists, through their teaching in the trivium, could reach out beyond the
disciplinary boundaries of the faculty of arts and could thereby come into
conflict with the other faculties. As a result of such expansion, Valla had to
flee from his professorship in Pavia because of the physical dangers arising
from his violent persecution at the hands of the members of the faculty of
law; in Rome he was protected from the attacks of the theologians only
because he enjoyed the favour of the pope. But even less critical humanists
could not avoid dealing with works in the natural sciences, law, and theology
when they collected Latin and Greek works and attempted to establish their
right textual form and therewith to interpret them. In their study of
mathematics, they drew in part upon important, newly discovered, ancient
sources.51 The same was true of their work on astronomical and natural
science texts, some of which were translated from the Greek for the first time;
they made available for the first time in the west the complete text of Lucretius' atomic theory. These works became important in the development of
the natural sciences. George of Peurbach (1423-61) who, as a magister
artium of the University of Vienna, had studied from 1440 to 1450 in Ferrara,
Bologna, and Padua, lectured on astronomy and on Latin authors in Vienna
from 1454 onward. This joining of the 'two cultures' was self-evident for later
humanists.52
In the Italian universities, the physicians, and artistae belonged to the same
50 Grafton and Jardine, Humanism
to Humanities
(note 30), 71—8; P. O. Kristeller,
AchtPhilosophen der italienischen
Renaissance
 , 17-31 . Cf. C. Vasoli, La dialettica e la retorica dell'Umanesimo,
'Invenzione'
e 'Metodo'
nella cultura del XV et XVI secolo
 .
51 P. I. Rose, The Italian Renaissance
of Mathematics
 .
52 M. Boas, The Scientific Renaissance
1450—1630 , ch. 1.
Walter Ruegg
faculty. Nevertheless, until 1500, as is shown in chapter 11, humanism had
only an indirect influence on medical studies. In the sixteenth century this
changed. One may speak of their influence as indirect because many physicians had received a humanistic education; many also carried on humanistic
studies and, by means of translations and commentaries on the newly available medical writings, made ancient medicine known at a historical distance.53 Niccolo Leoniceno (1428-1524) is a striking example. Until his death,
he taught medicine, mathematics, and Greek philosophy at Ferrara for sixty
years, and translated Galen and Hippocrates into Latin and Roman historians
into Italian. By his application of the humanistic methods of textual criticism
to medical works, he stirred up vehement academic controversies but his
influence was felt far beyond Italy. Erasmus praised him as a humanistic
renewer of medicine.54
More direct was the relationship between humanism and theology. The
church fathers, and particularly Saint Augustine, were from the very beginning among the favourite authors of the humanists. The humanists edited
their writings, wrote commentaries on them, and, if necessary, translated
them. In their lectures and writings on moral philosophy, the humanists had
repeatedly to deal with theological arguments; for example, Salutati dealt
with existential questions during plagues with respect to divine providence
and free-will. The critical treatments of the text of the New Testament by
Valla and later by Erasmus were occasions for deeply penetrating theological
discussions, which had long-lasting and profound repercussions on the
attempts at ecclesiastical reform and on the Reformation.55
The relationship both to the law as such and to the practice of law was not
an easy one. Many humanists had studied and practised law. Petrarch
retained a deep repugnance for legal hair-splitting as a result of his own years
as a law student. He preferred the simple moral laws of Cicero. In the first of
many disputations about the ranking of the faculties, Salutati decided against
medicine and for law on the ground that man is ennobled by law.56 But his
proteges Bruni and Poggio (1380-1459) condemned the lawyers, ridiculed the
law, and praised medicine as a true science.57 Many lawyers remained inter-
53 G. Baader, 'Medizinische Theorie und Praxis zwischen Arabismus und Renaissance Humanismus', and A. Buck, 'Die Rezeption des Humanismus an der juristischen und medizinischen
Fakultaten der italienischen Universitaten', in G. Keil, B. Moeller, and W. Trusen (eds.), Der
Humanismus
und die oberen Fakultaten,
Mitteilung XIV der Kommission fur Humanismusforschung , 185-213, zy6ii. Cf. E. Schmitz and G. Keil (eds.),
Humanismus
und Medizin,
Mitteilung XI der Kommission fiir Humanismusforschung .
54 M . J. C. Lowry, 'Niccolo Leoniceno', in P. G. Bietenholz (ed.), Contemporaries
of Erasmus. A
Biographical
Register of the Renaissance
and Reformation,
vol. II , 323.
55 H. Lutz, 'Humanismus und Reformation ', in H. Lutz, Politik, Kultur und Religion im
Werdeprozess
der fru'hen Neuzeit,
Aufsa'tze und Vortrage
 , 3-14; C. Trinkaus,
'The Religious Thought of the Italian Humanists and the Reformers: Anticipation or Autonomy?', in Trinkaus and Oberman (eds.), Pursuit of Holiness
(note 14), 339—66.
56 Cf. p. 28.
57 A. Buck, 'Rezeption des Humanismus' (note 53), 270—9.
The rise of humanism
ested in humanistic topics and were on friendly terms with humanists. Nevertheless, as mentioned earlier, humanistic methods encountered bitter resistance in the Italian faculties of law. The humanistic principles of historical
textual criticism were introduced into legal studies only in the sixteenth
century, and then as mos gallicus, by an Italian professor of law, Alciatus
(1492-1550). 'Legal humanism produced in the florescence of Italian humanism only forerunners and dispositions but scarcely results and perform-
THE EMERGENCE OF HUMANISM OUTSIDE ITALY
This last observation does not apply only to the reception of humanistic
methods and the substance of humanistic thought in the university faculties.
Aside from France, where humanism had an early flowering before the crisis
of 1418, humanism, beyond the borders of Italy, expanded into the universities only after the middle of the fifteenth century, and it became enduringly
established only after 1500. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile examining the
details of some of its less successful precursors. To do so will permit us to
perceive the social conditions under which the expansion of humanism
spread. For the most part, its patrons and adherents were to be found among
the secular and spiritual princes; then Her italicum brought the graduates and
the texts of the studia humanitatis into courts, cities, and universities beyond
the Alps. Finally, mostly on the initiative of the political authorities rather
than that of the universities, humanists, at first mostly of Italian origin, began
to be charged with the teaching of humanistic subjects in some faculties of
arts or in colleges.
Petrarch engaged in an intimate correspondence with Charles IV
(1316-87). In 1356, as the ambassador of the Visconti, he had sought out the
emperor in Prague, whereupon Archbishop Arnost of Prague, Bishop Johann
Ocko of Olmutz, and above all the imperial chancellor, Bishop Johann von
Neumark, became his admirers and followers. This did not, however, last
and it had no serious impact on the University of Prague, which had been
founded by Charles in 1348. It was only in the sixteenth century that the
University of Prague made a place for humanism.
The humanistic interest of the Hungarian king, Louis of Anjou (1322-82),
had an indirect influence on the short-lived University of Pecs (1376 to c.
1440); the king corresponded with Petrarch and Salutati and he opened his
chancery to the humanistic stylistic forms. Sermons at the University of Pecs
58 H. E. Troje, 'Die Literatur des gemeinen Rechts unter dem Einfluss des Humanismus', in H.
Coing (ed.), Handbuch der Quellen und Literatur der neueren europaischen Privatrechtsgeschichte, Bdn Neuere Zeit (1500—1800), vol. I , 614; see also Buck, 'Rezeption
des Humanismus' (note 53), 169-7% K. H. Burmeister, Das Studium der Rechte im Zeitalter
des Humanismus im deutschen Rechtsbereich , 2.6L 151-60; E. Meuthen,
Kolner Universitatsgeschichte, vol. I, Die alte Vniversitdt , 2i5ff.
Walter Ruegg
contain humanistic ideas and passages. It is still uncertain how much the
graduates of this university, who increasingly came from the lower nobility,
from the bourgeoisie, and even from the less prosperous peasants, and who
sought to follow secular careers, contributed to the diffusion of humanistic
ideas. In any case, King Louis laid the foundation on which humanists of
ensuing generations could build.59 Sigismund (1368-1437), king of Hungary,
Bohemia, and Germany, and later emperor, brought Piero Paolo Vergerio
(1370-1444), who was the author of the first humanistic educational tract,
from the Council at Constance to Ofen. Vergerio was active at the court up
to the very end of his life, as an inspirer and educator of the first Hungarian
humanists, including the later archbishop of Gran, Johannes Vitez (c.
1400-72). Hungarian humanism was an affair of the court. Vitez was a
teacher of and chancellor to the humanistic king, Matthias Corvinus
(1440-90); his nephew, Janus Pannonius (1434-72), whom he sent to Guarino
and who may be regarded as the greatest Hungarian humanist, was
Matthias's vice-chancellor. The studia humanitatis were cultivated above all
in learned circles, the first of which began in 1440 in Vitez's house, followed
in 1470 by Matthias in his court, and in 1497 by the contubernium in Buda of
the sodalitas literaria Danubiana. There, Italian humanists and intellectuals
from all over central Europe met; these 'academies' formed real centres for
the diffusion of humanism in Hungary, Bohemia, and Poland. They had their
counterpart in the humanistic libraries. Vitez created the first significant
library of central Europe at his episcopal court in Grosswardein, while
Matthias built up the largest and most splendid library outside Rome, namely
the Biblioteca Corvina. Of the various short-lived Hungarian universities of
the fifteenth century, only the University of Pozsony, founded by Matthias
and existing between 1465 and 1492, showed any trace of humanistic influence.60
The humanistic interests of the higher prelates had a much more farreaching influence in every respect on the University of Cracow, which was
re-established in 1400. The forerunner was Cardinal Olesnicky, who was
archbishop of Cracow from 1423 until his death in 1455; he participated in a
very lively correspondence with Italian humanists. Humanism entered the
University of Cracow in 1439 when Gregory of Sanok, following his studies at
Cracow and in Italy, began to deliver humanistic lectures. They met with
59 E. Kovacs, 'Die Griindung der Universitat Pecs und ihre Bedeutung fur die ungarische Kultur',
in Universites Europeennes
(note 47), 42—7.
60 T. Klaniczay, E. Kushner, and A. Stegmann (eds.), L'Epoque
de la Renaissance
1400-1600,
vol. I, L'Avenetnent
de Vesprit nouveau (1400-1480)
 , 135; T. Klaniczay,
Mattia Corvino e I'umanesimo italiano, Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, anno CCCLXXI -
1974, Quad. N.202 ; T. Klaniczay, 'Le mouvement academique a la Renaissance
et le cas de la Hongrie', Hungarian Studies 2:1 , 13-34; T. Klaniczay, 'Das Contubernium des Johannes Vitez, Die ersten ungarische "Akademie"', in K. Benda, T. von
Beggay, H. Glass, and K. Lengyel (eds.), Forschungen uberSiebenburgen und seine Nachbarn,
Festschrift fur A. T. Szabo und Z. Jako , 227-43.
The rise of humanism
such great interest that, in 1449, a professorship of poetry and rhetoric was
created. In 1440, Gregory followed Vitez to Hungary; and until 1450 he
participated as tutor of the sons of Hunyadi at Vitez's humanistic contubernium. Afterwards he returned to Poland in 1451, was elevated to the archbishopric of Lemberg by Olesnicky, and made his residence into a centre of
humanistic culture in Poland. The Italian humanist, Callimachus Experiens,
took refuge there before he became, in Cracow, a tutor of the royal princes in
1472 and then secretary of the king; he stood in a close relationship with the
university. The university soon became recognized as a centre for astronomy;
after 1450, many leading Cracow astronomers went to Italy to acquire a
doctorate in medicine and to train themselves further in the studia humanitatis. Copernicus, who studied artes in Cracow from 1491 to 1495, was the most
important of the beneficiaries of the humanistic combination of mathematical
and astronomical sciences with philological criticism. The humanistic
courses of study at Cracow, which included Greek from 1499 onwards,
attracted many students from central Europe and as far west as Switzerland.61
The true 'apostle of humanism' in the empire was Aeneas Sylvius, later
Pope Pius II,62 who, in connection with his role at the Council of Basle, was
appointed to the imperial chancellery in Vienna in 1442 and remained in the
service of Frederick III until 1455. At first he criticized the University of
Vienna for its neglect of letters, poetics, music, and arithmetic in favour of
dialectics;63 he regarded it as more important to attract young princes to
humanistic studies. Later, he exercised his right as poeta laureatus to deliver
humanistic lectures. Following his example, such lectures were held regularly
- although with interruptions - from 1450 onwards. In 1454 the astronomer,
George of Peurbach, taught Latin classics, and his pupil and friend, Regiomontanus, did the same in 1461. After the decline of the university in the
1480s, Emperor Maximilian I, supported by Perger, the humanistic superintendent of the university, exerted himself to bring about a humanistic
reform of the latter against the resistance of the scholastically dominated arts
faculty. Humanism acquired a firm position in the University of Vienna only
in 1497, when the emperor appointed the German 'arch-humanist', Conrad
Celtis, to a newly established professorship for poetics and rhetoric. When the
faculty would not swallow its pride, he created a separate educational centre
alongside the faculty, namely, the Collegium poetarum et mathematicorum\
the Collegium enjoyed the privilege of the coronation of poets which conferred the teaching qualification, i.e. the venia legendi.64
61 L. Hajdukiewicz and M. Karas, Die Jagellonen-Universitdt,
Tradition -
Gegenwart-Perspektiven , 26—34; M. Markowski, 'Astronomie an der Krakauer Universitat im
XV. Jahrhundert', in Universities
in the Late Middle
Ages, 267.
62 G. Voigt and M. Lehnerdt, Die Wiederbelebung
des classischen
Alterthums
oder das erste
Jahrhundert
des Humanismus,
vol. II, 3rd edn (Berlin, 1893), 277-
63 Enea Silvio Piccolomini, Epistolae,
vol. I, ed. R. Wolkan, , 8iff.
64 A. Lhotsky, Die Wiener Artistenfakultdt
 .
Walter Ruegg
In other parts of the Empire, too, where the reception of humanism has
been well investigated,65 it was primarily ecclesiastical and secular princes,
like the bishop of Worms and chancellor of the University of Heidelberg,
Johann von Dahlberg (1455-1503), who encouraged and supported humanistic learning in their palaces and universities - in part, personally as patrons
of centres of humanistic sodalitates and, in part, through their counsellors
and officials, who had been humanistically trained in Italy. But humanism
was also well received in the cities, which were gaining in collective selfconsciousness. This reception was partly the achievement of influential individuals like Albrecht von Eyb (1420-75), head of the cathedral at Bamberg
and Eichstatt, Sigismund Gossenbrot, mayor of Augsburg in 1458, or Hans
Pirckheimer, the Nuremberg patrician who, with Eyb in Bologna in 1448, had
been introduced to the studia humanitatis; his collection of humanistic manuscripts is now in the British Museum. His son Johannes and his nephew
Willibald, who was a member of the municipal council of Nuremberg (1498),
were also very active as humanists. The studia humanitatis were given an
institutional position in municipal schools; some of these, like the schools at
Rottweil, Munster, and Schlettstadt, became genuine forcing-houses of
humanism. Basle, through the joint activities of schools, the university, and
publishing houses, developed into a centre of humanistic culture, prominent
and influential throughout Europe.
'Itinerant humanists', both Italian and German, who had studied in Italy
were the first representatives of humanism in the German universities. They
taught mainly outside the programme of the faculties, on the basis of invitations by the territorial sovereign. Luder was a good example of the situation.
Although he had no university degree, he was the first person to deliver
humanistic lectures in German universities. Between 1456 and 1470, Luder
offered a new programme of humanistic teaching in Heidelberg, Erfurt,
Leipzig, Basle and Vienna. He did this in two senses: as an outsider he had to
make propaganda for his lectures by means of special publicity.66
Not only were the humanists imposed on the faculties of arts, they were
often paid on a princely scale; their remuneration exceeded by far the ordinary salary of a magister.67 The municipal universities made efforts to
65 H. O. Burger, Renaissance,
Humanismus,
Reformation,
Deutsche Literatur im
europaischen
Kontext ; L. W. Spitz, 'The Course of German Humanism', in H. A. Oberman (ed.), with T. A. Brady, Her Italicum, the Profile of the Italian
Renaissance in the Mirror of the European Transformation , 371-436; E.
Meuthen, 'Charakter und Tendenzen des deutschen Humanismus', in H. Angermeier (ed.),
der Reformationszeit,
Schriften des Historischen Kollegs, Kolloquien 3
 , 217-66.
66 L. Bertalot, 'Humanistische Vorlesungsankiindigungen in Deutschland im 15. Jahrhundert
 ', in L. Bertalot Studien zum italienischen und deutschen Humanismus,
vol. I, ed. P. O.
Kristeller, , 219—27.
67 L. Boehm, 'Humanistische Bildungsbewegung und mittelalterliche Universitatsverfassung,
Aspekte zur friihneuzeitlichen Reformgeschichte der deutschen Universitaten', in
Universities
The rise of humanism
provide humanistic teaching. Basle established its first salaried post in arte
humanitatis sive oratoria in 1464. Similar efforts were made in Cologne, it
was only in 1515 that it came to be regarded as a fortress of scholasticism and
hence the object of humanistic polemics. Taken as a whole, tendencies
towards humanistic teaching existed in most German universities before
1500. Nevertheless, it was only after 1516 that the structures of the universities, first of all in Wittenberg, were reformed in a humanistic direction.68
In England, too, humanism was at first a private affair of princes who,
through their diplomatic missions, were impressed by Italian humanists.
Thus, the bishop of Winchester and later cardinal of England, Henry Beaufort, engaged the services of the famous humanist Poggio Bracciolini at the
Council of Constance. But he did not do much for the humaniora during
Poggio's sojourn in London from 1418 to 1423. The situation was rather
different in the case of his rival, the regent of the English crown, Duke
Humphrey of Gloucester (1391-1447). He was not only an interested and
generous patron of Italian humanists, some of whom he took into his service
and others of whom dedicated their translations and essays to him. He also
assembled a valuable humanistic library, parts of which now form the basis
of the Bodleian Library in Oxford. His example was emulated by other
English aristocrats, who collected humanistic books and gathered learned
humanists around themselves. A generation later, it was the iter italicum
which introduced members of the aristocracy, as well as those who later
became tutors and officials, to the studia humanitatis. These were given
institutional status as prerequisites for other studies at the end of the fifteenth
century by certain colleges, for example, Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1480.
Humanistic studies, however, really penetrated into the universities only in
the sixteenth century.69
Humanism was even more an affair of the court in the Iberian peninsula.
King John II of Castile and Leon (1405-54) had very close relationships with
Italian humanists. Alfonso, V, king of Aragon, Catalonia, and Naples (1396-
1458), surrounded himself with a genuinely humanistic court. Later Italian
humanists at the Portuguese court led the efforts to make the new discoveries
known in Latin. After 1464, other Italian humanists were appointed to the
professorships of astrology and poetics at the University of Salamanca. The
studia humanitatis set down deep roots in Salamanca at the end of the
century through the activities of two scholars who had studied in Italy; these
were the Latinist, Antonio de Nebrija (1444-1522), and Aires Barbosa, who
of the Late Middle Ages, 329—41; O. Herding, 'Padagogik, Politik, Geschichte', in L'Humanisme allemand (1480—1540): XVHie Colloque international de Tours ,
68 Meuthen, Kolner Universitatsgeschichte
(note 58), 204-9.
69 W. E. Pantin, 'The Conception of the Universities in England in the Period of the Renaissance', in Universites
europeennes
(note 47), 101-13; D. Hay, 'England and the Humanities in
the Fifteenth Century', in Oberman (ed.), with Brady, her Italicum
(note 65), 305-67.
Walter Ruegg
was appointed to the first professorship of Greek in 1495. The University of
Alcala, which was founded in 1499 through the efforts of the humanistic
Cardinal Ximenes, opened its doors only in 1508. In Portugal, too, humanism
became established only during the sixteenth century.70
Ever since Petrarch, who called a Dutch friend 'his Socrates', there had
been in the Netherlands scattered individual intellectuals interested in
humanism. Nevertheless, one may speak of a reception of humanism in the
Netherlands only after 1465. Its reception occurred primarily in schools like
the one in Deventer under Alexander Hegius (1483-98) and in learned circles
like the 'academy' of Adwerth, which was a monastery near Groningen, to
which the important humanists, Wessel Gansfort (1419-85) and Rudolf Agricola (1443-85), belonged in the years around 1470. It is significant that Gansfort and Agricola first taught at universities outside the Netherlands, the
former at Paris, where Agricola and Reuchlin were among his students, the
latter at Ferrara and Heidelberg. It is true that, in Louvain, there was a professorship for poetics in the law faculty in 1477-8 and that, in the faculty of
arts, a professorship for rhetoric had existed since 1444. Nevertheless, the
incumbents of these chairs were primarily interested in mathematics and law.
It was only with the establishment of the Collegium trilingue in 1517 that the
efflorescence of humanism in Louvain began.71
In France, humanism developed at first mostly in close association with
Italian humanism. The papal court at Avignon, which fostered contacts
between Italian and French intellectuals, contributed to this. The high
officials of the papal and royal chancelleries, like Jean de Montreuil (1354-
1418) and Nicolas de Clamanges (1365-1437), gave currency to the humanistic ideas of their Italian colleagues. Both had become acquainted with the
Latin classics at the College de Navarre in Paris. Nicolas, before he took up
his new duties as apostolic secretary, gave lectures on those subjects at the
college de Navarre; in 1393 he was elected rector of the university. In addition
to these two, there was a third former pupil of the College de Navarre, the
eminent theologian, preacher, and ecclesiastical politician, Gerson (1363-
1429), who was chancellor of the University of Paris from 1396 and its most
influential representative at the Council of Constance. Together with Clamanges and Montreuil, Gerson may be regarded as the founder of the first
generation of French humanism.
With the dissolution of many of the colleges in 1418, humanism suffered a
70 F. Rico, 'Nebrija, Aires Barbosa et l'humanisme de leur temps'; A. da Costa Ramalho, 'Quelques aspects de Pintroduction de Phumanisme au Portugal'; L. de Matos, 'L'expansion portugaise dans la litterature latine de la Renaissance'; and L. de Albuquerque, 'Science et l'humanisme dans la Renaissance portugaise', in UHumanistne
portugais et {'Europe. Actes du XXle
international
humanistes,
Tours 3-13 juillet 1978 , 245—6,
33-49, 402-6, 4I9-35-
71 J. IJsewijn, 'The Coming of Humanism in the Low Countries', in Oberman (ed.), with Brady,
her Italicum (note 65), 193-301, especially 203, 230, 235, 276.
The rise of humanism
severe reverse. It is true that later on the English regent, Humphrey of
Gloucester, gave a stimulus to humanistic studies not only in Paris but also at
the University of Caen, which had been founded by the English king. In Aix,
Angers, and Avignon, the studia humanitatis were cultivated in the context of
relations with Italy. After 1440, former pupils of the College de Navarre also
lectured on humanistic subjects. But it was only after the reform of the
faculty of arts at the University of Paris from 1452 onwards that there was a
genuine upsurge of humanism. It was not only the arrival of Italian humanists
of high standing in Paris which opened the new phase of humanism in France.
In 1453, Guillaume Fichet (1433-c. 1480) began an influential career as a
humanistic teacher at the College de la Sorbonne. In 1470, together with his
colleague Heynlin, he established a printing-press at the Sorbonne which was
the first in France to print humanistic texts. However, they both left Paris in
1473. It was only a decade later that a Christian and nationally oriented
humanism became established, thanks to a pupil of Fichet, the general of the
Trinitarian order, Robert Gaguin (c. 1433-1502); he counted among his
pupils Erasmus of Rotterdam. Lefevre d'Etaples (1455-1536) continued this
tradition with the zeal of the Reformation. Taken as a whole, humanism in
the fifteenth century played a relatively modest part in the French universities.
The studia humanitatis offered only optional lectures, and teaching was confined to individual colleges. Humanistic reforms occurred only in the sixteenth century, and even then as a result of much strenuous exertion.72
BOOK-PUBLISHING AS THE ALLY OF HUMANISM
Fichet's foundation of a printing-press at the Sorbonne shows what importance humanism attached to the printing of books. But, in the fifteenth
century, we find only precursors of this development, which in the sixteenth
century became a significant feature of universities. It is true that Gutenberg's
invention of printing by the use of separately cast and combinable characters
was not driven by humanistic motives. The famous 42-line Bible was the first
product of Gutenberg's press and it appeared in 1455. Almost half of the
nearly 30,000 incunabula titles printed before 1501 were editions of the Bible,
liturgical works, breviaries, and other religious writings; nearly 30 per cent
were literary works of antiquity, the earlier Middle Ages, and contemporary
times; 10 per cent were legal and natural scientific works.73
The printing of books served the objectives of humanism in two ways.
First, the humanists, as we have seen, met other persons through books and
for that reason they were driven by the desire to possess as many books as
possible. This demand was met by copying offices like that of the Florentine
Vespasiano de Bisticci (1421-98), which produced expensive de luxe editions.
72 Universites
en France,
131-3; D. Cecchetti, // primo
 .
73 L. Febvre and H. -J. Martin, UApparition du livre , 351.
Walter Ruegg
The printing of books permitted the less propertied humanists to build up
their own libraries. The qualitative aspect was as important as the quantitative one. Salutati noted with regret in 1400 that the critical improvement of
the flawed traditional texts, which he had inaugurated through systematic
comparison of manuscripts, was a wasted labour of love because every
copyist made new mistakes. With the coming of the printed book, the critically edited text could be reproduced in as many copies as desired. This
presupposed, of course, special care in the setting of type.
The printing business expanded very rapidly, since it led to a speedy
growth of fortunes. It developed outside the guilds and their norms of
quality. It was easier to become a printer than to become a baker, Erasmus
said contemptuously. Alongside the innumerable producers of mass products, there appeared, as a result of the humanists' efforts to obtain
authentic texts, printers who themselves had been trained as scholars and
who collaborated closely with learned men. A typical example of this type
of printer was Aldus Manutius, who had gone through and taught the studia
humanitatis, including Greek - particularly in Rome and Ferrara - and
who, when he was forty years of age, founded a printing office in Venice in
1490. In order to publish Greek classics correctly, he surrounded himself
with a circle of learned friends who were Greeks and teachers of Greek.
This circle acquired the name and statute of a 'new academy', Neakademias
Manutius and, above all, his collaborator Erasmus of Rotterdam were
examples of the significance which the printing of books had for the
development of humanism outside the universities. Erasmus was the first
free-lance writer of the Occident who lived only for and from his publications; he rejected various invitations to become a university teacher or a
high ecclesiastical official. His influence as the most significant representative and propagator of Christian humanism, and as a forerunner of the
Protestant Reformation and the Catholic reforms of the sixteenth century,
was a result not only of his extended correspondence but of his role in the
printing of books and in the book trade. He worked directly at the
proof-reading table, first with Aldus Manutius and then later with Johannes
and Hieronymus Froben in Basle, where he read the proofs of his latest
work while at the same time he was busy writing another one. He sold his
own humanistic output, which included more than 160 works and which
were distinguished by the fact that he was one of the first to receive
royalties, and by his combination of personal attention to the design of his
books by artists like Urs Graf and Hans Holbein with advertising and
distributing them. He praised the art of book-printing as the highest of all
74 M. Lowry, The World of Aldus Manutius. Business and Scholarship in Renaissance Venice
 , 8, 196.
The rise of humanism
arts because it permitted a continuous dialogue with the most educated and
most pious men of all time.75
Book-printing had far-reaching consequences for university teaching.
Teaching in the Middle Ages was dominated by the spoken word in lectures
and in disputations, as well as by the ideas which were presented and elaborated in those oral forms. When the ordinary student began to buy books, the
written word became dominant in university teaching. Not only were the
sources made more immediately and more comprehensively accessible, but
commentaries, textbooks, and polemics ceased to be monopolized by teachers and could be purchased in the market. Thus, diverse views and new
insights could speedily become objects of intensive discussions and of individual debates within the larger scientific community. It was not only the
physical universe which expanded so vastly by the end of the fifteenth
century. Thanks to humanism and its connection with book-printing, the
world of knowledge and ideas in the universities expanded in all its historical
depths and its diverse manifestations to an extent which could only be fully
developed in subsequent centuries.
Humanism is a phenomenon of the transition from the Middle Ages to
modern times. Humanism, especially in the universities, was built on medieval foundations. The emphasis which the humanists laid on the differences
between themselves and medieval intellectual methods and beliefs shows how
deep the medieval imprint was on them; they felt themselves nearly overwhelmed by it and found it very difficult to go their own way, especially in
the universities. In so far as they placed at the centre of their intellectual
interests the understanding which human beings have of themselves and the
world, and the social activities of human beings as potential sources of conflict, they opened up a new epoch in the history of universities. In this new
epoch, human experience and its translation in verbal and mathematical form
became the task of the 'scientific revolution' - or, more precisely expressed,
the substantive extension, empirical deepening, methodological reformation,
and conceptual systematization of the results of scientific and scholarly
research and their communication through teaching.
75 W. Riiegg, 'Erasmus von Rotterdam', in S. Corsten, G. Pflug, and F. A. Schmidt-Kunsemuller
(eds.), Lexikon de gesamten Buchwesens, vol. II , 476-7.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baron, H. The Crisis of Early Italian Renaissance, Civic Humanism and Republican
Liberty in an Age of Classicism and Tyranny, 2 vols., Princeton, 1955; revised onevolume edition with an epilogue, Princeton, 1966.
Baron, H. In Search of Florentine Civic Humanism, Essays on the Transition from
Medieval to Renaissance Thought, 2 vols., Princeton, 1988.
Walter Ruegg
Baxandall, M. Giotto and the Orators, Humanist Observers of Fainting in Italy and
the Discovery of Pictorial Composition, Oxford, 1971.
Bibliographie Internationale de VHumanisme et de la Renaissance (Geneva), 1 ,
and subsequent annual volumes.
Buck, A. Humanismus, seine europdische Entwicklung in Dokumenten und Darstellungen, Freiburg/Munich, 1987.
Cochrane, R. Historians and Historiography in the Italian Renaissance, Chicago,
Garin, E. La cultura filosofica del Rinascimento italiano, Florence, 1961; znd edn,
Garin, E. La disputa delle arti nel Quattrocento, Florence, 1947.
Garin, E. Der italienische Humanismus, Berne, 1947.
Grafton, A. and Jardine, L. From Humanism to the Humanities, Education and the
Liberal Arts in Fifteenth and Sixteenth Century Europe, London, 1986.
Kohl, B. J. Renaissance Humanism, 1300-1550. A Bibliography of Materials in
English, New York/London, 1985.
Kristeller, P. O. 'The Curriculum of the Italian Universities from the Middle Ages to
the Renaissance', Proceedings of the Patristic, Mediaeval and Renaissance Conference, 7 , 1—15.
Kristeller, P. O. 'Humanism and Scholasticism in the Italian Renaissance ',
in P. O. Kristeller, Studies in Renaissance Thought and Letters, Rome, 1956.
Kristeller, P. O. 'Humanism', in C. B. Schmitt and G. Steiner, (eds.), The Cambridge
History of Renaissance Philosophy, Cambridge, 1988, 113-37.
Martines, L. Power and Imagination, City-states in Renaissance Italy, New York,
Mitteilungen der Senatskommission fiir Humanismusforschung der DFG Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, vol. XI, Humanismus und Medizin, ed. E. Schmitz and G.
Keil, Weinheim, 1984; vol. XII, Humanismus im Bildungswesen des 15. und 16.
Jahrhunderts, ed. W. Reinhard, Weinheim, 1984, vol. XIV, Der Humanismus und
die oberen Fakultdten, ed. G. Keil, B. Moeller, and W. Trusen, Weinheim, 1987.
Miiller, G. Mensch und Bildung im italienischen Renaissance - Humanismus, Vittorino da Feltre und das humanistische Erziehungsdenken, Baden-Baden, 1984.
Schmitt, C. B. and Steiner, G. (eds.) The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy, Cambridge, 1988.
Trinkaus, C. 'Humanism', in Encyclopedia of World Art, vol. VI, New York, 1962,
Trinkaus, C. and Oberman, H. A. (eds.) The Pursuit of Holiness in Late Medieval
and Renaissance Religion. Papers from the University of Michigan Conference,
Leiden, 1974.
Les Universites europeennes du XIVe au XVHle siecle: aspects et problemes. Actes du
colloque international a Voccasion du Vie centenaire de Vuniversite Jagellonne de
Cracovie, 6-8 Mai 1964, Geneva, 1967.
Verger, J. (ed.) Histoire des universites en France, Toulouse, 1986, 77-137.
Wuttke, D. 'Diirer et Celtis, l'an 1500 considere comme Pepoque de l'humanisme
allemand', in XVHle Colloque international de Tours, VHumanisme allemand
(1480-1540), Munich/Paris, 1979.
EDITORS' NOTE ON THE
For practical reasons, the index has been divided into two parts: a list of
names of persons, and an index of geographical places and subjects.
The first index contains the names of all the persons mentioned in the
volume. In the case of medieval scholars and personalities, the alphabetical
order used is that of the Christian or given name rather than the family
surname. For the humanists, usually better known under their patronymic,
this is the name that features in the alphabetical list. Authors' works have not
been included in the indexes.
The geographical and subject index has been carefully edited. In other
words, the various subjects which appear in the text are not necessarily
reproduced as such or under a place name in the index. Instead, we have
preferred to group entries under a more general heading, and we have
included only subjects which are directly relevant for the history of universities. For all references to individual persons, the reader should consult the
name index (with the obvious exception of Aristotle and Aristotelianism).
Place names are given in the English form, when this exists, followed by the
(modern) country and county, Land, departement or province. For the sake
of historical accuracy, the name commonly used at the time is listed. The
present place name or other variants are shown in brackets after the entry
concerned. Wherever possible, people have been identified and places located.
The two indexes have been compiled with the help of Johan Hanselaer in
Ghent. We are most grateful to him for his diligent work and attention to
NAME INDEX
Abano, see Peter of Abano
Abbeville, see Gerard of Abbeville
Abelard, see Peter Abelard
Abraham bar Hiyya (Savasorda)
(C.1065-C.1136), Jewish philosophical
scholar and scientist, 341
Abraham ibn Ezra (C.1090-C.1164), Jewish
Spanish scholar, 340
Abu al-Qasim (Abu al-Qasim Halaf b.
Abbas az-Zahrawi) (Albucasis)
(c.936—c.1013), Muslim physician and
author, 377
Abu Ma 'Shar (Albumazar) (787-886),
Muslim astrologer, 352
Accursius, see Franciscus Accursius
Adam Wodeham (d. 1358), English
theologian, 440
Adelard of Bath (/?. 1116-1142), English
philosophical scholar, 297, 339, 340, 342,
Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini, see Pius II
Africanus, see Constantinus Africanus
Agricola, Rudolf (1443-1485), Dutch
humanist, 457, 464
Agustin, Antonio (1517-15 86), Spanish
humanist, archbishop of Tarragona, 392
Ailly, see Peter of Ailly
Aimericus {fl. 1123-d. 1141), Frenchman,
cardinal-dean of S. Maria Nova,
chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire,
Aires Barbosa (£.1465-1540), Spanish
humanist and professor, 463
Alan of Lille (c.1128-1202/3), French
theologian, 412
Albert of Saxony {c. 1316-1390), German
philosophical scholar, 330, 440
Alberti, Leon Battista (1404-1472), Italian
humanist, 29
Albertino Mussato (1262-1329), Italian
author and statesman, 453
Albertus Magnus (1193-1280), German
philosophical scholar, theologian and
scientific writer, saint, 29, 298, 423, 426,
Albornoz, see Gil Albornoz
Albrecht von Eyb, see Eyb, Albrecht von
Albucasis, see Abu al-Qasim
Albumasar, see Abu Ma 'Shar
Alchabitius, see Kabisi, al
Alciatus, Andreas (1492-15 50), Italian legal
humanist and professor, 392, 459
Alcuin (735-804), Anglo-Saxon educational
writer and theologian, 41, 310
Alderotti, see Taddeo Alderotti
Aldus Manutius, see Manutius, Aldus
Alexander III (Rolando Bandinelli)
(£.1105-1181), pope, 16, 79, 80, 82, 83, 88
Alexander IV (Rinaldo, Count of Segni)
(1199-1261), pope, 91, 92, 94
Alexander V (Pietro di Candia)
(c.1339-1410), pope, 105
Alexander of Aphrodisias {fl. c.200), Greek
philosopher, 315
Alexander of Hales (c.i 170/85-1245),
Franciscan Parisian theologian and
philosophical scholar, 415, 423, 440
Alexander Neckam (1157-1217), British
scientist and theologian, 13, 338, 339,
347, 368, 414, 426
Alexander of Villedieu (C.1170-C.1250),
French grammarian, 312, 344
Alfanus (1015/20-1085), Italian scholar and
poet, archbishop of Salerno, 366
Name index
Alfonso V the Magnanimous (1396-1458),
king of Aragon, 105, 456, 463
Alfonso VIII (1155-1214), king of Castile,
54> 55, 92.
Alfonso IX (1171—1229), king of Leon, 92,
Alfonso X the Wise (1221-1284), king of
Castile, 92, 342, 390, 392, 404
Alfonso XI (1311-1350), king of Castile, 98
Alfraganus (d. after 861), Muslim
astronomer, 339, 348, 349
Alfred the Great (848-899), king of
Wessex, 7, 297
Algazel, see Ghazali, al
Alhazen (Abu-Ali Al-Hasan ibn
al-Haitham) (965-1038), Muslim
scientist, 323, 347
Alighieri, see Dante Alighieri
Alluncingoli Ubaldo, see Lucius III
Althoff, Friedrich Theodor ,
Prussian statesman and professor, xxiii
Amalric of Bene (d. c.1207), French
Aristotelian philosophical scholar, 420,
Ambrogio Traversari, see Ambrose of
Ambrose of Camaldoli (Ambrogio
Traversari) (1386-1439), Italian legal
humanist and translator, 392
Amerbach, Johannes (i443?-i5i3), Basle
book-printer 238
Amplonius Ratingk (fl. 13th c.)» German
medical professor, collector of
manuscripts, 216
Andreae, see Johannes Andreae and
Novella d'Andrea
Angelus Mantuanus, see Finzi, Mordecai
Anglicus, see Bartholomaeus Anglicus,
Johannes Anglicus and Robertus
Anjou, see Louis, duke of Anjou
Anselm of Canterbury (1033/34-1109),
English philosophical scholar and
theologian, saint, 406, 410
Anselm of Laon (d. 1117), French
theologian, 410, 411
Antenor, legendary prince of Troy, 453
Antonio Loschi (fl. end 14th c), Milanese
official, humanist, 454
Aphrodisias, see Alexander of Aphrodisias
Apollonius (2nd c. AD), Latin
grammarian, 313
Aquinas, see Thomas Aquinas
Argyropoulos, John (1415-1487),
Byzantine philosopher, 456
Aristotle (384-322 BC), Greek philosopher,
27, 29, 41, 51, 151, 179, 231, 234, 307,
311, 313, 314, 316-323, 32-5, 3^-330,
332, 338, 341, 346, 347, 375, 384, 391,
403, 409, 410, 413, 420-424, 426, 440,
Arnald of Villanova (d. 1311), French
medical scholar, 376, 383
Arnaut, Henry (15th c), Parisian master,
Arnost of Prague (Ernst of Pardubitz)
(1297-1364), archbishop of Prague,
councillor to emperor Charles IV, 459
Arzachel (Ibn az-Zarqellu) (d. 1100),
Muslim astronomer, 341
Ascoli, see Cecco d'Ascoli
Augustine (354-430), Church father, saint,
7, 41, 308, 309, 316, 347, 405, 406, 409,
423, 440, 446, 454, 458
Augustinus de Tridente (fl. I4th/i5th c.)>
Parisian teacher, astrologer, 351
Aurillac Gerbert of, see Sylvester II
Autrecourt, see Nicholas of Autrecourt
Auvergne, see William of Auvergne
Auxerre, see William of Auxerre
Averroes (Ibn Rushd, 1126-1198), Muslim
philosopher and scientist, 28, 318, 319,
322, 338, 341, 422, 440
Avicenna (al-Husain b. Abdallah Ibn Sina,
980-1037), Muslim philosopher and
scientist, 318-322, 338, 348, 377, 378,
381, 382, 384, 385, 422
Azzo dei Porci (Azo, Azzone)
(c. 1150-1230), Italian legal glossator, 223
Bacon, see Robert Bacon and Roger Bacon
Baldasarre Cossa, see John XXIII
Baldus de Ubaldis (1327-1400), Italian
legal post-glossator, 100, 168, 391
Bandinelli Rolando, see Alexander III
Barbarossa, see Frederick I Barbarossa
Barbosa, see Aires Barbosa
Bartholomaeus of Bruges (d. 1356),
Flemish philosopher and medical author,
benefactor of the Sorbonne college, 376n
Bartholomeus Anglicus (fl. 1220-1250),
Oxford Franciscan, encyclopaedist, 338,
Bartholomeus Brixiensis (d. 1258), Italian
legal glossator, 391
Bartolomeo Prignano, see Urban VI
Bartolus de Saxoferrato (1313/14-1357),
Italian legal post-glossator, 167, 391, 392
Barziza, see Gasparino Barziza
Basilius (330-379), Church father, saint,
Batecombe {fl. 1348), unknown astronomer
at Oxford, 352n
Bath, see Adelard of Bath
Name index
Beatriz Galindo (/?. m.i5th c), Spanish
learned woman, teacher of queen
Isabella the Catholic, 202
Beaufort, Henry (c. 1374/75-1447), English
chancellor, bishop of Lincoln and
Winchester, cardinal, 463
Beauvais, see Vincent of Beauvais
Bebel, Henry (1472-1518), German
humanist, 440
Bede the Venerable (672/3-735),
Anglo-Saxon historian, 338
Belleperche, see Pierre de Belleperche
Bena, see Amalric of Bene
Benedict XII (Jacques Fournier) (d. 1342),
pope, 98, 311
Benedict XIII (Pedro de Luna)
(c.1328-1423), pope, 101
Benedict Caetani, see Boniface VIII
Benzi, Ugo (d. 1439), Italian medical
commentator, 385
Beritho (/?. 1111-1129), lawyer of the
Lateran court in Pisa, 78
Bernard of Botone, alias Parmensis
(d. 1263/6), Italian legal glossator,
canonist, 90, 391
Bernard of Clairvaux (1090—1158), French
poet, theologian and mystical writer,
saint, 406, 411
Bernardino of Siena (1380-1444), Italian
humanist, saint, 446
Berruguete, Pedro (c.1450-1504), Italian
artist, 449
Bertrand de Deaux (d. 1355), cardinal
legate, 98, 99
Bertrand de Got, see Clement V
Bessarion of Trebizond (1403-1472),
cardinal, 356
Bicchieri, see Guala Bicchieri
Biel, Gabriel (c.1420-1495), German
philosophical scholar, 440
Billanovich, G. (20th c), 453, 454
Bisticci, Vespasiano de (1421-1498), Italian
biographer, 465
Blanchard, see John Blanchard
Blois, see Peter of Blois
Blund, see John Blund
Bobo Giacinto, see Celestine III
Boethius (c.480—c.524), Roman scholar,
philosopher and statesman, 27, 41, 310,
314-316, 320-324, 339, 343-345, 356,
Boethius of Dacia (d. c.1284), Aristotelian
philosopher, 92, 424, 425
Bolognini, Ludovico (1447-1508), Italian
legal humanist, 392
Bonaparte, see Napoleon Bonaparte
Bonaventure (John of Fidanza,
c.1217-1274), Italian Franciscan
theologian and professor, saint, 112,415,
Boncompagno di Signa, see
Buoncompagno
Boniface VIII (Benedict Caetani)
(1220/30-1303), pope, 95, 96, 160, 393,
Borsano, see Simon of Borsano
Botone, see Bernard of Botone
Bourguignons, 160
Brabant, see Siger of Brabant
Bradwardine, see Thomas Bradwardine
Brant, Sebastian (1458—1521), German
humanist, 224
Bredon, see Simon Bredon
Brixiensis, see Bartholomeus Brixiensis
Brockliss L. (20th c), historian, 290
Bruges, see Bartholomaeus of Bruges and
Rudolf of Bruges
Brunetto Latini (c. 1220—1294), Italian poet,
339, 343, 346
Bruni, see Leonardo Bruni
Bude, Guillaume (1468-1540), French legal
humanist and professor, 451
Bulgarus (d. 1166/1167), Italian legal
glossator, 78
Buonaccorsi Filippo, see Callimachus
Buoncompagno da Signa (c.1165—1240),
Italian writer on arts and legal
practitioner, 81, 315
Buonsignori, see Magdalena Buonsignori
Burgundio of Pisa (fl. 1150), Italian
translator, 377
Buridan, see John Buridan
Burley, see Walter Burley
Buschius, Hermannus (1468—1534),
German biblical humanist and teacher,
Caetani, see Boniface VIII
Cajetanus, see Vio, Thomas de
Callimachus Experiens (Buonaccorsi
Filippo) (1437-1496), Italian humanist
and statesman in Poland, 461
Camaldoli, see Ambrose of Camaldoli
Candia, Pietro di, see Alexander V
Canossa, see Matilda of Canossa
Cantimpre, see Thomas of Cantimpre
Cantor, see Peter the Chanter
Capella, see Martianus Capella
Capreolus, see John Capreolus
Carducci, G. , Italian poet, 4, 5
Carinthia, see Hermann of Carinthia
Carlo de Tocco (d. 1265), Italian legal
author, 391
Name index
Casimir III (i310-1370), king of Poland,
Cassiodorus (c.490—c.585), Italian
historian, statesman, monk, 41, 310
Cecco d'Ascoli (Francesco Stabili)
(1269-1327), Italian astrologer, 353, 376
Celestine II (Guido de Citta di Castello)
(d. 1144), pope, 16
Celestine III (Giacinto Bobo)
(c. 1105-1198), pope, 16
Celtis, Conrad (1459-1508), German
humanist, 187, 461
Chalcidius (4th c. AD), Syrian neo-platonic
philosopher, 315, 347
Chancellor, see Philip the Chancellor
Chanter, see Peter the Chanter
Charlemagne (c.742-814), Holy Roman
emperor, 7, 310, 444
Charles I (1226—12.85), duke of Anjou, 93
Charles II (d. 1309), duke of Anjou, 96
Charles IV (1316-1378), Holy Roman
emperor, 57, 97-99, 102, i n , 459
Charles V (1500-1558), Holy Roman
emperor, 299, 302
Charles V (1338-1380), king of France, 355
Charles VI (1368-1422), king of France,
Charles VII (1403-1461), king of France,
Charles the Bold (1433-1477), duke of
Burgundy, 302
Chaucer, see Geoffrey Chaucer
Chauliac, see Guy de Chauliac
Chester, see Robert of Chester
Chrysoloras, see Manuel Chrysoloras
Cicero (Marcus Tullius Cicero)
(106—43BC), Roman statesman, author,
41, 314-316, 409, 446-448, 45i, 454> 458
Cilicia, see Simplicius of Cilicia
Cino da Pistoia (Cino dei Sighibaldi)
(c.1268-1336/37), Italian legal
post-glossator, 391, 406
Clamanges, see Nicolas de Clamanges
Classen, P. (20th c), historian, 10, 11, 31
Clavius, Christopher (1537-1612), Roman
astronomer, 349
Clement V (Bertrand de Got)
(c.1260-1314), pope, 95, 393
Clement VI (Pierre Roger) (1291-1352),
pope, 98, 432
Clement VII (Giulio de Medici)
(1478-1534), pope, 100, 288, 289, 435,
Clemente Sanchez (1379-1426), Spanish
canonist, 406
Cobban, A. (20th c), historian, 12
Cobham, see Thomas Cobham
Colet, John (1466/7-1519), English
humanist, 296
Colonna Oddo(ne), see Martin V
Coluccio Salutati (1331-1406), Italian
humanist, 27, 443, 447, 448, 450, 451,
454, 455, 458, 459, 466
Columella (1st c. AD), Roman author, 29
Comestor, see Peter Comestor
Concio Savelli, see Honorius III
Condulmer Gabriele, see Eugenius IV
Conrad of Gelnhausen (1320—1390),
German theologian, 435, 436
Conrad Pickel, see Celtis, Conrad
Conrad of Urach (d.1227), cardinal legate
at Montpellier, 86
Constantinus Africanus (£.1020-1087),
medical scholar, 366, 377
Copernicus, Nicholas (1473-1543), Polish
astronomer, 461
Corbeil, see Giles of Corbiel and Peter of
Corvinus, Matthias (1440-1490), king of
Hungary, 460
Cosimo de Medici, the Elder (1389-1464),
ruler of Florence, 456
Cossa Baldassare, see John XXIII
Courcon, Courson, see Robert of Courson
Cremona, see Gerard of Cremona,
Praepositinus of Cremona and Roland
of Cremona
Crescenci, see Peter of Crescenci
Cujas, Jacques (1520—1590), French legal
humanist and professor, 392
Cupreus, William (/?. 1st half 15th c),
Dutch student, 302
Cuthbert Tunstall, see Tunstall, Cuthbert
Czechel, see Sandivogius de Czechel
Dacia, see Boethius of Dacia
Dahlberg, Johann von (1455-1503), bishop
of Worms, 462
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321), Italian poet
and political writer, 176, 342, 353, 406,
Dassel, see Rainald of Dassel
David of Dinant (/?. 1200), Aristotelian
philosophical scholar, 420, 421
Deaux, see Bertrand de Deaux
Denariis, see Odofredus de Denariis
Denifle, H. (20th c), historian, xxiii, 9,
Denis the Just (d. 1325), king of Portugal,
Descartes, Rene (1596-1650), French
mathematician and philosopher, 348
Despars, Jacques (d. 1458), French
physician, rector of Paris university, 385
Name index
Diego II (James II) (1291-1327), king of
Aragon, 58, 96
Dinant, see David of Dinant
Dino del Garbo (d. 1327), Italian medical
professor, 381, 382
Dioscorides (C.40-C.90), Greek physician,
Dobrzycki, J. (20th c), historian, 3
Dominicus Gundissalinus (c.1150),
archdeacon of Segovia, 27
Donatus (fl. 111.4th c. AD), Latin
grammarian, 312, 313, 321, 323
Dondi, see Giovanni de Dondi
Dorp, see John Dorp
Duese Jacques, see John XXII
Duns Scotus, see John Duns Scotus
Durand, see Guillaume Durand
Eberhard of Bethune (d. 1212), French
grammarian, 313
Edward I (1239-1307), king of England, 95
Edward II (1284-1327), king of England,
Edward III (1312-1377), king of England,
2-59, 372.
Emden, A. B. (20th c), historian, xxiii,
Erasmus of Rotterdam (c. 1466/69-15 36),
Dutch humanist and critic, 175,210,299,
444, 446, 448, 451, 452, 457, 458, 465,
Esch, A. (20th c), historian, 11
Este, Borso d' (1430-1471), ruler of
Ferrara, 377
Este, Leonello d' (d. 1450), ruler of
Ferrara, 377
Estouteville, see Guillaume d'Estouteville
Etaples, see Lefevre d'Etaples
Euclid (fl. c.300 BC), Greek
mathematician, 231, 320, 323, 324, 339,
344, 346, 347
Eugenius IV (Gabriele Condulmer)
(c.1383-1447), pope, 105
Evesham, see Walter of Evesham
Experiens, see Callimachus Experiens
Eyb, Albrecht von (1420-1475), German
humanist, canon, 462
Falisca, see John of Falisca
Farabi, al (Abu Nasr al-Farabi)
(c.870-950), Muslim philosopher, 318
Federigo da Montefeltro, see Montefeltro,
Federigo da
Feltre, see Vittorino da Feltre
Ferdinand II the Catholic (1452-1516),
king of Aragon and Castile, 270
Fibonacci, see Leonardo of Pisa
Fichet, see Guillaume Fichet
Ficino, Marsilius (Marsilio) (1433-1499),
Italian humanist, philosopher and
theologian, 451
Fidanza John of, see Bonaventure
Fieschi Sinibaldo, see Innocent IV
Filelfo, Francesco (1398-1481), Italian
legal humanist, 392, 455
Filipo Villani (fl. 1381), Florentine
historian, 447
Finzi, Mordecai (15th c), Italian scholar,
Fishacre, see Richard Fishacre
Flemmyng (Fleming), Robert (d. 1483),
English humanist, Greek scholar, dean
of Lincoln, 296
Floris, see Joachim of Floris
Flote, see Pierre Flote
Foligno, see Gentile da Foligno
Fontaines, see Godfrey of Fontaines
Fontana Tartaglia, Niccolo (1499-1557),
Italian mathematician, 354
Forli, see Giacomo da Forli
Fournier, see Benedict XII
Francesco Filelfo, see Filelfo, Francesco
Francesco Maurolico, see Maurolico,
Francesco Petrarch (Petrarca) (1304-1374),
Italian humanist, poet and moralist, 27,
376, 392, 443, 444, 447, 454, 458, 459,
Francesco Stabili, see Cecco d'Ascoli
Francis I (1494-1547), king of France, 135,
Franciscus Accursius (1182-1260),
Italian legal glossator, 167, 390,
Francois Villon, see Villon, Francois
Frederick I Barbarossa (1123-1190), Holy
Roman emperor, 12, 14, 48, 78, 79, 120,
248, 252, 302, 388
Frederick II (1194-1250), Holy Roman
emperor, 18, 52, 54, 86-91, 97, n o , 285,
Frederick III (1415-1493), Holy Roman
emperor, 262, 357, 461
Frederick of Habsburg (1286-1330), king
of the Germans, ^6
Froben, Hieronymus (1501-1563), Basle
humanist and printer, 466
Froben, Johannes (£.1460-1527), Basle
humanist and printer, 466
Gabirol, see Ibn Gabirol
Gabriel Biel, see Biel, Gabriel
Gabriele Condulmer, see Eugenius IV
Gaguin, Robert (c. 1433-1502), French
philosophical scholar, 465
Name index
Galen (129-C.199), Greek physician, 231,
3*7, 3^3> 377> 378, 379, 381, 382, 384,
385, 409, 458
Galilei, Galileo (1564-1642), Italian
astronomer and scientist, 330
Galindo, see Beatriz Galindo Dona
Gansfort, Wessel (1419-1485), Dutch
theologian, 464
Garbo, see Dino del Garbo
Garland, Garlandia John, see Johannes
Gasparino Barziza (Gasparino di
Pietrobuono) (i36o?-i43i), Italian
teacher, 454
Gaudet, see Stephen Gaudet
Gautier de Saint Victor (c.1096-1141),
French theologian, 406
Gautier, see Vidal Gautier
Geert Groote (1340-13 84), Dutch religious
reformer and writer, 165
Gelnhausen, see Conrad of Gelnhausen
Gentile da Foligno (d. 1348), Italian
medical commentator, 372, 385
Geoffrey Chaucer (1342/3-1400), English
poet, 224, 353
George of Peurbach, see Peurbach, George
Gerard of Abbeville (d. 1269/72), French
theologian, 416
Gerard of Cremona (c.1114-1187), Italian
philosophical scholar, translator 317,
318, 339, 341, 342, 346, 377
Gerbert of Aurillac, see Sylvester II
Gerson, see Jean Gerson
Ghazali, al (Algazel) (1058-1111), Muslim
lawyer, theologian and mystic, 322
Ghent, see Henry of Ghent
Giacinto Bobo, see Celestine III
Giacomo da Forli (d. 1414), Italian medical
commentator, 385
Gil Albornoz (c. 1310-1367), Spanish
cardinal, 118, 119, 215
Gilbert of Poitiers, alias de la Porree
(c.1080-1154), bishop of Poitiers, 406, 411
Giles (Aegidius) of Rome (Egidio Colonna)
{c. 1243-1316), Italian philosophical
scholar and theologian, 425, 427, 428,
Giles of Gorbeil (C.1140-C.1224), French
medical professor, 367
Gilson, E. (20th c), historian, 448, 452
Giovanni Boccaccio (1313-1375), Italian
poet, 447, 455
Giovanni de Dondi (1318-d. 1370), Italian
professor of medicine, 353, 376, 384
Giovanni da Legnano (fl. 1380), Italian
professor of canon law, 100
Giovanni de Medici, see Leo X
Giovanni del Virgilio (14th c), Italian
grammarian, 453
Girolamo Masci, see Nicholas IV
Giulio de Medici, see Clement VII
Gmunden, see John of Gmunden
Godfrey of Fontaines (before 1250-after
1305/6), French philosophical scholar
and theologian, 425, 427
Goffredo of Trani (d. 1245), Italian legal
post-glossator, 90, 391
Goldstein, B. R. (20th c), historian, 352n
Gonzales de Mendoza, Pedro (1428-1495),
Spanish cardinal, 215
Gossenbrot, Sigismund (fl. m. 15th c),
German humanist and town official, 462
Got, Bertrand de, see Clement V
Grabostow, see Nicolaus de Grabostow
Graf, Urs (^.1485-^.1528), German artist,
Gratian (late nth c.-before 1159),
Bolognese canonist, 48, 388, 391, 393,
396, 397, 4°5> 406
Gregory VII (Hildebrand of Soana)
(d. 1085), pope, 252
Gregory IX (Ugolino di Segni)
(1170-1241), pope, 23, 88-90, 94, 249,
320, 321, 391, 393, 397, 413, 421, 422,
Gregory of Rimini (late 13th c-1358),
Italian philosophical scholar, 431, 432,
Gregory of Sanok (c.i 409-1477), Polish
humanist, archbishop of Lemberg, 460,
Grevia, see Philippus de Grevia
Grey, William (d. 1478), English humanist,
bishop of Ely, 296
Grimoard, Guillaume de, see Urban V
Grocyn, William (c. 1446-1519), English
humanist and teacher, 296
Groote, see Geert Groote
Grosseteste, see Robert Grosseteste
Grundmann, H. (20th c), historian, 10, n
Guala Bicchieri (1238-1314), cardinal
legate in Paris, 82
Guarino da Verona (Veronese)
(1374—1460), Italian humanist and
educational writer, 446, 451, 460
Guglielmo da Pusterla (fl. 1st half 13th c),
Podesta of Bologna, 84
Guglielmus (d. 1178), cardinal-bishop of
Porto-Ostia, papal legate, 80
Guillaume Durand (c. 12 30-1296), French
legal post-glossator, 391
Guillaume d'Estouteville (c.1403-1483),
cardinal legate at Paris, 104, 132
Name index
Guillaume Fichet (143 y-c. 1480), French
humanist teacher, 465
Guillaume de Grimoard, see Urban V
Guillaume de Machaut (c.i 300-1377),
French scholar, composer, 343
Guillaume de Nogaret (d. 1314), French
royal official, 256
Gundissalinus, see Dominicus
Gundissalinus
Gutenberg, Johann (Johann Gensfleisch
zur Laden) (c.i 394/9-1468), German
printer, 465
Guy de Chauliac (c.i300-1368), French
surgeon and medical author, 363, 381
Guylforde, see Richard Guylforde
Habsburgs, 192
Hajjaj, al ibn Yusuf ibn Matar (9th c),
Muslim mathematician, 340
Hales, see Alexander of Hales
Haly Abbas (Ali b. al-Abbas al-Magusi,
ft. 10th c), Muslim medical author, 377
Hans Holbein, see Holbein, Hans
Hans Pirckheimer, see Pirckheimer, Hans
Harclay, see Henry of Harclay
Harriot, Thomas (1560-1621), English
mathematician and astronomer, 348
Harvey, William (1578-1657), English
physician and medical author, 364
Haskins, C. H. (20th c), historian, 9, 338
Hegius, Alexander (c. 1433-1498), Dutch
humanist teacher, 175, 176, 464
Helias, see Peter Helias
Henley, see Walter of Henley
Henry II (1133-1189), king of England, 340
Henry III (1207-1272), king of England, 92,
Henry IV (d. 1106), Holy Roman emperor,
Henry V (1086-1125), Holy Roman
emperor, 247
Henry Arnaut, see Arnaut, Henry
Henry Beaufort, see Beaufort, Henry
Henry Bebel, see Bebel, Henry
Henry of Ghent (c.1217-1293), French
philosophical scholar, 163,425,427,429,
Henry of Harclay (c.1270—1317), secular
theologian, chancellor of Oxford, 431
Henry of Langenstein (of Hesse)
(1325-1397), German theologian and
professor, 289, 356, 435, 436
Henry de Mondeville (C.1260-C.1325),
French surgeon and medical professor,
Henry of Munsterberg, German
astronomer, 351
Henry of Susa (Cardinal Hostiense)
(d. 1271), Italian post-glossator, cardinal,
Henry Totting of Oyta (c.i330-1397),
German theologian and professor, 436
Henry of Winchester {ft. 1239-1240),
English medical author, 367
Hereford, see Roger of Hereford
Hermann of Carinthia {ft. 1140-1150),
translator, scholar, 339, 340, 346
Hermannus Buschius, see Buschius,
Hero of Alexandria {ft. 62 AD), Greek
mathematician, 348
Herve Nedellec (d. 1323), French
theologian, 429
Hesse, see Henry of Langenstein
Heynlin of Stein, John (d. 1496), French
humanist, theologian, founder of the
printing press in the Sorbonne, 465
Heytesbury, see William Heytisbury
Hieronymus Froben, see Froben,
Hieronymus
Hildebrand of Soana, see Gregory VII
Hippocrates (C.460-C.377 BC), Greek
physician, 231, 377, 378, 458
Hohenstaufen, 105
Holbein, Hans (1497/8—1543), German
artist, 466
Honorius III (Concio Savelli) (d. 1227),
pope, 85, 86, 88, 90, i n , 292, 388, 389,
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8
BC), Roman poet, 357
Hostiense (Cardinal), see Henry of Susa
Hrabanus Maurus (784—856), German
theologian and educational writer, 338
Hugh of St Victor (1096-1141), Parisian
theologian, 26, 346, 411, 412
Hugolino of Orvieto (c.1300-1373), Italian
theologian, 432, 433, 434
Humbert II (d. 1349), dauphin of the
Dauphine, 97
Humboldt, Wilhelm von (1767-1835),
German statesman and professor, xxiv
Humphrey (1391-1447), duke of
Gloucester, 463, 465
Hunyadi, Janos (c.1387-1456), Hungarian
statesman and general, 461
Huss, see John Huss
Ibn az-Zarqellu, see Arzachel
Ibn Gabirol (c.1022-1070), Jewish poet
and philosopher, 318
Ibn Rushd, see Averroes
Inghen, see Marsilius of Inghen
Innocent III (Lothair of Segni)
Name index
(c.1160/61-1216), pope, 24, 82-84, 86,
88, 149, 248, 412, 413
Innocent IV (Sinibaldo Fieschi) (end 12th
c-1254), pope, 54, 90-92, i n , 393, 413
Irnerius (c.1080-1140), Bolognese legal
glossator, 5, 48
Irsay, S. d' (20th c), historian, xxii, xxiv,
Isabella the Catholic (1451-1504), queen of
Castile and Aragon, 202, 270
Ishaq Hunayn ibn, see Johannitius
Isidore of Seville (c.560-636), Spanish
encyclopaedist, saint, 310, 338
Jacobus Colombi (/?.i 227-1244), Italian
legal author, 391
Jacques Cujas, see Cujas, Jacques
Jacques Despars, see Despars, Jacques
Jacques Duese, see John XXII
Jacques Fournier, see Benedict XII
Jacques Pantaleon, see Urban IV
Jacques de Revigny (1210/15—1296), French
post-glossator, 391
Jacques de Vitry (1160/70-1240), French
moral writer, cardinal, 223, 282
Jagello, see Ladislaus Jagello
James II, see Diego II
James of Venice {fl. 1136-1147), Italian
scholar and translator, 314, 315, 317
Janos Hunyadi see Hunyadi, Janos
Janus Pannonius, see Pannonius, Janus
Jean de Mericour, see John of Mirecourt
Jean de Montreuil (1354-1418), French
royal official, 464
Jean Gerson (1363-1429), French
theologian and Parisian chancellor, 164,
166, 435-438, 440, 464
Jerome (c. 347—419/20), Church father,
saint, 41, 405, 446
Joachim of Floris (Joachim of Fiore,
Giacchino da Fiore) (1132-1202), Italian
theologian, 444
Joan I (1326-1381/2), queen of Naples, 99
Johann von Dahlberg, see Dahlberg,
Johann von
Johann Gutenberg, see Gutenberg, Johann
Johann von Neumark (Noviforensis)
(c. 1310-1380), Bohemian chancellor to
Charles IV, bishop of Olmiitz, 459
Johann Ocko of Olmiitz (ft. 1351—d. 1364),
Bohemian, bishop of Olmiitz,
archbishop of Prague, 459
Johannes Amerbach, see Amerbach,
Johannes Andreae (c. 1270—1348),
Bolognese post-glossator, canonist, 166,
167, 202, 391
Johannes Anglicus (John Garland,
Johannes de Garlandia) (1195-1272),
English grammarian and poet, 346
Johannes Froben, see Froben, Johannes
Johannes Kepler, see Kepler, Johannes
Johannes Kerer (1430—1507), German
philosopher and professor, suffragan
bishop of Augsburg, 228
Johannes de Mercuria, see John of
Johannes Muller, see Regiomontanus,
Johannes de Muris (c.i29o-after 1365),
French philosophical scholar, music
composer, 342, 344
Johannes Pirckheimer, see Pirckheimer,
Johannes Regiomontanus, see
Regiomontanus, Johannes
Johannes Reuchlin, see Reuchlin, Johannes
Johannes Teutonicus (Zemacke)
(d. 1245/46), German legal glossator,
canonist, professor in Italy, 391
Johannes Vitez, see Vitez, Johannes
Johannes Zmora of Leznicz, see Zmora of
Leznicz, Johannes
Johannitius (Hunayn ibn Ishaq) (808-873),
Muslim medical author, 366, 367
John II (1405-1454), king of Castile, 463
John IV (1403-1427), duke of Brabant, 104
John XXI (Petrus Hispanus)
(£.1210/20-1277), pope, 313, 329, 368,
John XXII (Jacques Duese) (d. 1334),
pope, 95, 98, 156, 257, 311, 393, 430
John XXIII (Baldassare Cossa) (d. 1419),
John Argyropoulos, see Argyropoulos,
John Blanchard (fl. 1381), French
theologian, chancellor of Paris, 435
John Blund (Blound) (d. 1248), English
philosophical scholar and theologian,
John of Brescain (fl. 1247), Parisian
philosophical scholar, 422
John Buridan (c. 1300-1366/76), French
philosophical scholar and scientist, 330,
332,424,439,440
John Capreolus (c. 13 80—1444), Dominican
scholar, 440
John Colet, see Colet, John
John Dorp {fl. 14th c), Parisian
philosophical scholar and theologian, 440
John Duns Scotus (c.i 266—1308), Scottish
philosophical scholar and Franciscan
theologian, 331, 430, 436, 439, 440
Name index
John of Falisca (d. 1365), Parisian
theologian, 435
John of Fidanza, see Bonaventure
John of Gmunden (c.i380-1442), Viennese
master of arts, 356
John Heynlin, see Heynlin of Stein, John
John Huss (1372/3-1415), Bohemian
religious leader, 102, 166, 439
John Killingworth, see Killingworth, John
John of La Rochelle (d. 1245), French
Franciscan theologian, 415
John Lackland (1166-1216), king of
England, 83
John of Ligneres (Linieres) (fl. early 14th
c.)> Parisian master of arts, astronomer,
John of Mirecourt (Jean de Mericour,
Johannes de Mercuria) (fl. 1344—1347),
French philosophical scholar, 432, 440
John of Monzon (d. c.1412), Parisian
theologian, 437
John Murmellius, see Murmellius, John
John Pecham (Peckham) (c.1230-1292),
English Franciscan theologian,
archbishop of Canterbury, 321, 348, 427,
John Philoponus (John the Grammarian)
(fl. 6th c), theologian and philosopher at
Alexandria, 318
John of Ripa (fl. 1350), Franciscan
theologian and writer, 436
John of Sacrobosco (c. 1200—c. 1256),
English astronomer, Parisian master,
323-325, 339, 341, 344, 348, 349, 356,
John of Salisbury (1115/20—1180), English
philosophical scholar and historian, 252,
John of Saxony (c.1327), German
astrologer, 342
John of Seville (d. 1157), Spanish
astronomer, 349
John of Spain (12th c.)» Spanish astrologer,
John of St Albans (1220), Parisian
theologian, 415
John of St Giles (d. after 1258), French
medical doctor and Dominican
theologian, 415, 422
John Standonck, see Standonck, John
John Wyclif (John Wycliffe) (c. 13 30-13 84),
English ecclesiastical reformer and
theologian, 102, 166, 293, 433, 439
Jordanus Nemorarius, alias de Saxa
(d. 1237), Parisian Dominican master,
mathematician, 346, 347
Juan I (1387-1395), king of Aragon, 236
Juan Luis Vives, see Vives, Juan Luis
Juan Ruiz (14th c), archpriest of Hita, 406
Judas ben Salomon Cohen (c.1200),
Toledan Jewish scholar, 342
Justinian (483-565), Roman emperor, 48,
78, 79, 88, 393, 394, 396, 399, 409
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis)
(60/70-C.140), Roman poet, 357
Kabisi, al (Alchabitius) (fl. 2nd half 10th
c), Muslim astrological writer, 352
Kaufmann, G. (20th c), historian, xxiii, 9,
Kedleston, see Robert of Courson
Kepler, Johannes (1571-1630), German
astronomer, 348
Kerer, see Johannes Kerer
Ketton, see Robert of Ketton
Khwarizmi, al (Muhammad ibn Musa
al-Khwarizmi) (c.780—c.850), Muslim
astronomer, 340, 341
Killingworth, John (fl. 1442), English
astronomer, 352n
Kilwardby, see Robert Kilwardby
Kindi, al (Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Kindi)
(813-873), Muslim author, 338, 347
Kubinyi, A. (20th c), historian, xxiii, 294
La Rochelle, see John of La Rochelle
Ladislaus Jagello (d. 1434), king of Poland,
Lanfranc (c.1005-1089), archbishop of
Canterbury, 406
Langenstein, see Henry of Langenstein
Langton, see Stephen Langton
Laon, see Anselm of Laon
Latini, see Brunetto Latini
Le Goff, J. (20th c), historian, xxiii, 12
Lefevre d'Etaples, Jacques (1455-1536),
French humanist and religious writer,
Legnano, see Giovanni da Legnano
Leo X (Giovanni de Medici) (1475-1521),
Leon Battista Alberti, see Alberti, Leon
Leonardo Bruni (Leonardo Aretino)
(1370-1444), Italian humanistic scholar
and historian, translator, 450, 455, 458
Leonardo of Pisa (Leonardo Pisano,
Leonardo Fibonacci) (c.ii7O-after 1240),
Italian mathematician, 342
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), Italian
artist, 348, 354
Leoncino Pilato (Leonzio) (14th c), Italian
humanistic scholar, 455
Leonello d'Este, see Este, Leonello d'
Name index
Leoniceno, Niccolo (1428-1524), Italian
medical doctor, mathematician,
humanist, translator, 458
Leonin (Leoninus) (/?. late 12th c.)5 French
chapel-master, 343
Leznicz, Johannes Zmora of, see Zmora of
Leznicz, Johannes
Ligneres, see John of Ligneres
Lille, see Alan of Lille
Lily, William (i468?-i522), English
humanist, 296
Linacre, Thomas (c.1460-1524), English
humanist, Oxford master, 296
Llobet of Barcelona (10th c), Spanish
astronomer, 340
Lombard, see Peter Lombard
Lorenzo Valla, see Valla, Lorenzo
Loschi, see Antonio Loschi
Lothair of Segni, see Innocent III
Louis (1322—82), duke of Anjou, 459, 460
Louis I (1326-1382), king of Hungary, 98
Louis II (1320-1362), king of Sicily and
count of Provence, 105
Louis III of Wittelsbach (1378-1436), count
palatine of the Rhine, 138, 439
Louis VII (c. 1120— 1180), king of France,
Louis IX (1214-1270), king of France, 89,
93, 116, 249, 257
Louis XI (1423—1483), king of France, 214,
Lovato Lovati (1241-1309), Italian jurist,
Lucca, see Ugo of Lucca
Lucius III (Ubaldo Alluncingoli) (d. 1185),
pope, 81, 83, 84
Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus)
(C.99-C.55 BC), Roman poet, 457
Luder, Peter (c.1415—1474), German
humanist, 462
Ludovico Bolognini, see Bolognini,
Luna Pedro de, see Benedict XIII
Machaut, see Guillaume de Machaut
Machiavelli, Niccolo (1469-1527), Italian
humanist, historian, 446
Maffeo Vegio, see Vegio, Maffeo
Magdalena Buonsignori, Italian learned
woman, legal scholar, 202
Maimonides, see Moses Maimonides
Majriti, al (d. c.1007), Cordoban
astronomer, 340
Makdisi (2nd half 10th c), Arabic
geographer, 8
Manuel Chrysoloras (c.1350—1415), Greek
scholar 455, 456
Manutius, Aldus (1450-1515), Italian
humanist and publisher, 452, 466
Marsilius Ficino, see Ficino, Marsilius
Marsilius of Inghen (£.1330-1396),
German, Parisian master, rector of
Heidelberg, 289, 330, 436, 439, 440
Marston, see Roger Marston
Martianus Capella (ft. late 4th and early
5th c), Early Christian author, 316, 338
Martin Perez, A. (20th c), historian, 397
Martin V (Oddone Colonna) (1368-1431),
Masci, Girolamo, see Nicholas IV
Matilda of Canossa (c.1046-1115),
countess or margravine of Tuscany,
vicar of the Holy Roman Empire, JJ
Matthias Corvinus, see Corvinus, Matthias
Maurolico, Francesco (1494—1575), Italian
mathematician, optician, 348
Maximilian I (1459-1519), Holy Roman
emperor, 241, 461
Medici Cosimo de, see Cosimo de Medici
Medici Giovanni de, see Leo X
Medici Giulio de, see Clement VII
Meiners, Christian (19th c), British privy
councillor and professor, xxii, xxvii, 9
Melanchthon, Philip (1497-1560), German
theologian, philologist and educational
writer, humanist, 200, 349
Meliton, see William of Meliton
Mendoza, Pedro Gonzales de, see
Gonzales de Mendoza, Pedro
Mercuria, John de, see John of Mirecourt
Mericour, Jean de, see John of Mirecourt
Merton, see Walter of Merton
Michael Scot (C.1175-C.1235), Scottish
theologian, 297, 318, 342
Michele Savonarola, see Savonarola,
Mirandola, Pico della (1463-1494), Italian
humanist, 352n
Mirecourt, see John of Mirecourt
Moerbeke, see William of Moerbeke
Mondeville, see Henry de Mondeville
Montauban, see Neveu de Montauban
Montealbano, see Neveu de Montauban
Montefeltro, Federigo da (1422—1482),
duke of Urbino, 449
Montreuil, see Jean de Montreuil
Monzon, see John of Monzon
Mordecai Finzi, see Finzi, Mordecai
Moses Maimonides (1135—1204), Jewish
philosopher, scholar and physician, 318
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, see
Miiller, Johannes, see Regiomontanus,
Name index
Munsterberg, see Henry of Munsterberg
Muris, see Johannes de Muris
Murmellius, John (1480-1517), Dutch
humanist and teacher, 175
Mussato, Albertino, see Albertino Mussato
Mutianus Rufus, see Rufus Mutianus
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769—1821), French
emperor, xxiv
Nebrija, Antonio de (Antonius
Nebrissensis) (1444-1522), Spanish legal
humanist, author, 463
Neckam, see Alexander Neckam
Nedellec, see Herve Nedellec
Nemorarius, Jordanus, see Jordanus
Nemorarius
Nepos, see Neveu de Montauban
Neumark, see Johann von Neumark
Neveu de Montauban (Nepos de
Montealbano) {fl. 13th c.)> French
lawyer, 392
Nicasius de Voerda, see Voerda, Nicasius
Niccolo Fontana Tartaglia, see Fontana
Tartaglia, Niccolo
Niccolo Leoniceno, see Leoniceno, Niccolo
Niccolo Machiavelli, see Machiavelli,
Niccolo dei Tudeschi (Abbas
Panormitanus) (1386-1453), Italian
canonist, legal commentator, 391
Nicholas IV (Girolamo Masci)
(1227-1292), pope, 93, 95
Nicholas V (Tommaso Parentucelli)
(1397-1455), pope, 456,
Nicholas of Autrecourt (fl. 1346), Parisian
master, i63n
Nicholas Copernicus, see Copernicus,
Nicholas of Oresme (c.1325-1382), French
scholar, bishop of Lisieux, 329, 330, 348
Nicolas de Clamanges (1365-1437), French
humanist and scholar, apostolic
secretary, 464
Nicolaus de Grabostow (fl. 1306),
astronomer, 351
Nicolaus de Romanis (d. 1219), cardinal
legate at Oxford, 84
Niethammer, Friedrich Immanuel
(1766-1848), German pedagogue, 443
Nogaret, see Guillaume de Nogaret
Novella d'Andrea (Novella Andreae) (14th
c.)» Italian learned woman, legal scholar,
Ockham, see William of Ockham,
Ocko, see Johann Ocko
Oddone Colonna, see Martin V
Odington, see Walter of Evesham
Odo of Chateauroux (d. 1273), papal
legate, 422, 423
Odo Rigaud (Rigaldus) (c.1205-1275),
French Franciscan theologian,
archbishop of Rouen, 415
Odofredus de Denariis (c.1200-1265),
Italian legal glossator, 223, 391
Olesnicky, Zbigniev (d. 1455), archbishop
of Cracow, 460, 461
Oresme, see Nicholas of Oresme
Orford, see Robert of Orford
Orvieto, see Hugolino of Orvieto
Otto I (912-973), Holy Roman emperor,
Otto IV (1175/82-1218), Holy Roman
emperor, 84
Otto IV (1315-1349), count of Burgundy,
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 BC-AD
18), Roman poet, 453
Oyta, see Henry Totting of Oyta
Pancius of Lucca (d. 1340), Italian medical
master, 372
Pannonius, Janus (1434—1472), Hungarian
humanist, 460
Panofsky, E. (20th c), art historian, 28, 451
Panormitanus, see Niccolo dei Tudeschi
Pantaleon Jacques, see Urban IV
Parmensis, see Bernard of Botone, alias
Paul of Venice (Paolo di Venezia, Paolo
Nicoletti) (d. 1344), Italian Franciscan
philosophical scholar, 354
Pecham, see John Pecham
Pedro Berruguete, see Berruguete, Pedro
Pedro Gonzales de Mendoza, see Gonzales
de Mendoza, Pedro
Pedro de Luna, see Benedict XIII
Pelerin de Prusse (Peregrin Zelesthuz of
Prussia) (fl. 1358-1382), German arts
student at Paris, astrologer, translator,
Pepo (d. C.IIOO), Bologna lawyer, 5,15, 33,
Perger (fl. 1480), humanist, 461
Pero Tafur (c.1438), Portuguese pilgrim,
Perotin (d. 1238?), French chapel-master,
Peter of Abano (1257-1315/6), Italian
medical master, 368, 375, 384
Peter Abelard (1079-1142/44), French
philosophical scholar, theologian and
poet, 6, 10, 16, 282, 406, 411, 412
Name index
Peter of Ailly (Pierre d'Ailly) (1350—1420),
French theologian, bishop of Cambray,
cardinal, 435, 437, 439, 440
Peter of Blois (1130/5-C.1204), French
theologian, 10
Peter Ceffons (fl. m.i4th c), French
theologian, 433, 440
Peter the Chanter (Petrus Cantor)
(d. 1197), French theologian and
moralist, bishop of Tournai, 50, 412
Peter Comestor (d. 1178), French
theologian, 50, 418
Peter of Corbeil (d. 1222), French
theologian, 321, 413
Peter of Crescenci (fl. 1306), writer on
agriculture, 29
Peter Damian (1007-1072), Italian moralist,
ecclesiastical reformer, saint, 406, 410
Peter Helias (Helie) (fl. c.1150), Parisian
professor, grammarian, logician, 313
Peter Lombard (Pierre Lombard)
(c. 1100—1160), French theologian, bishop
of Paris, 50, 156, 406, 412, 418, 423, 430,
Peter of Poitiers (d. 1161), French
theologian, 412
Peter of Poitiers (c. 1130-1205), French
theologian and professor, chancellor of
Paris, 406, 412
Peter of Spain (fl. 1135-1160), Spanish
logician, 313
Petrarca, see Francesco Petrarch
Petrus Hispanus, see John XXI
Petrus Ramus, see Ramus, Petrus
Peurbach, George of (Peuerbach)
(1423-1461), Austrian mathematician
and astronomer, 349, 356, 457, 461
Philip the Handsome (1478-1506), duke of
Burgundy, 299
Philip II Augustus (1165-1223), king of
France, 84, 89, 249, 252, 257
Philip IV the Fair (1268-1314), king of
France, 93, 95, 96, 160, 257
Philip VI (1293-1350), king of France, 371
Philip the Chancellor (d. 1236), Parisian
theologian, 321, 422
Philip Melanchthon, see Melanchthon,
Philippe de Vitry (Philippus de Vitriaco)
(1290—1361), French scholar, composer,
Philippus de Grevia (c.i 160/85—1236),
Parisian theologian and poet, chancellor
of Paris, 15
Philoponus, see John Philoponus
Piacentino, see Placentinus
Piccolomini Aeneas Sylvius, see Pius II
Pickel, Conrad, see Celtis, Conrad
Pico della Mirandola, see Mirandola, Pico
Piero Paolo Vergerio (1370—1444), Italian
teacher and educational writer, 446, 451,
Pierre de Belleperche (d. 1308), French
legal post-glossator, 391
Pierre Flote (d. 1302), French royal official,
Pierre de la Ramee, see Ramus, Petrus
Pierre Roger, see Clement VI
Pietro di Candia, see Alexander V
Pietro III (fl. 1178-1189), bishop of
Tusculum (Frascati), papal legate, 80
Pilato, see Leoncino Pilato
Pillius (d. after 1207), Bolognese legal
glossator, 81
Pirckheimer, Hans (c.1500), Niirnberg
patrician, brother of Willibald
Pirckheimer, 462
Pirckheimer, Johannes (fl. m.i5th c.)»
German humanist, Niirnberg patrician,
councillor to Duke Albert IV of Bavaria,
Pirckheimer, Willibald (1470-1530),
German humanist, Niirnberg patrician,
town official, 462
Pisa, see Burgundio of Pisa and Leonardo
Pistoia, see Cino da Pistoia
Pius II (Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini)
(1405-1464), pope, 19, 461
Placentinus (Piacentino) (d. 1192), Italian
legal glossator, 162
Plato (428/7-348/7 BC), Greek
philosopher, 307, 315, 346, 347
Plato of Tivoli (fl. 1134-1145), Italian
scholar active in Spain, translator, 340,
Pliny the Elder (Caius Plinius Secundus)
(23—79), Roman writer, polymath, 337
Plutarch (Ploutarchos) (C.46-C.120), Greek
biographer and philosopher, 451
Poggio Bracciolini (1380-1459), Italian
historian, humanist, 458, 463
Poitiers, see Gilbert of Poitiers and Peter of
Poliziano, Angelo (Politian) (1454-1494),
Italian poet and legal humanist, 392
Porci, see Azzo dei Porci
Porphyry (C.234-C.305), neoplatonist
philosopher, 314, 320
Porree, see Gilbert of Poitiers
Powicke, F. M. (20th c), historian, xxiii
Praepositinus of Cremona (d. 1210),
Parisian theologian, 412
Name index
Prignano Bartolomeo, see Urban VI
Priscian [fl. c.AD 500), Latin grammarian,
312, 313, 321, 323
Proclus (c.410-485), Greek philosopher,
Prusse, see Pelerin de Prusse
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolomaeus) (c.iooc.170), astronomer, mathematician and
geographer, active in Alexandria, 231,
320, 323, 324, 339, 341,347-349, 353
Pullen, see Robert Pullen
Purbach, see Peurbach, George of
Pusterla, see Guglielmo da Pusterla
Pythagoras (c.575-after 500 BC), Greek
philosopher and mathematician, 343
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus)
(c.35-after 96), Roman rhetorician and
critic, educational writer, 41, 451
Rada, see Rodrigo Ximenes de Rada
Rainald of Dassel (c.1118/20-1167),
German statesman, 252
Ramee, Pierre de la, see Ramus, Petrus
Ramus, Petrus (Pierre de la Ramee)
(1515—1572), French philosophical
scholar, 457
Rashdall, H. (20th c), historian, xxiii, 9,
Rasis (al-Razi) (865—925), Muslim medical
author, 377, 379, 381
Ratingk, see Amplonius Ratingk
Raymond (1041/2—1105), bishop and count
of Toulouse, 89
Regiomontanus, Johannes (Johannes
Miiller) (1436—1476), German
mathematician, 348, 349, 356, 461
Renardy, C. (20th c), historian, 286
Rene Descartes, see Descartes, Rene
Reuchlin, Johannes (1455-1522), German
humanist, critic and grammarian, 200,
Revigny, see Jacques de Revigny
Richard Fishacre (d. 1248), English
theologian, 426
Richard Guylforde {fl. 1500), English
pilgrim, 300
Richard Rufus (c.i2i2-after 1259), Oxford
Franciscan theologian, 427
Richard Torkyngton (fl. 1500), English
pilgrim, 300
Richard of Wallingford (c. 1292-13 36),
English astronomer, 350, 354
Richental, see Ulrich Richental
Rigaud, see Odo Rigaud
Rinaldo, count of Segni, see Alexander IV
Rinuccini (1419-1499), Italian poet, 451
Robert the Wise (1278-1343), king of
Naples, 99
Robert Bacon (d. 1248), English
Dominican theologian, 415
Robert of Chester (/?. 1145), English
scholar and translator, 297
Robert of Courson (Courcon, Robert of
Kedleston) (d. 1219), papal legate at
Paris, cardinal 24, 33, 83, 89, 316, 320,
321, 322, 325, 412, 413
Robert Flemmyng, see Flemmyng, Robert
Robert Gaguin, see Gaguin, Robert
Robert Grosseteste (c.i 170-1253), Oxford
philosophical scholar, bishop of Lincoln,
317, 322, 323, 325, 329, 345, 347, 348,
355, 415, 416, 426
Robert of Kedleston, see Robert of
Robert of Ketton {fl. 1140-50), scholar,
340, 342, 346
Robert Kilwardby (1210—1279), English
Dominican theologian, cardinal, 26, 321,
Robert of Orford (d. c.1300), English
theologian, 429
Robert Pullen (d. 1154), English
theologian, cardinal, 78, 414
Robert de Sorbon (1201—1274), French
theologian, founder of the college, 116,
Robertus Anglicus {fl. 1127), English
mathematician and astronomer, 346, 348
Rodrigo Ximenes de Rada (d. 1247),
Spanish cardinal 464
Roger, see Clement VI
Roger Bacon (c. 1219—c. 1292), Oxford
Dominican philosophical scholar, 322,
323, 345, 347, 348, 353, 355, 427
Roger of Hereford (late 12th c.)» English
astronomer, translator, 349
Roger Marston [0.2.4^-0.^0^)^ Oxford
Franciscan theologian, 427
Roland of Cremona (d. c.1259), Parisian
Dominican theologian, 16, 415, 421, 422
Rolando Bandinelli, see Alexander III
Romanis, see Nicolaus de Romanis
Rome, see Giles of Rome
Rudolf Agricola, see Agricola, Rudolf
Rudolf I of Hapsburg (1218-1291),
German king and Holy Roman emperor,
Rudolf IV of Hapsburg (1339-1365), duke
of Austria, 98
Rudolf of Bruges (12th c), Flemish
astronomer, 340
Rufus, Mutianus (1470/1—1526), German
humanist, 175
Name index
Rufus, see Richard Rufus
Sacrobosco, see John of Sacrobosco
Saint Victor, see Gautier de Saint Victor
Salisbury, see John of Salisbury
Salutati, see Coluccio Salutati
Sanchez, see Clemente Sanchez
Sandivogius de Czechel, Polish copyist, 351
Sanok, see Gregory of Sanok
Savasorda, see Abraham bar Hiyya
Savelli Concio, see Honorius III
Savonarola, Michele (d. after 1466), Italian
medical master, 376
Saxoferrato, see Bartolus de Saxoferrato
Saxony, see Albert of Saxony and John of
Scot, see Michael Scot
Scotus, see John Duns Scotus
Sebastian Brant, see Brant, Sebastian
Segni Lothair of, see Innocent III
Segni Ugo(lino) di, see Gregory IX
Sforza 105
Sherwood, see William of Sherwood
Siger of Brabant (c. 1240-1281/4), Parisian
philosophical scholar, 92, 163, 318,
Sighibaldi, see Cino da Pistoia
Sigismund Gossenbrot, see Gossenbrot,
Sigismund of Luxemburg (1368—1437),
king of Hungary, Bohemia and the Holy
Roman Empire, 460
Signa, see Buoncompagno da Signa
Simon Bredon (fl. early 14th c), Oxford
scientific scholar, doctor of medicine,
astronomer, 344
Simon of Borsano (14th c), Bolognese
doctor, 162
Simon of Hinton (fl. 1250-1260), Oxford
theologian, 426
Simplicius of Cilicia (fl. c.530), Greek
philosopher, 318
Sinisbaldo Fieschi, see Innocent IV
Soana, Hildebrand of, see Gregory VII
Somers, M. (20th c), historian, 296
Sorbon, see Robert de Sorbon
Southern, R. (20th c.)> historian, 12
Spain, see John of Spain and Peter of Spain
St Albans, see John of St Albans
St Giles, see John of St Giles
St Victor, see Hugh of St Victor
Stabili, see Cecco d'Ascoli
Standonck, John (m. 15th c-1504),
Brabant theologian, religious reformer,
founder of colleges, 210
Stelling Michaud, S. (20th c), historian,
283, 291, 402
Stephen Gaudet (13th c), Parisian
theologian, 435
Stephen Langton (d. 1228), English
theological writer, 412
Stephen Tempier (d. 1279), French
theologian, bishop of Paris, 92, 321, 413,
424, 425, 427, 428, 433, 436
Strzempino, see Thomas de Strzempino
Susa, see Henry of Susa
Sylvester II (Gerbert of Aurillac)
(c.945-1003), French philosophical
scholar and theologian, pope, 281, 316,
Taddeo Alderotti (d. 1295), Italian medical
professor and author, 380
Tafur, see Pero Tafur
Tanaka, M. (20th c), historian, 290
Tancred (d. c.1234), archdeacon of the
diocese of Bologna, lawyer, 88
Tartaglia, Niccolo Fontana, see Fontana
Tartaglia, Niccolo
Tempier, see Stephen Tempier
Teutonicus, see Johannes Teutonicus
Themistius (C.317-C.388), Greek orator
and philosopher, 318
Theodoric of Lucca (i3th/i4th c),
Bolognese medical writer, surgeon, 372
Theodosius (347-395), Roman emperor, 7
Thomas Aquinas (1224/5—1274), Parisian
Dominican theologian, saint, 27, 155,
298, 318, 406, 416, 423, 425, 426,
428-430, 439, 440
Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1290—1349),
archbishop of Canterbury, 329, 332, 344,
Thomas Cobham (d. 1327), bishop of
Worcester, 137
Thomas of Cantimpre (C.1186-C.1294),
Brabant Dominican theologian, 338
Thomas Docking, (fl. 1260-1265), English
theologian, 426
Thomas Harriot, see Harriot, Thomas
Thomas Linacre, see Linacre, Thomas
Thomas de Strzempino (1432), rector of
Cracow, 135
Thomas de Vio, see Vio, Thomas de
Thomas of York (d. c.1260), Oxford
theologian, 416
Tivoli, see Plato of Tivoli
Torkyngton, see Richard Torkyngton
Totting, see Henry Totting of Oyta
Trani, see Goffredo of Trani
Traversari, see Ambrose of Camaldoli
Trebizond, see Bessarion of Trebizond
Tridente, see Augustinus de Tridente
Tudeschi, see Niccolo dei Tudeschi
Name index
Tunstall, Cuthbert (1474-1559), English
humanist, 296
Ubaldis, see Baldus de Ubaldis
Ubaldo Alluncingoli, see Lucius III
Ugo Benzi, see Benzi, Ugo
Ugo of Lucca {fl. 1214), Italian surgeon,
Ugo(lino) di Segni, see Gregory IX
Ulrich Richental (c.i 365-1436/7), German
chronicler, 141
Urach, see Conrad of Urach
Urban IV (Jacques Pantaleon)
(c. 1200—1264), pope, 93
Urban V (Guillaume de Grimoard)
(1309-1370), pope, 59, 98, 99, 215
Urban VI (Bartolomeo Prignano)
(c. 1318-1389), pope, 100, 288, 289, 435,
Urs Graf, see Graf, Urs
Valla, Lorenzo (1407-1457), Italian legal
humanist, 166, 392, 440, 448, 456, 458
Varro (Marcus Terentius Varro) (116-27
BC), Roman author, 28, 29, 41, 337,
Vegio, Maffeo (1407-1458), Italian legal
humanist, 392
Venice, see James of Venice
Verger, J. (20th c), historian, 290
Vergerio, see Piero Paolo Vergerio
Verona, see Guarino da Verona
Vespasiano de Bisticci, see Bisticci,
Vespasiano de
Vidal Gautier (m. 13th c), founder of a
college at Toulouse, 119
Villanova, see Arnald of Villanova
Villon, Francois (1431-1463/5), French
Vincent of Beauvais (c.i 190-1264), French
Dominican encyclopaedist, 339
Vinci, see Leonardo da Vinci
Vio, Thomas de (Cajetanus)
(1468/9-1534), Italian cardinal, 354, 440
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19
BC), Roman poet, 313, 357, 409
Virgilio, see Giovanni del Virgilio
Visconti, rulers of Milan, 105, 459
Vitez, Johannes (1400—1472), archbishop
of Gran, 460, 461
Vitruvius (Vitruvius Pollio) (c.50-26 BC),
Roman architect, 28
Vitry, see Jacques de Vitry and Philippe
Vittorino da Feltre (Vittore dei
Ramboldini) (1378-1446), Italian
humanist and educational writer, 451
Vives, Juan Luis (1492-1540), Spanish
humanist and social reformer, 451
Voerda, Nicasius de (d. 1492), Louvain
professor of arts and law, 172
Wallingford, see Richard of Wallingford
Walter Burley (14th c), English theologian,
Walter of Evesham, alias Odington,
English composer, astrologer, 344
Walter of Henley (c.1250), English writer
on agriculture, 29
Walter of Merton (d. 1277), bishop of
Rochester, royal chancellor, founder of
Merton college, 215
Watt, D. (20th c), historian, 294
Wenceslas IV (1361-1419), king of
Bohemia, 102
Wessel Gansfort, see Gansfort, Wessel
William of Auvergne (after 1180-1249),
French philosophical scholar, 321, 413,
William of Auxerre (c.1150—1231), French
philosophical scholar, 321, 421, 422
William Cupreus, see Cupreus, William
William Grey, see Grey, William
William Grocyn, see Grocyn, William
William Harvey, see Harvey, William
William Heytisbury (i3io?-i38o), Oxford
logician and master of arts, 330
William Lily, see Lily, William
William de la Mare {fl. 1275), English
theologian and philosophical scholar,
William of Meliton (d. 1257/60),
Franciscan Parisian theologian, 415
William of Moerbeke (c.1215-1286),
Flemish Dominican, Parisian theologian,
translator, 317, 318, 348
William of Ockham (William Occam)
(1280/90-1349), English philosophical
scholar, 329, 331, 332, 430, 439, 440
William of Sherwood (d. c.1279), English
mathematician, 329
Willibald Pirckheimer, see Pirckheimer,
Witelo (c. 1235—after 1274), Silesian
scholar, 323, 348
Wodeham, see Adam Wodeham
Ximenes, see Rodrigo Ximenes de Rada
Zbigniev Olesnicky, see Olesnicky,
Zmora of Leznicz, Johannes (fl. 15th c.j,
student at Perugia and Cracow, copyist,
GEOGRAPHICAL AND SUBJECT
Aachen (Germany, Nordrhein-Westfalen),
abacus, see calendar
Aberdeen (United Kingdom Aberdeenshire), university, 64, 442; law, 389;
nations, 115, 284; teaching, 231
academic ethic, 32; freedom, xxvii, 225,
412; infallibility, 438; insignia, 115,133,
139, 328; literature, 224; title, 197,198
academies and learned societies, 144, 451,
accessibility of universities, 172—177
accommodation: lodging, 49, 50, 213, 218,
236; bursa (student house), 212, 214,
218-222,227, 237; contubernium, 218,
460; conventor, head of a student
house, 219; domus, 116, 218; hall
(aula), 80, 87, 96, 99, 116, 212, 218,
220, 326; hospicium (hospice), 87, 220;
hostel, 203, 211, 214, 225; house for
poor scholars, 61, 118; paedagogium
(pedagogy), 116, 177, 196, 218-221;
private lodging, 119, 153, 218, 220,
222; regens, head of a student house,
219; rent (pensio), 2.56; residence
requirement, 219; room (commoda),
119, 221; see also college
accommodation, students living inside
student houses: battelers, 220;
bursales, bursarii, 116, 117, 219, 222;
Bursche, 219; cameristae, 218, 219;
coderie (Bettelkotter), 218, 220;
commoners (commensales), 117, 218,
220; communarii, 220; hospites, 89,
219; portionistae, 218, 238; pupilos,
218; living outside student houses:
chamberdeacons, Martinets, 219
admission, 185,187,195,230; requirements
for, 171, 173, 174, 177-178, 325; see
Aduard see Adwerth
Adwerth (Aduard) (Netherlands,
Groningen), monastery 464
age, for admission, 183, 184, 195-199, 325,
358; for graduation, 325, 419; of
minors, 171,183; of scholars, 400,402;
for swearing an oath, 183
Aix-en-Provence (France, Bouches du
Rhone), university 64, 105, 205, 206,
285; admission, 230; studia
humanitatis, 465
Albigensians, 16
Alcala (Spain, Madrid), university 65, 215,
Alexandria (Egypt), 338
almocatenes or controllers of weight
(university officials), 131
Alsace (France), 175
alternatives to university education, 354
America, 457
amor sciendi, xxvii, 10, 20, 22, 23, 25, 29,
Anagni (Italy, Frosinone), 95
Ancona (Italy, Ancona), nation at Perugia
Angers (France, Maine-et-Loire),
university, 53, 55, 62, 89, i n , 189;
faculties, i n ; law 46, 179, 401;
nations, 120, 122, 179; rector, 120;
students, 287, 291; studia humanitatis,
Anjou (France), 93
antiquity, 307, 308, 318, 360, 366, 384, 444,
Subject index
antiquity {cont.)
448, 458; authors, 311, 378, 444, 446,
453-455; Christian authors, 446, 447;
educational theory, 311; study of, 453;
texts, 313; see also grammar, Greek,
languages, Latin, medicine
Antwerp (Belgium, Antwerpen), 273, 274,
apothecary, see pharmacy
applied natural sciences, 25ff.; agriculture,
25; medicine, 25; pharmacy, 25;
technology, 27, 42; veterinary, 25
apprentices, see socius
Arabic world, 229, 338; astronomy, 317,
318; chair of Arabic, 95;
commentaries, 27, 30, 311; learning, 8,
281, 342, 455; mathematics, 317, 318;
medicine, 311, 362, 367, 378, 384;
philosophy, 319, 426, 438; texts, 311,
3,17' 3 ? 8
Aragon (Spain), 58, 184; sovereigns, 105,
i n , 376, 401
universities, 47, 121, 152, 205, 229;
nation at Bologna, 216; see also
Huesca; Lerida; Perpignan
Aramaic, study of, 455
archbishop, 26, 130, 321, 348, 392, 412,
428, 429, 460, 461
archdeacon, see Bologna
archetypes, see Bologna and Paris
architecture, 28, 214, 338, 451
arenga, see harangue
Arezzo (Italy, Arezzo), university, 46, 49,
53, 56, 62, 88, 97
Aristotelianism, 318, 404, 444; Arabic
commentaries on, 27, 420, 424;
cosmology, 353; logic, 43, 329; natural
philosophy, 340, 365, 420, 425;
philosophy, 29, 51, 315, 319, 338;
politics, 404; see also Aristotle
arithmetic, 307, 339, 341, 344, 349, 461;
arithemetical game called
rithmomachia,
arms, carrying of, 109, 223, 225; see
privileges
ars dictaminis or dictandi (epistolary art),
50, 248, 255, 315, 316, 397, 453; ars
notaria, 41, 315, 397; ars predicandi,
315; ars sermonicalis (art of
expression), 337
artes liberales (liberal arts), 26, 28, 289,
307-335.338,409,4"; a r t e s
mechanicae or serviles (mechanical or
practical arts), 26-28, 30, 42, 307, 354;
quadrivium (arithmetic, music,
geometry, astronomy), 28, 281, 308,
309, 311, 312, 316, 319, 323, 324,
337-358; trivium {grammatical
rethorica, dialectica), 307—335, 357,
456, 457; see also faculty; lecturing;
school, and under subjects
articella, $66, 378
artista, 452, 457
Asia minor, 283, 284
assemblies, 38, 40, 124, 147, 155, 333;
congregatio generalis (general
assembly), 115, 124, 147, 211, 334;
congregations of the masters, 53, 147;
conventus or conventatio, 124, 399;
convocation 124
Assisi (Italy, Perugia), 431
association of academics (societas), 157,
211, 212, 285
astrology, 342, 352, 355, 357, 358, 375;
education, 343, 376; imagery, 352, 353
astronomy, 42, 59, 234, 318, 323, 324, 339,
344, 345, 348, 353, 355, 356, 384, 457,
461; calculation, 353; clock, 384;
instruments, 342; knowledge, 356;
tables, 341, 346; texts, 457
attendance at universities, see numbers
auctorista, 452, 453
Augsburg (Germany, Bavaria), 228, 272,
349, 451, 462
aula, hall, see accommodation
Aurillac (France, Cantal), 281
Austin friars, 414, 432
Austria, xxi, 18, 57, 129, 183
Authentica Habita, 12, 14, 78, 79, 87, 94,
108, 120, 124, 290, 302, 388
authoritative texts, 41, 43, 44, 233, 356,
382, 405; arts, 409, 423; law, 409;
medicine, 409; theology, 409, 423, 438
authority, 412; civil, 36, 53, 56, 109, 153;
church, 36, 56; external, 61, 121, 129,
147; intellectual, 410
Auvergne (France), 298
Averroism, 25, 424
Avignon (France, Vaucluse), city, 300, 349;
papal court, 96, 98, 100, 101, 240, 253,
288, 381, 430, 435, 436, 453, 464
university, 63, 95, 98, 141, 264, 288;
admission, 230; associations, 212;
attendance, 189, 199, 203, 207, 289,
291, 294, 295, 297; beadle, 126;
buildings, 157; college of doctors, 147;
faculties, 60, 287, 291, 311, 389;
finance, 134, 136; nation at Bologna,
284; ordinances, 205; studia
humanitatis, 465; teachers, 152
Bamberg (Germany, Bavaria), 462
ban, see prohibition
bankers, 115, 301, 449
Subject index
barber-surgeon or quack doctor, 274
Barcelona (Spain, Barcelona), 58, 340;
count of, 281; jurists, 270
university, 64; rector, 121
Basle (Switzerland, Basel-Stadt), 20, 178,
222, 238; city, 300, 301, 466;
council,156, 191, 289, 438, 461
university, 64, 199; attendance, 188, 192,
193; bursae, 220; foundation, 19;
humanism, 295, 462, 463; law, 291,
390; oaths, 185; size, 190; see also
Brant, Sebastian
Basque studiosi at Spanish universities, 297
beadle {bedellus), 39, 112, 115, 126, 127;
insignia, 115
Beauvais (France, Oise), bishop, 131
Bee, see Le Bec-Hellouin
bedellus, see beadle
bejaune {bejaunium, beanus, freshman,
greenhorn), 158, 230, 231, 236
Belgium, 175
Benedictines, 355
benefices, 80, 109, 151, 153, 257, 258, 261,
267, 273, 288, 371, 401, 402; church
livings, 201, 202, 240, 276; paid by the
king, 133; prebendal provision, 16, 17,
Berito (Italy), 78
Bern (Switzerland), 344
Bettelkotter, see accommodation
Beziers (France, Herault), 340
bible, 156, 409, 410, 412, 418, 420, 457
biblici, 156
bios praktikos, xxvii, 23; bios theoretikos,
xxvii, 22, 23
bishop, 51, 53, 80, 83-86, 88, 89, 93, 120,
122, 130, 131, 137, 150, 193, 216, 259,
403, 462, 463; jurisdiction, 81, 129;
representative, 119
Bohemia, 102; academy, 460; king, 18, 128
universities, 102; cathedrales, 129;
mobility, 283, 291, 293; revolt, 164;
students, 280, 283; teaching, 263
Bologna (Italy, Bologna), 53, 247, 248, 250,
253, 256, 260, 261, 262; archdeacon,
49, 85, 88, 129, 132, 388; bishop, 80,
88, 120, 293; commune, 80, 121, 300;
doctors, jurists, 87, 154; mendicant
studia, 417, 431; libri memoriales of
the commune, 127; notarial schools, 454
university, 14, 15, 18, 39, 54, 55, 62, 79,
96, 97, 100, 114, 185, 237; academic
dress, 139, 140; accommodation, 236;
arms, carrying, 225; ars dictaminis,
315; ars notaria, 41, 127, 397;
arts/medicine relations, 309, 375;
astronomy, 42, 349, 353; attendance,
189, 190, 292, 371, 373, 400, 403;
beadles, 115; bursars (receptores), 115;
careers, 361; collectae, 134; colleges,
118, 137, 285; college of doctors,
24—25, no, 149, 376; commemorative
celebrations, 4, 5; consiliarii, 125;
degrees, 17, 85, 95, 381; disputations,
398; faculties, no; foundation, 7, 12,
47, 77; grammar 231; humanism 453;
law 5, 25, 43, 48, 49, 50, 77, 80, 120,
211, 218, 291, 388, 390, 402, 413;
massarii (treasurers), 127;
mathematics/astrology relations, 355;
matriculation, 184,186,199; medicine,
207, 286, 365, 368-370, 378, 380, 385;
mobility, 233, 287-290, 296, 298, 371,
401; model/type, 21, 24, 25, 31, 36, 95,
102, 108, no, i n , 121, 126, 148, 149,
173, 199, 258, 284, 351, 389; nations,
6, 39, 48, 109, no, 115, 119, 179, 199,
283, 284, 290, 295, 402; oaths, 419;
pecia system, 128, 233; recruitment,
40, 203, 282; rector, 120, 121;
reformatores, 133; relations with the
emperor, 80; repetitions, 399; rhetoric,
308; schools, 5, 45, 145, 151; seals,
141; social status, 56, 82, 185, 241;
Spanish college, 61,118,119,137, 215,
216, 239, 297, 389, 401, 402, 403;
stationers, 128; statutes, 38, 45, 91,
113, 379, 418, 434; student life, 81, 223,
226, 230; studia humanitatis, 452, 462;
study of Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and
Aramaic, 455; surgery, 42, 381; teachers,
12, 21, 46, 93, 149, 152, 155, 156, 166,
167,202, 370, 380; theology, 60,98, 354,
418, 433-435; town/gown relations, 80,
81, 94, 96; vacations, 229; see also
Peurbach, George of; Pancius of
Lucca; Simon of Borsano
books, 146, 161, 303; book learning, 382;
classification, 232; owners, 385;
production (correctores, miniatores,
rasores), 129, 202; trade, 275; sale
(librarii), 39, 128; see also printing;
stationers
Bordeaux (France, Gironde), university,
64, 301; matriculation, 181; medical
doctors, 287; ordinances, 205
Bourges (France, Cher), university, 64, 301;
foundation, 58; medical doctors, 287
Brabant (Belgium and Netherlands), 172;
duke, 57; career of graduates, 273;
students in Orleans, 272; in Paris, 282
Bratislava (Pozsony, Pressburg)
(Czechoslovakia, Bratislava),
university, 64; chancellor, 130;
Subject index
Bratislava {cont.)
humanism, 460; Lithuanians and
Hungarians, 293
Brescia (Italy, Brescia), students, 79
Breslau (Poland, Breslau), cathedral
chapter, 131, 261
Bressanone (Brixen) (Italy, Bolzano),
cathedral chapter, 261
Brittany (France), Bretons at Paris, 282;
duke of, 266
Bruges (Belgium, West-Vlaanderen), 301;
commercial bank, 295
Budapest (Hungary), 219
university, 64, 190; coat of arms, 141;
contubernium, 460; mobility, 293
buildings and other properties, 38, 133,
136, 137, 157; college, 118, 137, 139,
214; faculty, 99, 139; university, 136,
137, 157, 173
bull, papal, 58, 60; Consideratis
circumstantiis (1219), 388; Parens
scientiarum (1231), 89, 90, 422;
Quaerantes in agro (1254), 413; Quasi
lignum vitae (1255), 416; Scholaribus
universis (1217), 388; Super Speculam
(1219), 85, 389
Burgundy (France), 283, 445; careers, 257;
duke, 132, 266, 302; nation at Lerida,
115; at Montpellier, 302; students at
Paris, 282
bursa, see accommodation
bursae volantes (grants), 240
bursales, bursarii, Bursche, see
accommodation
bursar [receptor), 112
Byzantium, 7, 35
Caen (France, Calvados), university, 64,
190, 465; foundation, 58; medical
doctors, 287; oaths, 182; ordinances,
Cahors (France, Lot), 98
university, 47, 63, 190, 311; arts colleges,
217; foundation, 56; medical doctors,
287; ordinances, 205
calculators, see mathematics
calendar, ecclesiastical (abacus), 340;
university, 128, 154, 155, 229, 339, 345
Cambridge (United Kingdom,
Cambridgeshire), xxi, 58; mendicant
schools, 415; public peace, 225
university, 62; academic dress, 140;
accommodation, 237; arts, 311, 354;
attendance, 189, 191, 268; bishops at,
150, 259; buildings, 137, 157;
chancellor, 122, 124, 130; coat of
arms, 141; colleges, 60—62, 117, 179,
215, 331; degrees, 94, 95; finance, 134;
hostels, paedagogia, 177,219,220,221;
humanists, 298; libraries, 138;
matriculation, 178, 181; mendicants,
160; mobility, 53, 292, 294, 414;
nations, 284; oaths, 184; proctor, 127,
334; recruitment, 55, 203; Scotism,
333; statutes, 38, 92, 113; students,
296; teachers, 53, 145, 160, 335, 414;
theology, 42, 59,199, 308, 435; trial, 89
cameristae, see accommodation
cancellarius, see chancellor
canon law, see law
canonista, 452
canons (explanatory principles), 339, 349
Canterbury (United Kingdom, Kent),
archbishop, 26, 130, 321, 348, 412,
career, 112, 151, 167, 255, 269—271, 296; of
graduates, 37, 244-277, 449; in arts,
255, 258, 259, 275; in law, 22, 25, 52,
58, 93, 127, 164, 232, 239, 247, 248,
255—259, 262, 264—268, 270—275, 292,
293, 308, 310; in medicine, 161, 162,
247, 255, 258, 262, 264, 265, 274, 308,
310, 362, 366, 369, 376, 380; in
theology, 232, 239, 257, 337, 405, 406,
career, academic, 22, 30, 112, 148, 150,
154, 205, 249, 254, 256, 258, 274, 403,
career, bureaucratization, 93, 269, 281,
357, 403; laicization, 263, 267, 269,
274, 403, 453, 460; opportunities, 264,
271,272; professionalization, 105,160,
167, 240, 248, 252, 266, 272, 310, 360,
362; relation of graduation to career,
165, 244, 264, 266, 270-272, 286, 294,
406; relation of social background to
career, 21, 167, 207, 246, 274, 286
career, ecclesiastical, 16,101,150,153, 240,
267, 269, 272, 274, 286, 401, 402, 412;
administration, 81, 144, 201, 259, 263,
269, 403; archdeacons, 248; bishops,
122, 248, 249, 252, 259, 269, 293, 403,
449; cardinals, 249, 253; chancellor of
the Holy Roman Church, 77, 78, 79;
chaplain, 127; chapters, 129, 145, 248,
2-57-2-59* 2.61, 267, 269, 273, 293, 403;
court of justice, 122, 144, 249, 269,
403; dignitaries learned in civil law,
292, 293, 403; ecclesiastical elite in the
king's service, 292; high offices, 14, 21,
80,81,99,207,250,252, 258, 270, 412;
local offices, 55, 275; papal curia, 98,
249, 267, 403; 464; parish clergy, 259,
268, 269, 405; preachers, 58
Subject index
career, governmental: central, 55, 93, 99,
248, 249, 250, 252, 254-257, 259,
261-263, 267, 268, 291-293, 299, 310,
403, 449, 456; provincial, 248, 255,
291; regional, 255, 257, 268; local, 93,
208, 247, 248, 255-256, 259, 267, 270,
273, 274, 362, 449; court of justice,
102, 144, 145, 207, 247, 248, 250, 252,
256, 257, 259, 267, 273, 274,299
career, secular: advocates and attorneys,
256, 268, 273, 274; diplomatic
missions, 133, 156, 289; healers, 362,
364; merchants, 207, 209, 449; notaries
(notarii), 127, 212, 247, 248, 256, 274,
449; practitioners, 25, 207, 209, 363,
364, 366, 371, 372, 380, 382, 403;
private professions, 270; procurators,
256; schoolmasters, 167,177, 247, 250,
252, 258, 268, 269; service-sector
market, 241; service of high-ranking
people, 274; service of hospitals, 274;
surgeons, 42, 262, 361-363, 380-382
Carmelites, 289, 355, 414
carmina burana, 224, 280
cartularies, 37
Castile (Spain), 47, 204, 251, 258; students
at Bologna, 216, 401; chancellor, 215;
king, 54, 55, 92, 270, i n , 152
universities, 136
Catalonia (Spain), 255, 270, 281, 316, 340;
nation at Perugia, 114, 283; Catalans
at Bologna, 297
Catania (Italy, Catania) university, 64;
foundation, 57, 105; recruitment, 298
cedilla, see matriculation register
celebrations, see festivities
censures, see doctrines
ceremonies, see festivities
chair {cathedra or writing chair), 129
chair, 149; of Arabic, Aramaic, Chaldean
and Hebrew, 95; litterae humanitatis,
452; philosophy, 152; theology, 414
Chaldean, chair of, 95
chamber deacons, see accommodation
Champagne (France), students at Cologne,
chancellor {cancellarius), 50, 51, 53, 121,
129, 146, 215, 333-334. 4i3
chapter, cathedral and collegiate, see
Chartres (France, Eure-et-Loire), cathedral
school, 10, 281, 411
Chateauneuf-sur-Loire (France, Loiret),
Chelmno, see Kulm
church fathers, 41, 406, 409, 423, 454, 458
Cistercians, 148, 432, 440
civil law, see law
clericus, 109, 200, 201
Clermont (France, Puy-de-D6me), Council,
coats of arms, 141, 142
coderie, see accommodation
coetus, cetus, see assemblies
coffers {archa), 133
Coimbra (Portugal, Coimbra), university,
63, 190, 258; academic dress, 140;
buildings, 157; fees, 236; law, 389;
ordinances, 205; paedagogia, 177;
rector, 121; student life, 225, 226;
teachers, 148, 152, 153
collectae, 48, 94, 127, 133, 151, 152, 157,
159; collectae pastus, 236
collectores (university officials), 136
college, 8, 58, 61, 124, 137, 180, 203, 211,
212, 222, 224, 225, 227, 295, 326, 355;
academic committee, 23; bursae, 222;
college de plein exercice, 62, 221;
everyday life, 119, 202, 228; fellows
{socii), 21, 61, 116, 152, 214; for arts,
217; foreigners, 284, 297; law, 217,
399; masters, 118; monks, 60, 116;
foundation, 215, 240, 241; officers,
116, 117; teaching, 221, 334
college-universities, 60, 116, 215, 221, 222
collegium doctorum (college of doctors or
masters), 21, 25, 39, 56, no, 118, 120,
121, 147, 149, 155, 211, 213, 326, 369,
399; arts, 51, 222, 309; law, 24, 50;
medicine, 116, 309, 370
Cologne (Germany, Nordrhein-Westfalen),
14, 209, 216, 301; doctor in Rat, 274;
students from the diocese in Paris, 290
university, 64, 286, 300, 436, 439; age of
admission, 183, of graduation, 419;
attendance, 189, 191, 192, 288, 400;
bursa, 222; coats of arms, 141;
collectores, 136; confraternities, 285;
contact with England, 431; humanism,
463; law, 390; matriculation, 180, 187;
mobility, 289, 292, 295, 299; nations,
115, 284; oaths, 185; privileges, 100;
requirements, 172, 177; social status,
210, 238; statutes, 112, 134, 417, 434;
teachers, 370, 463; theology, 417, 434,
438; see also Albertus Magnus;
Nicasius de Voerda; Roland of
commensales, see accommodation
commentum or commentarium
(commentary), 231, 318, 320, 324, 345,
379, 392, 395, 467; on Aristotle, 338;
astronomy, 349; canon law, 392;
Subject index
commentum {cont.)
constitutions of the German
emperors, 392.-393; logic and natural
philosophy, 330; the Sentences, 392,
commoners, see accommodation
communication and exchange, means of,
4*7> 445> 44<^ 467
computus, 345
conciliarism, 100, 101, 404, 405, 435
condemnation, see prohibition
Conference of European Rectors (CRE),
confraternities, 211, 213, 229, 240, 285
conservator privilegii (university official),
consiliarius or president of a nation, no,
consilium, see consultation
Constance (Germany,
Baden-Wiirttemberg), Council, 141,
156, 289, 438, 439, 460, 463, 464;
Peace, 391
Constantinople (Istanbul) (Turkey), 313,
455; College of Constantinople at
Paris, 284; translation centre, 317
consultation {consilium sapientum, expert
opinion), 124, 360, 372, 396, 400;
collections of, 380; legal, 153; medical,
contubernium, see accommodation
conventor, see accommodation
Copenhagen (Denmark), 178, 231
university, 64, 190; Danes at, 286; fines,
227; foundation, 292; medical faculty,
112; royal conservator, 132; statutes,
Corbeil (France, Essones), school, 6
Cordoba (Spain, Cordoba), astronomy,
corporations {corpora), 211
corpus iuris canonici (corpus of Canon
Law), 49, 391-393; corpus iuris civilis
(corpus of Roman Law), 48, 49, 87,
391—393; corpus of Greek and Arabic
sources and works, 311, 312, 324, 377
correspondence collections, 450
cosmology, 319, 323, 325, 331, 350
costs, 220, 236, 238; for board and lodging,
131, 237; graduation, 147, 206, 235;
learning, 235,237, 353; living, 235, 236
councils, 38, 39, 155; councils general, 101,
435; Second Lateran (1139), 77; Third
Lateran (1179), 80; Fourth Lateran
(1215), 82, 412; of Basle (1431-49),
191, 289, 438; Clermont (1130), 77;
Constance (1414-18), 141, 289, 438,
439; Pisa (1409), 438; Reims (1131),
77; Sens (1210), 320; the French
Church (1398), 101; Tours (1163), 85
Counter-Reformation, 118
course-hoppers (students), 200
courses, university, see university
Cracow (Poland, Krakow), 178; academy,
451; bishop, 130
university, 46, 56, 57, 58, 63, 189, 202,
301, 442; academic insignia, 139;
astronomy, 59, 349, 352n; attendance,
188; brotherhoods, 213; buildings, 157;
bursae, 118, 219; coats of arms, 141;
colleges, 118, 126, 135, 138; courses,
461; degrees, 98; dictation of texts,
129; finance, 134; humanism, 298, 460,
461; matriculation, 180; mobility, 276,
288, 291, 293, 294, 351; nation, 115;
rector, 123; relation of mathematics to
astrology, 355; royal chancellor, 99;
theology, 60
Crema (Italy, Cremona), siege, 79
curia, see papal court, Avignon, Rome
curiositas, 437
Czechoslovakia, Czech nation at Prague,
115; feud between Czechs and
Germans, 160; students, 57, 284
Danzig (Gdansk) (Poland, Gdansk),
Dauphine (France), 47
dean (decanus), 40, 52, 59, 112, 155, 235
decretal collections, 82, 88, 95; Collatio
decima (Tenth Collation), 393, 394;
Cum ex eo of Boniface VIII, 403; Ex
literis, 82; Quarta compilatio, 82;
Quia in causis, 82; Quinta compilatio,
88; Tertia compilatio, 88; Tuae
fraternitatis, 82
decretista, 452
degree, academic, 21, 23, 37, 39, 98, 129,
145, 146, 181, 197, 215, 231, 235, 239,
245, 246, 254, 255, 281, 299
degree, baccalarius artium, 171, 197, 211,
234, 324-327; baccalarius,
baccalaureus (bachelor) or
baccalariatus (baccalaureate), 8, 44,
J47> I575 i99> 2-00, 233, 235, 241, 326,
327, 418; biblicus or ordinarius, 418;
cursor, 418; formatus, 157, 418, 419;
sententiarius, 418
degree: ceremony of doctorate, 399; of
graduation, 95; of inception, 328;
certificate of study, 234;
determination, 157, 197, 234, 327;
failure, 147, 165, 196, 235, 251, 254,
276; harangues, 161; inaugural lectures
Subject index
(proemia inceptio magistri), 161, 234,
328; inceptio or inauguration, 146,
degree, graduation, age for, 325, 419;
graduation in a higher faculty, 235,
261; in arts, 232, 253; in law, 253, 399;
in medicine, 365, 373; in music, 344; in
surgery, 381; in theology, 253, 414,
416; graduation per bullam, 36, 403
degree, licentia docendi or ubique docendi,
17, 21, 23, 24, 36, 45, 49, 50, 79, 80,
83, 85, 87, 89, 90, 93-95, 98, 104, 108,
129, 139, 181, 199, 234, 334, 388, 399;
licentiatus, 146, 235; in arts, 234, 419;
in canon or civil law, 199, 399; in
medicine, 199; in theology, 199
degree, magister artiwn (master of arts),
146, 171, 197, 324, 325, 327, 328, 419;
doctor, doctorate, 144, 146, 199, 235;
doctor bullatus, 36; laurea (degree) in
law, 399; medicine, 368; laurel wreath
(laures), 452, 453; titles of doctor or
master, 36, 49, 327, 399
democratic character, 52, 242
Denmark, 190, 271, 276, 292; Danes at
Copenhagen, 285; Danes at Paris, 251,
284, 291; kings of, 252; mobility, 293;
social status, 263
denunciantes, proctors and other
watch-dogs (university officials), 227
Dessau (Germany, Sachsen-Anhalt),
Philanthropinum, 443
Deventer (Netherlands, Overijssel), school,
devotio moderna, 165, 175
dialectics, 44, 282, 406, 456; dialectical
methods, 314, 396, 398
dictator (university official), 127
diffinitores (university officials), 126
Dijon (France, Cote d'Or), 300, 349;
Dominican studium, 90
disciplines, classification of, 41, 42, 214
dispensation, see privileges
disputation (disputatio), 43, 44, 91, 146,
155, 156, 158, 232, 233, 324, 326-328,
382, 418-420; quodlibetal questions,
328, 418, 420, 429; solemn, 328
dissection of human cadavers, 364, 380
distributores (university officials), 132
doctor, see degree
doctrines, 44, 51, 160, 164, 325, 411, 413,
414, 428, 432, 433; classification of,
325, 411; strange or subversive
doctrines, 311, 432, 434, 437, 438;
doctrinal condemnation, 92, 164;
controversies, 320, 433; peace, 428;
textbooks, 320, 409
Dole (France, Jura), university, 64, 132,
299; law, 291; medical doctors, 287;
ordinances, 5
Dominicans (or Preachers), 355, 414, 415,
428, 432, 440
domusy see accommodation
Douai (France, Nord-Pas-de-Calais),
Confraternity at Paris, 285
dress, academic, 8, 109, 139, 140, 146, 190,
226,234,239
economic sciences, 27
education, 362; educational explosion, 192,
275; educational reforms, 273, 451,
455; educational system, 62, 251, 255,
309, 405, 455; educational treatises,
161, 451; higher education, 21, 35, 86,
95, 97,167, 292; of the ruling class, 55,
86,105, i n , 165; prior education, 174,
176,266,402,451; vocational training,
Eichstatt (Germany, Bavaria), 462
Ely (United Kingdom, Cambridgeshire),
empirism, experimentation and
measurement, 27, 30, 44, 330, 467
encyclopedias, 312, 333, 338, 339
England, 13, 52, 175, 245, 259, 269, 294,
333> 34°> 37*> 4i°> 4*2-; episcopate, 12,
150; kings, 18, 92, 249, 400;
mendicants, 440; public schools, 215;
royal chancery, 93
universities, 58, 190, 203, 268, 270, 288,
331, 334; astronomy, 342, 353;
attendance, 48, 189, 401; buildings,
137; chancellor, 122, 130; colleges and
halls, 60-62, 117, 210, 214, 218, 220;
courts, 252; degrees, 197; English
nation in Bologna, 295, in Paris, 114,
250, 251, 296, 333; law, 389;
matriculation, 178; mobility, 287, 300;
oaths, 182, 183; patronage, 207;
proctors, 134; rector, 119, 130;
relations with Cologne and Erfurt,
431, with Iberian Peninsula, 297;
scholars, 12, 250, 295; social status,
197, 204, 207, 463; students, 50, 224,
250, 281, 282, 284, 290, 296, 414;
teaching, 429; vice-chancellor, 123; see
also Ramus, Petrus; Robert Pullen
epistemology, 331, 332, 456
Erfurt (Germany, Thiiringen), mendicant
schools, 417; schools, 175
university, 64, 100, 185, 199; attendance,
187, 189, 192, 288, 400; coat of arms,
141; colleges, 118, 216, 221, 234, 301;
foundation, 436; humanism, 193, 298,
Subject index
Erfurt (Germany, Thiiringen) (cont.)
462; law, 390; manuscripts, 344;
matriculation, 180, 191; mobility, 289,
291; nations, 115; ordinances, 205;
relation with England, 431; seals, 173;
social status, 209; student life, 220
Esztergom, see Gran
ethics, 234, 355
Eton (United Kingdom, Berkshire), school,
examination, 24, 39, 146, 155, 158, 171,
176, 196, 197, 215, 234, 235, 326; fees
and gifts for, 133, 152, 153, 159; law,
399; licentia and doctorate, 157; oral,
158; private, 146; public, 146;
rigorous, 146
exercises (exercitia), repetitions,
resumptiones, 233, 379
Exeter (United Kingdom, Devon), school,
facultas as scientific discipline, 109, 411
faculty, 25, 59,109, i n , 124, 203, 211, 224;
arts, 40-42, i n , 172, 183, 196, 197,
231, 261, 266, 3O7-359, 374, 375, 377,
402, 431, 454-457, 461; grammar, 40;
higher, 42, 52, i n , 112, 183, 197, 199,
*59, 2-75, 308, 333, 334; law, 40, 41, 56,
198, 199, 266, 388-407, 454; lower, see
arts; medicine, 40, 41, 261,360-385;
paper, 46; pattern, 29, 333, 382;
theology, 40, 41, 59, 60, 98, no, 290,
321, 328, 354, 409-440, 453
familia, 174, 182, 198, 207, 208, 211, 216,
218, 237; see also patronage
fees, 151, 153, 182, 186, 187, 207, 208, 266;
for admission, 185; for matriculation
and graduation, 133, 152, 153, 159,
235; from guests and auditors, 181;
subject to status, 185
feneratores (university officials), 127
Fermo (Italy, Ascoli Piceno), university, n o
Ferrara (Italy, Ferrara), 300, 443
university, 47, 57, 64, 185, 290, 301;
attendance, 189; degrees, 239;
mobility, 296; nations, no; students,
288; town/gown relations, 132, 370;
see also Aldus Manutius; Borso
d'Este; George of Peurbach; Niccolo
Leoniceno; Rudolf Agricola
festivities and solemnities, 6, 135, 139, 155,
212, 229, 230
finance, 38, 49, 93, 96, 114, 133, 153, 212,
237, 238; resources to study, 172, 235;
support of students, 119, 127, 211,
fines, 121, 122, 133, 134, 227
Finland, absence of university 276; careers,
292; attendance, 293; students at Paris,
252, 253, 271, in Germany, 263
Flanders (Belgium and France), 282; jurists,
Florence (Italy, Firenze), 99; academy, 451;
schools, 176
university, 47, 56, 63, 190, 267; careers,
264, 361; games, 226; grammar, 231;
Greek, 455; humanism, 456; medicine,
385; pecia system, 128; rhetoric and
poetics, 455; social status, 185, 265;
teachers, 96, 152; theology, 98, 417;
town/gown relations, 97, 106; see
Coluccio Salutati, Filipo Villani
food, beer and wine, 136
foundation charters, 36; chronology, 45; of
universities, 7, 11, 36, 45, 46, 54, 58,
80, 97, 102, 103, 105, 129, 215, 241,
436; university colleges, 61, 98, 116,
216; faculties of theology, 112
France, xxi, 47, 54, 57, 85, 90, 138, 240,
247, 250, 295, 300, 301, 356, 406;
France, central, 299; France, north, 58,
245, 283, 367, 390; France, south, 39,
60, 98, 99,101,119,149,154,176,190,
199, 207, 217, 239, 245, 253, 256, 267,
283, 289, 297, 298, 309, 341; church,
14, 79, 101, 257; court, 86, 207, 252,
380; Great Schism, 100; local
authorities, 9% monarchy, 18, 51, 93,
100, 104, 414; relation with Scotland,
294; schools, 53, 81, 175
universities 58, 100, 101, 190, 199, 253,
276, 297; admission, 178, 230, 231;
arts, 154, 197, 310; attendance, 48,
189, 268; beadle, 126; careers, 14, 93,
249, 255, 258, 271, 361, 372; colleges,
61, 62, 119, 214; French nation in
Lerida, 115, in Paris, 114, 289, 297,
333, in Perugia, 114, 283; humanism,
459; laicization, 267; law, 183, 199,
207, 217, 256, 266, 389, 390, 401;
medicine, 199; mobility, 258, 287;
nations, 122; nuntius, 126; rector, 334;
relations with Italy, 298; social status,
204, 226; students, 283, 299; students
at Avignon, 289; students from
Germany, 291, from Schweinfurt, 288,
from Switzerland, 291; students'
behavior, 282; teachers, 92, 152, 259,
391; theology, 154, 310, 438
Franciscans (or Minors), 323, 346, 348,
355, 414, 43O, 432., 44O
Franconia (Germany), 288
Frankfurt-on-Main (Germany, Hesse), 301,
Subject index
Frankfurt-on-Oder (Germany,
Brandenburg), university, 65
freedoms, see privileges
Freiburg im Breisgau (Germany,
Baden-Wurttemberg), university, 19,
64, 190, 199; attendance, 192, 229;
colleges, 227; law, 390, 400; liber
taxatorum, 209; oaths, 183; via
antiqua and moderna, 160
freshman, see beanus
friars, 415, 417, 420
Friesland (Netherlands), graduates, 296;
students, 13
Fiinfkirchen, see Pecs
games, 226, 229, 345
Gascony (France), nation at Bologna, 298,
at Lerida, 115
Gdansk, see Danzig
Gelderland, Duchy of (Netherlands and
Germany), 287
Geneva (Switzerland, Geneve), projected
university, 46
Genoa (Italy, Genoa), 300; school, 176
university, 64
geographical area of recruitment, 40, 53,
192, 204, 254, 269, 283, 284;
denomination of the nations, 39;
national college, 284; origin of law
students and scholars, 400; of medical
students and scholars, 176, 177
geomancy, 352
geometry, 323, 339, 340, 346
Germany, xxi, xxiii, 12, 13, 62, 77, 87, 93,
102, 103, 152, 191, 207, 209, 228, 230,
235, 271, 281, 288, 289, 300, 334, 410,
445; cathedrals, 129; cities, 14;
dioceses, 252; imperial authority, 36,
77, 87, 89; princes, 132; Roman law,
78, 261; schools, 293
universities, 58, i n , 112, 157, 185, 190,
210, 288, 290, 292, 433, 442; academic
dress, 140; admission, 177, 191, 230,
231; arts, 147, 154, 237, 356, 377;
astrology, 357; attendance, 48, 188,
189, 192, 197, 199, 270, 275, 400;
buildings, 137; bursae, 219-222;
careers, 14, 136, 146, 154, 216, 259,
262, 271, 273, 274, 276, 281; colleges,
61, 62, 118, 216, 217; conservator of
the privileges, 132; foundation 57,241;
German model, 217; German Nation,
39,200; at Bologna, 119,260,290, 402,
at Lerida, 115, at Orleans, 135, 184,
291, 302, at Paris, 101, 251, 289, 296,
at Perugia, 114, 180, 283; humanism,
i93> 457> 461; law, 226, 261, 390;
medicine, 112; mendicants, 431;
mobility, 276, 284^ mos italicus, 392;
oaths, 184; rector, 124; scholars, 289,
435, 452; social status, 56, 204, 207,
208, 227, 238; students, 50, 57, 201,
204, 213, 223, 224, 263, 282, 286, 287,
290, 292; students at Bologna and
Padua, 371, at Paris, 333, at Pavia, 272;
students from England and Ireland,
296, from Finland, 271, from Sweden,
263, from Switzerland 291; teachers,
154, 159, 160; theology, 154, 237, 401,
414; town/gown relations, 138; via
antiqua and moderna, 160, 439
Gerona (Spain, Gerona), university, 57, 64
Glasgow (United Kingdom, Strathclyde),
university, 64, 190; astronomy, 342;
chancellor, 122,130; college, 116,153;
law, 389; nations, 59, 115, 284
gloss (glossa), 44, 48, 231, 390, 391, 395,
410; glossarum apparatus, 395, 397;
glossators, 390, 391, 394
Gloucester (United Kingdom,
Gloucestershire), duke, 152
goliards, vagantes, wandering students,
157, 224, 280, 286
Gottingen (Germany, Niedersachsen), xxi
graces, see privileges
grammar, 44, 50, 222, 231, 234, 248, 307,
308, 310, 312-316, 319, 321, 327, 329,
grammatice, 457
Gran (Esztergom) (Hungary, Komaron
megye), archbishop 460
Grand Tour, 286
grants, gifts and legacies, 23, 133, 240
Gray (France, Haute Saone), school at, 95
Great Britain, xxi; admission, 230;
mobility, 281; nation system, 115;
students, 199, 294; students at Paris,
Great Schism (1378-1417), 55, 57,100, 211,
289, 290, 334, 404, 435, 439, 445
Greece, 391; Aristotelian tradition from,
404; students at Paris, 283, 284
Greek, 313, 461, 466; authors, 455;
Hellenism, 312; language, 356,
455-457; medicine learning, 365;
philosophy, 311, 319, 337, 438, 450;
sciences, 311, 340, 365, 438; see also
translations
Greifswald (Germany,
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern),
university, 58, 64, 185, 190, 292;
attendance, 187, 192; colleges, 153;
conservator, 132; grammar, 231; law,
390; mobility, 301
Subject index
Grenoble (France, Isere), university, 47, 56,
63, 98; foundation, 97
Groningen (Netherlands, Groningen),
Groswardein (Oradea) (Romania, Bihor
judet), library, 460
guide or information booklets for new
students, 180; for examinations, 320;
for travel, 301; to books in logic,
grammar, ethics, 320; to medical
practice, 366
hall, see accommodation
Hamburg (Germany, Hamburg),
graduates, 274
handbook, see textbook
Hanseatic League, 292, 300, 301; Hanseatic
University, 58, 301
Hastings (United Kingdom, East Sussex),
Hebrew, astronomical texts in, 352; chair
of, 95; study of, 455
Heidelberg (Germany,
Baden-Wurttemberg), academy, 451
university, 64, 100, 103, 189, 202, 209,
262, 300; arts, 332; attendance, 187,
192, 400; coats of arms, 141; colleges
and bursae, 116, 153, 238; humanism,
462; law, 390; library, 138;
matriculation, 180; mobility, 288, 289,
291, 436, 439; nations, 284; oaths, 184;
ordinances, 205; student life, 226, 227;
theology, 417; via antiqua and
moderna, 160; see also Marsilius of
Inghen; Melanchthon, Philip;
Reuchlin, Johannes
Hibernia, see Ireland
higher education, see education
Hirsau (Germany, Baden-Wiirttemberg),
monastery, 453
history, historians, 4, 42, 445, 456;
historical analysis or exegesis, 44, 457;
criticism, 454, 456, 457, 459; research,
Holy Roman Empire, see Germany
hospicium, see accommodation
hostel, see accommodation
Huesca (Spain, Huesca), university, 47, 56,
63; ordinances, 205; professors, 152;
schools, 176
humanism, 25, 59, 192, 299, 356, 440, 442,
443,453-466; centres of, 193, 440, 462;
reception of, 62, 296, 298, 456, 459,
460, 462; in schools, 464; in
universities, 127, 288, 452, 455, 463;
outside universities, 449
humanista, 452
humanistic education, 331, 405, 448,
450-452, 454, 460-465
humanists, 44, 376, 453, 460, 461; German,
452, 463; Hungarian, 460; Italian, 298,
299, 452, 463; Polish, 440
Hungary, 57, 130; king, 18
universities, 190; bursa, at Cracow, 219;
graduates, 294; humanism, 460;
laicization, 276; social status, 199;
students, 13, 199, 293; students
abroad, 190, at Paris, 251, 291, at
Prague, 263, 283, at Rostock, 263
Iberian peninsula, 54, 284, 340, 341
universities, 39, 251, 258, 401; colleges,
61, 217; fees, 239; humanism, 463;
law, 389; matriculation, 178; nations,
115; salaries, 152; social status, 206,
226; students, 289, 297, 299; students
at Paris, 283
Iceland, study and career 252, 289, 291, 292
iconographic sources, 157
He de France (France), students at Paris,
immunities, see privileges
imperial authority, 36, 77; constitution, 87
income, 114, 133, 149, 167; from
ecclesiastical benefices, 36, 401; of
teachers, 105, 133, 151-153; see also
Ingolstadt (Germany, Bavaria), academy 451
university, 64, 189, 199, 272; academic
dress, 140; arts 332; attendance, 187,
192; humanism, 193; law, 390;
mobility, 298; via antiqua and
moderna, 160
Inns of Court, 389
intellectuals, 154, 248, 280; intellectual
authority, 410; autonomy, 42; clashes,
160; elites, 88,102, 286; emancipation,
163; formation, 360; movements, 351;
power, 55; society, 449
Ireland {Hibernia), interest in university
education, 296; students, 281, 291;
students at Cambridge, 284, at
Oxford, 115, 284, 296
Islamic models, 8
Islamic, see Arabic
Istanbul, see Constantinople
Italy, xxi, 4, 47, 58, 79, 80, 87, 90, 91, 93,
204, 245, 247, 248, 251, 261, 268, 281,
301, 310, 315, 316, 317, 356, 388, 391,
397, 410, 414, 440, 445; Italy, central,
96, 176; Italy, north, 46, 48, 53, 137,
176, 189, 247, 248, 253, 254, 260, 264,
269, 368, 374, 454; Italy, south, 54,
340; cities and states, 10, 48, 97, 106,
Subject index
270; contacts with Greek- and
Arabic-speaking world, 366;
humanists at the Portuguese court,
463; schools, 89, 220, 250; women's
level of knowledge, 202
universities, 22, 46, 57, 100, 105, 185,
212, 239, 253, 285, 300, 372;
admission, 183; arms carrying, 225;
arts, 27, 309, 330, 331, 455;
attendance, 189,190,193,199; careers,
255, 261, 262, 376; college of doctors,
121, 326; colleges, 99, 119, 137, 217,
454; conservatores, 132; humanism,
25, 299, 460, 462, 465; laicization, 267;
law, 199, 286, 309, 389, 390-392, 401;
medicine, 27, 199, 362, 369, 371, 376;
migration, 53, 258, 287, 289; nations,
115, 179; nation at Lerida, 115, at
Paris, 283, 333; philosophy, 368, 369;
recruitment, 114; rector, 112, 120, 121,
334; reformatores studii, 31; relation
with southern France, 256;
remuneration, 148; scholars, 289, 357,
452; social status, 207, 226, 263;
student life, 223; students, 39, 50, 118,
249, 298, 431; foreign students, 389,
from Byzantium and Turkey, 284,
from Eastern Europe, 293, from
England, 296, from Germany, 289,
from Scandinavia, 289, from the
Iberian Peninsula, 297; surgery, 381;
teachers, 88, 92, 152, 335; theology,
290, 374, 417, 433, 453; see also
Alciatus, Andreas; Callimachus
Her anglicum, 296, 297; iter gallicum, 295;
Her Halicum, 199, 213, 290, 298, 459,
ius commune, see law
iusticiarius scholarium (university official),
Jena (Germany, Thiiringen), 10
Jerusalem (Israel), 280, 300, 301
Jews, 229; Jewish communities of Spain,
362; practitioners, 367; scholars, 341,
342; texts, 30
jurisdiction, 48, 89,157, 259; academic, 49,
80, 82, 85, 87, 91, 109, 121, 122, 124,
139, 3O9, 333
Justinian collections, see law civil
knowledge, classification of, 41, 51, 412,
467; laicization of, 163; paradigm of,
337; traditional, 437
Kulm (Chelmno) (Poland, Torun),
university, 100
Kutna Hora (Czechoslovakia, Kutna
Hora), Decree of, 284
labour market mechanism, 192, 193, 246,
laicization of knowledge, 163; of society,
258, 259, 261, 267, 269, 273, 276, 403;
of the university, 200—202
languages, use of, 447, 448; analytical,
431; education in, 451; oriental, i n ;
see also Greek, Hebrew, Latin,
vernacular
Languedoc (France), 215
Laon (France, Aisne), cathedral school,
Latin, 43, 174, 227, 254, 281, 302, 312, 325,
338, 392, 457; authors and poets, 312,
377,397; encyclopedias, 338; language,
227, 233, 254, 302, 312, 377, 392, 457;
Latin-based culture, 312, 342, 375
Lausanne (Switzerland, Vaud), 300
law, 77, 85, 256, 457; canon law, 48, 248,
252, 266, 269, 289, 389, 404-406; civil
or Roman law, 15, 30, 33, 51, 78, 85,
261, 269, 275, 290, 312, 389-390, 393,
396; customary law, 42, 248, 259, 390;
disciplines taught at cathedral and
municipal schools, 403; divine law,
406; graduates, 248, 259; law as part
of ethics, 394; law experts, 247; law
school, 13, 25, 43, 46, 48, 77, 96, 179,
207, 248, 286, 389, 390, 401; law
schools, private, 37, 48; legal
education, 25, 93, 248, 268; legal
humanism, 392, 459; legal literature,
93, 391, 393; legal nomenclature,
394-397; natural law, 406; political
and constitutional law, 404; practice
of, 207, 458; private law, 404;
Roman—canon law, 393; scholars, 207,
262, 406; students, 49, 249, 402; study
of law, 259, 338, 404, 453, 454; written
law, 256, 390; see also jurisdiction
Le Bec-Hellouin (Bee) (France, Eure),
school, 281
lecture {lectio), 43, 44, 156, 232, 382, 395,
419, 420; lecture lists, 92
lecturing, 44, 153, 155, 231, 254; cursorily,
326, 328; dies legibilesy 154, 155;
extraordinary, 157, 158, 229, 232, 326,
379, 398; lists of, 351; methods, 129,
157, 232, 412, 418, 420; obligations,
154, 197; ordinary, 232, 328, 398;
private, 326, 379; public, 379; quality
of the, 43, 389; regulation of, 105;
staff, 147; suspension, 89; within the
colleges, 159
Subject index
lecturing in: arts, 38, 197, 248, 259, 268,
293, 326, 327, 340, 457; astrology, 383,
463; grammar, 406, 454; Greek, 456,
464; humanistic subjects, 356, 459,
463; law, 48, 80, 89, 256, 388-390, 402,
404, 456; medicine, 164, 310, 360, 361,
368-370, 382, 384, 456, 458; poetics,
455, 461, 463, 464; quadrivium, 340;
rhetoric, 310, 454-456, 461, 464;
theology, 418-420, 433, 434; trivium,
legista, 452
Leipzig (Germany, Sachsen), 10
university, 64, 103, 185, 210, 286, 292,
301; admission, 183; arts, 159;
attendance, 187, 189, 191, 192, 400;
colleges, 134, 153, 157, 217;
conservator of the privileges, 132;
humanism, 298, 462; law, 390;
matriculation, 180; mobility, 263, 288,
289; nations, 39,115, 283; possessions,
136; rector, 124; students, 212; via
antiqua and moderna, 439
Lemberg (Lvov, Lwow) (USSR, Ukraine),
archbishopric, 461
length of courses, 44, 325, 334, 379
Leon (Spain, Leon), 92, 340
Lerida (Spain, Lerida), university, 56, 58,
63, 96, 121, 189; accommodation, 236;
humanism, 298; law, 199, 389; nation,
115; oaths, 184; salaries, 152; social
status, 207, 226; statutes, 114; student
life, 229; theology, 60
letters, 307, 312, 461; littera humanitatis,
liber memorialis, 127; liber secretus, 400;
liber taxatorum, 209
liberties and immunities, see privileges
libraries, 138; colleges, 61, 139, 234;
humanistic, 460,463,466; private, 355;
public, 155, 234; university, 128, 135,
licentia, see degree
Liege (Belgium, Liege), 249; careers, 250,
371; schools, 175, 281; students, 286,
ligatores (university officials), 129
Limoges (France, Vienne), students, 284
Lincoln (United Kingdom, Lincolnshire),
bishop, 53, 83, 84, 122, 130, 413, 429
Lisbon (Portugal), 225
university, 55, 63, 95, 190, 258; fees, 236;
law, 389; theology, 60
literature, see letters
Lithuania, students at Prague, 293
lodging, see accommodation
logic, 50, 308-315, 319, 322-329, 331, 375,
394, 434, 457; in theology, 435, 410,
431, 435, 456; logical disputations,
330; terminism, 330, 332; writings,
logicus, 452
Lombardy (Italy), League, 79; nation at
Bologna, 48; students, 282; students at
Paris, 284
London (United Kingdom), 13, 14, 301,
340-342; bishop, 131; law schools,
389; royal court, 12; see also Poggio
Bracciolini
Louvain (Belgium, Brabant), 178, 443;
Carmelites, 289; city government, 136
university, 57, 58, 64, 210, 300;
admission, 172; attendance, 188, 189,
192; careers, 273, 274, 287; colleges
and bursae, 116, 117, 118, 222, 464;
conservators, 131; dictator, 127;
foundation, 103; humanists, 298; law,
390; matriculation, 180, 181, 191, 202;
mobility, 213, 285, 286, 288, 295, 299;
nations, 39, 59,115, 283; printing, 349;
recruitment, 40; salaries, 152; social
status, 238; statutes, 112; students,
219; town/gown relations, 104, 135
lower faculty, see faculty of arts
Liibeck (Germany, Schleswig Holstein),
chapter, 132; graduates, 274
Lucca (Italy, Lucca), projected university,
university, 56, 63, 97, 100
Luneberg (Germany, Niedersachsen), duke
Lwow, see Lemberg
Lyon (France, Rhone), 90, 267, 300;
careers, 256; projected university, 46
magic, 352
magister, see teacher
Maguelone (France, Herault), bishop, 86,
Mainz (Germany, Rheinland-Pfalz),
Carmelites, 289
university, 14, 64, 190; chapter, 131;
foundation, 103; law, 390
Malbork (Poland, Gdansk), 351
Mantua (Italy, Mantova), 352n; school,
manuscripts, 232, 233, 303, 344, 351, 352,
455, 462; copiers of, 155, 241
married clerics (clerici uxorati), 20, 109,
201; laymen, 369; students, 225;
teachers, 150, 225
Marseille (France, Bouches-du-Rhone),
astronomy, 341; translation centre,
Subject index
Martinets, see accommodation
massarius (treasurer) (university official),
mathematics, 234, 307, 322-325, 330, 343,
355, 451, 457, 458, 461; calculators
(Mertonians), 329, 332, 430
matricula or album registrum, see
matriculation register
matriculants, 195, 225
matriculation, 171, 178, 180, 181, 186, 191;
fee, 177, 178, 186, 235; frequency of,
187, 189, 191, 193; intitulation
(intitulatura), 186; oath, 171,177,178,
184,185; procedure, 178,179,181,192
matriculation register, 127, 139, 141,
177-181, 184, 187, 201, 202, 208, 210,
218, 220, 301; of the college, 178; of
the faculty, 178, 179, 182; of the
master, 178; of the nations, 178, 179,
180, 211; of the rector, 178-180, 182,
184, 224, 262
Meaux (France, Seine-et-Marne), bishop,
Mechelen (Belgium, Antwerpen), 172, 210
medical doctor or physicians {physici), 21,
2-57> 2.74, 361-364, 382, 421, 457
medicine, academic, 39, 309, 319, 338, 384;
ancient medicine, 318, 360, 366, 384,
458; colleges of medicine, 217; control
over public hygiene, 164; operatio
(actual administration of treatment),
380; practical medicine, 27, 360, 366,
380, 384; practitioners (male and
female), 366, 382; Salernitan medicine,
366, 367; scholastic medicine, 382,
384; schools, 6, 37, 43, 52, 281, 286,
364, 365, 371, 374, 375, 381;
speculative medicine, 27; study of
medicine, 265; 338; university
curricula, 310, 360, 373, 377, 380, 382;
writings, 362, 378, 381-385, 458
Melun (France, Seine-et-Marne), 6
membrum universitatis, see university
mendicants, 59, n o , 160, 323, 440; at arts
faculties, 316, 416; at theological
faculties, 160, 414, 416, 417; order, 60,
148, 202, 258, 316; schools, 37, 60,
119, 160, 414, 415, 417, 431; students,
431; see also Carmelites, Dominicans,
Franciscans
messenger, see nuntius
metaphysics, 234, 308, 319, 320, 321, 323,
meteorology, 357
methods of teaching, 43; arts, 431, 434,
438-439; law, 398; theology, 438-439
migration, see university migration
Milan (Italy, Milano), y^, 300, 454; duke
of, 105, 153, 299; jurists, 265; schools,
mobility academic, 40, 46, 53, 83, 101, 102,
213, 233, 250-252, 258, 262, 263, 271,
272, 276, 280-301, 351, 371, 393, 401,
414, 417, 435, 436, 489; prohibitions,
88, 105, 106, 285; safe-conducts, 302;
stabilitas loci (stable residence), 282,
410; teachers and scholars, 154, 251,
281, 287, 389, 393, 435; texts and
ideas, 351, 393; see also colleges,
confraternities, goliards, nations
model, see Bologna, Paris
Modena (Italy, Modena), 81; centre of
learning, 84, 88, 94
money economy, 445; money-changers,
115; money-lenders, 237;
money-receivers, 212
moral conduct, 171; education, 446, 449,
451; philosophy, 234, 308, 321-323,
331* 355.44^> 4 5 ^ 45^; standards, 397;
of the scholars, 295
Monte Cassino (Italy, Frosinone), 317, 366
Montpellier (France, Herault), 85, 96, 145
university, 14, 40, 55, 62, 99, 101, 189,
432; arts, 311; attendance, 364, 372,
373; Bologna archetype, i n ; careers,
375; chancellor, 130; charters, 36;
collectae, 134; dean, 112; foundation,
13; law, 13, 256, 389, 401; degrees, 94,
95; medicine, 217; 286, 291, 365, 367,
369, 370, 373~375> 379, 380, 381, 384,
385; mobility, 285, 287, 288, 297, 371;
nations, 122, 302; pre-existing schools,
45; social status, 207; statutes, 27, 38,
45, 113; teachers, 87, 92, 372;
theology, 60, 310, 417; translations,
340; see also Arnald of Villanova
Moravia (Czechoslovakia), students, 283
mos gallicus, 390, 392, 454, 459
mos italicus, 390, 392, 454
Munich (Germany, Bavaria), manuscripts,
Miinster (Germany,
Nordrhein-Westfalen), school, 462
music, 42, 234, 307, 339, 343, 345, 353,
mutuatores et feneratores (university
officials), 127
Nantes (France, Loire-Atlantique),
university, 64, 287
Naples (Italy, Napoli), academy, 451
university, 49, 54, 62, 87, 88, 90, 96, 99,
n o , 124, 189; accommodation, 236;
Subject index
Naples (university) (cont..)
finance, 136; foundation, 18; pecia
system, 128; relations between king
and university, 105, 285; royal
chancellor, 131; teachers, 93, 152;
theology, 417
Narbonne (France, Aude), 90; nation at
Lerida, 115; translations, 340
nationalism, 102, 283, 284
nations (nationes), 39, 48, 52, 53, 59, no,
112, 114, 115, 179, 200, 203, 211, 224,
229, 282-284, 333? 3345 of Ancona at
Perugia, 283; Anglo-German at Paris,
139, 210, 237, 270, 283, 289, 290, 293,
296, 321, 323, 324, 325, 326, 333;
Bavarian at Prague, 115, 284;
Bohemian at Prague, 283; Burgundian
at Montpellier, 302; Catalonian at
Perugia, 114, 283; Czech at Prague,
115; English at Paris, 114, 250, 296,
333, at Bologna, 295, at Padua, 295;
French at Paris, 114, 237, 283, 289,
297, 333, at Perugia, 114, 283; German
at Bologna, 119, 290, 402, at Orleans,
119, 135, 184, 291, 302, at Paris, 101,
289, 290, 296, at Perugia, 114, 180;
Lombard at Bologna, 48; Norman at
Paris, 114, 237, 283, 289, 333; Picard at
Paris, 114, 212, 237, 283, 289, 333;
Polish at Prague, 284; Roman at
Perugia, 283; Saxon at Prague, 115,
284; Sicilian at Perugia, 283; Tuscan at
Perugia, 283
natural law, see law
natural philosophy, see philosophy
Neoplatonism, 338
Netherlands, 175, 191, 204, 241, 299, 464;
academic dress, 140; devotio moderna,
165; humanism, 296; mos gallicus,
392; scholars, 390; students at Paris,
nominalism, 59, 160, 231, 314, 332, 439,
Normandy (France), students, 114, 237,
282, 283, 289, 333; nation at Paris,
114, 237, 283, 289,333
North Africa, 342
Northampton (United Kingdom,
Northamptonshire), 342
Norway, absence of universities, 276;
careers, 263, 271, 292; mobility, 293;
students, 219, 271; students at Paris,
number of graduates, 245, 275, 294, 373,
403; members in students houses, 221;
medical schools, 365; migrant
students, 303, 400; oversupply of
students and masters, 188, 263, 268,
272, 276; ratio of students to degrees,
245, 275, 373, 400; students, 187-193,
195-199, 204, 251, 253, 263, 264,
269-271, 276, 283, 286, 288, 290, 293,
296, 371-373, 402; teachers and
scholars, 159, 373, 400, 413, 414;
universities, 18, 55, 56, 58
nuntius, 127, 237, 293, 301, 302
Nuremberg (Niirnberg) (Germany,
Bavaria), careers, 272, 273; see also
Pirckheimer, Hans; Pirckheimer,
Johannes; Pirckheimer, Willibald
oath (juramentum), 182-185, 195, 419
Ofen (Hungary, Budapest), 220, 460;
academy, 451
officers, see university officers
optics, 346, 348
Oradea, see Groswardein
Orange (France, Vaucluse), 97
university, 47, 56, 63; college, 61;
teachers, 152
orator, 448, 452
ordinances, 205-206, 219
ordo clericalis, 201
Orleans (France, Loiret), 95, 241, 257, 300;
bishop, 89; schools, 53, 129
university, 55, 63, 101, i n , 261, 301;
accommodation, 218, 236; ars
dictaminis, 316; astrology, 352;
attendance, 187—190; buildings, 138;
careers, 93, 294; coats of arms, 141;
colleges, 217; fees, 239; finance, 135,
206; humanists, 298; law, 42, 90, 96,
114, 154, 199, 286, 292, 294, 309, 389,
401; nations, 39, 119, 122, 127, 135,
179, 291, 295, 302; ordinances, 205;
pecia system, 233; recruitment, 40;
rector, 120; social status, 207;
teachers, 89, 154
oversupply, see number
Oxford (United Kingdom, Oxfordshire),
ecclesiastical authority, 83;
mendicants, 316, 323, 347, 348, 355,
415, 417; schools, 145, 430
university, 12, 14, 36, 53, 55, 56, 58, 62,
89, 92, 165, 203, 420; academic dress,
139, 140; accommodation, 236;
Aristotelianism, 320; arts, 231, 286,
311, 319, 334; assemblies, 21, 125,147;
astronomy, 342; attendance, 62, 189,
191, 268; buildings, 137, 157; careers,
259; chancellor, 122, 124,130; coats of
arms, 141; colleges, 61, 62, 117, 118,
137, 150, 215, 217, 239, Balliol, 60,
117, 238, Durham, 60, Gloucester 60,
Subject index
Magdalen, 62, 151, 463, Merton, 60,
117, 215, 221, 234, 238, 239, 329, 331,
352, 354, 355, 430, New College, 61,
117, 209, 216, 234, 238, 269, 331, St
Edmund Hall, 219, University College,
60; Congregation House, 138;
conservator, apostolic, 131; deans,
112; degrees, 94, 95, 326; faculties, 42,
389; finance, 87, 134, 238; foundation,
7, 45, 52, 250; geometry, 346;
grammar, 308, 313; halls and
paedagogia, 177, 220, 221; law, 13,
401; length of the course, 325, of
study, 44; libraries, 128, 463; loan
chests, 237; logic, 308, 432;
mathematics, 324, 329, 330, 432;
matriculation, 178, 181; mobility, 83,
258,292-294,296; music, 344; nations,
115, 284; natural sciences, 323; oaths,
183; philosophy, 152, 309, 321, 322,
332, 333, 426; proctor, 127;
recruitment, 40; relations between
university and secular authority, 84;
relations with Paris, 351, 436;
requirements, 219; rhetoric, 316;
scholars, 91, 353; seals, 173; social
status, 202; stationers, 128; statutes
and privileges, 38, 113, 205, 224;
student life, 225, 227, 229; study of
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Aramaic,
455; teachers, 150, 160, 161, 335, 416;
teaching, 327, 328, 429; theology, 59,
138, 199, 286, 321, 401, 413, 414, 419,
427, 428, 432, 433, 435; town/gown
relations, 99, 100, 123
Padua (Italy, Padova), 148, 285, 356, 440;
city, 290, 453; mendicants, 417
university, 39, 55, 62, 98, no, 114, 185,
261, 300, 301, 369; ars notaria, 397;
arts, 309, 375; astrology, 376;
astronomy, 42, 353; attendance, 189,
372, 373; Bologna model/type, 389;
college of doctors, 369; colleges, 119;
degrees, 239, 365; doctors, 154;
faculty, 40; fines, 227; foundation, 49,
53; grammar, 231; law, 13, 179, 309,
390; matriculation, 191; medicine, 286,
309, 365, 375; mobility, 46, 88, 199,
284, 288, 289, 293, 296, 298, 371;
money-changers, 127; nations, 119,
283, 295; oaths, 184; pecia system,
128; pawnbroking, 237; rector, 120;
reformatores, 132; rhetoric, 308; social
status, 185, 207, 226; teachers, 94, 96,
152; theology, 60, 354, 417, 433, 439;
town/gown relations, 99; tractatores,
131; see also Gasparino Barziza;
Peurbach, George of; Peter of Abano
paedagogi and praeceptores, 241
paedagogium, see accommodation
Palencia (Spain, Palencia), university, 47,
62, 92, 251; auctorista, 452; degrees,
93; school, 54
Palermo (Italy, Palermo), 105
Palma (Spain, Majorca), university, 64,442
Pamiers (France, Ariege), school, 95
Pamplona (Spain, Navarra), translation
centre, 340
papacy, 77,93,248, 250, 253,289, 308,457;
papal court, 145, 252, 267, 348; legate,
52, i n , 132, 133, 141, 316, 320, 412;
university policy, 36, 46, 82, 89, 413,
433; see also benefices; career
paper faculties, 112; universities, 39, 46
Paris (France), xxii, xxiii, 56, 138, 330;
abbot of St Victor, 83; bishop, 83, 85;
parliament, 267; schools, 12, 45, 50,
220, 281, 415; Treaty of, 54
university, 10, 13, 55, 58, 80, 85, 91, 178,
183, 253, 262, 266, 282, 300-302, 339,
439; academic dress, 139, 140;
accommodation, 177, 218, 219;
admission, 179, 181, 191, 230;
Aristotelianism, 29, 51, 319, 320, 322,
420, 422; arithmetic, 344; arts, 29, 51,
154, 163, 268, 293, 308, 319, 322, 331,
333, 375, 390, 422, 465; associations,
285; astronomy, 323, 341, 342;
attendance, 187,189, 190; beadle, 115;
buildings, 137, 157; bursae, 240;
careers, 164, 248, 249, 256; chairs of
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Aramaic,
95; coats of arms, 141, 142; colleges,
60, 61, 116, 117, 221, 331; college
Bons-Enfants, 214, 241; college of
Cluny, 60, Constantinople, 284,
Daces, 216, Dix-huit, 116, 214,
German, 216, Gervaise, 355,
Harcourt, 60, Lombards, 216,
Montaigu, 210, Navarre, 61, 62, 116,
151, 464, 465, Saint Bernard, 60, Saint
Denis, 60, Saint Thomas du Louvre,
116, Sainte Barbe, 221, Scots, 216, 295,
Skara, 216, Sorbonne, 60, 116, 151,
214, 215, 233, Standonck, 210,
Uppsala, 216, conservator, 131;
control of the pope, 98; degrees, 17,
93, 94,95, 211, 32-5-32-7,4i9; faculties,
109, i n , 197, 286; foundation, 6, 7,
12, 50, 444; grammar, 314, 329;
humanism, 62, 298; law, 51, 90, 389,
393, 401, 413; logic, 43; mathematics,
323, 337; medicine, 365, 367, 369, 370,
Subject index
Paris (France) (cont.)
372, 374, 375, 381, 385; mendicants,
160, 316, 415, 416; messengers, 237;
mobility, 250-252, 258, 263, 271, 287,
288, 291, 292, 294, 296, 297, 371;
music, 343; nations, 39, 59, 101, 115,
210, 225, 270, 297, 321, 334,
Anglo-German, 101, 114, 139, 210,
237, 270, 283, 289, 290, 293, 296, 297,
321, 323-326, 333, France, 114, 283,
289, 297, 333, Normandy, 114, 237,
283, 289, 333, Picardy, 114, 212, 237,
283, 289, 333; nominalism, 322, 440;
notarius, 127; pecia system, 128;
philosophy, 309, 318, 375, 434;
printing press, 465; private lectures,
151, 424; privileges, 105; recruitment,
40; rector, 119, 121, 122, 124, 155;
reform of the university, 132, 224;
regionalism, 203; relation of arts to
theology, 161, 311, 320, 321, 354;
relations with Cracow, 351, with
Oxford, 430-431, with secular
authorities 23-24, 89, 103, 104;
secession, i n ; rhetoric, 316; seals,
141, 173; social status, 82, 238;
stationers, 128; statutes, 24, 30, 38, 45,
113, 324; student life, 219, 223, 227,
229; students, 57, 82, 84, 202, 211, 212,
249, 250; study of Hebrew, Greek,
Arabic and Aramaic, 455; teachers, 12,
46, 82, 83, 92, 101, 145, 147, 150, 152,
154, 159-160, 165, 250, 316, 335,412,
416; teaching methods, 129, 429;
theology, 42, 43, 44, 78, 99, 149, 150,
i54> 374, 378, 39O, 4i*> 4i4> 4*7, 418,
426-428, 431-433. 435-438;
type/model, 25, 31, 36, 38, 39, 47, 52,
59, 102, 108, 112, 114, 115, 123, 126,
198, 199; see also Henry de
Mondeville; John Pecham; Peter of
Abano; Philippus de Grevia; Robert
Kilwardby; Roland of Cremona;
Gansfort Wessel; Witelo
Parma (Italy, Parma), university, 57, 64,
105, no, 186; lawyers, 226; projected
university, 58
patronage and clientele, 102,174,198, 200,
207, 208, 210, 235, 241, 246, 361, 369,
Pavia (Italy, Pavia), 166
university, 56, 58, 63, 105, 190, 440;
degrees, 97, 239; law, 13, 389;
mobility, 272, 285, 296, 299; nations,
179; students, 199, 290, 299; teachers,
152, 153; theology, 60; see also
Gasparino Barziza; Valla, Lorenzo
pecia system, 128, 129, 233
Pecs (Fiinfkirchen) (Hungary, Baranya
megye), university, 56, 57, 63, 98, 99;
Hungarian and Lithuanian students,
293; humanism, 459
peregrinatio academica, see mobility
Perpignan (France, Pyrenees-Orientales),
university, 56, 63, 189, 229, 287;
academic dress, 140; ordinances, 205;
statutes, 174; theology, 60
Perugia (Italy, Perugia), university, 56, 63,
95, 189; ars notaria, 397; associations,
212; attendance, 191; ban on weapons,
226; degrees, 239; law, 389;
matriculation, 180; mendicants, 417;
nations, no, 114, 283; oaths, 184;
pecia system, 128; rector, no; social
status, 185; students, 199, 289;
teachers, 94, 96, 152; theology 417,
433; town/gown relations, 97, 99; see
also Zmora, Johannes
Pest, see Budapest
pharmacology, pharmacy, 20, 136, 378
philology, 44, 392, 454
philosophy, 50, 307, 314, 318, 420, 421,
434, 456; metaphysical, 308, 309;
natural philosophy, 308, 309, 319-320,
322-324, 326, 328, 331, 375,382;
practical, 309; scholastic, 28, 384, 444,
448, 451; three philosophies (natural,
moral and metaphysical), 307-335
physical education, 451
physician, see medical doctor
physics, 323, 325, 330, 394
Piacenza (Italy, Piacenza), university, 47,
63, 90, 92, 190; projected schools, 58;
teachers, 93
Picardy, (France), 114, 212, 237; nation at
Paris, 283, 289, 333
Pisa (Italy, Pisa), Council, 438
university 56, 63, 98, 190, 199, 300;
attendance, 191; chancellor, 129;
humanism, 452; nations, no; rector,
no; theology, 417, 433
Pistoia (Italy, Pistoia), 173, 265
plague, 385, 458
poeta, 452, 461
poetae humanistic, 232
poetics, poetry, 42, 232, 447, 452, 454, 456,
Poitiers, (France, Vienne), 301
university, 58, 64, 267, 287; buildings,
157; medicine, 365; mobility, 291;
teachers, 152
Poitou (France), students, 282
Poland, 188, 204; academy, 460; kings, 18
universities, 218; cathedrales,
Subject index
129; humanism, 296, 461; mobility,
393; nation at Prague, 284; students,
57, 207, 263, 276, 294, 390, at Paris
291, at Prague 293; see also Witelo
politics, 234, 404
portionistae, see accommodation
Porto-Ostia (Italy, Roma), bishop, 80
Portugal, 189, 289; humanism, 296, 463;
kings, 18, 55, 152, 400; relation with
Low Countries, 299
universities, 115; admission, 402;
conservators, 132; control of rents,
220, of weight, 131; mobility, 393;
students, 199, 251, at Bologna, 216,
389, 401, at Paris, 297
postal services, 282
Pozsony, see Bratislava
practica (knowledge about practice), 380,
382; practical deontology, 163;
practical medicine, 372, 380, 382
Prague (Czechoslovakia), 459
university, 13, 56, 63, 98, 100, i n , 123,
126, 189, 254, 262, 273, 290, 301, 436;
academic dress, 140; admission, 179,
180; arts, 212; astronomy, 351;
attendance, 190, 191, 263; buildings,
9% coats of arms, 141; collectores,
136; colleges, 118, 138, 157, 217;
conservators, 131; degrees, 212;
faculties, 60, 99, 433; foundation, ^-]\
humanism, 440; law, 39,271; mobility,
101, 284, 288, 289, 292; nationalism,
103; nations, 39, 59, 115, 251, 283,
284; nominalism, 439, 440; oaths, 182;
paedagogia, 220; pecia system, 129;
prices, 206; recruitment, 40, 57; social
status, 102, 238; statutes and
ordinances, 205, 293; teachers, 160,
164, 165, 212
preaching, 316
preparatory faculty, see faculty of arts
Pressburg, see Bratislava
principal or provisor (head of a student
house), 219, 222
printing, 128, 167, 202, 303, 465-467
prior of a college, 116, 155
privileges, 15, 18, 20, 37, 45, 55, 88,
89, 95, 97-101, 108, 109, 131, 184,
208, 214, 223, 246, 412, 413;
benefices, 37, 51, 90; foreign students,
302; freedom of movement, 85;
degrees, 9-/, 133; military service,
109; papal grants, 103, 131, 215;
poverty, 186; privilegium fori
(jurisdiction), 78, 84, 89, 90, 109,
120, 131, 181; residence, 37, 78, 401,
402; right of escheat, 302; right of
reprisal, 78, 97; taxes, 109, 181
proctor {procurator), 53, 114, 115, 116,
155, 179,211,212, 333
professions, see careers
prohibition: of Aristotle's philosophy,
320-322, 413, 422, 434; of civil law in
Paris (1219), 85, 90, i n , 389, 401, 413;
of clergy studying civil law, 77, 85,
413; of clergy studying medicine, 77,
85, 371, 413; doctrines and theses in
1270, 424-428; of teaching of
theology, 311; of usury by the church,
Provence (Florence), 13, 96; count, 266,
285; Jewish communities, 362
universities, 98, 100; nation at Bologna,
298, at Lerida 115; students, 105
provisor, see principal
Prussia (Germany), Teutonic Order, 241
psychology, 323, 331
public order, 50
publishing, 449, 463
puncta (points), 91, 113, 398
punishment, 226, 227, 229
pupilos, see accommodation
quadrivium, see artes liberates-, faculty
quaestiones, 232, 382, 395, 396, 398, 410,
quaestor aerarii, see receiver
realism, 231, 314, 438-440
receiver {receptor, collector, quaestor
aerarii), 127, 134, 155
rector dignissimus or magnificus, 39, 48,
50, 52, no, 119-121, 155, 199, 211,
219, 221, 227, 229, 309, 333, 334
reformatio in melius, 86
reformatio studii, 30-33, 86, 456
reformation in the church, 118, 292, 458,
reformator studii (university official), 31,
regency, regents, see teachers
regentia, see accommodation
Reggio Emilia (Italy, Reggio nell' Emilia),
university, 53, 62
regionalism of a university, 103, 203, 219,
266, 284, 285,287
registrar (university official), 127
regnum sacerdotium studium, xix, 18
Reims (France, Marne), Council of, 77;
school, 175, 281, 282
relations between disciplines, 423; arts and
higher faculties, 172, 307, 377, 402;
arts and law, 402; arts and medicine,
374, 376; arts and theology, 309, 310;
Subject index
relations between disciplines (cont.)
faith and reason, 426; law and
literature, 406; law and medicine, 374;
philosophy and faith, 413, 437;
philosophy and medicine, 367, 374;
philosophy and reason, 410, 426;
philosophy and science, 312;
philosophy and theology, 322,
421—427, 429, 431, 440; religious
orders and quadrivial studies, 354;
science and faith, 413, 437; theology
and medicine, 374, 406; theology and
science, 423, 432; theology and
trivium, 457
relations inside the university: between
master and student, 182; secular and
regular masters in theology, 433ff.;
teachers or colleagues, 159
relations between university and society,
245, 254; regions and foundations,
204, 216; university and church, 108,
416; university and local authorities
(town and gown), 53, 80, 81, 94, 96,
97, 99, 100, 104, 118, 121, 123, 131,
132, 136, 138, 152, 204, 223, 334;
university and secular authorities, 53,
54, 80, 84, 89, 103, 121, 132, 164, 182,
370; university and schools, 177
religious orders, 144, 148, 201, 298, 310,
331, 340, 355, 403, 410; members of,
184, 296, 321, 331, 449; studium
generate, 102, 176; and the university,
renovatio, see reformatio
rents and loans, 236
repetitiones (dissertations), 156, 214, 229,
residence requirements, 219
Rheinberg am Niederrhein (Germany,
Nordrhein-Westfalen), 216
rhetoric, 50, 255, 308-310, 312, 315, 316,
319, 355, 45*-456
Rhineland, 251,260; careers, 273; law, 261,
Rhone valley (France), 13, 300
Riviera (France), 299
Rome (Italy), 301, 404; academy, 451;
Church of, 89, 96; city, 100, 101, 300,
460; court, i n ; court of Emperor
Otto I, 281; papacy, 132, 253, 288,
289; papal court, 145, 348; pilgrimage,
university, 16, 56, 63, 95, 106, 190;
foundation, 14; Greek teaching, 466;
nation at Perugia, 283; students, 282;
see also Manutius, Aldus; Valla,
Roskilde (Denmark, Sjaelland), cathedral
chapter, 273
Rostock (Germany,
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern),
university, 58, 64, 185, 189, 301;
associations, 213; attendance, 188,
192; bursae, 219; foundation, 103; law,
390; matriculation, 180, 183, 187;
mobility, 213, 263, 292; prebends, 153;
promotor, 124; theology, 59
Rottweil (Germany, Baden-Wurttemberg),
studia humanitatis, 462
rotulus (roll): of petition for benefices, 17,
20, 100, 236, 240, 288, 289; list of
teachers and courses, 373; see also
matriculation register
Rouen (France, Seine-Marne), students at
Paris, 283
Rye (United Kingdom, East Sussex), 300
sacra doctrina, sacra pagina, see theology
Salamanca (Spain, Salamanca), bishop, 93
university, 14, 55, 63, 137, 173, 189, 202,
258, 340; academic dress, 140;
accommodation, 177, 218, 236;
admission, 40, 402; armed conflicts,
226; arts, 310; astrology, 355, 463;
attendance, 191, 400; buildings, 157;
careers, 241, 270; colleges, 119;
conservatores privilegii, 131; degrees,
94, 231, 344; fines, 227; humanism,
298; law, 389, 400; lectures, 229, on
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Aramaic,
95, 455; mathematics, 355; medicine,
365; mobility, 297; music, 42; nation,
39, 115; pecia system, 128; poetics,
463; rector, 121; social status, 207;
statutes and ordinances, 113, 126, 205;
students, 92, 199; teachers, 148, 152,
399; theology, 60, 138, 309, 310, 354;
town/gown relations, 131, 136
salary, see income; teachers
Salerno (Italy, Salerno), medicine, 367, 368;
meeting point of Arabic, Greek and
Latin culture, 317
university, 55, 56, 62; medical school,
6, 37, 43, 52, 281, 364, 366; mobility,
Salisbury (United Kingdom, Wiltshire),
bishop, 131
Santiago de Compostela (Spain, La
Coruna), pilgrimage, 280, 301
sapientia, 452
Saracens, see Arabs
Savoy (France), counts, 106
Saxony (Germany), nation at Prague, 115,
Subject index
Scandinavia, 57, 199, 288
universities, 64, 90; careers, 263, 292,
293; mobility, 393; scholars, 289;
students, 291, 292, 390, at foreign
universities, 190, 293, at Greifswald,
301, at Leipzig, 263, at Paris, 294, 333,
at Prague, 236
sceptres, 139
Schlettstadt (France, Bas-Rhin), school,
175, 462; studia humanitatis 462
schola, 157, 198; in the university, 179;
schola or familia of the master,
scholarships, 209, 210, 214, 240, 286
scholasticism, 41, 44, 231, 232, 391,
409-411, 440, 444, 447, 461, 463
scholasticus of a cathedral or collegiate
church, 252; magister scholarum, 126,
school, 12, 36, 53, 54, 81, 95,106,175,176,
250, 411, 430, 464; cathedral, 10, 37,
50, 129, 175, 308-310, 397, 403, 410,
412, 413; ecclesiastical, 50, 176;
episcopal, 79, 281; grammar
(Gymnasien), 222; Latin, 176, 177,
196, 361; mendicant, 51, 308, 403;
monastic, 281, 309, 310; municipal, 37,
129, 175, 176, 310, 403, 462, 463;
notarial, 403, 454; private, 50, 145,
151; public, 215; of translators, 281,
297; projected schools, 58; school
disciplines, 43, 87, 368, 462;
school-book, 412; school clock, 136
sciences, classification of, 26; autonomy of
secular sciences, 423; natural sciences,
*7> 30% 3*9, 32-3> 338, 354> 457; notion
of scientific progress, 162; scientiae
lucrativae, 24; scientific attacks, 357;
scientific attitude, 357, 437; texts, 354,
Schweinfurt (Germany, Bavaria), 187;
students, 288
Scotland, 57, 153, 218, 220, 288; Roman
law, 389, 401
universities, 112, 115, 122,190, 230, 276,
334; colleges, 61; graduates, 294;
higher faculties, 334; nations, 115,284;
students, 190, 230, 281, 291, 294, 295,
401, at foreign universities, 293, at
Oxford and Cambridge, 296, at Paris,
scribe or clerk, 39, 127, 202
scriptorium or writing-office, 129
seal, 38, 112, 114, 139, 141, 173, 212
secession, 53, 83, i n , 139, 351, 436
secularization, see laicization
Segovia (Spain, Segovia), translations, 340
Senlis (France, Oise), baillage, 268; bishop,
Sens (France, Yonne), Council, 320, 321
Sentences of Peter Lombard, 156, 158, 231,
411, 412, 418, 427, 434, 450
sententiarii, see degree
sermons, 161, 419, 420
servants (famuli, servitores), 39, 198, 210,
Seville (Spain, Sevilla), 340
university, 63, 215
Sicily (Italy), 87, 88, 93, 289; centre of
Greek and Arabic learning, 342; centre
of translations, 317, 318, 339, 342
universities, 105; mobility, 393; nation at
Perugia, 283; students, 282, at Bologna
and Padua, 298
Siena (Italy, Siena), 300
university, 53, 56, 63, 106, 189, 199, 290;
attendance, 191; buildings, 173;
degrees, 239; law, n o , 389; medicine,
368; mobility, 289, 297; teachers, 91,
96; town/gown relations, 94, 97, 99;
see also John XXI
Sigiienza (Spain, Guadalajara), university,
Silesia, see Witelo
singularitas, 437
social origin, 196-198, 262, 269; of law
students, 249, 267, 400, 402; of
medical students, 369; aristocracy,
204, 256, 259, 261, 264, 269, 271, 272,
292, 449, 463; artisans, 262, 265, 275;
bourgeois (urban), 57, 207, 209, 241,
256, 260-262, 269, 271-273, 275, 445,
460; central stratum, 207, 208;
commercial, 209; condottiere, 450;
divites, 61, 185, 204, 207, 208, 237,
252, 284; elites, 117, 168, 292; family
background, 200, 207, 208, 241, 251,
252, 261, 446; lower class, 166, 204,
292; middle class, 166, 196, 204, 207,
237, 262, 271; nobiles, 22, 56,117,145,
162, 166, 184, 198, 200, 204, 207, 208,
241, 260-261, 263, 269, 272, 446, 460;
patricians, 256, 273, 275; pauperes 60,
62, 116, 200, 204, 207, 209, 210, 227,
238,241,260,270, 275,284,286; rural,
53, 57, 204, 209, 460; semidivites, 208,
210, 238; semipauperes, 208, 210, 238;
smallholders, 269; upper class, 195,
198, 200, 203, 204, 207, 208, 211, 233,
236, 260, 271
social status, 35, 176, 185, 204, 217, 240,
325; life style, 196, 223, 226; social
connections, see patronage; social
mobility, 165, 166, 167, 198, 260, 264,
Subject index
social status (cont.)
265, 267, 269, 275, 276, 285; social
prestige (aureola), 37, 155, 163, 203,
235, 456; social responsibility,
163-165; social stratification, 204,205,
207, 208, 253; social ties and skills,
200, 209, 210, 225
socius (teacher/master's pupil, assistant,
apprentice), 379
sodalitates, humanistic, 460, 462
Soissons (France, Aisne), school, 175
solicitor (university official), 133
sophismata literature, 330
Spain, xxiii, 13, 115, 132, 199, 301, 392,
406, 452; Arabs, 317, 340; dioceses,
118; Jews, 362; kings, 18, 54, 92, 241;
schools, 175, 215, 220; translations,
316, 341, 391
universities, 111, 121, 126, 190;
admission, 183, 230; arts, 197, 310,
330; astrology, 343; astronomy, 342;
attendance, 189; colleges, 61, 119;
degrees, 197; law, 286, 309, 389, 390;
medicine, 309; mobility, 281, 287, 297;
rector, 334; social status, 207;
students, 216, 251, 270, 287, 297—299,
at foreign universities, 297, at
Bologna, 284, 389, at Paris, 333; see
also Dominicus Gundissalinus
St Albans (United Kingdom,
Hertfordshire), 339, 351
St Andrews (United Kingdom, Fife),
university, 64, 190; admission, 178;
colleges, 153, 220; degrees, 294; law,
389; nations, 59, 284; students, 225
St Gallen (Switzerland, Sankt Gallen),
trade links with Poland, 291
stationers (stationarii), 128, 155, 233
statutarius (university official), 125
statutes, 16, 24, 30, 31, 38, 45, 52, 53, 91,
92, 98, 122-114, 122, 123, 126-128,
134, 139, 161, 172, 174, 182, 206, 219,
224, 225, 293, 324, 417, 436; faculties,
40; arts, 379; medicine, 27, 379;
theology, 417-419, 434
Stralsund (Germany,
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern), 301
Strasbourg (France, Bas-Rhin), xxiii, 300;
humanism, 298
students (studens, studentes), 39, 49, 56,
149, 175, 195, 203, 245, 369;
associations, 211, 212, 282; beggars,
241; behaviour, 224, 225; discipline,
31, 122, 132, 132, 148, 212, 223, 226,
227, 231, 333; false (falsi scholares),
109, 181; job student, 220, 221, 241;
master-students, 198, 200, 203, 211,
233, 241; student life, 128, 155, 161,
213, 223, 227-230; typology, 20, 39,
175, 181, 195-211, 224-241, 272; see
also accommodation; colleges; costs;
degree; finance; mobility; nations;
social origin
studia humanitatis, 443, 446, 449, 451, 452,
455, 456, 459-465
studium curiae or sacri palatii, 16, 54, 59,
63, i n ; see also Avignon; Rome
studium generale, 6, 18, 35, 37, 43, 46, 47,
90, 108; see also university
summae, 231, 395, 411, 450
superintendens (university official), 124,
suppositus, see university member
surgeons, see career
Sweden, 218, 252, 253; careers, 292
universities, 190, 276; students at foreign
universities, 293, at Paris, 284, in
Germany, 263, 271
Switzerland, xxi, 461; nationalism, 283;
students, 233, 237, 291
syllabus, 43, 51, 154, 158, 159, 321, 322
symbols, 13, 139, 141, 146, 173, 446, 448,
syndici or law assessors and solicitors, 127
Syria, 340
Szeged (Hungary, Csongrad megye),
students at Cracow, 219
Tarazona (Spain, Zaragoza), translations
Tarragona (Spain, Tarragona), archbishop,
taxator hospiciorum (university official),
131,155,236
teacher, 39, 49, 58, 89, 144, 173, 174, 207,
232, 233, 296, 298, 449; absenteeism
of, 156; dotninus meus (individual
master), 158, 178, 181, 410; image, 97,
161—163; income, 19, 24—25, 148, 166,
181, 258, 334, 370, 399, 462, 463; lay,
150, 160, 229; master, 144, 146, 150,
197, 235, 249, 250; quality of, 156, 192;
regent (actu regens), 62, 145, 147, 166,
167, 218, 219, 222, 328, 334; regent,
ordinary, 148, 149, 150, 326,
extraordinary, 148, 150, 155, 232
technological sciences, 25—27; architecture,
25; book-printing, 233; machine
manufacture, 25; military technology,
25; mining, 25; shipbuilding, 25
teologus, 452
terminology used in law literary genres,
Teutonic Order, 289
Subject index
textbook, 312, 324, 329, 338, 348, 350, 356,
418, 467; copy of, 129, 155, 241
textual criticism, 450, 458
theology, 289, 308, 309, 310, 347, 355"35^,
409—440,457,458; theological schools,
43, 50, 78, 138, 149; textbook, 331,
422; Thomism, 428, 430, 439, 440;
traditional role of domina, 308, 422,
436, 437; study of, 263, 338, 440;
works, 315, 420, 422; see also faculty
of theology
theoria, courses in, 382
three philosophies, see philosophy
Thuringia (Germany), 175
Toledo (Spain, Toledo), astronomy, 341,
349; Jewish scholars, 342; translator
school, 281, 297; see also Judas ben
Salomon Cohen
Tongerlo (Belgium, Antwerpen), abbey,
Torun (Thorn) (Poland, Toruri) 351
Toul (France, Meurthe-et-Mosell),
students at Bolgna, 284
Toulouse (France, Haute Garonne),
translations, 340
university, 46, 63, 90, 96, 101, 104, 105,
199; admission, 183; armed conflicts,
225; attendance, 189, 287; colleges, 61,
119; degrees, 89, 94; fines, 134;
foundation, 16, 54, grammar, 40; law,
44, 256, 389; mobility, 297, 436; pecia
system, 128, 398; philosophy, 321,422,
434; statutes and ordinances, 98, 113,
122, 205, 206; teachers, 152, 436;
theology, 60, 311, 354, 417, 432, 434
Tournai (Belgium, Hainaut), bishop, 412
Tours (France, Indre-et-Loire), ars
dictaminis, 316; Council, 85
tractatores studii (university officials), 132,
training, see education
translations, 51, 316-318, 340, 377; from
Arabic, 338, 340, 341, 385, 391; from
Greek, 457; in Hebrew, 341; in
vernacular languages, 392, 458; of
Arabic and Greek medical texts, 317,
339, 360, 377, 378; of Aristotle, 51,
translators' schools, 281, 297
transmission of texts, 350, 351
travel, 171, 280, 281, 290, 299, 300, 301
Treviso (Italy, Treviso), 96
university, 47, 56, 63; pecia system, 128
Trier (Germany, Rheinland-Pfalz),
archbishop 131
university, 64; Carmelites, 289;
foundation, 103; law, 390
trivium, see artes liberates, faculty
Troy (ancient city), 7
Troyes (France, Aube), bishop, 83
Tubingen (Germany,
Baden-Wiirttemberg), university, 64,
190; attendance, 192; careers, 274;
chancellor, 130; humanism, 193; law,
2-75> 39O, 400; medicine, 365, 373;
nominalism, 59; oaths, 185; rector,
124; social status, 238; via antiqua and
moderna, 160, see also Bebel, Henry;
Melanchthon, Philip
Turin (Italy, Torino), 132; commune, 106
university, 64; foundation, 57; medical
degrees, 373
Tuscany (Italy), careers, 248; nation at
Perugia, 283
Tusculum (Italy, Latium), bishopric of
Frascati, 80
tutor, tutoring, 144, 198, 202, 461; private,
198, 202,326
tutores studii (university officials),
universals, debate on, 314
universitas, 8, 37, 39, 46, 81, 178, 203;
artistarum et medicorum, 50, no;
citramontanorum, 39, 49; legistarum,
39, no; magistrorum, 21, 38, 52, 59,
149; magistrorum et scholarium, 37,
38, 108, 412; scholarium, 37, 39, 49,
56, 108, no, 149, 369;
ultramontanorum, 39, 49, no, 114,
university archives and sources, 37, 138,
208, 213; autonomy, 122, 166; birth,
9ff., 47; character, 37, 141, 183-185,
237, 286; courses (curriculum
studiorum), 37, 51, 214, 229, 234, 281,
324, 325, 382, 454, 461; ephemeral, 46;
expectations, 14-23; four-faculty, 199,
271, 272; international centres, 203,
237, 263, 287, 334; member
(membrum universitatis, suppositus),
20, 38, 120, 172, 177, 180, 185, 202;
migrations, 53, 88, 89, 258, 260, 276,
351; models, see Bologna; Paris;
Islamic; paper universities, 39, 46;
policy, 100; property, 127, 139;
reforms, 113; relation with society,
165, 406; size of, 189, 190, 191;
structure and organization, 18,
108-143, 166, 172, 237
university officials, 38, 39, 124, 131, 132,
136, 157, 215; almocatenes or
controllers of weight, 131; collectores,
136; conservator privilegii, 122, 131;
Subject index
university officials (cont.)
denunciantes, proctors, and other
watch-dogs, 227; dictator, 127;
diffinitores, 126; distributores, 132;
iusticiarius scholarium, 124; ligatores,
129; massarii (treasurers), 127;
mutuatores et feneratores, 127;
reformatores studii, 31, 132, 148;
registrar, 127; solicitors, 133;
statutarii, 125; superintendens, 124,
215; taxator hospiciorum, 131, 155,
236; tractatores studii, 132, 148;
tutores studii, 132; visitors, 215
Uppsala (Sweden, Uppsala), 442
university, 64, 190, 292; college, 216;
degrees, 139; grammar teaching, 231
Urbino (Italy, Pesaro e Urbino), palazzo
ducale, 449; school, 176
Utrecht (Netherlands, Utrecht), students at
Paris, 290
vagantes, see goliards
Valence (France, Drome), university, 64;
ordinances, 205, 206
Valencia (Spain, Valencia), university, 65,
121; matriculation, 181; school, 175
Valladolid (Spain, Valladolid), university,
55> 63> 98, 259; arts, 310; careers, 259,
270; colleges, 215; teachers 152;
theology, 60, 310; town/gown
relations, 136
Vaud (Switzerland), students at Paris and
Bologna, 287
venia {licentia) docendi, 8; legendi, 461;
ubique legendi, 17
Venice (Italy, Venezia), 300, 466;
academy, 451; printing, 349; republic,
106, 132,284
university, 64; careers, 265; students at
Padua, 298
Vercelli, (Italy, Vercelli), university, 46, 53,
63; accommodation, 236; law, 88;
pecia system, 128; teachers, 152
verge {massa), 115, 127, 139
vernacular languages, 342, 385, 390, 392,
397; Castilian, 342, 392; Italian, 458;
study of, 294; texts in, 397, 406;
translations in, 392, 458; use in law,
390, 392, in medicine, 385
Verona (Italy, Verona), school, 176
via antiqua and via moderna, 18, 160, 231,
332, 333, 439, 440; via sancti Thotnae,
439; via Scoti, 439
Vicenza (Italy, Vicenza), university, 46, 53,
Vich (Spain, Barcelona), 281; Muslim
science, 340
Vienna (Austria), 351, 443; academy, 451
university, 46, 63, 99, 123, 126, 185, 189,
209, 210, 262; accommodation, 177,
221; attendance, 188,192; bursae, 220;
Carmelites, 289; coats of arms, 141;
colleges, 118, 153, 217, 461; degrees,
98, 419; foundation, 56, 57;
humanism, 59, 193, 298, 462; law, 390;
manuscripts, 344; matriculation, 178,
179, 180, 191; mobility, 101, 102, 191,
213, 288, 293, 436; nations, 39, 59,
115, 283; nominalism, 439; printing,
349; rector, 330; scholarships, 286;
seals, 173; social status, 134, 212, 218,
238, 241; statutes, 219, 434; teachers,
419; theology, 60, 100, 356, 417, 438;
see also Albert of Saxony; Peurbach,
visitors (university officials), 215
Wales, (United Kingdom), hall at Oxford,
219; students, 281, at Oxford, 114,
284, 296, at Cambridge, 296
Wertheim (Germany,
Baden-Wiirttemberg), 228; see also
Johannes Kerer
Winchester (United Kingdom, Hampshire),
bishopric, 216, 463; school, 175, 215
Wittenberg (Germany, Sachsen-Anhalt),
university, 349, 436; students, 288,
women, 202, 225, 228, 229, 403
Worcester (United Kingdom, Heresford
and Worcester), bishop, 137
Worms (Germany, Rheinland-Pfalz),
bishop, 462
Wiirzburg (Germany, Bavaria), diocese,
university, 64; law, 390
Ypres (Belgium, West-Vlaanderen),
student association, 285, at Paris, 212
Zaragoza (Saragossa) (Spain, Zaragoza),
university 64; school, 175
Zutphen (Netherlands, Gelderland),
students at foreign universities, 287,
Zwolle (Netherlands, Overijssel), school,
175; see also Arnaut, Henry