Learning Statistical Scripts with LSTM Recurrent Neural Networks
Karl Pichotta and Raymond J. Mooney
{pichotta,mooney}@cs.utexas.edu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
Scripts encode knowledge of prototypical sequences of
events. We describe a Recurrent Neural Network model
for statistical script learning using Long Short-Term
Memory, an architecture which has been demonstrated
to work well on a range of Artiﬁcial Intelligence tasks.
We evaluate our system on two tasks, inferring held-out
events from text and inferring novel events from text,
substantially outperforming prior approaches on both
Introduction
Text understanding requires commonsense inferences based
on world knowledge. Scripts, which model stereotypical sequences of events, encode one type of useful world knowledge. A script system can infer events from text: e.g., given
“After being laid off, Smith is looking for work,” we would
like to be able to predict that “Smith will have a job interview,” and perhaps “Smith will ﬁnd a job.” Inferences of this
type are required for robust question-answering systems.
The use of manually-written scripts dates back to the
seminal work of Schank and Abelson . Mooney and
DeJong provide an early non-statistical method of
inducing scripts automatically from text. More recently, a
growing body of work has followed Chambers and Jurafsky
 in describing methods of automatically learning statistical models of event sequences from large text corpora.
We describe a novel statistical script model which
uses a recurrent neural network with a Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) architecture. Recently, LSTMs have
yielded substantial performance gains in Machine Translation Speech Recognition
 Language Modeling
 and captioning images and videos , among other tasks.
We are the ﬁrst to apply LSTMs to the task of script
learning, demonstrating superior performance over a number of competitive baselines, including the best published
method. Our method can directly incorporate noun information about event arguments, which most previous methods
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
of script learning for event inference do not easily admit.
We evaluate our proposed LSTM script system against a
number of baselines on the task of predicting held-out verbs
with coreference information about their arguments, showing a 22.6% relative improvement compared to the strongest
baseline. Second, we evaluate on the more difﬁcult task of
predicting held-out verbs with argument nouns, demonstrating a 64.9% relative improvement over the most competitive
baseline. We ﬁnd that coreference information is empirically
useful for predicting noun arguments, and, conversely, noun
information helps to predict argument coreference information. Third, we demonstrate that human annotators judge the
top inferences made by LSTM script models to be qualitatively superior to those from baseline systems. Finally, we
provide a qualitative analysis of the LSTM script model.
Background
We brieﬂy review the ﬁeld of statistical script learning and
give a short description of Long Short-Term Memory.
Statistical Script Learning
Chambers and Jurafsky and Jans et al. 
propose script models of (verb, dependency) pairs1 which
co-occur with the same entity, capable of encoding, for example, that the grammatical subject of kill will frequently
also occur as the direct object of arrest. These models are
evaluated quantitatively on the Narrative Cloze task , in which an event is held out from
a document and a system is judged by its ability to infer this
held-out pair from the remainder of the document.
These pair-models are incapable of expressing interactions between entities. For example, the event “X orders
Y ” may strongly predict the event “X eats Y ,” but pairbased models have no straightforward way of representing
these multi-argument events or making such inferences. Motivated by these shortcomings, Pichotta and Mooney 
propose a model which represents events as relational atoms,
like eat(X, Y ). They ﬁnd that modeling co-occurring multiargument events and predicting simpler pair events provides
superior performance to modeling co-occurring pair events
1“Dependencies” here are grammatical structures output by a
syntactic parser, one of subject, direct object, or preposition.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)
directly. These events do not directly incorporate noun information. Events with similar relational structure are used in
Balasubramanian et al. and Modi and Titov ,
who present systems for other tasks.
Recurrent Neural Nets and Long Short-Term
Recurrent Neural Net (RNN) sequence models learn to map
input sequences to output sequence via a continuous vectorvalued intermediate hidden state. The most basic RNNs are
difﬁcult to train due to the so-called vanishing and exploding gradient problem. the phenomenon that the gradient
signal used to train the network tends to either approach
zero (“vanish”) or diverge (“explode”) as it is propagated
back through timesteps during learning, leading to instability. Further, long-distance data dependencies, in which some
timestep’s input is highly predictive of a much later output,
are not well modeled by simple RNNs.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units are designed to obviate these problems
by introducing a more complicated hidden unit which targets
long-distance dependencies and addresses the vanishing gradient problem. The LSTM formulation we use is described
in Zaremba and Sutskever . The LSTM unit is a composition of easily differentiable functions, so we may use
standard gradient-based methods to train all parameters.
LSTMs are a natural ﬁt to script learning: some events
will be highly predictive of events far ahead in the sequence
(e.g. “the army invaded” may be indicative of “a treaty was
signed” later in the text), while some event types are only
locally predictive (e.g. “he sat down” predict “he stood up,”
but only nearby). The LSTM is in principle able to learn
these sorts of dynamics. Further, since our formulation will
require one event to span multiple timesteps across the RNN,
handling even short-range dependencies across events requires modeling dependencies across tens of timesteps, so
long-range propagation in the network is crucial.
Script Models
We parse a large collection of natural-language documents,
extract sequences of events from them, and learn statistical
models of these sequences. Critically, we must specify what
we mean by an event. We adopt a similar event representation to Pichotta and Mooney , modeling an event as
a (possibly phrasal) verb with a number of arguments, each
of which may have noun information, coreference information, or both. Our proposed LSTM model could straightforwardly handle events with arbitrarily many arguments; however, in order to compare to previously published systems
with ﬁxed-arity events, we limit events’ arguments to a subject, a direct object, and one prepositional argument ignore). This amounts to representing events as 5-tuples.
The task we evaluate on, then, is to take as input a sequence of events and output additional events, where an
event is a tuple (v, es, eo, ep, p), where v is a verb lemma,
es, eo, and ep are nominal arguments standing in subject, direct object, and prepositional relations, respectively (about
Predictions
Embeddings
Figure 1: LSTM Script System at timestep t.
which we may know coreference information, the lemma of
the head noun, or both), and p is the preposition relating v
and ep. Any of es, eo, ep, and p may be null, indicating that
no word stands in that relation to v (ep is null if and only
if p is null). We will refer to v, es, eo, ep, and p as event
components.
LSTM Script Models
We frame script learning as a sequence modeling task, using
the standard technique of training a model to sequentially
predict the next input. That is, at timestep t, the model is
trained to predict the input at timestep t + 1. The sequence
modeled is the sequence of 5-component events; that is, a
sequence of N events has 5N timesteps.
We differentiate between two types of script systems
based on what the models predict. Noun models learn to
predict events as verb lemmas, noun lemmas, and prepositions. Entity models learn to predict verbs, entity IDs, and
prepositions, where an entity ID is an integer identifying an
argument’s entity according to a coreference resolution engine. For example, suppose we observe the two co-occurring
(pass, senate, bill1, ·, ·)
(veto, president, it1, ·, ·)
where · represents a null argument and subscripts indicate
entity IDs. An LSTM noun model will be trained to model
the sequence (pass, senate, bill, ·, ·, veto, president, it, ·, ·),
by successively predicting the next element in the sequence
(when receiving pass as input, it is trained to predict senate;
in the next timestep it is trained to predict bill, and so on).
An LSTM entity model will be trained to model (pass, 0,
1, ·, ·, veto, 0, 1, ·, ·), where 0 denotes singleton nouns, and
1 is the entity ID for bill/it. Previously published statistical
event-inference script models are entity models.
We consider four similar model architectures differing in
inputs and outputs, depicted in Figure 1 (the inputs and outputs not present in all models have dotted lines). At each
timestep t, there are multiple inputs, each of which is a onehot vector (with one 1 and all other entries 0). First, there is
the 1-of-5 input ct, indicating which component of the event
is input at t: verbs will have ct = 1, subject entities ct = 2,
and so on. Next, there is a 1-of-V input wt, with V the size
of the vocabulary, giving the component word at timestep
t. Finally, three of the four models have a one-hot et input,
which gives the entity ID of noun arguments according to a
coreference engine. This et value has special values for null,
singleton entities, and non-entity words (verbs and prepositions). We limit the number of entity IDs to 5,2 treating all
other entities as singletons.
One-hot input vectors are mapped to continuous distributed representations, labeled “Embeddings” in Figure 1.
These embeddings are learned jointly with the other model
parameters. The embeddings are input to a recurrent LSTM
unit, which modiﬁes a latent state vector at each timestep.
All models have an output vector from the LSTM, in RV ,
which is input to a softmax function, yielding a distribution
over predictions for the next wt value. Additionally, entity
models have a second output vector which is input to a softmax predicting the next et value. We train all models by
minimizing the cross-entropy error at the top softmax layer
and backpropagating the error gradient through the network.
We compare four related architectures, which all receive
and predict verbs and prepositions but differ in the input and
output of entity arguments:
1. LSTM-noun-noun, which receives only noun information about arguments and learns to predict argument
2. LSTM-ent-ent, which receives only entity IDs and learns
to predict entity IDs;
3. LSTM-both-noun, which receives noun and entity IDs
and learns to predict nouns;
4. LSTM-both-ent, which receives noun and entity IDs and
learns to predict entity IDs.
To generate probable event inferences, we perform a ﬁvestep beam search over the components (v, es, eo, ep, p) of
events. In steps 2 through 5 of this search, the previous step’s
output is treated as input. Since the LSTM-both-noun and
LSTM-both-ent models require both noun and entity ID information but only predict one of the two, we must generate
entity ID information from predicted nouns, and vice versa.
When predicting with the LSTM-both-noun model, we call
any predicted non-null noun a singleton entity; when predicting with the LSTM-both-ent model, we guess the special
Out-Of-Vocabulary token for any predicted non-null entities.
Baseline Models
We compare against four types of baseline script models.
The ﬁrst is the unigram model, which infers events by ignoring a document and simply guessing events according
to their frequency in the training set. Pichotta and Mooney
 showed this baseline to be surprisingly competitive
on the Narrative Cloze task. To compare with the different
LSTM models presented above, we construct both a unigram noun model (with arguments represented by their
head noun lemmas) and a unigram entity model (with arguments represented by entity IDs).
298% of training sequences involve ﬁve or fewer non-singleton
The other baseline systems we compare to follow previously published systems in making inferences based on
event co-occurrence statistics. The simplest is the allbigram system. This system ﬁrst calculates a closed vocabulary of the most common event types from the training set.
Next, event bigram statistics are calculated from the training set, where we follow Jans et al. and Pichotta
and Mooney in calculating 2-skip bigram counts:
when counting co-occurrence, event b is considered to follow event a if b is observed after a with at most two intervening events. Potential inferences at position t in a sequence
are scored by maximizing the objective
log P(a|si)
where si is the event at position i of the sequence, and
P(b|a) is the probability of b following event a according
to the 2-skip bigram model.
The third type of baseline system we compare to is
the rewritten all-bigram model. Similar to the all-bigram
model, we calculate 2-skip bigram counts, and events are
inferred by maximizing S(a). However, co-occurrences are
counted differently: during training, if two events a and
b are observed co-occurring, we also “hallucinate” cooccurrences of all events a′ and b′ such that a′ is a with
any subset of its entity IDs rewritten, and b′ is b with any
of its entity IDs rewritten, and shared entities are rewritten
consistently. The intuition is that if two events co-occur, then
they may also co-occur with different arguments. For more
details, see Pichotta and Mooney . This system does
not easily admit incorporation of nouns.
The ﬁnal baseline is the 2D rewritten all-bigram model,
which is the method described by Pichotta and Mooney
 . This system is similar to the rewritten all-bigram
model, with the difference that it maximizes
log P(a|si) +
log P(si|a)
with ℓthe length of the sequence. This model incorporates
the probabilities of an event a preceding events after t in the
document. This is the best performing published system on
the Narrative Cloze evaluation. In order to make these baselines as competitive as possible, if none of the test events
si being conditioned upon are in the event vocabulary, the
models fall back to estimating S(a) with a unigram model.
The baselines do not decompose events into constituent
parts, but instead treat entire events as atomic. For example, “Barbarians invade Rome” may be one event type, and
“Visigoths sack Rome” another, but the two will be unrelated in the event vocabulary. This requires a very large
event vocabulary and will have sparse co-occurrence statistics and poor generalization. On the other hand, in the LSTM
script model, invade, sack, Barbarian, and Visigoth could
individually be in the vocabulary, and each will have a lowdimensional continuous representation in which predictively
similar words should be similar. We can therefore predict
events never observed in the training set, and never observed
co-occurring with any events in the test document. Further,
the LSTM script model allows us to easily input both noun
and entity information about arguments.
Evaluation
Experimental Details
We use the Stanford dependency parser and coreference system .3 We lemmatize verbs and directly incorporate negation, a closed set of particles, and XCOMP nodes
(clausal complements with external subjects). For example,
“Jim didn’t dance” produces a not dance event; “Jim took
his shirt off” a take off event; and “Jim forgot to take it” a
forget to take event. Passive constructions are normalized to be identical to their active counterparts. We represent
noun arguments by their head lemmas.
For our corpus, we use English Language Wikipedia,4
breaking articles into paragraphs. Our training set was approximately 8.9 million event sequences, our validation set
was approximately 89,000 event sequences, and our test set
was 2,000 events from 411 sequences, such that no test-set
article is in the training or validation set. We add a <s>
beginning-of-sequence pseudo-event and a </s> end-ofsequence pseudo-event to every sequence. The event component vocabulary comprises the 2,000 most common verbs,
the 8,000 most common nouns, and the top 50 prepositions;
all other words are replaced with an Out-Of-Vocabulary
(OOV) token. For the unigram and bigram event vocabulary,
we select the 10,000 most common events (with either nouns
or entity IDs, depending on the system). We apply add-one
Laplace smoothing to bigram co-occurrence counts.
We use the implementation of LSTM provided by the
Caffe library . We train using batch stochastic gradient descent with momentum with a batch size of
20. Since RNNs are quite sensitive to hyperparameter values , we measured validation set performance in different regions of hyperparameter space, ultimately selecting learning rate η = 0.1, momentum parameter μ = 0.98, LSTM vector length of 1,000, and a Normal N(0, 0.1) distribution for random initialization (biases
are initialized to 0). Event component embeddings have dimension 300. We use ℓ2 regularization and Dropout with dropout probability 0.5. We clip gradient updates at 10 to prevent exploding gradients We damp η by 0.9 every 100,000 iterations. We train for 750,000 batch updates,
which took between 50 and 60 hours. We use a beam width
of 50 in all beam searches.
Evaluating Held-Out Event Inferences
We ﬁrst evaluate using the Narrative Cloze evaluation
 , which tests a system’s ability to reconstruct held-out events from documents. This evaluation is fully automated and does not require manually labeled evaluation data. We use four metrics. Primarily, we
3We use version 3.3.1 of the Stanford CoreNLP system.
4 dump from Jan 2, 2014.
evaluate with Recall at 25 (“R25”), which is the percentage
of held-out events that appear in the top 25 guesses a system
makes for that event; recall-at-k was also used in Jans et al.
 and Pichotta and Mooney . Since an inference
is counted as “correct” only if all event components match
the held-out exactly, this is a very challenging task in the
multi-argument setting, particularly when predicting nouns.
We also calculate Verb recall at 25 (“R25-V”), which is
recall at 25, but counting an inference as correct if its verb
matches the held-out event’s verb (ignoring arguments), and
4-Tuple recall at 25 (“R25-4”), which is recall at 25 ignoring prepositions. This allows us to compare directly to the
method of Pichotta and Mooney , whose events contain no prepositions. We evaluate LSTM systems by predicting 5-tuples and discarding prepositions, and evaluate baseline systems by directly modeling (v, es, eo, ep) 4-tuples.
Finally, motivated by the stringency of the R25 metric,
especially in the noun setting, we evaluate using Accuracy
with Partial Credit (“Acc”), in which we compute a system’s single most conﬁdent inference and calculate, for every component of the held-out event, a similarity score between that component and the respective inferred component. This relaxes the requirement that inferred events match
exactly, giving partial credit for similar components. Partial
credit is computed using WUP similarity , based on distance in the WordNet hierarchy . We assign a similarity score by taking the
maximum WUP scores over all Synset pairs (with appropriate parts-of-speech). Accuracy is average WUP score across
event components (ignoring OOVs and nulls in the held-out
event). This will be between 0 and 1. We use the NLTK implementation of WUP .
Table 1 gives results on the Narrative Cloze evaluation.
The LSTM-both-ent system demonstrates a 50.0% relative
improvement (5.7% absolute improvement) over the current
best-published system (2D rewritten all-bigram, evaluated
using 4-Tuple event recall at 25). Note that the simpler allbigram system outperforms the rewritten versions. This is
probably because there is information encoded in the entity IDs (the relative ordering of entities, and which entities
are singletons) that is lost during rewriting. Note also that,
on this corpus, the 2D rewritten system, which makes predictions based on subsequent events in addition to previous
events, does marginally worse than the system using only
previous events. We hypothesize this is because subsequent
events are less predictive than previous events on this corpus, and are comparatively overweighted.
Compared to the strongest baselines, the best-performing
entity system achieves a 22.6% relative improvement on
R25, an 18.4% relative improvement on verb-only R25,
and an 8.8% relative improvement on accuracy with partial
credit. The best-performing noun system achieves a 64.9%
relative improvement on R25, a 33.9% relative improvement on verb-only R25, and an 18.2% relative improvement
on accuracy with partial credit. LSTM-both-ent is the best
entity model, and LSTM-both-noun is the best noun model;
that is, the best performing system in both cases is the one
which is given both noun and entity information.
All-Bigram
Rewrite Bigram
2D Rewrite Bigram
LSTM-ent-ent
LSTM-both-ent
LSTM-noun-noun
LSTM-both-noun
Table 1: Narrative Cloze results on entity and noun models, with four metrics (higher scores are better).
Evaluating Novel Event Inferences
The low magnitude of the Narrative Cloze scores reﬂects
the task’s difﬁculty. The evaluation has a number of intuitive shortcomings: by their very nature, most obviously inferred facts are not explicitly stated, and so are not captured.
Also, Cloze scores on individual held-out events are not easily interpretable. Motivated by these concerns, we evaluate
inferences by eliciting human judgments via Amazon Mechanical Turk. Given a text snippet, annotators are asked
to rate, on a 5-point Likert scale, the likelihood of inferences, with 5 signifying “Very Likely” and 1 “Very Unlikely/Irrelevant” (uninterpretable events are to be marked
“Nonsense”). This provides interpretable scores, and allows
us to directly compare entity- and noun-predicting models,
which is not straightforward using the Narrative Cloze.
We present annotators with a snippet of text and 5 phrases,
4 of which are automatic script inferences based on the
events in the snippet, and one of which is a randomly selected event from the 10,000 most frequent events (“Random”). We transform relational events to English phrases using an LSTM model trained to predict, from extracted event
tuples, the original text from which the event was extracted.
This network uses a hidden state vector of length 1,000 and
a vocabulary of 100k tokens. We elicit three judgments for
each inference, treating “nonsense” judgments as 0 scores.
We asked annotators to judge each system’s most conﬁdent inference not involving one of the ten most frequent
verbs in the corpus.5 We evaluate two noun-predicting systems: LSTM-both-noun and All-bigram-noun, which were
the best-performing LSTM and Bigram systems on the Narrative Cloze; we also collect judgments for two entity systems, LSTM-both-ent and All-bigram-ent. We collect judgments on inferences from 100 snippets, each of which is the
smallest set of initial sentences from a different paragraph in
the test set such that the text contains at least two events.
The “All” column in Table 2 gives average ratings for
each system. The “Filtered” column gives the results after
removing annotations from annotators whose average “Random” score is higher than 1.0 (this may be viewed as a
quality-control procedure). The LSTM-both-noun system,
which predicts verbs and nouns, signiﬁcantly outperforms
all other systems, both with and without ﬁltering (p < 0.05,
Wilcoxon-Pratt signed-rank test). Incorporating nouns into
5have, make, use, include, know, take, play, call, see, give.
All-Bigram Ent
All-Bigram Noun
LSTM-both-ent
LSTM-both-noun
Table 2: Crowdsourced results (scores range from 0 to 5).
LSTM models improves inferences; on the other hand, bigram models, which do not decompose events into constituent components, perform worse when directly incorporating nouns, as this increases event co-occurrence sparsity.
Qualitative Analysis
Figure 2 (Top) shows, for two short two-event test sequences, the top 3 inferences the LSTM-both-noun system
makes at each position (the inferences following an event
are the system’s top predictions of immediately subsequent
events). Subscripts are entity IDs (singleton entities are unsubscripted). We do not display bigram inferences, because
in these examples they are exactly the most-common unigram events, as no observed events are in the event vocabulary. These examples clearly illustrate the importance of incorporating argument noun information: for example, without nouns, (obtain, OOV1, phd, dissertation, with) would be
represented as, roughly, “someone obtained something with
something,” from which few reasonable inferences can be
made. Note that since the learning objective does not directly encourage diversity of inferences, the LSTM makes
a number of roughly synonymous inferences.
To get further intuitions for what these models learn, we
can seed a model with a <s> beginning-of-sequence event
and generate events by probabilistically sampling from its
output predictions until it generates </s> (“ask it to generate a story”). That is, the ﬁrst event component (a verb) is
sampled from the model’s learned distribution of ﬁrst components, the hidden state is updated with this sample, the
next component is sampled from the model’s predictions,
and so on, until a </s> is sampled. Figure 2 (Bottom) gives
three probabilistically generated sequences from the LSTMnoun-noun model. These sequences, generated totally from
scratch one component at a time, are reasonably coherent,
and exhibit clear thematic dependencies across events.
Sample Events Inferred from Test Data
Sequence 1 (two events):
(obtain, OOV1, phd, dissertation, with)
obtained a PhD with a dissertation
Inference 1:
(study, he, ., university, at)
He studied at a university
Inference 2:
(study, OOV, ., university, at)
studied at a university
Inference 3:
(study, he, ., OOV, at)
He studied at
(graduate, OOV1, ., university, at)
graduated at a university
Inference 1:
(move, he, ., OOV, to)
He moved to
Inference 2:
(move, OOV, ., OOV, to)
Inference 3:
(return, he, ., OOV, to)
He returned to
Sequence 2 (two events):
 
The airport was destroyed in 1945.
Inference 1:
(destroy, ., airport, ., .)
The airport was destroyed
Inference 2:
(rebuild, ., airport, ., .)
The airport was rebuilt
Inference 3:
(build, ., airport, ., .)
The airport was built
 
The airport opened in 1940
Inference 1:
(rename, ., airport, ., .)
The airport was renamed
Inference 2:
(know, ., ., airport, as)
. . . known as
Inference 3:
(use, ., airport, ., .)
The airport was used
Probabilistically Generated Event Sequences
((pass, route, creek, north, in);
The route passes the creek in the North
(traverse, it, river, south, to))
It traverses the river to the South
((issue, ., recommendation, government, from);
A recommendation was issued from the government
(guarantee, ., regulation, ., .);
Regulations were guaranteed
(administer, agency, program, ., .);
The Agency administered the program
(post, ., correction, website, through);
A correction was posted through a website
(ensure, standard, ., ., .);
Standards were ensured
(assess, ., transparency, ., .))
Transparency was assessed.
((establish, ., ., citizen, by)
Established by citizens, . . .
(end, ., liberation, ., .)
. . . the liberation was ended
(kill, ., man, ., .)
A man was killed
(rebuild, ., camp, initiative, on)
The camp was rebuilt on an initiative
(capture, squad, villager, ., .)
A squad captured a villager . . .
(give, inhabitant, group, ., .))
. . . [which] the inhabitants had given the group
Figure 2: Sample Narrative Cloze inferences (Top), and some probabilistically generated event sequences (Bottom). The right
column gives possible English descriptions of the structured events on the left.
Related Work
Scripts in AI date back to the 1970s . Mooney and DeJong give an early knowledgebased method for learning scripts from a single document.
Miikkulainen proposes a Neural Network system
which stores events in episodic memory and is capable of
answering simple questions.
There has been a fair amount of recent work on learning models of events from large corpora. Some systems are
focused on event inference ; others focus on learning structured
collections of events ; others focus on
story generation . There
is also a body of work on building high-precision models
of real-world situations from smaller corpora of event sequences .
There have been a number of recent papers successfully
applying neural nets to tasks above the sentence level. Li, Li,
and Hovy and Ji and Eisenstein use RNNs for
discourse parsing. Li and Hovy and Modi and Titov
 present neural models of event ordering. Kalchbrenner and Blunsom use RNNs to classify speech acts.
Weston, Chopra, and Bordes describe a model with
a long-term memory component, which they use to answer
questions about short generated stories.
Conclusion
We have presented an LSTM-based statistical script model
capable of modeling and predicting either noun or coreference information about event arguments. We compared to a
number of baselines, including the previous best-published
system, on the tasks of inferring both held-out and novel
events, demonstrating substantial improvements.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Saro Meguerdichian, Matt Hausknecht, Amelia
Harrison, and the UT NLP group for discussions and feedback. This research was supported in part by the DARPA
DEFT program under AFRL grant FA8750-13-2-0026.