Genomic analysis identifies association of Fusobacterium
with colorectal carcinoma
Aleksandar D. Kostic,1,2 Dirk Gevers,1 Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu,1,3 Monia Michaud,4
Fujiko Duke,1,3 Ashlee M. Earl,1 Akinyemi I. Ojesina,1,3 Joonil Jung,1 Adam J. Bass,1,3
Josep Tabernero,5 Jose´ Baselga,5 Chen Liu,6 Ramesh A. Shivdasani,3 Shuji Ogino,2,3,7
Bruce W. Birren,1 Curtis Huttenhower,1,8 Wendy S. Garrett,1,3,4
and Matthew Meyerson1,2,3,9
1Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA; 2Department
of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; 3Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; 4Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; 5Department of Medical Oncology, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Universitat Auto`noma de
Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain; 6Departments of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA; 7Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA; 8Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
The tumor microenvironment of colorectal carcinoma is a complex community of genomically altered cancer cells,
nonneoplastic cells, and a diverse collection of microorganisms. Each of these components may contribute to carcinogenesis; however, the role of the microbiota is the least well understood. We have characterized the composition of the
microbiota in colorectal carcinoma using whole genome sequences from nine tumor/normal pairs. Fusobacterium sequences
were enriched in carcinomas, confirmed by quantitative PCR and 16S rDNA sequence analysis of 95 carcinoma/normal
DNA pairs, while the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla were depleted in tumors. Fusobacteria were also visualized within
colorectal tumors using FISH. These findings reveal alterations in the colorectal cancer microbiota; however, the precise
role of Fusobacteria in colorectal carcinoma pathogenesis requires further investigation.
[Supplemental material is available for this article.]
Malignant tumors are complex communities of oncogenically
transformed cells with aberrant genomes, associated nonneoplastic cells including immune and stromal cells, and sometimes
microbes, including bacteria and viruses. Several viruses that can
integrate into the human genome directly cause cancer, such as
human papillomavirus in cervical cancer and
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
in Kaposi’s sarcoma
 . In other cases, micro-organisms lead indirectly
to cancer through chronic inflammatory responses—a mechanism
by which Helicobacter pylori contributes to both gastric cancer and
MALT lymphoma .
In the human distal gut, where microbial cells outnumber
host cells nine-to-one , the microbiome can impart both beneficial and detrimental effects on host
physiology contributing to health or disease susceptibility. Gut
microbial communities (microbiota) may also influence the development of colorectal carcinoma . Sears and Pardoll have recently introduced
the concept of the ‘‘alpha-bug’’—wherein select members of a microbial community, in addition to possessing virulence and procarcinogenic features, are capable of remodeling the microbiome
as a whole to drive proinflammatory immune responses and colonic epithelial cell transformation leading to cancer .
We postulate that, if the microbiota play an active role in the
pathogenesis of colorectal carcinoma, then these microbes will be
found within the tumor microenvironment, and the composition
of the tumor microbiome will differ from that of adjacent nonneoplastic tissue. We have undertaken unbiased, sequence-based
approaches, followed by cytological analysis, to probe the differences in the microbial composition of the colorectal carcinoma
tumor microenvironment relative to adjacent nonneoplastic tissue. We now report an association of Fusobacterium with the colonic mucosa of colorectal carcinoma.
To determine the microbial composition of human colorectal
cancer, we analyzed whole genome sequences of nine colorectal
cancers and matched normal colons using
PathSeq, a computational subtraction pipeline that culls out candidate microbial sequences . These presumed
bacterial sequences were identified by alignment to known sequenced microbial genomes (Fig. 1A; Supplemental Fig. S1; Supplemental Table S1; Methods). PathSeq analysis also identified the
presence of virus sequences in these specimens including human
herpesvirus 7; however no significant differences in viral sequence
levels were detected between tumor and normal DNA (Supplemental Table S2).
9Corresponding author.
E-mail .
Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at 
Genome Research
www.genome.org
22:292–298  2012 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/12; www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Hierarchical clustering analysis of the species-specific relative
abundances of microbial sequences revealed that the microbial
communities of a tumor and matched noncancerous colon from
a given patient were more similar to each other than are tumors or
nonaffected colon samples from different patients (Fig. 1B). This
finding suggests that a patient’s intestinal ecosystem may be more
significant in shaping the microbiota than the generic microenvironment of a colon tumor or normal colonic tissue.
To identify bacterial species whose sequences are more abundant in colorectal tumors than in the matched, noncancerous
colorectal tissue, we applied a metagenomic biomarker discovery
approach, LEfSe [linear discriminant analysis (LDA) coupled
with effect size measurements], which performs a nonparametric
Wilcoxon sum-rank test followed by LDA analysis to assess the effect size of each differentially abundant taxon .
Using LEfSe, we found that Fusobacterium sequences were significantly enriched in the colorectal cancer metagenomes as were sequences from the family of Streptococcaceae (Fig. 1C,D; Supplemental Fig. S2). Other taxa were enriched in tumor or normal
tissue, but their LDA enrichment scores were lower by two orders of
magnitude or more (Fig.1C). The high abundance of Fusobacterium
sequences, ranging over 20% of total bacterial sequences, is a feature of some but not all colorectal cancer genomes (Fig. 1D).
As our initial screen was performed on a sample size of nine
cases, we next examined a larger cohort of 95 paired specimens of
colon cancer and normal colonic DNA to survey the colon cancer
microbiome and validate the tumor-specific enrichment of Fusobacterium. We amplified ribosomal 16S rDNA by PCR using consensus primers from 95 tumor/normal pairs, followed by pyrosequencing to assess the relative abundance of DNA from bacterial
species (Fig. 2A). Overall, as was the case in our whole-genome
sequence data, tumor/normal pairs from the same individual are
much more highly correlated than tumor/tumor pairs or normal/
normal pairs from different individuals (Fig.2B). Colorectal tumors
were associated with broad phylum-level changes including the
depletion (i.e., reduced relative abundance) of Firmicutes and
Whole-genome sequencing analysis of the colorectal cancer microbiome. (A) Schematic of experimental and computational whole-genome
sequencing analysis workflow. (B) Hierarchical clustering of phylotype relative abundance measurements demonstrates that microbial composition of
tumor/normal pairs within individuals is more highly correlated than tumor/tumor pairs or normal/normal pairs from different individuals. (Green) Normal
samples; (purple) tumors. (C ) Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) coupled with effect size measurements identifies Fusobacterium as the most differentially
abundant taxon in colon tumor versus normal specimens by whole-genome sequencing in nine individuals. Tumor-enriched taxa are indicated with
a positive LDA score (black), and taxa enriched in normal tissue have a negative score (gray). Only taxa meeting an LDA significant threshold of 1.8 are
shown. (D) Percent relative abundance for the genus Fusobacterium is depicted across all samples in the order of the labels in B, demonstrating a tumorenrichment in most individuals.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Fusobacterium in colorectal carcinoma
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Bacteroidetes, most prominently the Clostridia (Fig. 2C,D; Supplemental Fig. S3); however, the overall diversity in the tumors
relative to adjacent tissue was not significantly different (Supplemental Fig. S4A,B). Consistent with our whole-genome sequencing results, the relative abundance of Fusobacterium was highly
enriched in the population of tumor versus normal samples (Fig.
16S rDNA sequencing analysis of the colorectal cancer microbiome. (A) Schematic of experimental and computational 16S rDNA sequencing
analysis workflow. (B) Beta-diversity distances calculated using phylotype relative abundance measurements between all pairs of samples demonstrate that
the microbial composition of tumor/normal pairs within individuals is more highly correlated than tumor/tumor pairs, normal/normal pairs, or tumor/
normal pairs from different individuals. (C ) Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) coupled with effect size measurements identifies Fusobacterium as the most
differentially abundant taxon in colon tumor versus normal specimens by 16S rDNA sequencing in 95 individuals. Tumor-enriched taxa are indicated with
a positive LDA score (black), and taxa enriched in normal tissue have a negative score (gray). Only taxa meeting an LDA significant threshold of 4.2 are
shown. (D) A cladogram representation of data in C. (Red) Tumor-enriched taxa; (blue) taxa enriched in normal tissue. The brightness of each dot is
proportional to its effect size.
Kostic et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
2C,D). However a tumor-enrichment for Streptococcaceae was not
reproduced, most likely due to small sample-size in our initial
whole-genome sequencing results. In addition, we analyzed patient metadata to identify correlations or possible confounding
effects (including patient age, gender, ethnicity, tumor anatomic
location, tumor purity, inflammation, necrosis, and vascularization) but only found a modest correlation with patient geographic
location (Supplemental Fig. S5), as well as a correlation of higher
microbial diversity with tumors of higher histological stage or
grade (Supplemental Fig. S4C). The correlation of Fusobacteria
abundance with geographic location may either indicate a real
geographic effect or else a confounder introduced by slightly differing sample collection protocols at the collection sites, for example, time between surgery and freezing (see Methods).
To determine if there was an absolute increase of Fusobacterium (as one possible explanation for enrichment is depletion of
other bacterial species in the tumor microenvironment), we performed quantitative real-time PCR for Fusobacterium DNA relative
to human DNA as a control. We found that Fusobacterium DNA was
enriched in the tumor relative to normal in 98 paired samples
(Supplemental Fig. S6).
As we have shown that Fusobacterium species are enriched in
colorectal cancer DNA and tissue, we sought associations that
might suggest that Fusobacteria are required for the survival or
maintenance of colorectal cancer cells. Because Fusobacterium
species can invade colonic epithelial cells , we
examined colorectal cancer cell lines and hepatic and lymph node
metastases for evidence of fusobacterial DNA. Quantitative PCR
analysis of 59 human colorectal cancer cell line DNAs revealed no
significantly detectable Fusobacterium DNA; however, these in
vitro passaged cell lines are often cultured in the presence of antibiotics (Supplemental Table S3). Strikingly, however, when we
examined surgically resected colorectal cancer metastases, Fusobacterium was detected in two out of 11 cases (Supplemental Table
Given the increased abundance of Fusobacterium sequences in
colon cancer DNA, we next asked whether Fusobacterium could be
detected in histological sections of colon cancer and, if so, where.
To address this question, we used 16S rDNA fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) oligonucleotide probes on colonic biopsy
sections. Employing probeBase consortium 16S rDNA probes that
detect the majority of bacteria (EUB338) and members of the genus
Fusobacterium (FUSO) , we
performed FISH analysis on frozen (nine cases) and formalin-fixed
paraffin- embedded (12 cases) tissue sections from colorectal cancer and normal colon (see Supplemental Table S5 for a summary of
analyses performed on each sample). The Fusobacterium probes
detected bacteria in the colorectal cancer and normal tissue sections and were quantitated within the lamina propria and mucus
(Fig. 3A); z-section stacks suggest that some of the imaged bacteria
may reside intracellularly (Supplemental Movies 1 and 2). Consistent with the analysis of Fusobacterium DNA described above,
FISH-detected Fusobacteria were enriched in the colorectal cancer compared to the normal samples (Fig. 3B; Supplemental Fig.
S7; see Supplemental Fig. S8 for a comparison of Fusobacterium
quantitation across all four methods), in contrast to total bacteria counts which were more evenly distributed (Supplemental
Finally, we sought to assess the specific Fusobacterium species
that are enriched in colorectal carcinomas. Based on the 16S ribosomal DNA sequences, five out of a total of 409 operational
taxonomic units (OTUs, a proxy for species) identified in our
samples were classified as members of the Fusobacterium genus. By
performing multiple sequence alignments using our five OTUs
along with 16S rDNA sequences from a reference set of 31 Fusobacterium species and constructing maximum likelihood trees, the
OTUs were identified as most closely related to Fusobacterium
nucleatum, Fusobacterium necrophorum, Fusobacterium mortiferum,
and Fusobacterium perfoetens (Fig. 4A). The percent relative abundance in colorectal tumors versus normal colons of the two most
abundant OTUs is shown in Figure 4B, demonstrating that, for
most patients, these OTUs are enriched in the tumor. Strikingly,
only a subset of the cancers showed dramatic enrichment of
Fusobacterium species, accounting for up to 89% of total bacterial
DNA in some specimens; this result suggests that Fusobacteria may
be uniquely related to pathogenesis of subsets of colorectal cancer.
The OTU with the greatest similarity to F. nucleatum was the most
dominant phylotype identified within cancers; however, some
tumors contain more than one dominant species (Supplemental
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) detects enrichment
of Fusobacteria in colorectal tumors. (A) FISH using an Oregon-Green
488-conjugated ‘‘universal bacterial’’ 16S rDNA-directed oligonucleotide
probe (EUB338, green) (top left); and Cy3-conjugated Fusobacterium
(FUSO, red) (top right and bottom center) 16S rDNA-direct oligonucleotide probe demonstrates the presence of bacteria and Fusobacterium
within the colonic mucosa of colorectal tumor samples. Representative
images are shown with a 10-mm scale bar in the lower corner of each
panel; white arrowheads mark bacteria. Epithelial cell nuclei were stained
with DAPI. (B) To determine whether Fusobacterium was enriched in
tumor versus normal pairs, three random 403 fields were chosen for
scoring by an observer blind to tumor/normal status, using selection
criteria of mucosal tissue depth and a minimum of five bacteria visualized
by the EUB338 probe per field. Each dot represents data from either
a tumor or normal sample from nine tumor/normal paired cases. The
mean, SEM, and P-values (calculated by a Wilcoxon matched-pairs
signed rank test) are shown.
Fusobacterium in colorectal carcinoma
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Discussion
In summary, genomic analysis of the microbiome of colorectal
carcinomas reveals a significant enrichment of Fusobacterium species in these cancers, especially phylotypes with the greatest similarity to F. nucleatum, F. mortiferum, and F. necrophorum. This enrichment is confirmed by histological analysis of tumor tissue and
also by the identification of Fusobacterium DNA in colon tumor
metastases. Our analysis also reveals broader changes in the tumor
environment, such as the depletion of the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla, most notably the order Clostridiales. Fusobacterium
species may have a fitness advantage in the evolving tumor microenvironment, resulting in an altered microbiota in accordance
with the ‘‘alpha-bug’’ hypothesis.
Interestingly, Fusobacterium species may be associated with
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), including both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease , and IBD is a known risk factor, indeed, one of
three highest risk factors, for colorectal cancer. Furthermore, consistent with our findings in colorectal carcinoma, others have
reported that several Fusobacterium strains were associated with
IBD; however, the majority (69%) were specifically associated with
F. nucleatum . Therefore, it is worth further
exploration of a causal link between Fusobacterium spp. with inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal carcinoma pathogenesis.
F. nucleatum and other Fusobacterium species can elicit host
proinflammatory response and possess
virulence characteristics that promote their adhesiveness to host
epithelial cells and their
ability to invade into epithelial cells . Therefore, our findings of a tumoral enrichment of Fusobacterium spp. in colorectal carcinoma suggest the possibility that
these organisms may contribute to tumorigenesis, perhaps in a
limited subset of patients, most conceivably by an inflammatorymediated mechanism. Alternatively, it is possible that Fusobacteria
accumulate in the tumor microenvironment in the late stages of
tumorigenesis and, therefore, do not have a significant role in tumor development. Our results do not prove a causal relationship
between Fusobacterium and colorectal cancer; the establishment or
repudiation of such a relationship will require further studies of
colorectal cancer in both human subjects and animal models of
the disease. Additionally, case-control studies comparing tumor
microbiota to that of colonic epithelial tissues from healthy individuals will serve to demonstrate whether Fusobacterium species
Phylogenetic analysis identifies several Fusobacterium species in human colon cancer tissues. (A) Approximately-maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees were constructed on the V3–V5 region of the 16S rDNA gene using 31 reference Fusobacterium species along with the five most prominent
OTUs identified in colon cancer specimens (indicated in red). Nodes that have bootstrap support above 50% and 75% are indicated with a white and black
dot, respectively. The mean percent relative abundance in tumor (T ) and normal (N ) of each OTU is indicated in parentheses. The full names of the
reference strains appear in Supplemental Table S6. (B) The abundance of the indicated OTU relative to all other phylotypes in a given specimen is shown for
the two most abundant Fusobacterium OTUs in tumors (x-axis) and normal colon tissue (y-axis); each point represents tumor and normal abundance data
for a different individual. The lower-right quadrant of the graph highlights the substantial proportion of patients for whom the Fusobacterium abundance is
>10% in tumors but <10% in the matched normal.
Kostic et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
are more prevalent in individuals with colon cancer relative to the
general population.
In summary, our findings reveal species-specific alterations in
the colorectal cancer microbiota, which may lead to microbiotadirected prevention, diagnostic, prognostic, and treatment strategies for these cancers.
Sample collection and preparation
Colorectal adenocarcinoma and adjacent nonaffected tissue was
obtained from the Vall d’Hebron University Hospital in Barcelona,
Spain and Genomics Collaborative Inc. (GCI), using the sample
collection protocols detailed below.
Vall d’Hebron University Hospital
All frozen tissue samples were collected following the Standard
Operating Procedures at the site. Participants were enrolled in the
study prior to surgery, and informed consent was obtained by the
surgeon. After arterial ligation and surgical removal of the tissues,
the specimens were immediately transferred from the operating
room to the pathology suite and subsequently evaluated by the
pathologist, and, if possible, one fragment of healthy tissue and
one of tumor were chosen and placed in a cryotube and frozen
immediately in liquid nitrogen (time interval between specimen
removal and freezing: maximum = 30 min; median = 22 min). The
frozen tissue was stored at 80°C until DNA extraction. All clinical
data, captured on case report forms, was double-data entered into
a clinical database.
Genomics Collaborative, Inc.
All frozen tissue samples were collected following the same Standard Operating Procedure at all collection sites, both within the
United States and in Vietnam. Participants were enrolled in the
study prior to surgery, and informed consent was obtained. After
arterial ligation and surgical removal of the tissues, the tissue was
transferred from the operating room to the pathology suite. The
time taken from surgical removal of the specimen until the time it
was received for processing in the pathology suite, as well as the
temperature at which it was transferred (room temperature, or on
ice) were recorded. The SOP required the tissue transmittal time
(from removal to freezing of the sample) to ideally be from 30 to no
more than 45 min. Upon dissection in the pathology suite, samples were cut into ;1 g pieces and placed into prelabeled cyrovials
supplied in the sample kits. Samples were immediately frozen in
liquid nitrogen vapor phase in charged vapor-shippers located at
each site. An H&E slide was cut from the adjacent face of each
tissue sample and sent to GCI along with the frozen tissue samples.
Upon receipt at GCI, the samples were qualified by pathologist
review of the H&E slide, and all samples were stored in liquid N2
vapor freezers until requested for research. All clinical data, captured on case report forms, was double-data entered into a clinical
DNA extraction, whole genome sequencing, and analysis
DNA was extracted from colorectal carcinoma tumors and adjacent
nonaffected tissues, and whole genome sequencing was performed
as described previously . Initial alignments to
the human reference genome were performed as described . All unaligned sequencing reads were (1) analyzed on
PathSeq and (2) aligned to the complete set of fully sequenced
bacterial and archaeal genomes by MegaBlast (Blast Tools version 2.2.23, word size 16, match reward 1, mismatch reward 2, gap
open reward 5, gap extension reward 2). The top 30 sequence
matches with >90% sequence identity and >90% query coverage
were reported for each read (i.e., query). Classifications were performed at the domain, then phylum, then genus, then species level,
requiring unique alignments (i.e., reads with equivalent E-values to
multiple taxa were removed from analysis). At the species level,
relative abundance (RA) for each organism was calculated as follows: RA = (# unique alignment positions in genome 3 1,000,000) /
(# total alignable reads 3 genome size). The RA values were then
per-sample normalized such that the total relative abundance for
each sample sums to one. The resulting normalized RA matrix was
analyzed on LEfSe .
Amplification and 454 sequencing of the 16S gene
The 16S gene data set consists of 454 FLX Titanium sequences
spanning the V3 to V5 variable regions obtained for 190 samples
(95 pairs). Detailed protocols used for 16S amplification and sequencing are available on the HMP Data Analysis and Coordination
Center website ( 
protocols.php). In brief, genomic DNA was subjected to 16S amplifications using primers designed incorporating the FLX Titanium
adapters and a sample barcode sequence, allowing directional sequencing covering variable regions V5 to partial V3 (Primers: 357F
59-CCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-39 and 926R 59-CCGTCAATTCMTTT
RAGT-39). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) mixtures (25ml) contained 10 ng of template, 1x Easy A reaction buffer (Stratagene), 200
mM of each dNTP (Stratagene), 200 nM of each primer, and 1.25 U
Easy A cloning enzyme (Stratagene). The cycling conditions for the
V3–V5 consisted of an initial denaturation of 95°C for 2 min, followed by 25 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 40 sec, annealing at
50°C for 30 sec, extension at 72°C for 5 min, and a final extension
at 72°C for 7 min. Amplicons were confirmed on 1.2% Flash Gels
(Lonza) and purified with AMPure XP DNA purification beads
(Beckman Coulter) according to the manufacturer’s instructions
and eluted in 25 mL of 13 low TE buffer (pH 8.0). Amplicons were
quantified on Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 DNA 1000 chips (Agilent
Technologies) and pooled in equimolar concentration. Emulsion
PCR and sequencing were performed according to the manufacturer’s specifications.
Processing of 16S sequence data
Resulting sequences were processed using a data curation pipeline
implemented in mothur , complimented by
abundantOTU , and custom PERL scripts. Sequences were
removed from the analysis if they were <200 nt or >600 nt, had
a read quality score <25, contained ambiguous characters, had a
nonexact barcode match, or did show more than four mismatches
to the reverse primer sequences (926R). Remaining sequences were
assigned to samples based on barcode matches, after which barcode and primer sequences were trimmed, and reads were oriented
such that all sequences begin with the 59 end, according to standard sense-strand conventions. All sequences were aligned using
a NAST-based sequence aligner to a custom reference based on the
SILVA alignment . Chimeric
sequences were identified using the mothur implementation of
the ChimeraSlayer algorithm . Quality filtered
and chimera-free sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units using abundantOTU . Representative sequences per OTU were classified with the MSU RDP classifier v2.2
 , using the taxonomy proposed by Garrity et al.
 , maintained at the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP 10
database, version 6).
Fusobacterium in colorectal carcinoma
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Quantitative PCR analysis
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed as described using pan-Fusobacterium probe-primer sets as described
 . Fusobacterium quantitation was measured
relative to human endogenous 18S [Applied Biosystems TaqMan
Ribosomal RNA Control Reagents, Hs99999901_s1 (part number
4331182)].
Microbial FISH analysis
Frozen sections were fixed in Carnoy’s solution overnight and
embedded in paraffin, and 5-mm-thick sections were prepared
and hybridized as previously described .
The sequences of the following FISH probes were obtained from
probeBase ( net/probebase/) : the ‘‘universal’’ bacterial probe-EUB338 (pB-00159),
Fusobacterium targeted probe (pB-00782). Slides were imaged on an
Olympus B40 microscope and digitally photographed using IP
Lab. Three random fields per sample were chosen by an observer blind
to tumor/normal status, using selection criteria of mucosal tissue
depth and a minimum of five bacteria visualized by the EUB338 probe
per field. Composite z-stacks were assembled in IP Lab, and composite
photomicrographs were assembled in Adobe Photoshop.
Data access
The 16S sequence data from this study have been submitted to the
NCBI Sequence Read Archive ( 
sra/sra.cgi) under accession number SRP000383.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by grants from the National Human Genome Research Institute (U54HG003067), The National Cancer
Institute (P50CA127003; RC2CA148317; R01CA154426), and the
Starr Cancer Consortium. A.D.K. was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Postgraduate
Scholarship and an Albert J. Ryan Foundation Fellowship. A.I.O.
was supported by the Rebecca Ridley Kry Fellowship of the Damon
Runyon Cancer Research Foundation. We thank Jordi Barretina,
Kristin Ardlie, Candace Guidicci, Lauren Ambrogio, and Susanna
Hamilton of the Broad Institute and Emma Allen-Vercoe of the
University of Guelph for assistance and advice.
References
Bachrach G, Ianculovici C, Naor R, Weiss EI. 2005. Fluorescence-based
measurements of Fusobacterium nucleatum coaggregation and of
fusobacterial attachment to mammalian cells. FEMS Microbiol Lett 248:
Bass AJ, Lawrence MS, Brace LE, Ramos AH, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C,
Voet D, Saksena G, Sivachenko A, et al. 2011. Genomic sequencing of
colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion.
Nat Genet. doi: 10.1038/ng.936.
Boutaga K, van Winkelhoff AJ, Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM, Savelkoul PH.
2005. Periodontal pathogens: A quantitative comparison of anaerobic
culture and real-time PCR. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 45: 191–199.
Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin MS, Lee F, Culpepper J, Knowles DM, Moore PS.
1994. Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDSassociated Kaposi’s sarcoma. Science 266: 1865–1869.
Cole JR, Wang Q, Cardenas E, Fish J, Chai B, Farris RJ, Kulam-Syed-Mohideen
AS, McGarrell DM, Marsh T, Garrity GM, et al. 2009. The Ribosomal
Database Project: Improved alignments and new tools for rRNA analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 37: D141–D145.
Cover TL, Blaser MJ. 2009. Helicobacter pylori in health and disease.
Gastroenterology 136: 1863–1873.
Garrity GM, Lilburn TG, Cole JR, Harrison SH, Tindall BJ. 2007. Taxonomic
outline of the Bacteria and Archaea, Release 7.7. 
taxonomicoutline.org/
Goodman AL, Gordon JI. 2010. Our unindicted coconspirators:
Human metabolism from a microbial perspective. Cell Metab 12:
Haas BJ, Gevers D, Earl AM, Feldgarden M, Ward DV, Giannoukos G, Ciulla
D, Tabbaa D, Highlander SK, Sodergren E, et al. 2011. Chimeric 16S rRNA
sequence formation and detection in Sanger and 454-pyrosequenced
PCR amplicons. Genome Res 21: 494–504.
Han YW, Shi W, Huang GT, Kinder Haake S, Park NH, Kuramitsu H, Genco
RJ. 2000. Interactions between periodontal bacteria and human oral
epithelial cells: Fusobacterium nucleatum adheres to and invades
epithelial cells. Infect Immun 68: 3140–3146.
Hope ME, Hold GL, Kain R, El-Omar EM. 2005. Sporadic colorectal cancer–
role of the commensal microbiota. FEMS Microbiol Lett 244: 1–7.
Kostic AD, Ojesina AI, Pedamallu CS, Jung J, Verhaak RGW, Getz G,
Meyerson M. 2011. PathSeq: Software to identify or discover microbes
by deep sequencing of human tissue. Nat Biotechnol 29: 4–7.
Loy A, Arnold R, Tischler P, Rattei T, Wagner M, Horn M. 2008. probeCheck–
a central resource for evaluating oligonucleotide probe coverage and
specificity. Environ Microbiol 10: 2894–2898.
Moore WE, Moore LV. 1994. The bacteria of periodontal diseases. Periodontol
2000 5: 66–77.
Neut C, Bulois P, Desreumaux P, Membre JM, Lederman E, Gambiez L,
Cortot A, Quandalle P, van Kruiningen H, Colombel JF. 2002. Changes in
the bacterial flora of the neoterminal ileum after ileocolonic resection
for Crohn’s disease. Am J Gastroenterol 97: 939–946.
Ohkusa T, Sato N, Ogihara T, Morita K, Ogawa M, Okayasu I. 2002.
Fusobacterium varium localized in the colonic mucosa of patients with
ulcerative colitis stimulates species-specific antibody. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 17: 849–853.
Polk DB, Peek RM Jr. 2010. Helicobacter pylori: Gastric cancer and beyond. Nat
Rev Cancer 10: 403–414.
Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J, Glockner FO.
2007. SILVA: A comprehensive online resource for quality checked and
aligned ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic
Acids Res 35: 7188–7196.
Rowland IR. 2009. The role of the gastrointestinal microbiota in colorectal
cancer. Curr Pharm Des 15: 1524–1527.
Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB,
Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Robinson CJ, et al. 2009.
Introducing mothur: Open-source, platform-independent, communitysupported software for describing and comparing microbial
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 75: 7537–7541.
Sears CL, Pardoll DM. 2011. Perspective: Alpha-bugs, their microbial
partners, and the link to colon cancer. J Infect Dis 203: 306–311.
Segata N, Izard J, Waldron L, Gevers D, Miropolsky L, Garrett WS,
Huttenhower C. 2011. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and
explanation. Genome Biol 12: R60. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r60.
Strauss J, Kaplan GG, Beck PL, Rioux K, Panaccione R, Devinney R, Lynch T,
Allen-Vercoe E. 2011. Invasive potential of gut mucosa-derived
Fusobacterium nucleatum positively correlates with IBD status of the host.
Inflamm Bowel Dis 17: 1971–1978.
Swidsinski A, Dorffel Y, Loening-Baucke V, Theissig F, Ruckert JC, Ismail M,
Rau WA, Gaschler D, Weizenegger M, Kuhn S, et al. 2011. Acute
appendicitis is characterized by local invasion with Fusobacterium
nucleatum/necrophorum. Gut 60: 34–40.
Uitto VJ, Baillie D, Wu Q, Gendron R, Grenier D, Putnins EE, Kanervo A,
Firth JD. 2005. Fusobacterium nucleatum increases collagenase 3
production and migration of epithelial cells. Infect Immun 73: 1171–
Yang L, Pei Z. 2006. Bacteria, inflammation, and colon cancer. World
J Gastroenterol 12: 6741–6746.
Ye Y. 2010. Fast and accurate identification and quantification of abundant
species from pyrosequences of 16S rRNA by consensus alignment. In The
Proceedings of BIBM, 153–157. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), New York.
zur Hausen H. 2009. Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. Indian
J Med Res 130: 209.
Received May 20, 2011; accepted in revised form July 28, 2011.
Kostic et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
10.1101/gr.126573.111
Access the most recent version at doi:
2012 22: 292-298 originally published online October 18, 2011
Genome Res.
Aleksandar D. Kostic, Dirk Gevers, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, et al.
colorectal carcinoma
Fusobacterium
Genomic analysis identifies association of