Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 86–96,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Improving Neural Machine Translation Models with Monolingual Data
Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow and Alexandra Birch
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
{rico.sennrich,a.birch}@ed.ac.uk, 
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has
obtained state-of-the art performance for
several language pairs, while only using parallel data for training.
Targetside monolingual data plays an important role in boosting ﬂuency for phrasebased statistical machine translation, and
we investigate the use of monolingual data
for NMT. In contrast to previous work,
which combines NMT models with separately trained language models, we note
that encoder-decoder NMT architectures
already have the capacity to learn the same
information as a language model, and we
explore strategies to train with monolingual data without changing the neural network architecture.
By pairing monolingual training data with an automatic backtranslation, we can treat it as additional
parallel training data, and we obtain substantial improvements on the WMT 15
task English↔German (+2.8–3.7 BLEU),
and for the low-resourced IWSLT 14 task
Turkish→English (+2.1–3.4 BLEU), obtaining new state-of-the-art results.
also show that ﬁne-tuning on in-domain
monolingual and parallel data gives substantial improvements for the IWSLT 15
task English→German.
Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has obtained
state-of-the art performance for several language
pairs, while only using parallel data for training.
Target-side monolingual data plays an important
role in boosting ﬂuency for phrase-based statisti-
The research presented in this publication was conducted
in cooperation with Samsung Electronics Polska sp. z o.o. -
Samsung R&D Institute Poland.
cal machine translation, and we investigate the use
of monolingual data for NMT.
Language models trained on monolingual data
have played a central role in statistical machine
translation since the ﬁrst IBM models . There are two major reasons for their
importance. Firstly, word-based and phrase-based
translation models make strong independence assumptions, with the probability of translation units
estimated independently from context, and language models, by making different independence
assumptions, can model how well these translation
units ﬁt together. Secondly, the amount of available monolingual data in the target language typically far exceeds the amount of parallel data, and
models typically improve when trained on more
data, or data more similar to the translation task.
In (attentional) encoder-decoder architectures
for neural machine translation , the decoder is essentially an RNN language model that is also conditioned on source context, so the ﬁrst rationale,
adding a language model to compensate for the independence assumptions of the translation model,
does not apply. However, the data argument is still
valid in NMT, and we expect monolingual data to
be especially helpful if parallel data is sparse, or
a poor ﬁt for the translation task, for instance because of a domain mismatch.
In contrast to previous work, which integrates
a separately trained RNN language model into the
NMT model , we explore
strategies to include monolingual training data in
the training process without changing the neural
network architecture. This makes our approach
applicable to different NMT architectures.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• we show that we can improve the machine
translation quality of NMT systems by mixing monolingual target sentences into the
training set.
• we investigate two different methods to ﬁll
the source side of monolingual training instances: using a dummy source sentence, and
using a source sentence obtained via backtranslation, which we call synthetic. We ﬁnd
that the latter is more effective.
• we successfully adapt NMT models to a new
domain by ﬁne-tuning with either monolingual or parallel in-domain data.
Neural Machine Translation
We follow the neural machine translation architecture by Bahdanau et al. , which we will
brieﬂy summarize here. However, we note that our
approach is not speciﬁc to this architecture.
The neural machine translation system is implemented as an encoder-decoder network with recurrent neural networks.
The encoder is a bidirectional neural network
with gated recurrent units 
that reads an input sequence x = (x1, ..., xm)
and calculates a forward sequence of hidden
states (−→h 1, ..., −→h m), and a backward sequence
(←−h 1, ..., ←−h m). The hidden states −→h j and ←−h j are
concatenated to obtain the annotation vector hj.
The decoder is a recurrent neural network that
predicts a target sequence y = (y1, ..., yn). Each
word yi is predicted based on a recurrent hidden
state si, the previously predicted word yi−1, and
a context vector ci. ci is computed as a weighted
sum of the annotations hj. The weight of each
annotation hj is computed through an alignment
model αij, which models the probability that yi is
aligned to xj. The alignment model is a singlelayer feedforward neural network that is learned
jointly with the rest of the network through backpropagation.
A detailed description can be found in . Training is performed on a
parallel corpus with stochastic gradient descent.
For translation, a beam search with small beam
size is employed.
NMT Training with Monolingual
Training Data
In machine translation, more monolingual data
(or monolingual data more similar to the test set)
serves to improve the estimate of the prior probability p(T) of the target sentence T, before taking the source sentence S into account. In contrast to , who train separate
language models on monolingual training data and
incorporate them into the neural network through
shallow or deep fusion, we propose techniques
to train the main NMT model with monolingual
data, exploiting the fact that encoder-decoder neural networks already condition the probability distribution of the next target word on the previous
target words. We describe two strategies to do this:
providing monolingual training examples with an
empty (or dummy) source sentence, or providing
monolingual training data with a synthetic source
sentence that is obtained from automatically translating the target sentence into the source language,
which we will refer to as back-translation.
Dummy Source Sentences
The ﬁrst technique we employ is to treat monolingual training examples as parallel examples with
empty source side, essentially adding training examples whose context vector ci is uninformative,
and for which the network has to fully rely on
the previous target words for its prediction. This
could be conceived as a form of dropout , with the difference that the training instances that have the context vector dropped
out constitute novel training data.
We can also
conceive of this setup as multi-task learning, with
the two tasks being translation when the source
is known, and language modelling when it is unknown.
During training, we use both parallel and monolingual training examples in the ratio 1-to-1, and
randomly shufﬂe them. We deﬁne an epoch as one
iteration through the parallel data set, and resample from the monolingual data set for every epoch.
We pair monolingual sentences with a single-word
dummy source side <null> to allow processing of
both parallel and monolingual training examples
with the same network graph.1 For monolingual
minibatches2, we freeze the network parameters
of the encoder and the attention model.
One problem with this integration of monolin-
1One could force the context vector ci to be 0 for monolingual training instances, but we found that this does not solve
the main problem with this approach, discussed below.
2For efﬁciency, Bahdanau et al. sort sets of 20
minibatches according to length. This also groups monolingual training instances together.
gual data is that we cannot arbitrarily increase the
ratio of monolingual training instances, or ﬁnetune a model with only monolingual training data,
because different output layer parameters are optimal for the two tasks, and the network ‘unlearns’
its conditioning on the source context if the ratio
of monolingual training instances is too high.
Synthetic Source Sentences
To ensure that the output layer remains sensitive to
the source context, and that good parameters are
not unlearned from monolingual data, we propose
to pair monolingual training instances with a synthetic source sentence from which a context vector can be approximated. We obtain these through
back-translation, i.e. an automatic translation of
the monolingual target text into the source language.
During training, we mix synthetic parallel text
into the original (human-translated) parallel text
and do not distinguish between the two: no network parameters are frozen. Importantly, only the
source side of these additional training examples
is synthetic, and the target side comes from the
monolingual corpus.
Evaluation
We evaluate NMT training on parallel text,
additional
monolingual
English↔German
Turkish→English,
English↔German,
English→German,
Turkish→English.
Data and Methods
We use Groundhog3 as the implementation of the
NMT system for all experiments . We generally follow the
settings and training procedure described by Sennrich et al. .
For English↔German, we report case-sensitive
BLEU on detokenized text with mteval-v13a.pl for
comparison to ofﬁcial WMT and IWSLT results.
For Turkish→English, we report case-sensitive
BLEU on tokenized text with multi-bleu.perl for
comparison to results by Gülçehre et al. .
Gülçehre et al. determine the network
vocabulary based on the parallel training data,
3github.com/sebastien-j/LV_groundhog
WMTparallel
WITparallel
WMTmono_de
160 000 000
WMTsynth_de
WMTmono_en
118 000 000
WMTsynth_en
Table 1: English↔German training data.
and replace out-of-vocabulary words with a special UNK symbol. They remove monolingual sentences with more than 10% UNK symbols. In contrast, we represent unseen words as sequences of
subword units , and can represent any additional training data with the existing network vocabulary that was learned on the
parallel data. In all experiments, the network vocabulary remains ﬁxed.
English↔German
We use all parallel training data provided by WMT
2015 4. We use the News Crawl
corpora as additional training data for the experiments with monolingual data.
The amount of
training data is shown in Table 1.
Baseline models are trained for a week. Ensembles are sampled from the last 4 saved models of
training (saved at 12h-intervals). Each model is
ﬁne-tuned with ﬁxed embeddings for 12 hours.
For the experiments with synthetic parallel
data, we back-translate a random sample of
3 600 000 sentences from the German monolingual data set into English. The German→English
system used for this is the baseline system
(parallel). Translation took about a week on
an NVIDIA Titan Black GPU. For experiments
in German→English, we back-translate 4 200 000
monolingual English sentences into German, using the English→German system +synthetic.
Note that we always use single models for backtranslation, not ensembles.
We leave it to future work to explore how sensitive NMT training
with synthetic data is to the quality of the backtranslation.
We tokenize and truecase the training data, and
represent rare words via BPE in performing BPE on the joint vocabulary
with 89 500 merge operations. The network vo-
4 
Gigawordmono
177 000 000
Gigawordsynth
Table 2: Turkish→English training data.
cabulary size is 90 000.
We also perform experiments on the IWSLT
15 test sets to investigate a cross-domain setting.5
The test sets consist of TED talk transcripts. As indomain training data, IWSLT provides the WIT3
parallel corpus , which also
consists of TED talks.
Turkish→English
We use data provided for the IWSLT 14 machine
translation track , namely the
WIT3 parallel corpus , which
consists of TED talks, and the SETimes corpus
 .6
After removal of
sentence pairs which contain empty lines or lines
with a length ratio above 9, we retain 320 000 sentence pairs of training data. For the experiments
with monolingual training data, we use the English LDC Gigaword corpus (Fifth Edition). The
amount of training data is shown in Table 2. With
only 320 000 sentences of parallel data available
for training, this is a much lower-resourced translation setting than English↔German.
Gülçehre et al. segment the Turkish text
with the morphology tool Zemberek, followed by
a disambiguation of the morphological analysis
 , and removal of non-surface tokens produced by the analysis. We use the same
preprocessing7. For both Turkish and English, we
represent rare words (or morphemes in the case of
Turkish) as character bigram sequences .
The 20 000 most frequent words
(morphemes) are left unsegmented. The networks
have a vocabulary size of 23 000 symbols.
we back-translate a random sample of
3 200 000 sentences from Gigaword. We use an
English→Turkish NMT system trained with the
same settings as the Turkish→English baseline
5 
6 
7github.com/orhanf/zemberekMorphTR
We found overﬁtting to be a bigger problem
than with the larger English↔German data set,
and follow Gülçehre et al. in using Gaussian noise (stddev 0.01) , and
dropout on the output layer (p=0.5) . We also use early stopping, based on BLEU
measured every three hours on tst2010, which we
treat as development set. For Turkish→English,
we use gradient clipping with threshold 5, following Gülçehre et al. , in contrast to the threshold 1 that we use for English↔German, following
Jean et al. .
English→German WMT 15
Table 3 shows English→German results with
WMT training and test data. We ﬁnd that mixing
parallel training data with monolingual data with a
dummy source side in a ratio of 1-1 improves quality by 0.4–0.5 BLEU for the single system, 1 BLEU
for the ensemble. We train the system for twice
as long as the baseline to provide the training algorithm with a similar amount of parallel training
instances. To ensure that the quality improvement
is due to the monolingual training instances, and
not just increased training time, we also continued
training our baseline system for another week, but
saw no improvements in BLEU.
Including synthetic data during training is very
effective, and yields an improvement over our
baseline by 2.8–3.4 BLEU.
Our best ensemble
system also outperforms a syntax-based baseline
 by 1.2–2.1 BLEU.
We also substantially outperform NMT results reported by Jean et al. and Luong et al.
 , who previously reported SOTA result.8
We note that the difference is particularly large
for single systems, since our ensemble is not as
diverse as that of Luong et al. , who used
8 independently trained ensemble components,
whereas we sampled 4 ensemble components from
the same training run.
English→German IWSLT 15
Table 4 shows English→German results on
IWSLT test sets. IWSLT test sets consist of TED
talks, and are thus very dissimilar from the WMT
8Luong et al. report 20.9 BLEU (tokenized) on
newstest2014 with a single model, and 23.0 BLEU with an
ensemble of 8 models. Our best single system achieves a tokenized BLEU (as opposed to untokenized scores reported in
Table 3) of 23.8, and our ensemble reaches 25.0 BLEU.
training instances
newstest2014
newstest2015
syntax-based 
Neural MT 
37m (parallel)
+monolingual
49m (parallel) / 49m (monolingual)
+synthetic
44m (parallel) / 36m (synthetic)
Table 3: English→German translation performance (BLEU) on WMT training/test sets. Ens-4: ensemble
of 4 models. Number of training instances varies due to differences in training time and speed.
ﬁne-tuning
NMT (single model)
NMT (ensemble of 8)
+synthetic
2+WITmono_de
WMTparallel / WITmono
2+WITsynth_de
2+WITparallel
Table 4: English→German translation performance (BLEU) on IWSLT test sets (TED talks). Single
test sets, which are news texts. We investigate if
monolingual training data is especially valuable if
it can be used to adapt a model to a new genre or
domain, speciﬁcally adapting a system trained on
WMT data to translating TED talks.
Systems 1 and 2 correspond to systems in Table
3, trained only on WMT data. System 2, trained on
parallel and synthetic WMT data, obtains a BLEU
score of 25.5 on tst2015. We observe that even a
small amount of ﬁne-tuning9, i.e. continued training of an existing model, on WIT data can adapt
a system trained on WMT data to the TED domain. By back-translating the monolingual WIT
corpus (using a German→English system trained
on WMT data, i.e. without in-domain knowledge),
we obtain the synthetic data set WITsynth. A single epoch of ﬁne-tuning on WITsynth (system 4) results in a BLEU score of 26.7 on tst2015, or an improvement of 1.2 BLEU. We observed no improvement from ﬁne-tuning on WITmono, the monolingual TED corpus with dummy input (system 3).
These adaptation experiments with monolingual data are slightly artiﬁcial in that parallel training data is available.
System 5, which is ﬁnetuned with the original WIT training data, obtains
a BLEU of 28.4 on tst2015, which is an improve-
9We leave the word embeddings ﬁxed for ﬁne-tuning.
PBSMT 
NMT 
+shallow fusion
+deep fusion
+synthetic
+synthetic (ensemble of 4)
German→English translation performance (BLEU) on WMT training/test sets (newstest2014; newstest2015).
ment of 2.9 BLEU. While it is unsurprising that
in-domain parallel data is most valuable, we ﬁnd
it encouraging that NMT domain adaptation with
monolingual data is also possible, and effective,
since there are settings where only monolingual
in-domain data is available.
The best results published on this dataset are
by Luong and Manning , obtained with an
ensemble of 8 independently trained models. In
a comparison of single-model results, we outperform their model on tst2013 by 1 BLEU.
German→English WMT 15
Results for German→English on the WMT 15
data sets are shown in Table 5. Like for the reverse translation direction, we see substantial improvements (3.6–3.7 BLEU) from adding monolingual training data with synthetic source sentences, which is substantially bigger than the improvement observed with deep fusion ; our ensemble outperforms the previous
state of the art on newstest2015 by 2.3 BLEU.
Turkish→English IWSLT 14
Table 6 shows results for Turkish→English. On
average, we see an improvement of 0.6 BLEU on
the test sets from adding monolingual data with a
dummy source side in a 1-1 ratio10, although we
note a high variance between different test sets.
With synthetic training data (Gigawordsynth), we
outperform the baseline by 2.7 BLEU on average,
and also outperform results obtained via shallow
or deep fusion by Gülçehre et al. by 0.5
BLEU on average. To compare to what extent synthetic data has a regularization effect, even without
novel training data, we also back-translate the target side of the parallel training text to obtain the
training corpus parallelsynth. Mixing the original
parallel corpus with parallelsynth (ratio 1-1) gives
some improvement over the baseline (1.7 BLEU
on average), but the novel monolingual training
data (Gigawordmono) gives higher improvements,
despite being out-of-domain in relation to the test
sets. We speculate that novel in-domain monolingual data would lead to even higher improvements.
Back-translation Quality for Synthetic
One question that our previous experiments leave
open is how the quality of the automatic backtranslation affects training with synthetic data. To
investigate this question, we back-translate the
same German monolingual corpus with three different German→English systems:
• with our baseline system and greedy decoding
• with our baseline system and beam search
(beam size 12). This is the same system used
for the experiments in Table 3.
10We also experimented with higher ratios of monolingual
data, but this led to decreased BLEU scores.
back-translation
parallel (greedy)
parallel (beam 12)
synthetic (beam 12)
ensemble of 3
ensemble of 12
English→German translation performance (BLEU) on WMT training/test sets (newstest2014; newstest2015). Systems differ in how
the synthetic training data is obtained. Ensembles
of 4 models (unless speciﬁed otherwise).
• with the German→English system that was
itself trained with synthetic data (beam size
BLEU scores of the German→English systems, and of the resulting English→German systems that are trained on the different backtranslations, are shown in Table 7. The quality
of the German→English back-translation differs
substantially, with a difference of 6 BLEU on newstest2015. Regarding the English→German systems trained on the different synthetic corpora, we
ﬁnd that the 6 BLEU difference in back-translation
quality leads to a 0.6–0.7 BLEU difference in
translation quality. This is balanced by the fact
that we can increase the speed of back-translation
by trading off some quality, for instance by reducing beam size, and we leave it to future research
to explore how much the amount of synthetic data
affects translation quality.
We also show results for an ensemble of 3 models (the best single model of each training run),
and 12 models (all 4 models of each training run).
Thanks to the increased diversity of the ensemble
components, these ensembles outperform the ensembles of 4 models that were all sampled from
the same training run, and we obtain another improvement of 0.8–1.0 BLEU.
Contrast to Phrase-based SMT
The back-translation of monolingual target data
into the source language to produce synthetic parallel text has been previously explored for phrasebased SMT . While our approach is technically
similar, synthetic parallel data fulﬁlls novel roles
baseline 
deep fusion 
parallelsynth
parallel/parallelsynth
Gigawordmono
parallel/Gigawordmono
Gigawordsynth
parallel/Gigawordsynth
Table 6: Turkish→English translation performance (tokenized BLEU) on IWSLT test sets (TED talks).
Single models. Number of training instances varies due to early stopping.
+synthetic
PBSMT gain
Phrase-based
(English→German) on WMT test sets (average of newstest201{4,5}), and IWSLT test sets
(average of tst201{3,4,5}), and average BLEU
gain from adding synthetic data for both PBSMT
To explore the relative effectiveness of backtranslated
phrase-based
NMT, we train two phrase-based SMT systems
with Moses , using only
WMTparallel, or both WMTparallel and WMTsynth_de
for training the translation and reordering model.
Both systems contain the same language model,
a 5-gram Kneser-Ney model trained on all available WMT data.
We use the baseline features
described by Haddow et al. .
Results are shown in Table 8. In phrase-based
SMT, we ﬁnd that the use of back-translated training data has a moderate positive effect on the
WMT test sets (+0.7 BLEU), but not on the IWSLT
test sets. This is in line with the expectation that
the main effect of back-translated data for phrasebased SMT is domain adaptation . Both the WMT test sets and the
News Crawl corpora which we used as monolingual data come from the same source, a web crawl
of newspaper articles.11 In contrast, News Crawl
is out-of-domain for the IWSLT test sets.
In contrast to phrase-based SMT, which can
11The WMT test sets are held-out from News Crawl.
training time (training instances ·106)
cross-entropy
parallel (dev)
parallel (train)
parallelsynth (dev)
parallelsynth (train)
Gigawordmono (dev)
Gigawordmono (train)
Gigawordsynth (dev)
Gigawordsynth (train)
Figure 1: Turkish→English training and development set (tst2010) cross-entropy as a function of
training time (number of training instances) for
different systems.
make use of monolingual data via the language
model, NMT has so far not been able to use monolingual data to great effect, and without requiring architectural changes. We ﬁnd that the effect
of synthetic parallel data is not limited to domain
adaptation, and that even out-of-domain synthetic
data improves NMT quality, as in our evaluation
on IWSLT. The fact that the synthetic data is more
effective on the WMT test sets (+2.9 BLEU) than
on the IWSLT test sets (+1.2 BLEU) supports the
hypothesis that domain adaptation contributes to
the effectiveness of adding synthetic data to NMT
It is an important ﬁnding that back-translated
data, which is mainly effective for domain adaptation in phrase-based SMT, is more generally useful in NMT, and has positive effects that go beyond
domain adaptation. In the next section, we will investigate further reasons for its effectiveness.
training time (training instances ·106)
cross-entropy
WMTparallel (dev)
WMTparallel (train)
WMTsynth (dev)
WMTsynth (train)
Figure 2: English→German training and development set (newstest2013) cross-entropy as a function of training time (number of training instances)
for different systems.
We previously indicated that overﬁtting is a concern with our baseline system, especially on small
data sets of several hundred thousand training
sentences, despite the regularization employed.
This overﬁtting is illustrated in Figure 1, which
plots training and development set cross-entropy
by training time for Turkish→English models.
For comparability, we measure training set crossentropy for all models on the same random sample of the parallel training set.
We can see
that the model trained on only parallel training data quickly overﬁts, while all three monolingual data sets (parallelsynth, Gigawordmono, or
Gigawordsynth) delay overﬁtting, and give better perplexity on the development set.
best development set cross-entropy is reached by
Gigawordsynth.
cross-entropy
English→German, comparing the system trained
on only parallel data and the system that includes
synthetic training data. Since more training data is
available for English→German, there is no indication that overﬁtting happens during the ﬁrst 40
million training instances (or 7 days of training);
while both systems obtain comparable training
set cross-entropies, the system with synthetic data
reaches a lower cross-entropy on the development
set. One explanation for this is the domain effect
discussed in the previous section.
A central theoretical expectation is that monolingual target-side data improves the model’s ﬂusystem
produced attested natural
+synthetic
Number of words in system output that do not occur in parallel training data
(countref = 1168), and proportion that is attested
in data, or natural according to native speaker.
English→German; newstest2015; ensemble systems.
ency, its ability to produce natural target-language
sentences.
As a proxy to sentence-level ﬂuency, we investigate word-level ﬂuency, specifically words produced as sequences of subword
units, and whether NMT systems trained with additional monolingual data produce more natural
words. For instance, the English→German systems translate the English phrase civil rights protections as a single compound, composed of three
subword units: Bürger|rechts|schutzes12, and we
analyze how many of these multi-unit words that
the translation systems produce are well-formed
German words.
We compare the number of words in the system
output for the newstest2015 test set which are produced via subword units, and that do not occur in
the parallel training corpus. We also count how
many of them are attested in the full monolingual
corpus or the reference translation, which we all
consider ‘natural’. Additionally, the main authors,
a native speaker of German, annotated a random
subset (n = 100) of unattested words of each system according to their naturalness13, distinguishing between natural German words (or names)
such as Literatur|klassen ‘literature classes’, and
nonsensical ones such as *As|best|atten (a missspelling of Astbestmatten ‘asbestos mats’).
In the results (Table 9), we see that the systems trained with additional monolingual or synthetic data have a higher proportion of novel words
attested in the non-parallel data, and a higher
proportion that is deemed natural by our annotator. This supports our expectation that additional
monolingual data improves the (word-level) ﬂuency of the NMT system.
12Subword boundaries are marked with ‘|’.
13For the annotation, the words were blinded regarding the
system that produced them.
Related Work
To our knowledge, the integration of monolingual
data for pure neural machine translation architectures was ﬁrst investigated by , who train monolingual language models independently, and then integrate them during decoding through rescoring of the beam (shallow fusion), or by adding the recurrent hidden state of
the language model to the decoder state of the
encoder-decoder network, with an additional controller mechanism that controls the magnitude of
the LM signal (deep fusion). In deep fusion, the
controller parameters and output parameters are
tuned on further parallel training data, but the language model parameters are ﬁxed during the ﬁnetuning stage. Jean et al. also report on
experiments with reranking of NMT output with
a 5-gram language model, but improvements are
small (between 0.1–0.5 BLEU).
The production of synthetic parallel texts bears
resemblance to data augmentation techniques used
in computer vision, where datasets are often augmented with rotated, scaled, or otherwise distorted
variants of the (limited) training set .
The main difference is that self-training typically
refers to scenario where the training set is enhanced with training instances with artiﬁcially
produced output labels, whereas we start with
human-produced output (i.e. the translation), and
artiﬁcially produce an input. We expect that this
is more robust towards noise in the automatic
translation.
Improving NMT with monolingual
source data, following similar work on phrasebased SMT , remains possible future work.
Domain adaptation of neural networks via continued training has been shown to be effective for
neural language models by , and in work parallel to ours, for neural
translation models .
We are the ﬁrst to show that we can effectively
adapt neural translation models with monolingual
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose two simple methods to
use monolingual training data during training of
NMT systems, with no changes to the network
architecture.
Providing training examples with
dummy source context was successful to some extent, but we achieve substantial gains in all tasks,
and new SOTA results, via back-translation of
monolingual target data into the source language,
and treating this synthetic data as additional training data. We also show that small amounts of indomain monolingual data, back-translated into the
source language, can be effectively used for domain adaptation. In our analysis, we identiﬁed domain adaptation effects, a reduction of overﬁtting,
and improved ﬂuency as reasons for the effectiveness of using monolingual data for training.
While our experiments did make use of monolingual training data, we only used a small random sample of the available data, especially for
the experiments with synthetic parallel data. It is
conceivable that larger synthetic data sets, or data
sets obtained via data selection, will provide bigger performance beneﬁts.
Because we do not change the neural network architecture to integrate monolingual training data, our approach can be easily applied to
other NMT systems. We expect that the effectiveness of our approach not only varies with the quality of the MT system used for back-translation, but
also depends on the amount (and similarity to the
test set) of available parallel and monolingual data,
and the extent of overﬁtting of the baseline model.
Future work will explore the effectiveness of our
approach in more settings.
Acknowledgments
The research presented in this publication was
conducted in cooperation with Samsung Electronics Polska sp. z o.o. - Samsung R&D Institute Poland.
This project received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement
645452 (QT21).