Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with
Observational Cosmology
Juan Garcia-Bellido1,2, Troels Haugbølle1,3
1 Instituto de F´ısica Te´orica UAM-CSIC, Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid,
Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain,
2 Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California Santa Barbara, CA
93106-4030,
3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus C,
E-mail: , 
The possibility that we live in a special place in the universe, close to the
centre of a large void, seems an appealing alternative to the prevailing interpretation
of the acceleration of the universe in terms of a ΛCDM model with a dominant dark
energy component. In this paper we confront the asymptotically ﬂat Lemaitre-Tolman-
Bondi (LTB) models with a series of observations, from Type Ia Supernovae to Cosmic
Microwave Background and Baryon Acoustic Oscillations data. We propose two concrete LTB models describing a local void in which the only arbitrary functions are the
radial dependence of the matter density ΩM and the Hubble expansion rate H. We ﬁnd
that all observations can be accommodated within 1 sigma, for our models with 4 or 5
independent parameters. The best ﬁt models have a χ2 very close to that of the ΛCDM
model. A general Fortran program for comparing LTB models with cosmological observations, that has been used to make the parameter scan in this paper, is made public, and can be downloaded at 
together with IDL routines for creating the Likelihood plots. We perform a simple
Bayesian analysis and show that one cannot exclude the hypothesis that we live within
a large local void of an otherwise Einstein-de Sitter model.
PACS numbers: 98.80.Cq
 
Submitted to: JCAP
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
1. Introduction
Cosmology has been traditionally prone to speculation, a science which has had more of
wishful thinking than actual deduction. Even today, with the extraordinary revolution
in observational cosmology, there are many assumptions we have to take for granted, in
order to interpret the present observations. In particular, the present abundance of less
that 5% of critical density in matter we know and measure in the laboratory, i.e. the
baryons we are made of, compared to the 23% of unknown “dark matter” and the 72%
of even more unknown “dark energy”, seems a rather peculiar and perhaps suspicious
composition for the universe, given their disparate evolution rates. Are we sure we have
now the correct picture of the universe?
We live in a very isolated part of the universe and have not reached that much
beyond our solar system. All we can say about the universe has been inferred from
observations done under very general assumptions; but some of them, no matter how
fundamental they may seem, may be wrong. It is worth pointing out how Einstein failed
to make one of the most fundamental predictions of his new theory of general relativity,
and had to introduce an “absolute” in the theory −the cosmological constant −much
to his regret, because he had the prejudice, supported by incomplete observational data,
that we lived in a static universe without a beginning or an end. Soon after the discovery
of the “recession” of galaxies by Hubble did he renounce to his prejudice on the validity
of the Perfect Cosmological Principle, which assumed maximally symmetric spacetimes. For 70 years cosmologists have worked under the assumption of the less strict
Cosmological Principle, which imposes maximal symmetry (homogeneity and isotropy)
only for the spatial sections. But are these symmetries consistent with observations? It
is evident to anyone that looks at the sky in a clear night far away from city lights that
the universe is not homogeneous and isotropic.
It has usually been argued that these fundamental symmetries should only be
“expected to be valid on very large scales”, but how large are large scales? In fact,
the distribution of matter in our local vicinity, i.e. within several Mpc, is very far from
homogeneous; density contrasts reach enormous values not only at the centres of galaxies
but also on larger scales like clusters and superclusters, stretching over hundreds of Mpc.
So, how far do we have to go before we reach homogeneity? Certainly present galaxy
catalogues are not really there yet, and it has been speculated that perhaps with the
next generation of deep catalogues like DES we will ﬁnally reach the homogeneity
But, if we do not live in a homogeneous universe, how do we interpret the
observations we have of objects whose light has travelled a signiﬁcant fraction of the
age of the universe in order to reach us? Our present assumption is that, in practice,
the intervening inhomogeneity averages out and everything works as if we lived in a
homogeneous universe. For several decades this assumption has been a valid one, and has
provided conﬁdence into the construction of the so-called Standard Model of Cosmology.
It is only now that we begin to have suﬃciently good cosmological data, and
certainly will have even better data in the near future, that we can be critical
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
and pose the appropriate questions.
The issue of homogeneity of the universe has
been often dismissed because of the apparent extraordinary isotropy of the cosmic
microwave background. However, any mathematician can readily show that isotropy
and homogeneity are very diﬀerent sets of symmetries and one does not imply the other.
Nevertheless, if we impose the further assumption, usually stated as the Copernican
Principle, that any point in space should be equivalent to any other, i.e. that we don’t
live in any special place in the universe, then a mathematical theorem states that if all
equal observers see the universe isotropic around them, then the universe must be not
only isotropic but also homogeneous. What remains to be proven is that all observers
are in fact equivalent in the patch of the universe we call the observable universe. Some
will be near a large concentration of mass and others will be in large voids. Certainly
what these two types of observers see will diﬀer from what an idealised observer living
in a perfectly homogeneous universe would see. Unfortunately, we have never spoken to
anyone at the other side of the universe.
The advantage of the present state of Cosmology is that we can begin to pose those
questions and hope to get concrete answers, while just ten years ago it would have been
futile. Moreover, like with the ﬁrst inclusion of the cosmological constant in the theory,
almost 100 years ago, the physics community is very much puzzled about the nature of
this so-called vacuum energy. Its properties defy our basic understanding of quantum
physics and, moreover, it reminds us suspiciously of the Maxwellian ether, which led
the way (via its disappearance) to a new understanding of physical reality.
the question straight, are we sure we live in an accelerated universe which is driven by
some unknown vacuum energy? Could it be that we have misinterpreted our superb
cosmological data and what those photons coming from afar are telling us is something
completely diﬀerent?
The last few years we have seen a tremendous burst of activity, both at the
theoretical and observational level, in order to disentangle the subtle intricacies of the
actual data sets from their interpretation. As with any hard science (and Cosmology
is indeed ﬁnally becoming one), such enterprises can be approached only via further
observational crosschecks. It is no longer true that “astrophysicists are often in error,
but never in doubt”, as Lev Landau once said to annoy his colleague Yakov Zel’dovich
 . We can now propose new ways to measure more observables in a wider theoretical
construction.
Perhaps it is time to explore the troubled waters of non-maximally
symmetric spatial sections of the universe.
In particular, since we indeed observe a
high degree of isotropy in the cosmic microwave background, we can start by exploring
the simpliﬁed version of a spherically symmetric inhomogeneous model, which comes
under the name of the Lemaˆıtre-Tolman-Bondi (LTB) model .
While ordinary Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) space-times are characterised
by two functions, the Hubble rate H(t) and the density parameter Ω(t), which depend
on cosmic time but are independent of the radial coordinate, the LTB models have also
two arbitrary functions, H(r, t) and Ω(r, t), which depend on both time and the radial
coordinate. The Einstein equations for the LTB model are suﬃciently simple that they
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
can be integrated exactly in terms of two arbitrary boundary conditions. Thus, the LTB
models have lower symmetries, and thus more freedom, but nevertheless make speciﬁc
predictions about the behaviour of light along geodesics of the new metric. Therefore,
one can evaluate the corresponding observables, like cosmological distances (or ratios
of distances), from the available sets of data. Surprisingly, as we will show in the next
sections, present cosmological data does not yet seem able to exclude with conﬁdence
a universe which is not exactly homogeneous. This should not come as a surprise, we
do live in an (locally) inhomogeneous universe, some say that within a large underdense
void similar to that which induces a cold spot in the CMB 
so why should we assume global homogeneity? In fact, the possibility that we happen
to live in the centre of the world was advocated long ago in Ref. , based on the
stochastic inﬂation formalism . What is surprising is that within this framework
one can account for (almost) all observational evidence without having to introduce
an unknown in the theory, an absolute, whose properties are highly mysterious, not to
mention the alternative highly artiﬁcial and ad hoc modiﬁcations of gravity on the very
large scales.
In this paper we propose an inhomogeneous model of the universe, with a local
void size of a few Gpc and asymptotically Einstein-de Sitter, and then use the present
sets of data (CMB, LSS, BAO, SNIa, HST, Ages, etc.) to constrain its parameters. In
Section 2 we describe the general LTB metric, the Einstein equations and the deﬁnitions
of cosmic distances. We also give a novel series expansion that allows one to integrate
to arbitrary precision the Einstein equations for arbitrary functions H0(r) and ΩM(r).
We then describe a speciﬁc model with a concrete form of these two functions that are
plausible but simple matches to observations, and show the diﬀerent (longitudinal and
transverse) rates of expansion and the apparent acceleration. We also show that the
comoving size of the sound horizon depends on the distance to the centre of the void
in the LTB model, and relate it to the expansion rates at diﬀerent redshifts. This is a
prerequisite for making a realistic comparison with Baryon Acoustic Oscillation data.
In Sect. 3 we present the data sets we use to constrain the model, with the subtleties
needed to correctly interpret these in terms of the model. In Sect. 4 we give the main
results and present a Bayesian analysis to ascertain the goodness of ﬁt of the model by
comparing it with a standard ΛCDM model with variable (but constant) equation of
state parameter w. In Sect. 5 we give the conclusions.
2. The LTB model
The most general (cosmological) metric satisfying spherically symmetric spatial sections
can be written as
ds2 = −dt2 + X2(r, t) dr2 + A2(r, t) dΩ2 ,
where dΩ2 = dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2. Assuming a spherically symmetric matter source,
ν = −ρM(r, t) δµ
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
the (0, r) component of the Einstein equations,
implies X(r, t)
1 −k(r), with an arbitrary function k(r) playing the role of the spatial
curvature parameter.
Note that we recover the FRW metric imposing the extra
homogeneity conditions,
A(r, t) = a(t) r ,
k(r) = k r2 .
The other components of Einstein equations read 
AA′ + k′(r)
AA′ = 8π G ρM ,
˙A2 + 2A ¨A + k(r) = 0 .
Integrating the last equation, we get
with another arbitrary function F(r), playing the role of eﬀective matter content, which
substituted into the ﬁrst equation gives
A′A2(r, t) = 8π G ρM(r, t) .
Combining these two equations we arrive at
A′ = −4π G
which determines the “eﬀective” acceleration in these inhomogeneous cosmologies. Note
that the notion of acceleration becomes ambiguous since backward proper time has both
a time and a spatial component.
The boundary condition functions F(r) and k(r) are speciﬁed by the nature of the
inhomogeneities through the local Hubble rate, the local matter density and the local
spatial curvature,
0(r) ΩM(r) A3
where functions with subscripts 0 correspond to present values, A0(r) = A(r, t0) and
H0(r) = H(r, t0).
With these deﬁnitions, the r-dependent Hubble rate is written
as 
H2(r, t) = H2
+ (1 −ΩM(r))
Inhomogeneities come in two diﬀerent classes: in the matter distribution or in the
expansion rate, which are mutually independent. Moreover, the extra gauge freedom of
the synchronous comoving gauge allows us to choose
A(r, t0) = A0(r) = r .
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Then we can integrate the Hamiltonian constraint equation (10) to provide comoving
time as a function of the radial coordinate,
H0(r)t(r) =
Z A(r,t)/A0(r)
ΩM(r)/x + 1 −ΩM(r)
1 + ΩM(r)A0(r)
ΩK(r)A(r, t) −ΩM(r)
ΩK(r)A(r, t)
ΩM(r)A0(r) ,
where ΩK(r) = 1 −ΩM(r). In particular, setting A(r, t) = A0(r) we ﬁnd the current
age of the universe
H0(r)tBB(r) =
ΩK(r) −ΩM(r)
For an observer located at the centre r = 0, by symmetry, incoming light travels
along radial null geodesics, ds2 = dΩ2 = 0, and time decreases when going away,
dt/dr < 0, and we have
which, together with the redshift equation,
d log(1 + z)
can be written as a parametric set of diﬀerential equations, with N = log(1 + z) being
the eﬀective number of e-folds before the present time,
dN = −A′(r, t)
from which the functions t(z) and r(z) can be obtained. From there one can immediately
obtain both the luminosity distance, the comoving distance and the angular diameter
distance as a function of redshift,
dL(z) = (1 + z)2A[r(z), t(z)] ,
dC(z) = (1 + z) A[r(z), t(z)] ,
dA(z) = A[r(z), t(z)] ,
2.1. Series solution
In order to integrate out the redshift dependence it will be useful to make a series
expansion of the cosmic time variable t(r) as a function of the space-dependent scale
factor A(r, t). For this purpose we will deﬁne new variables
ΩM(r) H0(r)
ΩK(r) t(r) = 2
3(δ a)3/2 ,
A0(r) = δ A
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
where δ = ρc/ρM −1 is the density contrast ratio and a(t) is the Einstein-de Sitter
(FRW) scale factor,
δ(r) = ΩK(r)
With these deﬁnitions, the time integral (12) can be written as y =
x(1 + x)−ln[√x+
√1 + x], which can be expanded in series and inverted. With the deﬁnitions
g(z) = z + 1
3031875z5 + O(z6) ,
1 + ΩM(r)/2
ΩM(r)(1 −ΩM(r)) ,
we can write the solution as a power series, whose coeﬃcients can be calculated with
arbitrary precision,
A(r, t) = r
δ g(a δ) ,
˙A(r, t) = 2
δ a δ g′(a δ) ,
A′(r, t) = r
g(a δ)h(r) + 2
3 a δ g′(a δ) f(r)
˙A′(r, t) = 2
a δ g′(a δ)h(r) + 2
3 a δ g′(a δ) f(r) + 2
3(a δ)2g′′(a δ) f(r)
¨A(r, t) = −
2A2(r, t) ,
¨A′(r, t) = F(r)A′(r, t)
2A2(r, t) .
These functions allow us to construct any other observable.
For instance, the
transverse and longitudinal rates of expansion can be written as
HT(r, t) ≡
HL(r, t) ≡
A′(r, t) .
Note that in general these two functions will be diﬀerent, and they enter into other
observables. We can also construct quantities like the “eﬀective” acceleration parameter
q(z) = −1 + d ln H(z)
d ln(1 + z) ,
where H(z) is in fact HL(r(z), t(z)).
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
One could also deﬁne an eﬀective equation of state parameter
w(z) ≡p(z)
ρ(z) = −1 + 1
0(r) −ΩM(r)(1 + z)3i
d ln(1 + z)
where H(z) is here HT(r(z), t(z)).
2.2. Parametric solution
At ﬁxed r the r-dependent Hubble rate Eq. (10) is just like the normal Friedmann
equation, and the standard way to explicitly solve for A(r, t) is to use an additional
parameter η. With the selected gauge the solution is
2[1 −ΩM(r)][cosh(η) −1]A0(r)
2[1 −ΩM(r)]3/2[sinh(η) −η]
Given r and t solving Eq. (39) η can be found, and combining Eqs. (38)-(39) with the
Einstein equations we can the derive any necessary quantity.
We have used both the series solution, implemented in a Mathematica notebook,
and the parametric solution, implemented as a Fortran program, to make and double
check all numerical computations in this paper. The Fortran 90 program together with
a set of IDL routines for making likelihood plots is made publicly available and can be
downloaded at 
2.3. The GBH model
Here we deﬁne a new type of LTB model, which is completely speciﬁed by the matter
content ΩM(r) and the rate of expansion H0(r),
ΩM(r) = Ωout +
 1 −tanh[(r −r0)/2∆r]
1 + tanh[r0/2∆r]
H0(r) = Hout +
 1 −tanh[(r −r0)/2∆r]
1 + tanh[r0/2∆r]
which is governed by 6 parameters,
determined by asymptotic ﬂatness
determined by LSS observations
determined by CMB observations
determined by HST observations
characterises the size of the void
characterises the transition to uniformity
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
dA(tBB) [Gpc]
dA(tBB) [Gpc]
Figure 1. The radial dependence of the physical matter density in units of the critical
density (ρm), of our density function (Ωm), that coincides with the usual matter density
at the centre and asymptotically, and of the transverse and longitudinal expansion
rates (HT and HL). The radial axis is the angular diameter distance (dA(r, tBB)), and
everything is taken at the current time for the central observer. To the left (right) is
shown the best ﬁt GBH (constrained) model (see table 2). Also shown to the right is
an example of the density proﬁle of a model with a sharp transition (∆r/r0 = 0.3),
but still within 1-σ of the best ﬁt.
We ﬁx Ωout = 1 and let the other ﬁve parameters vary freely in our parameter scans
(see table 1 for the priors). For instance, a plot of ΩM(r), HT(r) and HL(r) for the two
best ﬁt models, as a function of the angular diameter distance today, dA(r, tBB), can be
seen in Fig. 1‡. Also shown is the density proﬁle of a model with a sharper transition
(∆r/r0 = 0.3), but still within 1-σ of the best ﬁt. This illustrates that observations
allow for shallower density proﬁles close to the origin, and that for the physical matter
density ρM, we naturally get a shell-like transition.
2.4. The constrained GBH model
We have also considered a more constrained model, in which the Big Bang is
homogeneous, that is, the spatial hypersurface at the Big Bang does not depend on
the radial coordinate r. This can be obtained simply using Eq. (13), by a choice of
H0(r) = H0
ΩK(r) −ΩM(r)
so that tBB = c H−1
is universal, for all observers, irrespective of their spatial location.
Note that in this model we have less freedom than in the previous model, since now
there is only one arbitrary function, ΩM(r), and there is one free parameter less.
‡ Note that while apparently this model is similar to that of Ref. , it diﬀers in the details. They ﬁx
their gauge A(r, t) = A0(r) = r at the moment of recombination, while we ﬁx it at the current time,
and they deﬁne their free functions in terms of F(r) and k(r), while we use H(r) and Ω(r).
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
2.5. Apparent acceleration in the light cone
It is yet not clear, if what we observe as a function of redshift, in the form of luminosity
distances to standard candles (e.g. Supernovae Type Ia), angular diameter distances to
standard rulers (e.g. Baryon Acoustic Oscillations), the galaxy power spectrum, galaxy
cluster counts, or other measures of the geometry and mass distribution of the Universe,
are due to modiﬁcations of gravity, an extra energy component, a cosmological constant,
or simply a wrong interpretation of the underlying cosmological model. But as a whole
they represent diﬀerent possible explanations for the “Dark Energy” problem. One of
the main observables, that will help decide between the diﬀerent scenarios in the future,
is the Hubble parameter H(z). Under the assumption that the correct background is a
ﬂat FRW cosmology we can write it 
= (1 + z)3Ωin + (1 −Ωin) exp
d log(1 + z′)(1 + wT,L
where Hin and Ωin are the expansion rate and matter density as observed at z = 0§. By
taking the derivative we can write it as
eﬀ(z) = −1 + 1
−(1 + z)3Ωin
d log[1 + z]
where we have assumed that
−(1 + z)3Ωin > 0. The beauty of Eq. (50) is that
if the observational data indeed is a manifestation of extra energy components, wT,L
has the usual interpretation of a dark energy equation of state, while in the case of
modiﬁed gravity models, or the LTB model that we are considering in this paper, it
can be interpreted as an empirical observational signature. In those case wT,L
eﬀ(z) is a
function that captures the diﬀerence between the expansion rate that we measure, and
the expansion rate that we ascribe to the observed matter density Ωm (see also Eq. 37
for a correct deﬁnition of w in the case of an LTB universe).
It is worthwhile pointing out, that even if there is not an accelerated expansion in
the LTB models we are considering, because data is observed in the light cone, the total
time derivative is 
and an observer can measure an apparent acceleration when the light cone traverses
the central inhomogeneity due to spatial gradients in either the matter density or the
expansion rate. In Fig. 2 we show wT,L
eﬀ(z) for two best ﬁt models. Letting H = HT
and H = HL are both relevant, because diﬀerent observations probe diﬀerent expansion
rates, i.e. as will be seen below, the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation signal depends partly
on HL, while supernova observations are only related to HT through its dependence on
dL = (1 + z)2dA = (1 + z)2 exp(
HTdt). Interestingly, the variation and derivative of
§ Alternatively, in Eq. (50) is written with derivatives of the scale factor a instead of the redshift
z. We advocate using z, as it is an observable, in contrast to a(z). Notice that HT (0, t) = HL(0, t).
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Constrained model with HL
Constrained model with HT
GBH model with HL
GBH model with HT
Figure 2. The apparent acceleration wT,L
eﬀ(z) inferred by applying Eq. (50) and FRW
cosmology as the underlying model to describe the change in the Hubble parameter
(either HT (z) or HL(z)) in the two best ﬁt LTB models.
eﬀ(z) is quite large in the best ﬁt LTB models, showing that a precise low redshift
supernova survey, such as the SDSS Supernova Survey , sensitive to HT, or a ﬁne
grained BAO survey such as PAU , sensitive to HL, could rule out or reinforce
the models in the near future. Conversely, if a disagreement between w as observed
by Supernovae and w as observed through the BAOs is found, this could be a hint of
inhomogeneous expansion rates.
We can directly compute wT,L
eﬀ(z) in the limiting cases z = 0 and z ≫1 for
asymptotically ﬂat LTB models
if z = 0, and H = HT
if z = 0, and H = HL
where we have used that the LTB metric converges asymptotically to a FRW metric
giving dz = −da/a. We see that to have w ≪−1/3 at low z implies either a signiﬁcant
negative gradient in H0(r), or Ωin ∼1.
2.6. Physical scales in the early universe
Many bounds from observational cosmology, such as the sound horizon (a “standard
ruler”), the CMB, and the big bang nucleosynthesis, are derived by considering scales
and processes in the early universe, and are based on the implicit assumption of an
underlying FRW metric. To test LTB models against these observational data we have
to connect distance scales, redshifts, and expansion rates in the early universe to those
observed today.
By construction, at high redshifts the LTB metric converges to a FRW metric, and
the central void disappear (see Eq. 10), and physical results derived for FRW space
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
times still hold in the early universe, even though we are considering an LTB space
time. But starting from an approximately uniform universe at a high redshift ze in the
LTB model, the expansion rate and matter density become gradually inhomogeneous,
and a uniform comoving physical scale l in the early universe at ze, for example the
sound horizon, is not uniform at some later redshift z. In particular the comoving size
at t = t0 = tBB(0) depends on how much relative expansion there has been at diﬀerent
positions since the formation of the uniform scale
l(r(z)) = l(r∞) A(r(z), t0)
A(r(z), t(ze))
A(r∞, t(ze))
where t0 is the time now for the central observer, and r∞is the radial coordinate of an
observer very far away from the void. This is a consequence of deﬁning the comoving
physical scale as the scale measured at t0. If instead we ﬁxed the comoving length scales
to be measured in the early universe at t(ze), then indeed l(r(z)) would be independent
of the observer position. The convenience of the above formula is, that the LTB models
we consider are asymptotically FRW, and we can easily compute comoving scales at
Normal relations determining early universe quantities, such as the redshift at
matter-radiation equality, are essentially based on the Friedmann and conservation
equations to relate cosmological parameters now to the parameters then
H2(z) = H2
ΩM(1 + z)3 + (1 −ΩM)(1 + z)2
ρ(z)a3 = ρ(0)a3
where we have written it for a matter dominated universe. Eq. (10) is the LTB equivalent
to Eq. (54), and since we are considering LTB metrics that asymptotically converge to
FRW metrics the equation for light rays, or null geodesics, (15) at high redshifts have
the usual solution d(1+z) = −da/a, and we can write an asymptotic version of Eq. (10)
that is valid at high redshifts
H2(z) = H2
M (1 + z)3 + (1 −Ωeﬀ
M )(1 + z)2
Heﬀ= H0(ze)
(1 + ze)A(r(ze), t(ze))
and the asymptotic matter density is
M = ΩM(r(ze)) = Ωout = 1
In summary, any quantity at high redshifts in the LTB model can be computed with
the usual formulas valid for a FRW metric, but using the matter density and Hubble
constant given in Eqs. (57)-(58).
3. Observational Data
To assess the viability of the proposed models we have tested them against a set of
current observational data. We divide the data into two classes: Constraining data sets,
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
and prior data. The constraining data sets are actual measurements with errors, that
are used to compute the likelihood of a given model, while the prior data, merely give
ranges inside which the models should be.
3.1. The Cosmic Microwave Background
It is not a priori clear how to compute the spectrum of temperature anisotropies, without
a full perturbation theory for the LTB models, but as shown in section 2.6 we can
compute the comoving distance to the surface of large scattering, and the comoving size
of the sound horizon at large distances. The ratio give the typical size, of the CMB
temperature ﬂuctuations on the sky, or equivalently the scale of the ﬁrst peak, which is
measured with exquisite precision by the WMAP satellite 
θCMB = rs(zrec)
dC(zrec) = 0.5952 ± 0.0021◦= 0.010388 ± 0.00037.
The sound horizon rs(zrec) is calculated using the ﬁtting formula provided by Eisenstein
and Hu with ΩM = Ωout = 1, h = Heﬀ(see Eq. 57). The physical baryon density
in the early universe and the recombination redshift are ﬁxed to their best ﬁt WMAP3
values ΩBH2
eﬀ= 0.0223 and zrec = 1089. The χ2 from the CMB constraint is simply
CMB = [θCMB −rs(zrec)/(dC(zrec)]2
3.2. Baryon Acoustic Oscillations
The BAO has been measured at diﬀerent scales using a variety of techniques, and the
feature has been detected in the 3D two-point correlation function , the 3D power
spectrum , and the angular power spectrum . In particular Percival et al 
have combined the 2DF and SDSS large scale surveys to yield a measure of the BAO
centred at two diﬀerent redshifts, namely z = 0.2, and z = 0.35.
In the power spectrum is calculated in a reference cosmology, and then the
comoving distance scale is either dilated, using a ﬁxed factor, or deformed using a 3 node
spline ﬁt. In principle one would need a full perturbation theory for LTB geometries to
recalculate the 3D power spectrum, using our best ﬁt model, but if we take into account
that the observed galaxies are divided into redshift slices, and that the LTB universe
at constant redshift behaves locally like a homogeneous FRW universe (e.g. Eq. (10)
is a local analogy to the normal FRW Hubble rate equation), we can then, as a ﬁrst
approximation, relate the ΛCDM power spectrum calculated in to the LTB power
spectrum through a dilation.
In Fig. 3 we show the fractional diﬀerence between a
simple dilation of the comoving scale, and a full modelling around the relevant redshifts
z = 0.2 and = 0.35. The dilation is an excellent approximation, the diﬀerence being less
than 2% over the relevant redshift range. We stress, however, that a comprehensive test
of LTB models against large scale structure data has to await the development of the
linear perturbation theory for LTB space times, an approach that is outside the scope
of this paper .
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Deviation between a dilation, and full modelling
Deviation between a dilation, and full modelling
Best fit GBH model (1.24)
Best fit constrained model (1.28)
Figure 3. The fractional diﬀerence in the comoving distance used in the reference
model in compared to the best ﬁt GBH model (red, full line) and constrained
model (blue, dashed line). To the left (right) is shown the the dilation at z = 0.2
(z = 0.35), and in parenthesis in the legend is indicated the dilation.
The relevant BAO quantity to test against is the observed peak (in the case of
real space) or wiggle wavelength (in the case of Fourier space), compared to the size
of the sound horizon in the reference model used in , which can be interpreted
approximately as the projected size of the BAO on the sky for structures at a given
redshift. The ratio is given as
θBAO(z) = rs(z)
As discussed in Section 2.6, the comoving size of the sound horizon rs(z) is a
function of redshift, due to the inhomogeneous nature of the expansion since the surface
of last scattering A(r(z), t(z))/A(r(zrec), t(zrec)). Because we detect the BAO in the 3D
distribution of galaxies, and not in the 2D projection on the sky, DV is not just the
comoving distance, but rather a combination of longitudinal and transversal distances.
In LTB space-times the longitudinal and transversal Hubble parameters, HL and HT, can
diﬀer signiﬁcantly, see Fig. 1, and therefore it is important to use the correct longitudinal
expansion rate:
A(z)(1 + z)2
Percival et al ﬁnd
θBAO(0.2) = 0.1980 ± 0.0058
θBAO(0.35) = 0.1094 ± 0.0033
with a 39% correlation, and we use these two measurements as our BAO data set giving
[θBAO(zi) −rs(zi)/DV (zi)] C−1
ij [θBAO(zj) −rs(zj)/DV (zj)] (64)
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Best fit GBH model
Best fit constrained model
Flat ΛCDM with ΩM=0.27
Open CDM with ΩM=0.3
Type Ia Supernovae
Figure 4. Apparent magnitude residuals for the two best ﬁt LTB models, standard
open CDM, and the best ﬁt ΛCDM FRW models compared to Type Ia Supernovae
3.3. Type Ia Supernovae
We use the Type Ia Supernovae compilation by Davis et al. , which is a compilation
of 192 SNIa consisting of 45 SNe from a nearby SNIa sample , 57 SNLS and
60 ESSENCE intermediate redshift SNe and 30 high redshift “Gold” SNe ,
with internally consistent magnitude oﬀsets. The supernovae span the redshift range
z = 0.01 −1.7, and we use the magnitude residuals µ to constrain the LTB models.
The residual µ, and apparent and absolute magnitudes m and M are related to the
luminosity distance dL as
µ = m −M = 5 log10
The exact absolute magnitude of a SNIa is unknown, and we include an arbitrary oﬀset
µ0, when calculating χ2 for the model ﬁt to the observed SNIa
−(µmodel(zi) + µ0)
where µ0 is determined by minimising χ2
SNIa. µ has a logarithmic dependence on dL,
and the zero point µ0 is degenerate with the local overall scale of the expansion rate
(Hin in the GBH model, and H0 in the constrained model, see Figs. 8 and 6).
Even though the Supernova data set is by far the largest of the three, the error bars
on individual SNe are large, and internally there is a large scatter, as can be appreciated
in Fig. 4, where the residuals are compared to the best ﬁt GBH LTB models, and the
open CDM and ΛCDM FRW models. Note that the predicted curves for the best ﬁt
GBH model and the best ﬁt ΛCDM model start to deviate signiﬁcantly beyond redshift
z = 1, and therefore it would be extremely useful to have a complete Supernovae data
set at high redshifts, which could help discard one of the models against the other one.
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
The three data sets discussed above are obtained through diﬀerent means, and relate
to diﬀerent physical observations, and hence they are not correlated in any way. This
independence allow us to ﬁnd the total likelihood by simply multiplying the individual
likelihood functions.
3.4. Priors
Even though we do not include them in the likelihood analysis, we still require our
models to obey three additional priors: Two of them concern the local universe, and as
such are priors at z = 0. They are the observed lower age limit on globular clusters in
the Milky Way of 11.2 Gyr (2-σ limit) and the HST key project measure
of the local value for the Hubble parameter Hin = 72 ± 8 (1-σ limit).
prior is the gas fraction as observed in clusters of galaxies. This is a very powerful
observation for limiting alternative models: Clusters of galaxies sit at the bottom of
deep gravitational potential wells, and supposedly the gas fraction is representative
for the universe as a whole, because neither gas nor dark matter can escape out
of the potential well.
This universal prior can be compared to the gas fraction we
deduce far away from the void, by combining the WMAP satellite and Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis bound on the physical baryon density ωb = ΩbH2
eﬀ= 0.0223 with the
physical matter density at inﬁnity ωm = ΩoutH2
eﬀ. The current observational
limits are fgas = ωb/ωm = 0.1104 ± 0.0016 ± 0.1 (random+systematic) , while for
our best ﬁt models (see Table 2) we ﬁnd fgas = 0.127 −0.134 in agreement at 2-σ with
observations.
100 km s−1 Mpc−1
0.5 −0.85 0.30 −0.70
0.05 −0.35
0.3 −4.5 0.1 −0.9
Constrained
0.50 −0.95 0.4 −0.89 0.33 −0.63
0.05 −0.35
0.5 −4.5 0.1 −0.9
Priors used when scanning the parameters of the two models.
constrained model H0 is only a pre factor for H0(r) and the span of Hin and Hout
are derived from the priors on Ωin and H0.
4. Analysis and results
To test the full and the constrained GBH LTB model, we have performed a parameter
scan over the models and for each set calculated the χ2.
The priors are given in
table 1, and have been chosen to encompass the best ﬁt 2-σ limits, except where large
degeneracies exist, and also to be reasonable, taking into account the HST key project
 , and acceptable matter densities.
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Multipole moment (l)
l(l+1)Cl /2π [ µK ]
Multipole moment (l)
l(l+1)Cl /2π [ µK ]
Figure 5. To the left/right the CMB spectrum for the best ﬁt GBH/constrained-GBH
model (red line) compared to WMAP3 data (diamonds) , and including cosmic
variance (grey shading).
4.1. The best ﬁt models
In table 2 are given the best ﬁt for the two models. It is interesting to notice that both
have very similar values, and in fact this seems to hint that current data prefer the
simpler constrained model with a homogeneous big bang. Both best ﬁt models have
local Hubble rates on the low side but still in agreement with the HST project, and the
local time to Big Bang is well inside the limits given by globular clusters.
The best ﬁt models both give an excellent luminosity redshift distance relation, that
are in as good an accordance with current Type Ia SNe as the ΛCDM model (see Fig.
4). This comes as no surprise: LTB models can be constructed that ﬁt any luminosityredshift relation . Our model ﬁt is done though under the simultaneous constraints
of the other probes, and as such is more constrained. In the transition zone between the
void and the surrounding Einstein-de Sitter space (at r ∼r0) there is a signiﬁcant (up
to ∼10%) diﬀerence between HT(r), which is related to dL, important for supernova
observations, and HL(r), important for the longitudinal part of the Baryon Acoustic
Oscillations (see Fig. 1). This diﬀerence marks a fundamental observational signature
between LTB and FRW models. A set of very well observed Type Ia SNe at z 0.1 −0.2,
such as the SDSS II SN survey , together with the BAO observations already done
at similar redshifts, will put strain on either model.
Because we currently do not have a full perturbation theory for LTB space times,
we were not able to make a full likelihood analysis comparing our model to all
the WMAP data.
Nonetheless, to get an idea of how bad the models ﬁt the full
body of WMAP temperature anisotropy observations, we have calculated a standard
temperature anisotropy spectrum using as input Heﬀand Ω= Ωout = 1 (see Fig. 5).
Even though we ﬁx the physical baryon density, and only ﬁt the ﬁrst peak of the
CMB, the obtained model is not too bad, and it is reassuring that other people have
proposed Einstein-de Sitter models that do ﬁt the WMAP3 CMB observations using
a non standard primordial spectrum and a hot neutrino component (e.g. ). Very
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
recently an LTB model similar to ours was proposed and the authors managed to
make a reasonable ﬁt to the full WMAP TT and TE data by adding a running of the
tilt in the primordial spectrum. In a more complete analysis at low l-values and large
angles one could expect an eﬀect similar to that of a cosmological constant, since we
have a non-trivial curvature at low redshifts, and hence an even better ﬁt that do not
have to rely on ad hoc features or a large running of the tilt in the primordial power
spectrum may indeed be possible.
4.2. Likelihood contours and degeneracies
We have marginalised over diﬀerent dimensions in parameter space by integrating over
the likelihood, given as L ∝exp(−χ2/2). The marginalised 1-σ and 2-σ likelihoods for
the individual data sets, and also the 3-σ limits for the combined data sets are shown
in Figs. 8 and 6.
In the normal ΛCDM model, if ωb is ﬁxed, there is a well known strong degeneracy
between Ωm and H0 for a given size of the sound horizon on the sky θA. In our model
the relevant Ωm for the CMB is Ωout = 1, that ﬁxes the size of the sound horizon, and
we have also ﬁxed ωb. Then the size of θA depends essentially on H0 or Hin, which is
reﬂected in the likelihood constraint from CMB on Hubble rates as seen in the ﬁgures.
Nonetheless we can to some extent change dA by introducing curvature, allowing us to
choose a higher value for Hin or H0, either by having a large void size, r0, or making
the void very underdense Ωin ≪1. This can be seen by the widening of the 2-σ limit in
the H-r0 plot for large values of r0, and the asymmetric 2-σ errors in the H-Ωin plots.
Ωin and r0 are the major parameters determining the luminosity-redshift relation,
and are hence constrained by the Type Ia SNe and the BAO. While only the relative
value of Hubble rate play a role for the SNe, the BAO does limit H, and there is some
strain between the BAO and the Type Ia SNe, as seen in the Ωin-r0 plots.
An obvious degeneracy is that of r0 and ∆r/r0 because the eﬀect of a larger void
can also be obtained by making a smoother, and hence broader, transition. Current
data does not have any sensitivity to Hout, because it mainly aﬀects the Hubble rate at
very high redshift, where no good observational data exist. The relative transition width
∆r/r0 is also not very well constrained. The only thing we can deduce, in agreement
with the good ﬁt to the data given by the ΛCDM model, is that no sudden transition
is allowed. The lower limit on ∆r/r0 is mainly limited by the Type Ia SN data, and to
a lesser extent the BAO.
It should be stressed though, that even though our LTB models give very good ﬁts
with χ2 that are comparable to that of the ΛCDM model, current data do put signiﬁcant
constraints on the models, and they will probably be challenged by new observational
data in the near future, and can be falsiﬁed.
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
100 km s−1 Mpc−1
0.58±0.03 0.49±0.2 0.43
2.3±0.9 0.62(>0.20)
Constrained
2.5±0.7 0.64(>0.21)
Best ﬁt values with 2-σ error bars for the two models.
The likelihood
contours are not closed for ∆r, and only a lower limit can be given. In the GBH model
Hout is unconstrained. For the central values of the other four parameters Hout = 0.49
minimises χ2. Notice that naturally the best ﬁt GBH model and the constrained model
give similar best ﬁt values, and error bars. Ie. among all the diﬀerent GBH models a
model with a homogeneous Big Bang is preferred.
Figure 6. Likelihoods for the GBH model: The likelihood for the combined data
set is shown in yellow with 1-, 2-, and 3-σ contours, while the individual SNIa, BAO,
and CMB data sets are shown in blue, purple, and green respectively with 1- and 2-σ
4.3. Bayesian analysis
In this section we would like to ﬁnd out whether a homogeneous FRW model of the
universe (including the accelerated expansion in terms of a vacuum energy with constant
equation of state w) can be used with conﬁdence when analysing present cosmological
data, or should we rather be more general and assume an inhomogeneous LTB model
of the universe?
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Figure 7. . . . Figure 6 continued.
The standard frequentist analysis of parameter estimation, given a set of data, is
not very useful for model selection, since it is diﬃcult to compare models with diﬀerent
number of parameters. For a discussion about probability theory and model selection
see Refs. . For instance, the usual method of comparing minimum χ2 per
eﬀective degree of freedom normally misses the point and is not very decisive. Other
methods to decide which model gives the best description, given the data, include various
Information Criteria, e.g. Akaike and Bayesian , which use more or less ad hoc
formulae without much justiﬁcation and normally do not compare well among eachother.
However, in the last few years there has been a ﬂourishing of several independent
analysis based on the Bayesian evidence associated with a given likelihood and a given
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
Figure 8. Likelihoods for the constrained model: The likelihood for the combined
data set is shown in yellow with 1-, 2-, and 3-σ contours, while the individual SNIa,
BAO, and CMB data sets are shown in blue, purple, and green respectively with 1and 2-σ contours.
cosmological model, within some given priors, both theoretical and observational, see
e.g. Refs. .
The Bayesian evidence is based on Bayes theorem, which relates the posterior
distribution P(θ, M|D) for the parameters θ of the model M given the data D, in
terms of the likelihood distribution function L(D|θ, M) within a given set of priors
P(θ, M|D) = L(D|θ, M) π(θ, M)
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
where E is the Bayesian evidence, that is the average likelihood over the priors,
dθ L(D|θ, M) π(θ, M) .
The prior distribution functions contain all the information about the parameters
before observing the data, e.g. our theoretical prejudices, our physical intuition about
the model, the ranges of parameters obtained from previous experiments, etc.
Bayesian evidence is very useful because it allows a comparison of models within a
complete set Mi=1...N (in our case, N=2). We can compute the posterior probability
for each hypothesis (model) given the data D using again Bayes theorem, P(Mi|D) ∝
E(D|Mi) π(Mi), where E(D|Mi) is the evidence of the data under model Mi and
π(Mi) is the prior probability of the i-th model before we see the data, usually taken
to be identical, i.e. π(Mi=1...N) = 1/N. Finally, the ratio of the evidences for two
competing models is called the Bayes factor,
Bij ≡E(D|Mi)
This expression provides a mathematical representation of Occam’s razor, because more
complex models tend to be less predictive, lowering their average likelihood (within the
priors) in comparison with simpler, more predictive models. Complex models can only
be favoured if they are able to provide a signiﬁcantly improved ﬁt to the data. In simple
cases where diﬀerent models give vastly diﬀerent maximum likelihoods there is no need
to employ model selection techniques because they provide only minor corrections to
the standard inference, but they are essential when the diﬀerence between maximum
likelihoods is only marginal, as will be the case at hand. The Bayes factor (70) is then
used to give evidence of (i.e. favour) the model Mi against the model Mj using the so
called Jeﬀreys’ scale, a particular interpretation of the Bayes factor which strengthens its
veridic roughly each time the logarithm ln Bij increases by one unit, from 0 (undecisive)
to greater than 5 (strongly ruled out).
Unfortunately, the computation of the Bayesian evidence (69) is rather involved
and typically requires extensive computational power, unless the number of parameters
is signiﬁcantly reduced. When the likelihood of the data given the model parameters
is a single isolated peak, far from the edges of the prior ranges, then there is a simple
approximation to the logarithm of the Bayesian evidence,
ln E = ln Lmax −ln A −
where A is the normalisation of the likelihood, and ∆θi = bi−ai is the range of parameter
θi ∈[ai, bi], i = 1 . . . n. Moreover, for the case of a Gaussian likelihood,
L(θ) = A exp
we ﬁnd A = (2π)−n/2/
det C, where C is the covariance matrix and xi = θi −¯θi. It is
clear that whenever the prior ranges are too big for the likelihood, the Bayesian evidence
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
is penalised. Moreover, the more parameters there are, the larger the diﬀerence in ln E,
and the larger the logarithm of the Bayes factor, as expected.
We will now apply this discussion to the case at hand. We will compare the standard
ﬂat ΛCDM model with a constant equation of state parameter, w, while ﬁxing all other
cosmological parameters but ΩM. Thus our FRW model has here 2 parameters, which
we believe are the most constraining, since others like the local rate of expansion do not
provide signiﬁcant extra information. We performed a calculation of the minimum χ2
within a grid of 5000 models, where w ∈[−2.0, 0.0] and ΩM ∈[0.0, 0.6]. The maximum
likelihood corresponds to a χ2
min(ΛCDM) = 197.05 for w = −1.005 and ΩM = 0.276.
On the other hand, the constrained GBH model has 4 independent parameters,
the local rate of expansion H0 = 100 h km/s/Mpc, the local matter fraction Ωm ≡
ΩM(0), the transition distance r0, and the width ∆r/r0, providing a grid of several
million models within the ranges h ∈[0.50, 0.95], Ωm ∈[0.05, 0.35], r0 ∈[0.5, 4.5]
and ∆r/r0 ∈[0.1, 0.9].
We found that the maximum likelihood corresponds to a
min(GBH) = 197.845 for h = 0.659, Ωm = 0.124, r0 = 2.47 Gpc and ∆r/r0 = 0.638.
At face value it seems that the inhomogeneous model provides as good a ﬁt to the
data as the FRW one. If we compute the usual minimum χ2 per eﬀective number of
degrees of freedom (i.e. the number of data points minus the number of parameters),
min(ΛCDM)/d.o.f. = 1.021 ,
min(GBH)/d.o.f. = 1.036 ,
so that both models seem excellent descriptions of the data, the ﬁrst one being slightly
better. However, there are other indicators more appropriate for model comparison, like
the (corrected) Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), computed as
min + 2k + 2k(k −1)
where k is the number of parameters and N is the number of data points. In our case this
gives AIC(ΛCDM) = 201.1, while AIC(GBH) = 206.0, which would clearly favour
the homogeneous FRW model. On the other hand, if we choose to compare models with
the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), computed as
min + k ln N ,
we ﬁnd BIC(ΛCDM) = 207.6, while BIC(GBH) = 218.9, which would very strongly
favour the homogeneous FRW model. Clearly, neither method gives a good assessment
for choosing among models. This is the reason why the Bayesian evidence has been used
recently in the context of model comparison.
If we compute the Bayes factor (70) by performing the integral of the likelihood
over the priors, (69), we ﬁnd
ln E(ΛCDM) = −103.1 ,
ln E(GBH) = −106.7 ,
and therefore the logarithm of the Bayes factor is ln B12 = 3.6, which clearly favours
the homogeneous FRW model against the GBH-LTB model. It seems that the bayesian
evidence method discards signiﬁcantly, but not very strongly, the inhomogeneous model
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
versus the usual FRW model.
It is possible that, in the future, better data sets
and stronger priors on cosmological parameters may discard once and for all the
inhomogeneous model. For the moment, a local void with a size of several Gpc, with
matter well below average, and a local rate of expansion of 71 km/s/Mpc, can account
for both the distant (CMB), intermediate (SNIa) and local (BAO) data sets.
5. Discussion and Conclusions
We have shown that present observations do not exclude the possibility that we live close
to the center of a large void. This is a appealing possibility which eﬀectively gets rid of
the necessity to introduce an ad hoc cosmological constant in our model of the universe.
Moreover, it is consistent with early universe cosmology in terms of inﬂationary initial
conditions for the origin of large scale structures. Perhaps these voids arise due to large
non-perturbative inhomogeneities associated with the stochastic nature of the inﬂaton
evolution , or due to large non-gaussianities in the primordial spectrum coming from
inﬂation that could arise due to phase transitions or in multiﬁeld inﬂation . In
fact, we already know there can be other voids in our local patch of the universe, with
a Gpc scale, as exempliﬁed by the observed cold spot in the CMB .
We have analysed the likelihood of such an interpretation of the present acceleration
of the universe, using data from the Cosmic Microwave Background (on large scales),
Supernova Ia (at intermediate scales), Baryon Acoustic Oscillations, the present age
and the local rate of expansion (at small scales). All the data seems to be consistent at
the 95% conﬁdence level with a local void of size around 2.5 Gpc, within an Einstein-de
Sitter universe on large scales, without the need to introduce a cosmological constant.
The apparent acceleration of the universe can be interpreted here as due to the curved
path of photons in this locally open universe.
We have performed a Bayesian analysis in order to compare two competing models,
the predominant ΛCDM model and our GBH inhomogeneous model. While the usual
frequentists analysis does not discard the GBH model against the ΛCDM model, there
seems to be strong but not decisive (bayesian) evidence against the GBH model. It
is possible that in the near future, with much better cosmological data on large scale
structures and an extended set of supernovae at intermediate and high redshift, we
may be able to constrain and deﬁnitely rule out the inhomogeneous LTB model. We
should also mention that the data seems to favour a homogeneous Big Bang since the
constrained GBH model gives the same likelihood contours and minimum χ2 than the
unconstrained model, while having one parameter less.
At the moment we are studying the eﬀect that a generic LTB model has on the
growth of structure in order to constrain further the GBH model with data from ISW-
LSS correlations and the Lyman-α forest within the Alcock-Paczynski-test analysis .
In conclusion, we cannot discard that we live in an inhomogeneous local void
within an asymptotically Einstein-de Sitter universe.
The possibility that we have
misinterpreted the present acceleration and that the cosmological constant is nothing
Confronting Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi models with Observational Cosmology
but a mirage has been addressed recently . We have added to the discussion
the comparison with a large, albeit incomplete, set of cosmological observations, and
the bayesian analysis appropriate for model selection. We hope in the future to provide
further constraints on the model and possibly rule it out.
Acknowledgements
We thank Andrei Linde, Andy Albrecht, David Valls-Gabaud and Alex Kusenko for
generous comments and suggestions.
We also thank the Danish Centre of Scientiﬁc
Computing (DCSC) for granting the computer resources used. JGB would like to thank
the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics for hospitality during the last stages of the
work, supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. PHY05-
We also acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Spanish Research Ministry
(M.E.C.), under the contract FPA2006-05807.