UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Technical Report No. 481
SITUATED COGNITION AND
THE CULTURE OF LEARNING
John Seely Brown
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and
Institute for Research on Learning
Allan Collins
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
Paul Duguid
Institute for Research on Learning
August 1989
Center for the Study of Reading
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
174 Children's Research Center
51 Gerty Drive
Champaign, Illinois 61820
THE LIBRARY OF THE
SEP 1 1 1989
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
'A CHAMPAIGN
CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF READING
Technical Report No. 481
SITUATED COGNITION AND
THE CULTURE OF LEARNING
John Seely Brown
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and
Institute for Research on Learning
Allan Collins
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
Paul Duguid
Institute for Research on Learning
August 1989
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
51 Gerty Drive
Champaign, Illinois 61820
The work upon which this publication was based was supported in part by the
Personnel and Training Research Programs, Psychological Sciences Division, Office
of Naval Research under Contract No. N00014-C-85-0026, Contract Authority
Identification Number, NR 667-540 and in part by the Office of Educational
Research and Improvement under Cooperative Agreement No. OEG 0087-C1001,
with the Reading Research and Education Center. The publication does not
necessarily reflect the views of the agency supporting the research.
EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD
Beck, Diana
Commeyras, Michelle
Foertsch, Daniel
Hartman, Doug
Jacobson, Michael
Jehng, Jihn-Chang
Jimenez, Robert
Kerr, Bonnie
Kerr, Paul
Meyer, Jennifer
Moran, Juan
Ohtsuka, Keisuke
Schommer, Marlene
Scott, Judy
Stallman, Anne
Wilkinson, Ian
Wolff, Phillip
MANAGING EDITOR
Mary A. Foertsch
MANUSCRIPT PRODUCTION ASSISTANTS
Delores Plowman
Debra Gough
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 1
Many teaching methods implicitly assume that conceptual knowledge is independent of the situations
in which it is learned and used. The authors examine one such method and argue that its lack of success
is a direct result of this assumption. Drawing on recent research into learning in everyday activity and
not just in the highly specialized conditions of schooling, they claim that knowledge is not independent
but, rather, fundamentally "situated," being in part a product of the activity, context, and culture in which
it is developed. Teaching, however, often overlooks the central, but restrictive, contribution made by
the activities, context, and culture of schools to what is learned there. A theory of situated knowledge,
by contrast, calls for learning and teaching methods that take these into account. As an alternative to
conventional, didactic methods, therefore, the authors propose teaching through "cognitive
apprenticeship" .
They examine two examples of mathematics
teaching that exhibit important features of this approach.
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 2
SITUATED COGNITION AND THE CULTURE OF LEARNING
Introduction
Deeply embedded in our society is a profoundly misleading, theoretical separation between knowing and
doing. The folk categories of know how and know what reflect this, but the division extends well beyond
folk categories. Much current cognitive science, philosophy of mind, and artificial intelligence, for
instance, assumes that knowing is a process that can be separated from the activities and situations in
which it is used. And many of the practices of conventional schooling exhibit the same assumption.
Thus G. B. Shaw could make his notorious comment that "He who can, does. He who cannot, teaches."
An understanding of the inseparability of knowing and doing, which we argue for in this paper, leads
to a distinctly different view of teaching and a more enlightened appreciation of good teachers.
In his epigram, Shaw encapsulated, unfairly but concisely, conventional educational assumptions that
knowledge can be usefully regarded as self-contained and discrete, and that it can be adequately
transferred from teachers to students in the activities of the classroom independent of the activities in
which that knowledge might normally be used. Knowing, in this view, is assumed to go on in heads and
teaching to go on in classrooms isolated from the complexity of the world outside, from which abstract
knowledge can successfully be distilled. A growing body of research that focuses on cognition in
everyday activity, however, is beginning to undermine the plausibility of these presuppositions.1 Knowing
(and not just learning), this research suggests, is inextricably situated in the physical and social context
of its acquisition and use. It cannot be extracted from these without being irretrievably transformed.
If knowledge is situated, then many conventional assumptions must be questioned. In particular, a
situated theory of knowledge challenges the widely held belief that the abstraction of knowledge from
situations is the key to transferability. An examination of the role of situations in structuring knowledge
indicates that abstraction and explication provide an inherently impoverished and often misleading view
of knowledge. Knowledge is fundamentally a co-production of the mind and the world, which like woof
and warp need each other to produce texture and to complete an otherwise incoherent pattern. It is
impossible to capture the densely interwoven nature of conceptual knowledge completely in explicit,
abstract accounts.
In the first part of this paper, we explore, in a consciously speculative way, just how cognition is
situated.2 Knowledge, we claim, is partially embedded in the social and physical world. And these
embedding circumstances allow people to share the burden of solving problems efficiently. Learning
is the process of constructing robust understanding out of this sort of embedded activity. Such an
approach to learning and knowledge offers, among other things, new insights into pedagogical practices.
These we address in the second part. In particular, a theory of situated cognition helps explain
"cognitive apprenticeship" . In methods of cognitive apprenticeship,
teachers deliberately deploy the embedding circumstances of knowledge to help students construct robust
understanding.
Situated Knowledge and Learning Activity
Learning and Learning Activity
Miller and Gildea's work on vocabulary teaching shows how the assumption that knowing and
doing can be separated leads to a teaching method that ignores the way situations structure cognition.
Their work describes how children are taught words from dictionary definitions and a few uprooted
exemplary sentences.
They compare this method of teaching with the way vocabulary is normally
learned outside school.
People generally learn words in the context of ordinary communication. This process is startlingly fast
and successful. Miller and Gildea note that by listening, talking, and reading the average 17-year-old
has learned vocabulary at a rate of 5,000 words per year (13 per day) for over 16 years. By contrast,
learning words from definitions and sentences abstracted from the context of normal communication,
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 3
the way vocabulary has often been taught, is slow and unsuccessful. There is barely enough classroom
time, Miller and Gildea suggest, to teach more than 100 to 200 words per year. Moreover, much of what
is taught turns out to be almost useless in practice. They give the following examples of students using
vocabulary acquired this way:
Me and my parents correlate, because without them I wouldn't he here.
I was meticulous about falling off the cliff.
The redress for getting well when you're sick is to stay in bed.
I relegated my pen pal's letter to her house.
Mrs. Morrow stimulated the soup.
The news is very tenet.
Our family erodes a lot.3
Given the method, such mistakes seem unavoidable. Teaching from dictionaries assumes that definitions
and exemplary sentences are self-contained "pieces" of knowledge. But words and sentences are not
islands, entire unto themselves. They rely on the context in which they are used--and not just the
linguistic context--to be understood. Language use would involve an unremitting confrontation with
ambiguity, polysemy, nuance, metaphor, etc., were it not for the extralinguistic help that the context of
an utterance provides .
Prominent among the intricacies of language that depend on extralinguistic help are indexical words-words like I, here, now, next, tomorrow, afterwards, this, which thoroughly ground interpretation in
situations. Indexical terms are those that "index" or more plainly point to a part of the situation in which
communication is being conducted.4 They are not merely context sensitive; they are completely context
dependent. They can only be understood in relation to specific situations, from which indexicals are,
for the purposes of interpretation, inseparable. A different context for I or now produced a different
meaning. These indexical words rely on a great deal of contextual, extralinguistic information to be
understood. And surprisingly, all words can be seen as at least partially indexical distinction between the mere
acquisition of inert concepts and the development of useful, robust knowledge. It is quite possible to
acquire a tool but to be unable to use it. Similarly, it is common for students to acquire algorithms,
routines, and decontextualized definitions that they cannot use and that therefore lie inert.
Unfortunately, this problem is not always apparent. Old-fashioned pocket knives, for example, have a
device for removing stones from horses' hooves. People with this device may know what it is for and
be able to talk wisely about horses, hooves, and stones. But they may never betray--or even recognize
--that they wouldn't begin to know how to use this implement on a horse. Similarly, students can often
manipulate with apparent competence algorithms, routines, and definitions they have acquired and yet
not reveal--to their teachers or themselves--that they would have no idea what to do if they came upon
the domain equivalent of a limping horse.
By contrast, people who use tools in authentic activity actively build an increasingly rich implicit
understanding both of the tools themselves and of the world in which they use those tools. Their
understanding, initially narrow, is continually broadened through use. Learning and acting are, as a
result, interestingly indistinct, learning being a continuous, life-long process resulting from acting in
situations.
To develop this comparison between tools and knowledge, between manual tools and conceptual tools,
a little further, it can be noted that learning how to use a tool involves far more than can be accounted
for in any set of explicit rules. The occasions and conditions for use arise directly out of the context of
activities of each community or culture that uses the tool, framed by the way members of that culture
see the world. The culture and its cultural viewpoint, quite as much as the tool itself, determine how
a tool is used. Thus, carpenters and cabinet makers, for example, both use chisels and lumber, but each
profession uses them quite differently. These differences reflect the viewpoint and insights of the
members of each particular culture. The culture's viewpoint, a product of its activity, is only gained
through entering that culture. Thus, it isn't possible to use a tool fully and appropriately without
entering the culture in which it is used, observing practitioners at work, and engaging in authentic
cultural activity.
Conceptual tools similarly reflect the cumulative wisdom of the culture in which they are used and the
insights and experience of individuals. Their meaning is not invariant but a product of negotiation within
a culture and of practice in authentic activity. Again, appropriate use is not simply a function of the
abstract concept alone. It is a function of the culture and the activities in which the concept has been
developed and used. Just as carpenters and cabinet makers use chisels differently, so physicists and
engineers use mathematical formulae differently. Activity, concept, and culture are interdependent. No
one can be totally understood without the other two. Learning must therefore involve all three.
Teaching methods, however, often try to impart abstracted conceptual tools as fixed, well-defined,
independent entities that can be explored in prototypical examples and textbook exercises. But such
teaching denies students the access to either the activity or the culture that they need in order to develop
an active understanding of a particular concept.
To talk about academic disciplines, professions, or even manual trades as communities or cultures may
seem strange. Yet practitioners in each of these areas are connected by far more than their ostensible
tasks. They are bound by intricate, socially constructed webs of belief, which make it possible to see
them as cultures , and which are essential to interpreting what they do. The activities of
most cultures are unfathomable, unless they are viewed from within the culture, for membership of a
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 5
culture provides a set of cultural eyeglasses that are the key to understanding and carrying out its
activities.
The culture, its belief system and the way it uses its tools--whether they are manual or conceptual-determine the way practitioners see the world. And the resulting way the world appears reciprocally
affects the belief system and the activity. Activity, culture, and tools form a complex, interdependent,
and inseparable unit. Unfortunately, students are too often presented with only a part of this complex.
They are asked to use the conceptual tools of a discipline without being able to look through its cultural
eyeglasses. To learn to use tools as practitioners use them, students, like apprentices, must be enabled
to enter that community and its culture. Thus, in a significant way, learning is, we believe, a process of
enculturation.
Learning and Enculturation
Enculturating may, at first, appear to have little to do with learning. But it is, in fact, what people do
in learning to speak, read, and write or to become school children, office workers, researchers and so
on. From a very early age and throughout their lives, people, consciously or unconsciously, adopt the
behavior and belief systems of new social groups. Given the chance to observe and practice in situ the
behavior of members of a particular culture, people pick up relevant jargon, imitate behavior, and
gradually start to act in accordance with the culture's norms, though these are often recondite and
extremely complex. Students, for instance, can quickly get an implicit sense of what is suitable diction,
what makes a relevant question, what is legitimate (and also illegitimate) behavior in a particular school
activity. The ease and success with which they adopt the school culture (as opposed to the intricacy of
describing what it entails) belie the immense significance of the process and obscure the fact that what
they pick up is a product of the ambient culture rather than explicit teaching.
The practices of contemporary schooling, however, usually deny students the chance to engage the
relevant domain culture, because that culture is not in evidence. Although students are shown the tools
of many academic cultures in the course of a school career, the pervasive culture that they observe, in
which they participate, and which some enter quite effectively is the pervasive culture of school life
itself--a culture that can unintentionally be quite antithetical to useful domain learning. School becomes
the dominant cultural framework within which many students assimilate what they learn. But the way
schools use dictionaries (or math formulae, or historical analyses) is very different from the way
practitioners use them (Schoenfeld, in press). Thus students may pass school-based exams (a distinctive
part of the school culture) but still not be able to use a domain's conceptual tools in authentic practice.
Before they can use the tools of a domain in the way a practitioner uses them--either formally or
informally--students need to see the activity from the practitioner's cultural standpoint.
standpoint is the product of domain activity, not explicit teaching. You cannot tell apprentice carpenters
how to hit the blunt end of a chisel and assume they can infer the practices of carpentry. And you
cannot present students with some of the uprooted conceptual ideas of a domain and typical textbook
examples and exercises and assume that they can infer the subtle belief system implicit in the culture's
use of those concepts in the world.
This is not to suggest, however, that all students of mathematics or history must be expected to become
professional mathematicians or historians. Rather, we claim that in order to learn these subjects (and
not just to learn about them) students need much more than abstract concepts and self-contained
examples. They need to be exposed to practitioners using these tools in the authentic, ill-defined
problems of their world. It is from this sort of activity that the culture's belief system--the key to
understanding its behavior--can be inferred and adopted. Thinking mathematically doesn't necessarily
include grappling with the unresolved problems of the subject. Mathematicians can think mathematically
about apparently trivial issues. As Schoenfeld's teaching shows (see below), even relatively simple
problems can be used to tease out the way a mathematician looks at the world and solves emergent
problems. The process may appear informal, but it is nonetheless full-blooded, authentic mathematical
activity; it can thus be deeply informative for students--in a way that textbook examples and declarative
explanations are not.
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 6
In noting the centrality of activity to learning and knowledge, we have leaned heavily on the as yet
undefined concept of authentic or appropriate activity. As a result of our discussion of cultures and
enculturation, we are now in a position to clarify and explore these terms a little further.
Authentic activity. Like a tool, activity is only understood with regard to a particular culture and its
belief system. It cannot be understood in isolation. Each culture implicitly embraces a set of relevant
activities--some of which it may not even recognize explicitly--and constructs meaning and purpose in
relation to them; conversely, the common activities, tools, and belief systems are what help to define a
particular culture. Authentic activity is simply the ordinary activity of the practitioners in a culture, or
activity which is congruent with their ordinary activity. In order to enter a culture, to develop its belief
system, and to understand its goals, those are the activities that need to be undertaken.
Again, it is worth stressing that authentic activity is not only done by people who are already experts;
it is not necessarily work in the forefront of the field. Apprentice tailors , for instance,
begin by ironing finished garments (which tacitly teaches them a lot about cutting and sewing). The
activity is simply, valuable, and absolutely authentic. Students of Palincsar and Brown's reciprocal
teaching of reading may read only elementary texts, but they nonetheless use authentic strategies
common in some form or other to all readers. The students in Miller and Gildea's study, by contrast,
take part in a pedagogical activity that is not even congruent with the normal behavior of practitioners.
School activity tends to be hybrid--implicitly framed by one culture while explicitly being attributed to
Most classroom activity inevitably takes place within the culture of schooling, but it is
attributed by both teachers and students to the cultures of readers, writers, mathematicians, historians,
and so on. What students do in school thus tends to be a sort of ersatz activity, distorting both what is
learned and the culture to which it is attributed.
This sort of school activity is very different from what we have in mind when we talk of authentic
domain activity because it is in important ways not congruent with what a domain's authentic
practitioners do. Much school work has become a highly specialized, self-confirming activity in a culture
of its own. When, for pedagogic purposes authentic domain activities are transferred to the classroom,
their context is usually transmuted; they become classroom tasks and part of school culture. Classroom
procedures are then applied to what have become classroom tasks. As a result, the system of learning
and using (and, of course, testing) can remain hermetically sealed within the self-confirming culture of
the school. Consequently, contrary to the aim of schooling, success within this culture often has little
bearing on performance elsewhere.
Math word problems, for instance, are generally encoded in a syntax and diction that is common only
to other math problems. Thus the word problems of a textbook from 1478 are instantly recognizable
today . Many of today's word problems, however, are as foreign to contemporary authentic
math practice as they are to the math practice of the fifteenth century. By participating in this ersatz
activity students risk misunderstanding entirely what practitioners actually do.
Most classroom tasks are inevitably ersatz because, in their creation, apparently peripheral features of
authentic tasks (like the extralinguistic supports involved in learning vocabulary) are dismissed as "noise"
from which salient features can be abstracted for the purpose of teaching.
The features of the
environment that people actually use to perform mathematical calculations, for instance, are not included
in word problems (see next page). Classroom exercises assume that such calculations are performed
solely through abstracted mathematical algorithms. In all activity, the context offers an extraordinarily
complex network of support for all practitioners, and, as a result, its absence vitiates the learning
exercise. Furthermore, the source of such support is often only tacitly understood by practitioners, or
even by teachers or designers of simulations. Even well-planned classroom exercises can, therefore,
completely fail to provide the supporting contextual features that allow authentic activity. At the same
time, students may come to rely on features of the classroom context, in which classroom tasks are
inevitably embedded, that are wholly absent in authentic activity. Thus, much of what is learned in
school may apply only to the ersatz activity, if it was through such activity that it was learned.
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 7
Activities of students, practitioners, and JPFs. The idea that most school activity exists in a culture of
its own helps explain many of the difficulties of cultivating robust domain learning in school. Jean
Lave's ethnographic studies of learning and everyday activity reveal how schools can divorce
students from the activities and culture that give meaning and purpose to what they learn elsewhere.
This is the separation between what Resnick calls "learning in and out of school" . Lave focuses
on the behavior of JPFs (just plain folks) and records that the ways they learn are quite distinct from
the ways students are expected to learn.
Three categories primarily concern us here: JPFs, students, and the practitioners to whose status both
JPFs and students aspire. Put most simply, when JPFs want to learn a particular set of practices, they
have two apparent options. First, they can enculturate through apprenticeship. Becoming an apprentice
doesn't involve a qualitative change from what JPFs normally do. People enculturate into different
communities all the time. The apprentices' behavior and the JPFs' behavior can thus be thought of as
pretty much the same.6
[Insert Table 1 about here.]
The second and now more conventional option is to enter a school as a student. Schools do seem to
demand a qualitative change in behavior, however. What the student is expected to do and what a JPF
does are significantly different. The student enters the school culture, while ostensibly being taught
something else. And the general strategies for intuitive reasoning, resolving issues, and negotiating
meaning that people develop through everyday activity are superseded by the precise, well-defined
problems, formal definitions, and symbol manipulation that characterize much school activity.
We try to represent this discontinuity in Table 1, which compares salient features of JPF, practitioner,
and putative student behavior:
This table (somewhat like the JPFs' problems) is a little ill defined. But it is intended to help make
apparent the important similarity between JPFs' and practitioners' activity. Both have their activities
situated in the culture in which they work, within which they negotiate meanings and construct
understanding. The issues and problems that they face arise out of, are defined by, and are resolved
within the constraints of their belief system and the activity they are pursuing.
Lave's work provides a good example of a JPF engaged in authentic activity using the context
in which an issue emerged to help find a resolution. The example comes from a study of a Weight
Watchers class, whose participants were preparing their carefully regulated meals under instruction:
In this case they were to fix a serving of cottage cheese, supposing the amount laid out for the
meal was three-quarters of the two-thirds cup the program allowed. The problem solver in this
example began the task muttering that he had taken a calculus course in college. . .. Then
after a pause he suddenly announced that he had "got it!" From then on he appeared certain
he was correct, even before carrying out the procedure. He filled a measuring cup two-thirds
full of cottage cheese, dumped it out on the cutting board, patted it into a circle, marked a cross
on it, scooped away one quadrant, and served the rest.
Lave's account nicely brings out the central features of this example:
Thus, "take three-quarters of two-thirds of a cup of cottage cheese" was not just the problem
statement but also the solution to the problem and the procedure for solving it. The setting was
part of the calculating process and the solution was simply the problem statement, enacted with
the setting. At no time did the Weight Watcher check his procedure against a paper and pencil
algorithm, which would have produced 3/4 cup x 2/3 cup = 1/2 cup. Instead, the coincidence
of the problem, setting, and enactment was the means by which checking took place. (p. 165)
The dieter's solution path was extremely expedient and drew on the sort of inventiveness that
characterizes the activity of both JPFs and practitioners. It reflected the nature of the activity, the
resources available, and the sort of resolution required in a way that problem solving'that relies on
abstracted knowledge cannot. This inventive problem-solving resolution depended on the dieter seeing
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 8
the problem in the context of ongoing activity, which provided him with privileged access to the solution
path he chose. (This probably accounts for the certainty he expressed before beginning his calculation.)
He was able to see the problem and its resolution in terms of the measuring cup, cutting board, and
knife. Activity-tool-culture (cooking-kitchen utensils-dieting) moved absolutely in step throughout this
procedure because of the way the problem was seen and the task was performed. The whole microroutine simply became one more step on the road to a meal.7 Knowing and doing were interlocked and
inseparable.
This sort of problem solving, carried out in conjunction with the environment, stands quite distinct from
the idea of processing solely inside heads to which many teaching practices subscribe. By off-loading
part of the cognitive task onto the environment, the dieter automatically used his environment to help
solve the problem. In doing this, his actions are not in any way exceptional; they resemble many
ordinary JPF and expert practices. Scribner records, for instance, how complex calculations can
be performed by practitioners using their environment directly. In the case she studied, dairy loaders
used the configuration of crates they were filling and emptying almost as an embedded abacus. Nor are
such problem-solving strategies limited to the physical or social environment. This sort of reliance on
situations can be seen in the work of physicists, who see "through" formulae onto the situations of an
envisioned world, which then provides support for inferences and approximations . Hutchins' (in press) study of intricate naval navigation also records the way people engaged in
difficult collaborative tasks distribute the burden throughout the environment and the group. The
resulting cognitive activity can only be explained in relation to the entire context in which it takes place.
"When the context of cognition is ignored," Hutchins observes, "it is impossible to see the contribution
of the structure in the environment, in artifacts, and in other people to the organization of mental
processes" (p. 31).
Instead of taking problems out of the context of their creation and providing them with an extraneous
framework, JPFs and practitioners seem particularly adept at solving them within the framework of the
context that produced them. This allows them to share the burden--of both defining and solving the
problem--with the task environment as they respond directly to emerging issues. The adequacy of the
solution they reach becomes apparent in relation to the role it must play in allowing activity to continue.
In the end, the problem, the solution, and the cognition involved in getting between the two cannot be
isolated from the context in which they are all fundamentally embedded.
So even though students are expected to behave differently, they inevitably do behave like the JPFs they
are and solve most of their problems in their own situated way. Schoenfeld (in press) describes math
students using well-known strategies, such as the position of a problem in a particular page or section
of a book (where the first questions at the end of chapters are always simple ones, and the last usually
demand concepts from earlier chapters) or the occurrence of a particular word in the problem (e.g.,
"left" signals a subtraction problem), to find solutions quickly and efficiently. Such ploys indicate how
thoroughly learners really are situated, and how they always lean on the embedding context for help.
Within the culture of schooling this can obviously be very effective. But the school situation is extremely
specialized. Viewed from outside, where problems do not come in text books, an unacknowledged
dependency on such school-based cues makes the learning extremely fragile.
Conversely, though schooling seeks to encourage problem solving, it disregards most of the inventive
heuristics that students bring to the classroom. Instead of deploying such inventiveness to good effect,
schools tend to dismiss it out of hand. It thus implicitly devalues not just individual heuristics, which
may be fragile, but the whole process of inventively structuring cognition and solving problems. Lave
 describes how some students feel it necessary to disguise effective strategies so that teachers
believe the problems have been solved in the school-approved way. In order to suggest how this sort
of problem-solving can be deployed (which we attempt later), it will be helpful, first, to have some sort
of idea of how cognition is structured by situations.
Structuring Cognition
Authenticity in activity is paramount for learning if conceptual knowledge is not self-contained but,
rather, if it is the product of and structured by the activity in which it is developed and deployed; if, in
short, not just learning but knowledge itself is situated. It thus needs to be explained in some fashion
Brown, Coffllins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 9
how knowledge can be situated. In this section we try to outline, in an admittedly tentative way, the
mechanisms whereby situations in the world structure knowledge.
Language, it is now widely recognized, is situated. A proposition, as we pointed out above, can only be
correctly interpreted in the context of the situation in which it is used. This, we claim, is also true of
knowledge itself. Like an indexical proposition, knowledge "indexes" the situation that produces it,
without which it is, in the end, unintelligible. Situations are thus integral components of knowing.
To grasp this idea of indexing, it is perhaps helpful to remember the association of the word index with
pointing (hence the term index finger) and signs. Indexical propositions are situated somewhat in the
way that signposts are. Signposts are not universal statements but specifically situated "propositions,"
whose meaning depends very much on where they stand. To be interpreted correctly, the signpost must
be in the right situation. The sign reading Berkeley 5, Oakland 7, San Francisco 15 needs to be quite
specifically situated. It relates its component parts by indexing the situation in which it is placed.
Face-to-face conversations enable people to interpret indexical expressions because the indexed features
of the situation are immediately available, though people are rarely conscious of their contribution.
Their importance becomes apparent, however, in communications between people at a distance. Then
indexical expressions become problematic until ways are found to secure their interpretation by situating
their reference .
Authors of a collaborative work such as this one will recognize the problem if they have ever discussed
the paper over the phone. "What you say here" is not a very useful remark. "Here" in this setting needs
an elaborate description (such as "page 3, second paragraph, third sentence") and can often lead to long
conversations at cross purposes. The problem gets harder in conference calls when "you" becomes as
ambiguous as "here" is unclear.
When descriptions replace indexical terms (which is analogous, we hold, to classroom descriptions of
activity replacing activity), the nature of discourse changes and understanding becomes much more
problematic. Indexical terms are virtually transparent. They, like a signpost, draw little or no attention
to themselves. They do not inherently add to the difficulty of understanding a proposition in which they
occur, but simply provide essential structure for the discourse. Descriptions, by comparison, are at best
translucent and at worst opaque, intruding emphatically between speakers and their subject. (They are
less like a signpost and more like a map, which requires extra steps of interpretive work to discover its
relationship to the situation.) The audience has first to focus on the descriptions and try to interpret
them, then find what they might refer to, and only then can the proposition in which they are embedded
be understood. However elaborate, a description does not merely replace the indexical word, just as
a map doesn't replace a signpost.
The more elaborate the description is in an attempt to be
unambiguous, the more opaque it is in danger of becoming. And as Perry argues , in some
circumstances, the indexical term simply cannot be replaced.
Knowledge, we suggest, similarly indexes the situations in which it arises and is used, without which it
cannot be fully understood. The embedding circumstances efficiently provide essential parts of its
structure and meaning.
So knowledge, which comes coded by and connected to the activity and
environment in which it is developed, is spread across its component parts--some of which are in the
mind and some in the world--as the final picture on a jigsaw is spread across its component pieces.
Indexical representations developed through engagement in a task may greatly increase the efficiency
with which subsequent tasks can be done, if part of the environment that structures the representations
remains invariant.
This is suggested by the ability to perform tasks that cannot be described or
remembered in the absence of the situation. Recurring features of the environment seem to afford
recurrent sequences of actions. Memory and subsequent actions, as knots in handkerchiefs and other
aides memoirs reveal, are not context-independent. Routines may also be a product of
this sort of indexicalization. Thus authentic activity in context becomes a central component of learning.
As Hutchins (in press), Pea , and others point out, the structure of cognition is widely distributed
throughout the environment, both social and physical.
The environment therefore contributes
importantly to indexical representations people form in activity.
These representations, in turn,
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 10
contribute to the ability to perform future activity efficiently.
Recurrent activity--in thoroughly
conventional terms, practice, but practice in authentic activity--is what ultimately leads from specific,
individually situated actions through a process of acting and re-acting, to generalizable knowledge. The
generality is not abstract, but situated across multiple contexts.
In language learning, for example, the original frail understanding of a word is developed and extended
through subsequent use and social negotiation, though each use is no less situated. Miller and Gildea
 describe two stages to this process. The first, in which people learn the word and assign it a
semantic category (e.g., the word olive is first assigned to the general category of color words), is quickly
done. The second, in which distinctions within this semantic category (e.g., between olive and other
colors) are explored as the word occurs again and again, is a far more gradual process, which "may
never be completely finished" (p. 95).
This second phase of word learning corresponds to the
development through activity of all conceptual knowledge. The threadbare concepts that initially develop
out of activity are gradually given texture as they are deployed in different situations. In the ensuing
situations, the appropriateness of the word is tested and, as with all conceptual knowledge, each
application has the potential to change an individual's understanding of both the word and the world
--the two are interdependent.
Out of this sort of continual activity grows an increasingly more densely textured conceptual knowledge
that is enriched by each application in situations. Eagleton describes reading as just such an
enriching process, through which people continually change how they read and this, in turn, changes
what they are reading. He begins with the assumption that in order to read, people apply a code to a
text. This is analogous to the deployment of a cultural belief system in order to undertake a cultural
activity that we described earlier. That belief system is itself constantly changing as a result of the
activity it supports:
In applying a code to the text, we may find that it undergoes revision and transformation in the
reading process; continuing to read ... we discover that it now produces a "different" text, which
in turn modifies the code by which we are reading it, and so on. This dialectical process is
infinite; and ... it undermines any assumption that once we had identified the proper codes for
the text our task was finished. 
This sort of dialectical process is common to all activity, and it similarly undermines any assumption that
once conceptual knowledge has been described and applied in exercises, the task of teaching or learning
has been finished. Learning is instead a continual process needing above all authentic activity to support
its development.
In the following section, we examine the practical ways in which students might be given access to some
sort of authentic activity.
Learning Through Cognitive Apprenticeship
Cognitive Apprenticeship
In discussing tools, culture, activity, JPFs, and situated cognition, we have been accumulating a set of
characteristics of human learning and reasoning that, we feel, school practices need to honor. Though
there are many innovative teachers, schools, and school programs that are exceptions, prevalent school
practices still broadly assume that knowledge is individual and self-structured, that schools are neutral
with respect to what is learned in them, that concepts are abstract and immutable and independent of
the activity in which they are acquired and used, and that JPF behavior is something to be discouraged.
Cognitive apprenticeship methods, by contrast, try to enculturate
students into authentic practices through authentic activity and social interaction in a way similar to that
which is evident--and evidently successful--in craft apprenticeship.
In this section, we examine two
examples of mathematics teaching in an attempt to elucidate how some of the characteristics of learning
we have discussed can be honored in the classroom.
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 11
Schoenfeld's teaching of problem solving--thinking mathematically. Schoenfeld's teaching of problem
solving attempts to show college students how to think mathematically about the world,
how to see the world through mathematicians' eyes, and thus how to use the mathematician's tools. By
deliberately engaging students in authentic mathematical practice, he reaches well beyond the inculcation
of problem-solving skills. His method, much more importantly, provides students with the opportunity
to enter the culture of mathematical practice, which enables them to use those skills as practitioners.
As a means to generate spontaneous mathematical thinking and to permit his students to see and engage
in mathematics as a sense-making pursuit, Schoenfeld has students bring problems to class that he and
they investigate.
The approach is distinctive because conventionally, before graduate school, few
students get the opportunity to see their teachers engaged in mathematical practice--yet the students are,
nonetheless, expected to understand the nature of that practice.
In one case (Schoenfeld, in press), he and his class faced the problem of the magic square (see Figure
1). Though the problem is relatively straightforward, the collaborative work involved in solving it and,
importantly, in analyzing the solution helped reveal to the class the way mathematicians look at
problems. The class worked collectively through a number of strategies, in which, on reflection, they
recognized more general and more powerful mathematical ideas. Thus, from discussing whether 9 can
go in the center of the square, they developed the ideas of "focus[ing] on key points that give you
leverage," and "exploit[ing] extreme cases." Although Schoenfeld may seem only to be teaching strategy
rather than subject matter, he is, more fundamentally, building with his class a mathematical belief
system around his own and the class' intuitive responses to the problem.
[Insert Figure 1 about here.]
As an indication that he is working in the culture of mathematics, not in the culture of schooling, he
does not stop at what, in culture of school practice, marks the end: an answer.
Are we done? In most mathematics classes the answer is "yes." Early in the semester my
students all say "yes," expecting me to go on to another problem. My answer, however, is a
resounding "no." In most classes, so-called "problems" are exercises; you are done when you've
shown that you've mastered the relevant technique by getting the answer. (Schoenfeld, in press,
His class' goal, by contrast, is to understand the mathematical nature of magic squares, and it is in part
by doing this that the belief system is exemplified. The class went on to explore other possible magic
squares and thereby discovered general principles (e.g., an algebraic form for describing them). This
process also led to some further generalizable mathematical strategies that are less commonly seen in
classroom practice, such as working forwards from an initial solution, using systematic generating
procedures, and having more than one way to solve a problem. Schoenfeld is careful to emphasize that
all these strategies are illustrated in action, developed by the class, not declared by the teacher. The
belief system is instilled in the only way it can be, through practice in which the students actively take
Lampert's Teaching of Multiplication
Lampert also involves her students in mathematical exploration, which she tries to make
continuous with their everyday knowledge. She has devised methods for teaching mathematics to fourthgrade students that lead from students' implicit understanding of the world beyond the classroom,
through activity and social construction in the culture, to the sort of robust learning that direct teaching
of algorithms usually fails to achieve.
She starts teaching multiplication, for example, in the context of coin problems, because in the
community of fourth-grade students, there is usually a strong, implicit, shared understanding of coins;
next she has the students create stories for multiplication problems, drawing on their implicit knowledge
to delineate different examples of multiplication. Then she helps them toward the abstract algorithm
that everyone learns for multidigit multiplication, in the context of the coin problems and stories the
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 12
community has created. Thus, Lampert presents the algorithm as one more useful strategy to help them
resolve community problems.
[Insert Figure 2 about here.]
The first phase of Lampert's teaching starts with simple coin problems, such as "Using only nickels and
pennies, make 82 cents." With these problems, Lampert helps her students explore their implicit
knowledge. Then, in the second phase, her students create stories for multiplication problems (see
Figure 2). The students perform a series of decompositions and discover that there is no one magically
"right" decomposition decreed by authority, just more and less useful decompositions, whose use is
judged in the context of the problem to be solved and the interests of the problem solvers.
The third phase gradually introduces students to the standard algorithm, now that such an algorithm has
a meaning and a purpose in their community. The students start with an extended procedure that
parallels the story problem above. Eventually they find ways to shorten the process, and they usually
arrive at the standard algorithm, justifying their findings with the stories they had created earlier.
Lampert hopes to develop a composite understanding of four different kinds of mathematical knowledge:
(a) intuitive knowledge, the kind of short cuts people invent when doing multiplication problems in
authentic settings; (b) computational knowledge, the basic algorithms that are usually taught; (c) concrete
knowledge, the kind of concrete models of the algorithm associated with the stories they created; (d)
principled knowledge, the principles such as associativity and commutativity that underlie the algorithmic
manipulations of numbers. She tries to inculcate an inseparable understanding of all of these kinds of
knowledge and the connections between them, and thus to bridge the huge gap that emerges from much
conventional teaching between conceptual knowledge and problem-solving activity--between, as we
characterized them at the beginning, knowing and doing.
Lampert's approach exhibits several qualities of social construction and situated cognition that exemplify
cognitive apprenticeship:
by beginning with a task embedded in a familiar activity, it shows the students the legitimacy
of their implicit knowledge and its availability as scaffolding in apparently unfamiliar tasks.
by pointing to different decompositions, it stresses that heuristics are not absolute, but assessed
with respect to a particular task--and that even algorithms can be assessed in this way.
by allowing students to generate their own solution paths, it helps make them conscious, creative
members of the culture of problem-solving mathematicians. And, in enculturating through this
activity, they acquire some of the culture's tools--a shared vocabulary and the means to discuss,
reflect upon, evaluate, and validate community procedures in a collaborative process.
Schoenfeld's approach, on the other hand, points in particular to the way in which students can be
exposed to the authentic ways of thinking of a culture and its conceptual viewpoint, as much as to its
subject matter.
In the terms of cognitive apprenticeship, we can represent the progress of the students from embedded
activity to general principles of the culture as presented in Figure 3.
[Insert Figure 3 about here.]
In this sequence, apprenticeship and coaching begin by providing modeling in situ and scaffolding for
students to get started in an authentic activity. As the students gain more self-confidence and control,
they move into a more autonomous phase of collaborative learning, where they begin to participate
consciously in the culture. The social network within the culture helps them develop its language and
the belief systems and promotes the process of enculturation.
Collaboration also leads to the
articulation or manifestation of strategies, which can then be discussed and reflected on. This in turn
fosters generalizing, grounded in the students' situated understanding.
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 13
From here, students can, as we have suggested, use their fledgling conceptual knowledge to see their
activity in a new light, which in turn leads to the further development of the conceptual knowledge, and
so on. This, then, suggests a helical process (Figure 4), rather than the linear process outlined in Figure
[Insert Figure 4 about here.]
Cognitive apprenticeship attempts to develop densely textured concepts out of and through continuing
authentic activity.
The term is closely allied to our image of knowledge as tool.
apprenticeship supports learning in a domain by enabling students to acquire, develop, and use
conceptual tools in authentic domain activity, just as craft apprenticeship enables apprentices to acquire
and develop the tools and skills of their craft through authentic work at and membership of their trade.
Through this process, apprentices enter the culture of practice. So the term apprenticeship helps to
emphasize the centrality of activity in learning and knowledge and highlights the inherently contextdependent, situated, and enculturating nature of learning. And apprenticeship also suggests the paradigm
of situated modeling, coaching, and fading , whereby teachers or
coaches promote learning first by modeling their strategies for students in authentic activity. Then
teachers and colleagues support a student's attempts at doing the task. And finally they empower the
student to coatinue independent of the teacher. The progressive process of learning and enculturation
perhaps argues that Burton, Brown, and Fischer's "increasingly complex microworlds" should be
replaced by "increasingly complex enculturating environments."
Cognitive emphasizes that apprenticeship techniques actually reach well beyond the physical skills usually
associated with apprenticeship to the kinds of cognitive skills more normally associated with conventional
schooling. This extension is not as incompatible with traditional apprenticeship as it may at first seem.
The physical skills usually associated with apprenticeship embody important cognitive skills if our
argument for the inseparability of knowing and doing is correct. Certainly many professions with
generally acknowledged cognitive content--for example, law, medicine, architecture, business, etc.--have
nonetheless traditionally been learned through apprenticeship. Moreover, advanced graduate students
in the humanities, the social sciences, and the physical sciences, acquire their extremely refined research
skills through the apprenticeship they serve with senior researchers. Then they, like all apprentices, must
recognize and resolve the ill-defined problems that issue out of authentic activity, in contrast to the welldefined exercises that are typically given to them in text books and on exams throughout their earlier
schooling. It is at this stage, in short, that students no longer behave as archetypal students but
participate in the activity of practitioners and develop their conceptual understanding through social
interaction and collaboration in the culture of the domain, not of the school.
Social interaction and collaboration play such a central role in this sort of learning that before
concluding this discussion of cognitive apprenticeship, we should highlight their importance. And we
should emphasize that though we have been explicitly discussing school education, features of this form
of learning, in particular "legitimate peripheral participation" and collaboration are particularly relevant
to workplace training as well as school learning.
Social interaction and the social construction of knowledge. Lave and Lave and Wenger (in
preparation) point out the importance for apprentices of learning their craft in the appropriate
community of practice, towards the center of which they continuously progress through gradual
enculturation. The apprentice tailors Lave studied are surrounded both by master tailors and by other
apprentices, all engaged with similar tools in similar authentic activity. This allows apprentices to
observe and gradually participate fully in the practices of the community. The apprentices learn to use
the relevant tools in the context of their use within the belief system that gives purpose and meaning to
the tasks they undertake.
The knowledge of the community is evidently constructed, acquired,
developed, distributed, and validated through intense social interaction.
This sort of social interaction should not be seen as a facet of some distant and exotic community.
Resnick has pointed out that throughout most of their lives people learn and work collaboratively,
not individually, as they are asked to do in many schools. Lampert's and Schoenfeld's work described
above, Scardamalia, Bereiter, and Steinbach's teaching of writing, and Palincsar and Brown's
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 14
 work with reciprocal teaching of reading all employ some form of social interaction, social
construction of knowledge, and collaboration.
Within a culture, ideas are exchanged and modified and belief systems developed and appropriated in
part through conversation and narratives, so these must be promoted, not inhibited. Though these are
often anathema to traditional schooling, they are an essential component of social interaction and thus
of learning. They provide access to much of the distributed knowledge and support of the social matrix
 . So learning environments must allow narratives to circulate and "war stories" to be added
to the collective wisdom of the community.
The role of narratives and conversations is perhaps more complex than might at first appear. An
intriguing role in learning is played by "legitimate peripheral participation," whereby people who are not
directly taking part in a particular activity learn a great deal from their legitimate position on the
periphery (Lave & Wenger, in preparation). It is a mistake to think that important discourse in learning
is always direct and declarative.
This peripheral participation is particularly important for people
entering the culture. They need to observe how qualified practitioners behave and talk to get a sense
of how expertise is manifest in conversation and other activities.
Cognitive apprenticeship and collaborative learning.
If, as we propose, learning is a process of
enculturating that is supported in part through social interaction and the circulation of narrative, groups
of practitioners are particularly important, for it is only within groups that social interaction and
conversation can take place.
Some of the most salient features of group learning include:
Collective problem solving. Groups are not just a convenient way to accumulate the
individual knowledge of their members. They give rise synergistically to insights and
solutions that would not come about without them (Schoenfeld, in preparation).
b. Displaying multiple roles.
Successful execution of most individual tasks requires
students to understand the many different roles needed for carrying out that task.
Getting one person to be able to play all the roles entailed by authentic activity and
to reflect productively upon his or her performance is one of the monumental tasks
of education.
The group, however, permits different roles to be displayed and
engenders reflective narratives and discussions about the aptness of those roles.
Confronting ineffective strategies and misconceptions. We know from an extensive
literature on the subject that students have many misconceptions about qualitative
phenomena in physics. Teachers rarely have the opportunity to hear enough of what
students think to recognize when the information that is offered back by students is
only a surface retelling for school purposes (the handing back of an uncomprehended
tool, as we described it at the beginning) that may mask deep misconceptions about
the physical world and problem-solving strategies.
Groups, however, can be an
efficient means to draw out, confront, and discuss ineffective strategies.
Providing collaborative work skills. Students who are taught individually rather than
collaboratively can fail to develop skills needed for collaborative work.
collaborative conditions of the workplace, knowing how to learn and work
collaboratively is increasingly important. If people are going to learn and work in
conjunction with others, they must be given the situated opportunity to develop those
In looking at Schoenfeld's and Lampert's teaching, in noting what we believe are particularly important
features of their methods, and in stressing in particular social interaction and collaborative learning, we
are trying to show how teaching through a form of apprenticeship can accommodate the new view of
knowledge and learning we have been outlining. The increasing role of the teacher as a master to
apprentices, and the teachers' use of authentic domain activity as a major part of teaching will perhaps
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 15
once and for all dismiss Shaw's scurrilous criticism of teachers with which we opened. His comment
may then be replaced with Alexander Pope's more admirable wish to
Let such teach others who themselves excel
Conclusion: Toward an Epistemology of Situated Cognition
A great deal of work in investigating situated features of cognition remains to be done. It is, however,
already possible to point to areas of education already under serious reappraisal for which continued research in this area may be particularly relevant.
One of the particularly difficult challenges for education (which many exceptional teachers may have
independently solved) is how to separate what should be made explicit in teaching from what should be
left implicit. A common strategy in trying to overcome difficult pedagogic problems is to make as much
as possible explicit. Thus we have ended up with wholly inappropriate methods of teaching. Whatever
the domain, explication lifts implicit and possibly even nonconceptual constraints out of
the world and tries to make them explicit or conceptual. These then occupy a place in our ontology and
become something more to learn about rather than simply something useful in learning. In contrast,
indexical representations seem to gain their efficiency by leaving a great deal of the context
underrepresented or implicit. Future work into situated cognition, from which educational practices will
benefit, must, among other things, try to frame a convincing account of the relationship between explicit
knowledge and implicit understanding.
We have described here only part of the implications of a fully developed theory of situated cognition.
The major theoretical work to shift the traditional focus of epistemology remains to be done. For
centuries epistemologists have concentrated primarily on conceptual representation and its problematic
relation to objects in the world, assuming that representation is cognitively prior to all else. This has
led them to battle with the seemingly intractable question of reference--the problematic alignment of
conceptual representations of the world and objects in the world. A theory of situated cognition
suggests that activity and perception are importantly and epistemologically prior--at a nonconceptual
level--to conceptualization and that it is on them that more attention needs to be focused. An
epistemology that begins with activity and perception, which are first and foremost embedded in the
world, may simply bypass the classical problem of reference--of mediating conceptual representations.
In educational terms alone, however, the unheralded importance of activity and enculturation to learning
suggests that much common practice is the product of an inadequate epistemology. This further
suggests that a new epistemology might hold the key to a dramatic improvement in learning and
completely new insights into education.
Brown, Collins, & Duguid
Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning - 16