Likability Classiﬁcation - A not so Deep Neural Network Approach
Raymond Brueckner1,2, Bj¨orn Schuller2
1Institute for Human-Machine Communication, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Germany
2Nuance Communications Inc., Aachen, Germany
 , 
This papers presents results on the application of restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM) and deep belief networks
(DBN) on the Likability Sub-Challenge of the Interspeech 2012
Speaker Trait Challenge . RBMs are a particular form of
log-linear Markov Random Fields and generative models which
try to model the probability distribution of the underlying input
data which can be trained in an unsupervised fashion. DBNs
can be constructed by stacking RBMs and are known to yield
an increasingly complex representation of the input data as the
number of layers increases. Our results show that the Likability Sub-Challenge classiﬁcation task does not beneﬁt from the
modeling power of DBN, but that the use of an RBM as the ﬁrst
stage of a two-layer neural network with subsequent ﬁne-tuning
improves the baseline result of 59.0 % to 64.0 %, i.e., a relative 8.5 % improvement of the unweighted average evaluation
Index Terms: Likability, speaker trait challenge, restricted
Boltzmann machines, deep belief networks
1. Introduction
The recent surge of interest in deep belief networks (DBN) and
their constituent components have led to remarkable advances
in many machine learning and pattern recognition problems
and signiﬁcant improvements have been reported lately in the
speech recognition community . These networks have
also been successfully applied to emotion recognition .
In the Likability Sub-Challenge of the INTERSPEECH
2012 Speaker Trait Challenge , the task is to automatically
predict the likability of a users voice from the speech signal
applying a pre-deﬁned acoustic feature set. This might be of
interest in various applications in human-machine and humanhuman communication, such as voice portals or social networks.
We have investigated the applicability of deep neural networks and Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM) on this task
and we will show that indeed the baseline approaches using
Support Vector Machines and Random Forests can be outperformed.
The authors of the present paper are all afﬁliated with and
partly identical with the organizers of the Challenge. Therefore,
we do not participate in the Challenge. To ensure comparability
of the results, we strictly follow the procedures deﬁned in 
and we neither use any data or information that were not available to all competitors nor more result trials on the test data.
The structure of this paper is as follows: in section 2 we
will describe RBMs for binary input and a variant thereof, the
Gaussian-Bernoulli RBM (GBRBM) for real-valued input data.
We will further show how deep belief networks (DBN) can be
constructed from these RBMs and how the resulting deep networks can be further trained to improve their discriminative performance. In section 3 we will present the experimental setup
and the results obtiained on the Likability Sub-Challenge. Finally, in section 4 conclusions will be drawn.
2. Deep Belief Networks
The idea of using deep multilayer neural networks is not new,
but traditionally it has been difﬁcult to train these models successfully: with large initial weights, the typically adopted backpropagation algorithm converges towards poor local minima;
with small initial weights, on the other hand, the gradients in
the lower layers become tiny making it infeasible to train networks with many hidden layers. Furthermore, if there are many
hidden layers in the neural network with many hidden units in
each layer, it is easy for the network to overﬁt.
In order to overcome these problems DBNs have been proposed. Deep belief networks are probabilistic generative models
that are composed of multiple layers of stochastic, latent variables or hidden units, which typically have binary values. In
generative models the goal is to learn the distribution of the input data p(data), instead of p(labels|data), as is common in
training a discriminative model.
Hinton et al proposed an efﬁcient, greedy algorithm that
allows to learn one layer at a time in an unsupervised fashion
using an undirected graphical model called a RBM.
2.1. Restricted Boltzmann Machine
RBMs are the building blocks of DBNs, and are undirected
graphical models with a layer of observed, or visible, variables
and a layer of latent or hidden variables, with each layer forming one part of a bipartite graph; i.e., each visible unit (node) is
connected to each hidden unit, but there are no intra-visible or
intra-hidden connections. The graph of a RBM is depicted in
Figure 1: Restricted Boltzmann Machine graph.
A RBM assigns an energy to every conﬁguration of visible
and hidden state vectors, denoted v and h respectively. For binary visible units, an RBM with V visible units and H hidden
units is governed by the following energy function:
E(v, h) = −
where vi and hj are the binary states of visible unit i and
hidden unit j, bv
j are their biases, and wij is the weight
between them.
Under the this energy function, the conditional probabilities
for each visible and hidden unit given the others are
p(hj = 1|v) = g
p(vi = 1|h) = g
is the logistic or sigmoid function.
The network assigns a probability to every possible joint
conﬁguration (v, h) via the energy function as:
p(v, h) = e−E(v,h)
where Z is called the partition function. The marginal distribution of the visible units is then given as
and the gradient of the average log-likelihood is
= ⟨vihj⟩0 −⟨vihj⟩∞
The average ⟨·⟩0 can be readily computed using the sample
data v, but the average ⟨·⟩∞involves the normalisation constant
Z, which cannot generally be computed efﬁciently (being a sum
of an exponential number of terms).
To avoid the difﬁculty in computing the log-likelihood gradient, Hinton proposed the Contrastive Divergence (CD) algorithm which approximately follows the gradient of the difference of two divergences:
≈⟨vihj⟩0 −⟨vihj⟩k
The expectation ⟨·⟩k represents a distribution from running
a Gibbs sampler (eqs. 2, 3) initialized at the data for k full steps.
This process is shown in Fig. 2. In practice, we typically choose
k = 1. This is a rather crude approximation of the true log
maximum likelihood gradient, but it works well in practice.
Figure 2: Illustration of k-step Gibbs sampling.
2.2. Gaussian-Bernoulli Restricted Boltzmann Machine
To deal with real-valued input data, we use an RBM with Gaussian visible units and binary hidden units yielding a so-called
GBRBM, where we use the modiﬁed energy function proposed
Under the modiﬁed energy function, the conditional probabilities for each visible and hidden unit given the others are
p(vi = v|h)
p(hj = 1|v)
where N(·|µ, σ2) denotes the Gaussian probability density
function with mean µ and variance σ.
In our approach we also learn the parameter σ. Note, however, that this σ2 is not necessarily equivalent to the variance of
the input data.
2.3. Constructing a Deep Belief Network
Once the weights of an RBM have been learned, the outputs of
the hidden nodes can be used as input data for training another
RBM that learns a more complex representation of the input
data. Proceeding this way a deep belief network (DBN) can be
constructed stacking one RBM on top of the preceding layer.
Building a deep generative model one layer at a time is much
more efﬁcient than trying to learn all of the layers at once.
The parameters of this stacked network model are often
close to an optimum and hence gradient descent techniques can
be used to ﬁne-tune the DBN. The limited information contained in the labels is then used to only slightly adjust the pretrained weights in order to improve the discriminative power of
the generative model.
One important property of DBNs is that their hidden states
can be inferred very efﬁciently by a single bottom-up pass in
which the top-down generative weights are used in the reverse
direction. Another important property is that each time an extra
layer of learned features is added to a DBN, the new DBN has
a variational lower bound on the log probability of the training
data that is better than the variational bound for the previous
DBN, provided the extra layer is learned in the right way .
The weights and biases of a DBN can be used to initialize the
hidden layers of a feedforward neural network which is given
an additional output layer. For a wide variety of tasks, discriminative ﬁne-tuning of a DBN-initialized neural network gives
much better performance than the same neural network initialized with small random weights . Many of the generatively
learned features may be irrelevant for the discrimination task,
but those that are relevant are usually much more useful than the
input features because they capture the complex higher-order
statistical structure that is present in the input data.
It has been shown in that greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training is crucial in deep learning by introducing a
useful prior to the supervised ﬁne-tuning training procedure.
The regularization effect is claimed to be a consequence of
the pre-training procedure establishing an initialization point of
the ﬁne-tuning procedure inside a region of parameter space in
which the parameters are henceforth restricted. Furthermore,
overﬁtting can be substantially reduced if a generative model
is used to ﬁnd sensible features without making any use of the
3. Experiments and Results
The results presented in this section were obtained by carrying
out experiments on the Likability Sub-Challenge of the Interspeech 2012 Speaker Trait Challenge, which uses the ”Speaker
Likability Database” . The speech is recorded over ﬁxed and
mobile telephone lines at a sample rate of 8 kHz. The feature set
contains 6125 features based on low-level descriptors and functionals applied thereon. For details about the Challenge and the
underlying feature set refer to .
3.1. Feature Preprocessing
We trained and evaluted the networks on the complete Challenge feature set comprising all the 6125 acoustic features. As
the feature set exposes an extremely high variance and as RBMs
and other neural network architectures are not scale-invariant,
all input features were normalized to zero mean and unit variance which often is beneﬁcial or even necessary to obtain good
results with neural networks . Means and standard deviations for normalization were computed from the training set.
It is interesting to note that the feature set was approximately
Gaussian distributed after this preprocessing. This turns out to
be beneﬁcial for using GRBMs, as these models work very well
in this case.
3.2. Training Setup
3.2.1. Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Training RBMs, although conceptually simple, requires many
parameters to be adjusted carefully in order to be successful;
we used the suggestions in as a starting point. We applied stochastic gradient descent (SGD) run on mini-batches.
The minibatch size trades off noisy gradients with slow convergence. We obtained best results with a mini-batch size of
20. Gradient descent in mini-batches works best if the data is
presented in random order, hence we shufﬂed the input data accordingly.
We trained each RBM for 50 epochs using contrastive divergence with one Gibbs step per mini-batch.
For the pretraining, we used a learning rate of 10−3 for the weights and
biases and a learning rate of 10−6 for the σ parameter of the
GBRBM. Often a momentum term is used to smooth the gradients, but it was not helpful for pre-training the RBMs, so we set
it to 0. As a further regularization we applied a small weightcost
parameter. This prevents the weights becoming too big, which
typically leads to bad generalization performance.
We also found out that the performance of the RBM in
the ﬁrst layer can be improved by moderate sparsiﬁcation of
the weight matrices. Enforcing weight sparseness is equivalent
to incorporating L0 and approximate L1 regularizations to the
training criterion. We reached an optimum in performance for a
sparsity threshold of 0.08 and after each mini-batch simply set
all weights assuming a value below this threshold to 0.
As the ﬁrst layer of our ﬁnal network we used a GRBM
which is a good model of the approximately Gaussian distributed input data (after preprocessing). Any subsequent RBM
layer was then a standard RBM with binary visible and binary
hidden units. The training parameters were the same for both
type of models, except that in the binary-binary RBM obviously
there is no σ parameter to be modeled.
3.2.2. Full Network
Following section 2.3, a deep belief network was constructed by
stacking the pre-trained RBMs and adding an additional layer
on top. For the Likability Sub-Challenge we have binary target
labels (likable / not likable) and thus for the top-layer we used
a logistic regression network with one output node.
For the ﬁne-tuning phase, the full network was then trained
using SGD based on a crossentropy cost function. Even though
SGD is known to be a rather limited approximator with respect
to the full batch gradient descent we obtained best results for
small batch sizes of 2, with the input data being shufﬂed randomly.
Network training was run until the unweighted accuracy on
the development set reached a minimum. This is referred to as
early stopping in the literature . Several parameter combinations have been tried out, but we obtained the best results
using a learning rate of 0.05, no momentum term, and a sparsity
threshold of 0.
To enforce additional regularization, we constrained the
square of the L2 norm to be small using a regularization coefﬁcient of 10−4.
3.3. Results
Table 1 shows the results obtained on the Likability Sub-
Challenge when applying the different neural network architectures. Preliminary experiments have shown that for the task at
hand a constant layer size of 2048 proved to be most effective.
The reported evaluation measure is the unweighted accuracy (UA). In the given case of two classes (L and NL), it is
calculated as (Recall(L)+Recall(NL))/2, i. e., the number of
instances per class is ignored by intention, because the UA is
also meaningful for highly unbalanced distributions of instances
among classes.
The results show that this classiﬁcation task does not beneﬁt from the modeling power of DBNs, but that the use of a
GBRBM as the ﬁrst stage of a two-layer neural network with
subsequent ﬁne-tuning improves the baseline result of 59.0 %
UA to 64.0 % UA, i.e., a relative 8.5 % improvement. As more
layers are added, the performance decreases, and a two-layer
DBN already has lower performance than a standard one-hidden
layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
We also tried architecture topologies with decreasing layer
sizes which are equivalent to the well-known bottleneck networks. Such models have been successfully applied in previous
challenges, for example on tasks of the Interspeech 2010 Paralinguistic Challenge . A fundamental difference is that the
approach to create classic bottleneck networks (such as e.g. autoencoder networks) is to decrease the layer sizes towards the
innermost hidden layer and to increase them towards the top
layer, then to train the network, and ﬁnally to take the output of
Table 1: Results on the Likability Sub-Challenge. MLP refers
to a standard one-hidden layer neural network with random initialization of its weight parameters. Test results are reported for
the experiments that were submitted to the Challenge site and
which were returned by the Challenge organizers. Participants
were allowed to submit only ﬁve uploads of their predictions on
unlabeled test data.
UA Test / UA Devel
Baseline (random forests) 
59.0 / 57.6
MLP (random initialization)
60.9 / 56.4
DBN (1 layer)
64.0 / 57.2
DBN (2 layers)
62.9 / 56.2
DBN (3 layers)
62.2 / 56.0
DBN (4 layers)
the smallest, innermost layer, hence discarding the upper layers. Here we construct bottleneck networks by stacking RBMs
trained with the contrastive divergence algorithm and with decreasing layer size towards the output layer. The results obtained on various bottleneck topologies are depicted inTable 2.
Table 2: Results on the Likability Sub-Challenge for bottleneck
architectures. Test results are reported for the experiments that
were submitted to the Challenge site and which were returned
by the Challenge organizers.
UA Test / UA Devel
Baseline (random forests) 
59.0 / 57.6
DBN 
60.2 / 60.3
DBN 
DBN (6125-1024-256-32)
DBN (6125-1024-256-32-8)
Even though bottleneck architectures have been used successfully on many different tasks, the results show that the Likability Sub-Challenge task does not beneﬁt from their application. The ﬁrst two bottleneck topologies actually beat the baseline results on the development set; a result which is conﬁrmed
on the test set for the ﬁrst bottleneck architecture. Nonetheless,
the test result on the ﬁrst topology still is considerably below
the best test result obtained with a one-layer DBN.
4. Conclusion
We investigated the applicability of deep belief networks on the
Likability Sub-Challenge of the Interspeech 2012 Speaker Trait
Challenge. For this particular task we were not able to leverage
the power of DBNs to model the complex probability distribution of the supplied full feature set. Neither bottleneck topologies nor the standard topology of stacking equally sized layers
were as efﬁcient as a standard MLP whose ﬁrst layer consists of
a GBRBM trained in an completely unsupervised manner. With
this architecture we were able to improve the baseline results
of 59.0 % UA to 64.0 % UA which constitutes a relative improvement of 8.5 % UA. In our opinion this clearly shows the
potential that lies in unsupervised methods for the paralinguistic
With respect to further optimization of our system, we think
about considering second-order optimization methods for the
ﬁne-tuning stage of the neural network training such as Conjugate Gradient Descent or Quasi-Newton methods, which are
known to be more efﬁcient on small-scale problems.
Furthermore, given the approximately Gaussian distribution of the
mean- and variance-normalized feature set it might be interesting to compare GBRBMs to radial basis funcions in the ﬁrst
hidden layer. More importantly, we plan to examine more thoroughly the potential of semi-supervised techniques in the context of emotion and speaker trait recognition.
5. Acknowledgements
This work was conducted while the ﬁrst author was working at
Nuance Communications Inc., Aachen, Germany.
6. References
 B. Schuller, S. Steidl, A. Batliner, E. N¨oth, A. Vinciarelli,
F. Burkhardt, R. van Son, F. Weninger, F. Eyben, T. Bocklet,
G. Mohammadi, and B. Weiss, “The Interspeech 2012 Speaker
Trait Challenge,” in Proceedings of the Interspeech 2012.
Portland, OR, USA: ISCA, Sep 2012.
 G. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, “Large-Vocabulary
Continuous Speech Recognition with Context-Dependent DBN-
HMMs,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing, Prague, Czech Republic, May 2011, pp.
4688–4691.
 M. Abdel-Rahman, G. Dahl, and G. E. Hinton, “Acoustic Modeling using Deep Belief Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech and Language Processing, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 14–22, 2012.
 A. Stuhlsatz, C. Meyer, F. Eyben, T. Zielke, G. Meier, and
B. Schuller, “Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Emotion
Recognition: Raising the Benchmarks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) 2011.
Prague, Czech Republic: IEEE, May 2011,
pp. 5688–5691.
 G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets,” Neural Computation, vol. 18, no. 7,
pp. 1527–1554, Jul 2006.
 G. E. Hinton, “Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence,” Neural Computation, vol. 14, no. 8, pp.
1771–1800, Aug 2002.
 K. Cho, A. Ilin, and T. Raiko, “Improved Learning of Gaussian-
Bernoulli Restricted Boltzmann Machines,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Espoo,
Finland, Jun 2011, pp. 10–17.
 D. Erhan, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, P.-A. M. P. Vincent, and
S. Bengio, “Why Does Unsupervised Pre-training Help Deep
Learning?” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 11,
pp. 625–660, Mar 2010.
 F. Burkhardt, B. Schuller, B. Weiss, and F. Weninger, “’Would
You Buy A Car From Me?’ - On the Likability of Telephone
Voices,” in Proceedings of the Interspeech 2011.
Florence, Italy:
ISCA, Aug 2011, pp. 1557–1560.
 Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. Orr, and K.-R. M¨uller, “Efﬁcient Back-
Prop,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the trade, G. Orr and K.-R.
M¨uller, Eds.
Springer, 1998, ch. 2, pp. 9–50.
 G. Hinton, “A Practical Guide to Training Restricted Boltzmann
Machines,” Machine Learning Group, University of Toronto,
Technical Report 2010-003, 2010.
 M. W¨ollmer, F. Weninger, F. Eyben, and B. Schuller, “Acoustic-
Linguistic Recognition of Interest in Speech with Bottleneck-
BLSTM Nets,” in Proceedings of the Interspeech 2011. Florence,
Italy: ISCA, Aug 2011, pp. 77–80.